
1. Rev Assoc Med Bras. 2016 Feb;62(1):21-3. doi: 10.1590/1806-9282.62.01.21.

Facial extensive ulcer.

Fernández-Crehuet P(1), Ruiz-Villaverde R(2).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)aff2.

Basosquamous carcinoma (BSC), as described in 1910, is a distinctive variety of
skin cancer and its etiology and pathological characteristics have generated much
controversy over the years. Currently, BSC is considered a basal cell carcinoma
(BCC) subtype with aggressive behavior and greater tendency for recurrence and
metastases. We present a clinical case recently reported in our unit.

PMID: 27008486  [PubMed - in process]


2. Rev Assoc Med Bras. 2016 Feb;62(1):13. doi: 10.1590/1806-9282.62.01.13.

Videolaparoscopic appendectomy during pregnancy - gold standard.

Trindade EN(1), Leboutte Ldel P(2), Trindade MR(3).

Author information: 
(1)aff1, Brazil. (2)General Surgery Service, Hospital Femina, Porto Alegre, RS,
Brazil. (3)Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São
Paulo, SP, Brazil.

PMID: 27008483  [PubMed - in process]


3. Dental Press J Orthod. 2016 Feb;21(1):47-53. doi:
10.1590/2177-6709.21.1.047-053.oar.

Nasal septum changes in adolescent patients treated with rapid maxillary
expansion.

Aziz T(1), Wheatley FC(2), Ansari K(3), Lagravere M(4), Major M(4), Flores-Mir
C(4).

Author information: 
(1)aff1, Canada. (2)Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (3)Department 
of Surgery, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (4)Department of
Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) scans to measure
changes in nasal septal deviation (NSD) after rapid maxillary expansion (RME)
treatment in adolescent patients.
METHODS: This retrospective study involved 33 patients presenting with moderate
to severe nasal septum deviation as an incidental finding. Out of these 33
patients, 26 were treated for transverse maxillary constriction with RME and
seven, who did not undergo RME treatment, were included in the study as control
group. CBCT scans were taken before appliance insertion and after appliance
removal. These images were analyzed to measure changes in nasal septum deviation 
(NSD). Analysis of variance for repeated measures (ANOVA) was used.
RESULTS: No significant changes were identified in NSD regardless of the
application or not of RME treatment and irrespective of the baseline deviation
degree.
CONCLUSION: This study did not provide strong evidence to suggest that RME
treatment has any effect on NSD in adolescent patients; however, the results
should be interpreted with caution, due to the small sample size and large
variation amongst individual patient characteristics.

PMID: 27007761  [PubMed - in process]


4. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2016 Mar 21. doi: 10.1002/pbc.25957. [Epub ahead of print]

Unique Familial MLL(KMT2A)-Rearranged Precursor B-Cell Infant Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia in Non-twin Siblings.

Urtishak KA(1), Robinson BW(1), Rappaport EF(2), Sarezky MD(3), Biegel JA(4,)(5),
Nichols KE(1,)(5), Wilmoth DM(6), Wang LS(7), Stern JW(1,)(5), Felix CA(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. (2)Nucleic Acids & Protein Core Facility, The Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (3)Department of Pediatrics, The
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (4)Division of
Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (6)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.

BACKGROUND: Infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) has never occurred in
families except for the ~100% concordant cases in monozygous twins attributed to 
twin-to-twin metastases. We report the first kindred with infant ALL in non-twin 
siblings. The siblings were diagnosed with MLL-rearranged (MLL-R) ALL 26 months
apart. The second affected sibling had an unaffected dichorionic monozygous
co-twin. Both had fatal outcomes.
PROCEDURES: Translocations were characterized by karyotype, FISH, multiplex FISH,
and MLL breakpoint cluster region (bcr) Southern blot analysis. Breakpoint
junctions and fusion transcripts were cloned by PCR. TP53 mutation and NADPH
quinone oxidorecuctase 1 (NQO1) C609T analyses were performed, and pedigree
history and parental occupations were ascertained. The likelihood of chance
occurrence of infant ALL in non-twin siblings was computed based on a binomial
distribution. Zygosity was determined by single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
array.
RESULTS: The translocations were not related or vertically transmitted. The
complex karyotype of the proband's ALL had chromosome 2, 3, 4, and 11
abnormalities causing a 5'-MLL-AFF1-3' fusion and a non-productive rearrangement 
of 3'MLL with a chromosome 3q intergenic region. The affected twin's ALL
exhibited a simple t(4;11). The complex karyotype of the proband's ALL suggested 
a genotoxic insult, but no exposure was identified. There was no germline TP53
mutation. The NQO1 C609T risk allele was absent. The likelihood of infant ALL
occurring in non-twin siblings by chance alone is one in 1.198 × 10(9) families.
CONCLUSIONS: Whether because of a deleterious transplacental exposure, novel
predisposition syndrome, or exceedingly rare chance occurrence, MLL-R infant ALL 
can occur in non-twin siblings. The discordant occurrence of infant ALL in the
monozygous twins was likely because they were dichorionic.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26999444  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2016;24:e2668. doi: 10.1590/1518-8345.1074.2668. Epub 2016
Mar 4.

Competing health policies: insurance against universal public systems.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Laurell AE(1).

Author information: 
(1)aff1.

OBJECTIVES: This article analyzes the content and outcome of ongoing health
reforms in Latin America: Universal Health Coverage with Health Insurance, and
the Universal and Public Health Systems. It aims to compare and contrast the
conceptual framework and practice of each and verify their concrete results
regarding the guarantee of the right to health and access to required services.
It identifies a direct relationship between the development model and the type of
reform. The neoclassical-neoliberal model has succeeded in converting health into
a field of privatized profits, but has failed to guarantee the right to health
and access to services, which has discredited the governments. The reform of the 
progressive governments has succeeded in expanding access to services and
ensuring the right to health, but faces difficulties and tensions related to the 
permanence of a powerful, private, industrial-insurance medical complex and
persistence of the ideologies about medicalized 'good medicine'. Based on these
findings, some strategies to strengthen unique and supportive public health
systems are proposed.

PMID: 26959328  [PubMed - in process]


6. Mol Cell Biol. 2016 Feb 1;36(7):1194-205. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00994-15.

A Minor Subset of Super Elongation Complexes Plays a Predominant Role in
Reversing HIV-1 Latency.

Li Z(1), Lu H(2), Zhou Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California, USA. (2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA Innovation Center
of Cell Signaling Network, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Xiamen University, 
Xiamen, Fujian, China. (3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA qzhou@berkeley.edu.

Promoter-proximal pausing by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) is a key rate-limiting
step in HIV-1 transcription and latency reversal. The viral Tat protein recruits 
human super elongation complexes (SECs) to paused Pol II to overcome this
restriction. Despite the recent progress in understanding the functions of
different subsets of SECs in controlling cellular and Tat-activated HIV
transcription, little is known about the SEC subtypes that help reverse viral
latency in CD4(+) T cells. Here, we used the CRISPR-Cas9 genome-editing tool to
knock out the gene encoding the SEC subunit ELL2, AFF1, or AFF4 in Jurkat/2D10
cells, a well-characterized HIV-1 latency model. Depletion of these proteins
drastically reduced spontaneous and drug-induced latency reversal by suppressing 
HIV-1 transcriptional elongation. Surprisingly, a low-abundance subset of SECs
containing ELL2 and AFF1 was found to play a predominant role in cooperating with
Tat to reverse latency. By increasing the cellular level/activity of these
Tat-friendly SECs, we could potently activate latent HIV-1 without using any
drugs. These results implicate the ELL2/AFF1-SECs as an important target in the
future design of a combinatorial therapeutic approach to purge latent HIV-1.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 26830226  [PubMed - in process]


7. Trends Psychiatry Psychother. 2015 Dec;37(4):171-82. doi:
10.1590/2237-6089-2014-0026.

Crisis interventions in online psychological counseling.

Silva JA(1), Siegmund G(2), Bredemeier J(3).

Author information: 
(1)aff1, Brazil. (2)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, 
Brazil. (3)UFRGS, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: The world's population is often assailed by crises of various
orders. Disasters caused by nature and by humans themselves also impact on
people's mental health. Psychological crises, such as suicide attempts, represent
a growing problem in mental health. When faced with such scenarios, specific
strategies of crisis intervention are both appropriate and necessary.
OBJECTIVE: To conduct a systematic review of the literature dealing with online
psychological crisis intervention, describing and discussing their operational
design, specific characteristics and applications.
METHOD: A systematic review of literature indexed on the PubMed, PsycINFO, and
SciELO databases identified by searches conducted from January to June of 2014.
RESULTS: The searches identified 17 empirical studies about online crisis
interventions which were reviewed. Three crisis contexts emerged: 1) disasters,
2) risk/prevention of suicide, and 3) trauma. Eleven different intervention
programs were described and the predominant treatment approach was cognitive
behavioral therapy. The results showed that research into online psychological
crisis intervention has been conducted in several different countries, especially
the Netherlands and Australia, and that the users of these tools benefit from
them.
CONCLUSION: Online crisis interventions have been developed and researched in
many countries around the world. In Brazil, there is still a lack of investment
and research in this area.

PMID: 26689385  [PubMed - in process]


8. Mol Syndromol. 2015 Oct;6(4):193-203. doi: 10.1159/000441046. Epub 2015 Oct 7.

Cytogenetic and Molecular Findings in Children with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia:
Experience of a Single Institution in Argentina.

Coccé MC(1), Alonso CN(2), Rossi JG(3), Bernasconi AR(3), Rampazzi MA(1), Felice 
MS(2), Rubio PL(2), Eandi Eberle S(2), Medina A(2), Gallego MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics Laboratory, Genetics Department, Hospital de Pediatría 'Prof Dr. 
Juan P. Garrahan', Buenos Aires, Argentina. (2)Department of Hematology and
Oncology, Hospital de Pediatría 'Prof Dr. Juan P. Garrahan', Buenos Aires,
Argentina. (3)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, Hospital de Pediatría
'Prof Dr. Juan P. Garrahan', Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The purpose of the current study was to evaluate the cytogenetic findings in
1,057 children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) referred to the
cytogenetics laboratory at the Hospital de Pediatría Dr. Juan P. Garrahan,
between 1991 and 2014. Chromosomal abnormalities were evaluated by G-banding and 
FISH. Since December 2002, RT-PCR determinations were systematically carried out 
for BCR-ABL1, KMT2A-AFF1, ETV6-RUNX1, and TCF3-PBX1 rearrangements in children,
adding KMT2A-MLLT3 and KMT2A-MLLT1 in infants. The percentage of abnormalities
detected by cytogenetics was 70.1%. Four novel abnormalities, t(2;8)(p11.2;p22), 
inv(4)(p16q25), t(1;7)(q25;q32), and t(5;6)(q21;q21), were found in this cohort. 
We compared cytogenetic and RT-PCR results for BCR-ABL1, KMT2A-AFF1 and TCF3-PBX1
rearrangements in 497 children evaluated by both methods. The results were highly
concordant (p < 0.7), and interestingly, FISH was relevant to confirm G-banding
findings that were discordant with RT-PCR studies. This study showed the
importance of performing G-banding, FISH and RT-PCR simultaneously to improve the
detection of chromosomal abnormalities considering their important value in the
diagnosis and prognosis of childhood ALL patients. Finally, to the best of our
knowledge, this is the first series of cytogenetic findings in children with ALL 
reported in Argentina.

PMCID: PMC4662297
PMID: 26648836  [PubMed]


9. Braz J Phys Ther. 2015 Sep-Oct;19(5):329-30. doi: 10.1590/bjpt-rbf.2014.0129.

Editorial.

Nawoczenski DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)aff1, Brasil.

PMCID: PMC4647144
PMID: 26537803  [PubMed - in process]


10. Arq Bras Cir Dig. 2015 Jul-Sep;28(3):183-5. doi: 10.1590/S0102-67202015000300009.

The prevalence of HLA DQ2 and DQ8 in patients with celiac disease, in family and 
in general population.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Cecilio LA(1), Bonatto MW(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Faculdade Assis Gurgacz, Cascavel, PR, Brazil. (2)aff1,
Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Celiac disease is an enteropathy characterized by gluten sensitivity 
and broad clinical aspect. Has a multifactorial cause and depends on genetic,
immunological and environmental factors for its development. The genetic
influence is given mostly by the human leukocyte antigens HLA DQ2 and DQ8.
AIM: To evaluate the prevalence of human leukocyte antigens DQ2 and DQ8 in three 
different groups: patients with celiac disease, first-degree relatives and the
general population.
METHOD: Retrospective analysis that evaluated serologic and endoscopic data of 74
patients with celiac disease and 109 non-celiac, which were subdivided into two
subgroups: non-celiac who had first-degree relatives with celiac and non-celiac
who did not. All patients underwent laboratory examination for screening genetic 
sensitivity given by HLA DQ2 and HLA DQ8 by.
RESULTS: The presence of HLA DQ2 and DQ8 was identified in 98,4% of 74 celiac
patients, of which 79,7% had only HLA DQ2; 8,1% had only HLA DQ8 and 10,8% had
both antigens histocompatibility. In the group of relatives of celiac patients,
were included 29 patients; among them, 89,6% had HLA DQ2 and/or DQ8; 76% only the
HLA DQ2, 10,3% only HLA DQ8 and 3,4% presented both human leukocyte antigens
(HLA).
CONCLUSION: HLA DQ2/DQ8 was present in 98,4% of celiac patients; 89,6% relatives 
of celiac family and in 55,4% of people from the general population without
family celiac.

PMCID: PMC4737358
PMID: 26537142  [PubMed - in process]


11. Br J Haematol. 2015 Dec;171(5):818-29. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13763. Epub 2015 Sep 25.

HMGA2 as a potential molecular target in KMT2A-AFF1-positive infant acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Wu Z(1), Eguchi-Ishimae M(1), Yagi C(1), Iwabuki H(1), Gao W(1), Tauchi H(1),
Inukai T(2), Sugita K(2), Ishii E(1), Eguchi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Ehime University Graduate School of Medicine, Toon,
Ehime, Japan. (2)Department of Paediatrics, University of Yamanashi, Chuo,
Yamanashi, Japan.

Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) in infants is an intractable cancer in
childhood. Although recent intensive chemotherapy progress has considerably
improved ALL treatment outcome, disease cure is often accompanied by undesirable 
long-term side effects, and efficient, less toxic molecular targeting therapies
have been anticipated. In infant ALL cells with KMT2A (MLL) fusion, the microRNA 
let-7b (MIRLET7B) is significantly downregulated by DNA hypermethylation of its
promoter region. We show here that the expression of HMGA2, one of the oncogenes 
repressed by MIRLET7B, is reversely upregulated in infant ALL leukaemic cells,
particularly in KMT2A-AFF1 (MLL-AF4) positive ALL. In addition to the suppression
of MIRLET7B, KMT2A fusion proteins positively regulate the expression of HMGA2.
HMGA2 is one of the negative regulators of CDKN2A gene, which encodes the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p16(INK4A) . The HMGA2 inhibitor netropsin,
when combined with demethylating agent 5-azacytidine, upregulated and sustained
the expression of CDKN2A, which resulted in growth suppression of
KMT2A-AFF1-expressing cell lines. This effect was more apparent compared to
treatment with 5-azacytidine alone. These results indicate that the
MIRLET7B-HMGA2-CDKN2A axis plays an important role in cell proliferation of
leukaemic cells and could be a possible molecular target for the therapy of
infant ALL with KMT2A-AFF1.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26403224  [PubMed - in process]


12. Acta Reumatol Port. 2015 May 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Association Study of an AFF1 Gene Polymorphism (rs340630) with Iranian Systemic
Lupus Erythematosus Patients.

Arabi E, Garshasbi M, Jamshidi AR, Khalesi R, Ahmadzadeh N, Akbarian M, Mahmoudi 
M.

AIM: To investigate whether an AFF1 polymorphism was associated with
susceptibility and clinical features of SLE in Iranian patients.
METHODS: A total of 320 patients with SLE and 330 age, sex and ethnically matched
healthy control subjects were enrolled in the present study. Both cases and
healthy controls were genotyped for rs340630 polymorphism located inside the
AFF1using Amplification Refractory Mutation System-PCR (ARMS-PCR). In order to
investigation of SNP association and clinical features of SLE, clinical
manifestations of patients were recorded. The distributions of rs340630 genotypes
were tested for deviation from Hardy-Weinberg in controls. Genotypic and allelic 
distribution between patients and controls were assessed by chi-squares test. The
Odds Ratio (OR) and 95 % Confidence Intervals were calculated from multiple
logistic regression analysis.
MAJOR RESULTS: Both A and G alleles of rs340630were seen among the Iranian
samples. All three genotypes of rs340630 were found, i.e., homozygous A/A
(OR=1/01, 95%CI=%72 - 1/42, P= %99), homozygous G/G (OR=%92, 95%CI= %63 - 1/35,
P=%77) and heterozygous A/G (OR=1/03, 95%CI= %76 - 1/41, P=%87). In the SLE
group, the number of patients with renal disorder was significantly higher for
the AG genotype compared to other genotypes of AFF1 polymorphism (P= 0.05).
CONCLUSION: There was no association between AFF1 polymorphism (rs340630) and
SLE. However, our findings indicated that AFF1 polymorphism (rs340630) was
significantly (P=0.0045) correlated with renal disorder in Iranian population.

PMID: 26337188  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. J Neuroinflammation. 2015 Aug 16;12:150. doi: 10.1186/s12974-015-0369-6.

Active immunization against complement factor C5a: a new therapeutic approach for
Alzheimer's disease.

Landlinger C(1), Oberleitner L(2), Gruber P(3), Noiges B(4), Yatsyk K(5), Santic 
R(6), Mandler M(7), Staffler G(8).

Author information: 
(1)AFFiRiS AG, Karl-Farkas-Gasse 22, Vienna, 1030, Austria.
christine.landlinger@affiris.com. (2)AFFiRiS AG, Karl-Farkas-Gasse 22, Vienna,
1030, Austria. lisa.oberleitner@affiris.com. (3)AFFiRiS AG, Karl-Farkas-Gasse 22,
Vienna, 1030, Austria. petra.gruber@affiris.com. (4)AFFiRiS AG, Karl-Farkas-Gasse
22, Vienna, 1030, Austria. bnoiges@gmx.at. (5)AFFiRiS AG, Karl-Farkas-Gasse 22,
Vienna, 1030, Austria. kristyna.yatsyk@affiris.com. (6)AFFiRiS AG,
Karl-Farkas-Gasse 22, Vienna, 1030, Austria. radmila.santic@affiris.com.
(7)AFFiRiS AG, Karl-Farkas-Gasse 22, Vienna, 1030, Austria.
markus.mandler@affiris.com. (8)AFFiRiS AG, Karl-Farkas-Gasse 22, Vienna, 1030,
Austria. guenther.staffler@affiris.com.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disease
characterized by neuronal loss due to amyloid beta aggregations, neurofibrillary 
tangles, and prominent neuroinflammation. Recently, interference with
neuroinflammation as a new therapeutic approach for AD treatment gained great
interest. Microglia cells, one of the major contributors in neuroinflammation,
are activated in response to misfolded proteins such as amyloid ß and cell debris
leading to a sustained release of pro-inflammatory mediators. Especially,
complement factor C5a and its receptor have been found to be up-regulated in
microglia in the immediate surroundings of cerebral amyloid plaques and blocking 
of C5aR resulted in a reduction of pathological markers in a model of AD. Here,
we investigate the effect of active vaccination against the complement factor C5a
to interfere with neuroinflammation and neuropathologic alterations in a mouse
model of AD.
METHODS: Short antigenic peptides AFF1 and AFF2, which mimic a C-terminal epitope
of C5a, were selected and formulated to vaccines. These vaccines are able to
induce a highly specific antibody response to the target protein C5a. Tg2576
mice, a common model of AD, were immunized with these two C5a-peptide vaccines
and the induced immune response toward C5a was analyzed by ELISA and Western blot
analysis. The influence on memory retention was assessed by a contextual fear
conditioning test. Microglia activation and amyloid plaque deposition in the
brain was visualized by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Both C5a-targeting vaccines were highly immunogenic and induced
sustained antibody titers against C5a. Tg2576 mice vaccinated at early stages of 
the disease showed significantly improved contextual memory accompanied by the
reduction of microglia activation in the hippocampus and cerebral amyloid plaque 
load compared to control mice. Late-stage immunization also showed a decrease in 
the number of activated microglia, and improved memory function, however, had no 
influence on the amyloid ß load.
CONCLUSION: C5a-peptide vaccines represent a safe and well-tolerated
immunotherapy, which is able to induce a strong and specific immune response
against the pro-inflammatory molecule C5a. In a mouse model of AD, C5a-peptide
vaccines reduce microglia activation and thus neuroinflammation, which is
supposed to lead to reduced neuronal dysfunction and AD symptomatic decline.

PMCID: PMC4537556
PMID: 26275910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Ovarian Res. 2015 Aug 12;8:56. doi: 10.1186/s13048-015-0186-7.

MicroRNA-200c and microRNA-31 regulate proliferation, colony formation, migration
and invasion in serous ovarian cancer.

Ibrahim FF(1), Jamal R(2), Syafruddin SE(3), Ab Mutalib NS(4), Saidin S(5), MdZin
RR(6), Hossain Mollah MM(7), Mokhtar NM(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)UKM Medical Molecular Biology Institute, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Jalan
Yaa'cob Latiff, Bandar Tun Razak, 56000 Cheras, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
fateeniasani@gmail.com. (2)UKM Medical Molecular Biology Institute, Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia, Jalan Yaa'cob Latiff, Bandar Tun Razak, 56000 Cheras, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia. rahmanj@ppukm.ukm.edu.my. (3)UKM Medical Molecular Biology
Institute, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Jalan Yaa'cob Latiff, Bandar Tun
Razak, 56000 Cheras, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. effendisy@ppukm.ukm.edu.my. (4)UKM
Medical Molecular Biology Institute, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Jalan
Yaa'cob Latiff, Bandar Tun Razak, 56000 Cheras, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
nurulsyakima@gmail.com. (5)UKM Medical Molecular Biology Institute, Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia, Jalan Yaa'cob Latiff, Bandar Tun Razak, 56000 Cheras, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia. sazuita@yahoo.com. (6)Department of Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Jalan Yaacob Latiff, 56000 Cheras,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. ayureena@hotmail.com. (7)UKM Medical Molecular Biology
Institute, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Jalan Yaa'cob Latiff, Bandar Tun
Razak, 56000 Cheras, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. mhmollah06@yahoo.com. (8)UKM Medical
Molecular Biology Institute, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Jalan Yaa'cob
Latiff, Bandar Tun Razak, 56000 Cheras, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
norfilza@ppukm.ukm.edu.my. (9)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Medical Center, Jalan Yaacob Latiff, Bandar Tun
Razak, 56000 Cheras, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. norfilza@ppukm.ukm.edu.my.

BACKGROUND: Serous epithelial ovarian cancer (SEOC) is a highly metastatic
disease and its progression has been implicated with microRNAs. This study aimed 
to identify the differentially expressed microRNAs in Malaysian patients with
SEOC and examine the microRNAs functional roles in SEOC cells.
METHODS: Twenty-two SEOC and twenty-two normal samples were subjected to miRNA
expression profiling using the locked nucleic acid (LNA) quantitative real-time
PCR (qPCR). The localization of miR-200c was determined via LNA in situ
hybridization (ISH). Functional analysis of miR-200c and miR-31 on cell
proliferation, migration and invasion and clonogenic cell survival were assessed 
in vitro. The putative target genes of the two miRNAs were predicted by miRWalk
program and expression of the target genes in SEOC cell lines was validated.
RESULTS: The miRNA expression profiling revealed thirty-eight significantly
dysregulated miRNAs in SEOC compared to normal ovarian tissues. Of these,
eighteen were up-regulated whilst twenty miRNAs were down-regulated. We observed 
chromogenic miR-200c-ISH signal predominantly in the cytoplasmic compartment of
both epithelial and inflammatory cancer cells. Re-expression of miR-200c
significantly increased the cell proliferation and colony formation but reduced
the migration and invasion of SEOC cells. In addition, miR-200c expression was
inversely proportionate with the expression of deleted in liver cancer-1 (DLC-1) 
gene. Over-expression of miR-31 in SEOC cells resulted in decreased cell
proliferation, clonogenic potential, cell migration and invasion. Meanwhile,
miR-31 gain-of-function led to the down-regulation of AF4/FMR2 family member 1
(AFF1) gene.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggested that miR-200c and miR-31 may play roles in the 
SEOC metastasis biology and could be considered as promising targets for
therapeutic purposes.

PMCID: PMC4531514
PMID: 26260454  [PubMed - in process]


15. Am J Blood Res. 2015 Jun 15;5(1):10-24. eCollection 2015.

AF4 and AF4N protein complexes: recruitment of P-TEFb kinase, their interactome
and potential functions.

Scholz B(1), Kowarz E(1), Rössler T(1), Ahmad K(2), Steinhilber D(2), Marschalek 
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology, Goethe-University of Frankfurt Biocenter,
Max-von-Laue-Str. 9, D-60438 Frankfurt/Main, Germany. (2)Institute of
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Goethe-University of Frankfurt Biocenter,
Max-von-Laue-Str. 9, D-60438 Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

AF4/AFF1 and AF5/AFF4 are the molecular backbone to assemble "super-elongation
complexes" (SECs) that have two main functions: (1) control of transcriptional
elongation by recruiting the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb =
CyclinT1/CDK9) that is usually stored in inhibitory 7SK RNPs; (2) binding of
different histone methyltransferases, like DOT1L, NSD1 and CARM1. This way,
transcribed genes obtain specific histone signatures (e.g. H3K79me2/3, H3K36me2) 
to generate a transcriptional memory system. Here we addressed several questions:
how is P-TEFb recruited into SEC, how is the AF4 interactome composed, and what
is the function of the naturally occuring AF4N protein variant which exhibits
only the first 360 amino acids of the AF4 full-length protein. Noteworthy,
shorter protein variants are a specific feature of all AFF protein family
members. Here, we demonstrate that full-length AF4 and AF4N are both catalyzing
the transition of P-TEFb from 7SK RNP to their N-terminal domain. We have also
mapped the protein-protein interaction network within both complexes. In
addition, we have first evidence that the AF4N protein also recruits TFIIH and
the tumor suppressor MEN1. This indicate that AF4N may have additional functions 
in transcriptional initiation and in MEN1-dependend transcriptional processes.

PMCID: PMC4497493
PMID: 26171280  [PubMed]


16. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jul 13;43(12):5868-79. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv541. Epub 2015
May 24.

Gene target specificity of the Super Elongation Complex (SEC) family: how HIV-1
Tat employs selected SEC members to activate viral transcription.

Lu H(1), Li Z(2), Zhang W(2), Schulze-Gahmen U(2), Xue Y(3), Zhou Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Innovation Center of Cell Signaling Network, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, Fujian, China Department of Molecular
and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. (3)Innovation Center of Cell Signaling Network, School
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, Fujian, China.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA qzhou@berkeley.edu.

The AF4/FMR2 proteins AFF1 and AFF4 act as a scaffold to assemble the Super
Elongation Complex (SEC) that strongly activates transcriptional elongation of
HIV-1 and cellular genes. Although they can dimerize, it is unclear whether the
dimers exist and function within a SEC in vivo. Furthermore, it is unknown
whether AFF1 and AFF4 function similarly in mediating SEC-dependent activation of
diverse genes. Providing answers to these questions, our current study shows that
AFF1 and AFF4 reside in separate SECs that display largely distinct gene target
specificities. While the AFF1-SEC is more potent in supporting HIV-1
transactivation by the viral Tat protein, the AFF4-SEC is more important for
HSP70 induction upon heat shock. The functional difference between AFF1 and AFF4 
in Tat-transactivation has been traced to a single amino acid variation between
the two proteins, which causes them to enhance the affinity of Tat for P-TEFb, a 
key SEC component, with different efficiency. Finally, genome-wide analysis
confirms that the genes regulated by AFF1-SEC and AFF4-SEC are largely
non-overlapping and perform distinct functions. Thus, the SEC represents a family
of related complexes that exist to increase the regulatory diversity and gene
control options during transactivation of diverse cellular and viral genes.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4499153
PMID: 26007649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2015 Apr;110(2):263-6. doi: 10.1590/0074-02760140309. Epub
2015 Mar 31.

T-helper 17-related cytokines and IgE antibodies during hepatitis A virus
infection in children.

Trujillo-Ochoa JL(1), Corral-Jara KF(1), Escobedo-Meléndez G(2), Realpe M(3),
Panduro A(1), Roman S(2), Fierro NA(1).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)aff4. (3)Departamento de Medicina Veterinaria, Centro Universitario
de Ciencias Biológicas y Agropecuarias, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, 
Jalisco, Mexico.

We determined the serum IgE levels and T-helper (Th)17-related cytokines during
distinct hepatitis A virus (HAV)-induced clinical courses in children. A
significantly higher concentration of macrophage inflammatory protein 3a,
interleukin (IL)-17E and IL-17F in HAV-infected children with intermediate liver 
injury compared with those with minor liver damage was found. A reduction in the 
IgE levels in those patients who showed the highest levels of IL-17F in the group
of intermediate liver injury was found. The data suggested that the Th17-related 
profile is associated with the severity of HAV infection and might play a role on
the modulation achieved by HAV during allergies.

PMCID: PMC4489460
PMID: 25946253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Arq Bras Cir Dig. 2015;28(1):36-9. doi: 10.1590/S0102-67202015000100010.

Food intolerances and associated symptoms in patients undergoing Fobi-Capella
technique without gastric ring.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Moreira Mde A(1), Espínola PR(1), de Azevedo CW(1).

Author information: 
(1)aff1.

BACKGROUND: Bariatric surgery is considered the only effective method to treat
refractory obesity, and especially for those in which clinical treatment was not 
successful. However, the appearance of food intolerances and clinical
manifestations are quite common.
AIM: To identify food intolerances and associated them to symptoms in patients
undergoing Fobi-Capella technique without gastric ring.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study of adult patients who had more than one
year after surgery. Demographic, anthropometric, weight and preoperative height
data were investigated. Nutritional status was classified according to the
criteria established by the World Health Organization. It was considered food
intolerance the presence of nausea, vomiting, diarrhea or bloating after eating a
particular food.
RESULTS: The sample consisted of 61 patients who attended the nutritional
consultation of which 26 (42.6%) had food intolerance, mostly related to red meat
(n=12; 34.3%) during the first six months of operation; there was a significant
difference between the periods between 0 and 6 months, and 7 to 12 (p=0.02).
Among the symptoms reported by patients, nausea was the most recurrent until the 
6th month, but without significant differences between the two periods (p=0.06).
CONCLUSION: The Fobi-Capella procedure without gastric ring promoted high
frequency of intolerance to meat in general, especially for the red, chicken and 
fish, on this sequence; nausea was the most frequent symptom. These data suggest 
the need for adequate nutritional monitoring throughout the postoperative period.

PMCID: PMC4739254
PMID: 25861067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Apr 8;16(4):7723-37. doi: 10.3390/ijms16047723.

Genome-wide expression in visceral adipose tissue from obese prepubertal
children.

Aguilera CM(1), Gomez-Llorente C(2), Tofe I(3), Gil-Campos M(4), Cañete R(5), Gil
Á(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology II, Institute of Nutrition
and Food Technology, Centre for Biomedical Research, University of Granada,
Armilla, 18100 Granada, Spain. caguiler@ugr.es. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology II, Institute of Nutrition and Food Technology, Centre for
Biomedical Research, University of Granada, Armilla, 18100 Granada, Spain.
gomezll@ugr.es. (3)Unit of Pediatric Endocrinology, Reina Sofia University
Hospital, Avda Menéndez Pidal s/n. 14004 Córdoba, Spain. drakaramelo@hotmail.com.
(4)Unit of Pediatric Endocrinology, Reina Sofia University Hospital, Avda
Menéndez Pidal s/n. 14004 Córdoba, Spain. mercedes_gil_campos@yahoo.es. (5)Unit
of Pediatric Endocrinology, Reina Sofia University Hospital, Avda Menéndez Pidal 
s/n. 14004 Córdoba, Spain. agil@ugr.es. (6)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology II, Institute of Nutrition and Food Technology, Centre for
Biomedical Research, University of Granada, Armilla, 18100 Granada, Spain.
agil@ugr.es.

Characterization of the genes expressed in adipose tissue (AT) is key to
understanding the pathogenesis of obesity and to developing treatments for this
condition. Our objective was to compare the gene expression in visceral AT (VAT) 
between obese and normal-weight prepubertal children. A total of fifteen obese
and sixteen normal-weight children undergoing abdominal elective surgery were
selected. RNA was extracted from VAT biopsies. Microarray experiments were
independently performed for each sample (six obese and five normal-weight
samples). Validation by quantitative PCR (qPCR) was performed on an additional 10
obese and 10 normal-weight VAT samples. Of 1276 differentially expressed genes (p
< 0.05), 245 were more than two-fold higher in obese children than in
normal-weight children. As validated by qPCR, expression was upregulated in genes
involved in lipid and amino acid metabolism (CES1, NPRR3 and BHMT2), oxidative
stress and extracellular matrix regulation (TNMD and NQO1), adipogenesis (CRYAB
and AFF1) and inflammation (ANXA1); by contrast, only CALCRL gene expression was 
confirmed to be downregulated. In conclusion, this study in prepubertal children 
demonstrates the up- and down-regulation of genes that encode molecules that were
previously proposed to influence the pathogenesis of adulthood obesity, as well
as previously unreported dysregulated genes that may be candidate genes in the
aetiology of obesity.

PMCID: PMC4425045
PMID: 25856673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2015 Mar 31:0. [Epub ahead of print]

T-helper 17-related cytokines and IgE antibodies during hepatitis A virus
infection in children.

Trujillo-Ochoa JL(1), Corral-Jara KF(1), Escobedo-Meléndez G(2), Realpe M(3),
Panduro A(1), Roman S(2), Fierro NA(1).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)aff4. (3)Departamento de Medicina Veterinaria, Centro Universitario
de Ciencias Biológicas y Agropecuarias, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, 
Jalisco, Mexico.

We determined the serum IgE levels and T-helper (Th)17-related cytokines during
distinct hepatitis A virus (HAV)-induced clinical courses in children. A
significantly higher concentration of macrophage inflammatory protein 3a,
interleukin (IL)-17E and IL-17F in HAV-infected children with intermediate liver 
injury compared with those with minor liver damage was found. A reduction in the 
IgE levels in those patients who showed the highest levels of IL-17F in the group
of intermediate liver injury was found. The data suggested that the Th17-related 
profile is associated with the severity of HAV infection and might play a role on
the modulation achieved by HAV during allergies.

PMID: 25830544  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2015 Jan-Feb;23(1):148-54. doi:
10.1590/0104-1169.3518.2536.

Adaptation and validation of indicators concerning the sterilization process of
supplies in Primary Health Care services.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Passos IP(1), Padoveze MC(2), Roseira CE(1), de Figueiredo RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)Escola de Enfermagem, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil. (3)Departamento de Enfermagem, Universidade Federal de São Carlos, São
Carlos, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: to adapt and validate, by expert consensus, a set of indicators used 
to assess the sterilization process of dental, medical and hospital supplies to
be used in PHC services.
METHOD: qualitative methodological study performed in two stages. The first stage
included a focal group composed of experts to adapt the indicators to be used in 
PHC. In the second stage, the indicators were validated using a 4-point Likert
scale, which was completed by judges. A Content Validity Index of = 0.75 was
considered to show approval of the indicators.
RESULTS: the adaptations implemented by the focal group mainly referred to the
physical structure, inclusion of dental care professionals, inclusion of chemical
disinfection, and replacement of the hot air and moist heat sterilization
methods. The validation stage resulted in an index of 0.96, which ranged from
0.90 to 1.00, for the components of the indicators.
CONCLUSION: the judges considered the indicators after adaptation to be
validated. Even though there may be differences among items processed around the 
world, there certainly are common characteristics, especially in countries with
economic and cultural environments similar to Brazil. The inclusion of these
indicators to assess the safety of healthcare supplies used in PHC services
should be considered.

PMCID: PMC4376043
PMID: 25806643  [PubMed - in process]


22. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2015 Jan-Feb;23(1):130-8. doi:
10.1590/0104-1169.3357.2534.

Adaptation and validation of the Caregiver Burden Inventory for use with
caregivers of elderly individuals.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Valer DB(1), Aires M(2), Fengler FL(3), Paskulin LM(3).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. 
(3)Escola de Enfermagem, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre,
RS, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: to adapt and validate the Caregiver Burden Inventory for use with
caregivers of older adults in Brazil.
METHOD: methodological study involving initial translation, synthesis of
translations, back translation, expert committee review, pre-testing, submission 
of the final version to the original authors, and assessment of the inventory's
psychometric properties. The inventory assesses five dimensions of caregiver
burden: time-dependence, developmental, physical, social and emotional
dimensions.
RESULTS: a total of 120 family caregivers took part in the study. All
care-receivers were older adults dependent on assistance to perform activities of
daily living, and lived in the central region of the city of Porto Alegre, RS,
Brasil. Cronbach's alpha value for the inventory was 0.936, and the Pearson
correlation coefficient for the relationship between the scores obtained on the
Caregiver Burden Inventory and the Burden Interview was 0.814. The intraclass
correlation coefficient was 0.941, and the value of Student's T-test comparing
test and retest scores was 0.792.
CONCLUSION: the instrument presented adequate reliability and the suitability of 
its items and factors was confirmed in this study.

PMCID: PMC4376041
PMID: 25806641  [PubMed - in process]


23. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2015 Jan-Feb;23(1):36-43. doi:
10.1590/0104-1169.0144.2522.

Use of identification wristbands among patients receiving inpatient treatment in 
a teaching hospital.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Hoffmeister LV(1), de Moura GM(2).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)Escola de Enfermagem, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul,
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: to evaluate the use of identification wristbands among patients
hospitalized in inpatient units.
METHOD: quantitative, descriptive and transversal research, with a sample of 385 
patients. Data collection occurred through the observational method through the
filling out of a structured questionnaire which aimed to check the presence of
the identification wristband and the identifiers used. Descriptive statistics
with absolute and relative frequencies was used for analysis.
RESULTS: it was obtained that 83.9% of the patients were found to have the
correctly identified wristband, 11.9% had a wristband with errors, and 4.2% of
the patients were without a wristband. The main nonconformities found on the
identification wristbands were incomplete name, different registration numbers,
illegibility of the data and problems with the physical integrity of the
wristbands.
CONCLUSION: the study demonstrated the professionals' engagement in the process
of patient identification, evidencing a high rate of conformity of the
wristbands. Furthermore, it contributed to identify elements in the use of
wristbands which may be improved for a safe identification process.

PMCID: PMC4376029
PMID: 25806629  [PubMed - in process]


24. Braz J Phys Ther. 2015 Jan-Feb;19(1):52-60. doi: 10.1590/bjpt-rbf.2014.0070. Epub
2015 Feb 13.

Relation between hand function and gross motor function in full term infants aged
4 to 8 months.

Nogueira SF(1), Figueiredo EM(2), Gonçalves RV(3), Mancini MC(3).

Author information: 
(1)aff1, Brazil. (2)Departamento de Fisioterapia, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil. (3)UFMG, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: In children, reaching emerges around four months of age, which is
followed by rapid changes in hand function and concomitant changes in gross motor
function, including the acquisition of independent sitting. Although there is a
close functional relationship between these domains, to date they have been
investigated separately.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the longitudinal profile of changes and the
relationship between the development of hand function (i.e. reaching for and
manipulating an object) and gross motor function in 13 normally developing
children born at term who were evaluated every 15 days from 4 to 8 months of age.
METHOD: The number of reaches and the period (i.e. time) of manipulation to an
object were extracted from video synchronized with the Qualisys(r) movement
analysis system. Gross motor function was measured using the Alberta Infant Motor
Scale. ANOVA for repeated measures was used to test the effect of age on the
number of reaches, the time of manipulation and gross motor function.
Hierarchical regression models were used to test the associations of reaching and
manipulation with gross motor function.
RESULTS: RESULTS revealed a significant increase in the number of reaches
(p<0.001), the time of manipulation (p<0.001) and gross motor function (p<0.001) 
over time, as well as associations between reaching and gross motor function
(R2=0.84; p<0.001) and manipulation and gross motor function (R2=0.13; p=0.02)
from 4 to 6 months of age. Associations from 6 to 8 months of age were not
significant.
CONCLUSION: The relationship between hand function and gross motor function was
not constant, and the age span from 4 to 6 months was a critical period of
interdependency of hand function and gross motor function development.

PMCID: PMC4351608
PMID: 25714437  [PubMed - in process]


25. Braz J Phys Ther. 2015 Jan-Feb;19(1):77-85. doi: 10.1590/bjpt-rbf.2014.0071. Epub
2015 Feb 13.

Does company compliance with RS-17 influence the characterization of a casual
nexus in expert testimony?

Ribeiro M(1), Guimarães B(2), Sampaio B(3).

Author information: 
(1)aff1, Brazil. (2)Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Recife, PE, Brazil.
(3)UFPE, Recife, PE, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To examine whether company compliance with RS-17 influences the
characterization of the casual nexus in physical therapists' expert reports of
cumulative trauma disorders in the labor court of Pernambuco, Brazil.
METHOD: The sample was composed of seven physical therapists who provided expert 
testimony regarding cumulative trauma disorder cases in the labor court of
Pernambuco, Brazil. Data collection was performed across two stages. In the first
stage, the experts answered a sociodemographic survey and requested the
identification numbers of recent cases where expert testimony was provided to
characterize the causal nexus. In the second stage, the researchers went to the
labor court to collect expert testimony data. These experts indicated that of 75 
total cases, 31% (N=23) of the companies fulfilled RS-17, whereas 69% (N=52) did 
not comply with the law.
RESULTS: Among the organizations that complied with legislation, 30% of the
analyzed expert testimonies showed a positive causal nexus. However, of the
companies that did not comply with RS-17, 71% of the expert testimonies revealed 
a causal nexus. These results indicate that the breach of the law increases the
probability that a causal nexus will be determined by 54.8%.
CONCLUSION: The results showed that failure to comply with RS-17 significantly
increases the probability that a causal nexus will be determined in physical
therapists' expert testimony of cumulative trauma disorders.

PMCID: PMC4351611
PMID: 25714436  [PubMed - in process]


26. Cien Saude Colet. 2015 Jan;20(1):5. doi: 10.1590/1413-812320141912.15662014.

Ciência & Saúde Coletiva celebrates its 20th year, commemorating successes and
setting new goals.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Minayo MC(1), Gomes R(1).

Author information: 
(1)aff1.

PMID: 25650592  [PubMed - in process]


27. Hist Cienc Saude Manguinhos. 2014 Oct-Dec;21(4):1467-73. doi:
10.1590/S0104-59702014000400011.

[The social context of the birth control debate in Colombia in the 1960s and
1970s: politics, medicine and society].

[Article in Spanish]

Chávez AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)aff1, Bogotá, Colombia.

The article seeks to present the necessary context and a preliminary approach to 
understanding and addressing the birth control debate in Colombia in the 1960s
and 1970s. It covers the main conflicting positions during that period and the
discourses and logics permeating the arrival of North American family planning
programs to Latin America as a form of political control of revolutionary
movements.

PMID: 25606736  [PubMed - in process]


28. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2014 Nov-Dec;22(6):942-9. doi:
10.1590/0104-1169.3309.2499. Epub 2014 Dec 16.

Applying Nightingale charts to evaluate the heterogeneity of biomedical waste in 
a Hospital.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Paiz JC(1), Bigolin M(2), Schneider VE(3), Stedile NL(3).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. 
(3)Universidade de Caxias do Sul, Caxias do Sul, RS, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: to evaluate the heterogeneity of biomedical waste (BW) using
Nightingale charts.
METHOD: cross-sectional study consisting of data collection on wastes (direct
observation of receptacles, physical characterisation, and gravimetric
composition), development of a Management Information System, and creation of
statistical charts.
RESULTS: the wastes with the greatest degree of heterogeneity are, in order,
recyclable, infectious, and organic wastes; chemical waste had the most efficient
segregation; Nightingale charts are useful for quick visualisation and
systematisation of information on heterogeneity.
CONCLUSION: the development of a management information system and the use of
Nightingale charts allows for the identification and correction of errors in
waste segregation, which increase health risks and contamination by infectious
and chemical wastes and reduce the sale and profit from recyclables.

PMCID: PMC4309228
PMID: 25591088  [PubMed - in process]


29. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2014 Dec 16;0:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Applying Nightingale charts to evaluate the heterogeneity of biomedical waste in 
a Hospital.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Paiz JC(1), Bigolin M(2), Schneider VE(3), Stedile NL(3).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. 
(3)Universidade de Caxias do Sul, Caxias do Sul, RS, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: to evaluate the heterogeneity of biomedical waste (BW) using
Nightingale charts.
METHOD: cross-sectional study consisting of data collection on wastes (direct
observation of receptacles, physical characterisation, and gravimetric
composition), development of a Management Information System, and creation of
statistical charts.
RESULTS: the wastes with the greatest degree of heterogeneity are, in order,
recyclable, infectious, and organic wastes; chemical waste had the most efficient
segregation; Nightingale charts are useful for quick visualisation and
systematisation of information on heterogeneity.
CONCLUSION: the development of a management information system and the use of
Nightingale charts allows for the identification and correction of errors in
waste segregation, which increase health risks and contamination by infectious
and chemical wastes and reduce the sale and profit from recyclables.

PMID: 25517931  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


30. J Exp Ther Oncol. 2014;10(4):293-300.

An AF9/ENL-targted peptide with therapeutic potential in mixed lineage leukemias.

Barretto NN, Karahalios DS, You D, Hemenway CS.

Misregulation of transcription elongation is proposed to underlie the
pathobiology of MLL leukemia. AF4, AF9, and ENL, common MLL fusion partners, are 
found in complex with positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). AF9
and its homolog ENL directly interact with AF4 within these complexes.
Previously, we designed a peptide that mimics the AF9 binding domain of AF4 and
reported that MLL leukemia cell lines are inhibited by it. Extending these
studies, we have modified the peptide design in order to avoid recognition by
proteases. The peptide is as effective as its predecessor in vitro and enhances
survival in mice bearing MLL leukemia cell lines.

PMID: 25509985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2014 Sep-Oct;47(5):573-8.

Impact of insecticide resistance on the field control of Aedes aegypti in the
State of São Paulo.

Macoris Mde L(1), Andrighetti MT(1), Wanderley DM(1), Ribolla PE(2).

Author information: 
(1)aff1, Laboratório de Entomologia Aplicada, Superintendência de Controle de
Endemias, Marília, São Paulo, SP. (2)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de 
Biociências, Universidade Estadual Paulista, Botucatu, SP, Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: The need to control dengue transmission by means of insecticides
has led to the development of resistance to most of the products used worldwide
against mosquitoes. In the State of São Paulo, the Superintendência de Controle
de Endemias (SUCEN) has annually monitored the susceptibility of Aedes aegypti to
insecticides since 1996; since 1999, surveys were conducted in collaboration with
the National Network of Laboratories (MoReNAa Network) and were coordinated by
the Ministry of Health. In this study, in addition to the biological
characterization of insecticide resistance in the laboratory, the impact of
resistance on field control was evaluated for vector populations that showed
resistance in laboratory assays.
METHODS: Field efficacy tests with larvicides and adulticides were performed over
a 13-year period, using World Health Organization protocols.
RESULTS: Data from the field tests showed a reduction in the residual effect of
temephos on populations with a resistance ratio of 3. For adults, field control
was less effective in populations characterized as resistant in laboratory
qualitative assays, and this was confirmed using qualitative assays and field
evaluation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicated that management of resistance development
needs to be adopted when insect populations show reduced susceptibility. The use 
of insecticides is a self-limiting tool that needs to be applied cautiously, and 
dengue control requires more sustainable strategies.

PMID: 25467257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Arq Bras Cir Dig. 2014;27 Suppl 1:43-6.

Comparison of weight loss, food consumption and frequency of vomiting among
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass patients with or without constriction ring.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Faria SL(1), Faria OP(1), Cardeal Mde A(1).

Author information: 
(1)aff1, Brasil.

BACKGROUND: After Roux-en-Y gastric bypass to avoid rapid gastric emptying,
dumping syndrome and regained weight due to possible dilation of the gastric
pouch, was proposed to place a ring around the gastric pouch.
AIM: To compare weight loss, consumption of macronutrients and the frequency of
vomiting among patients who underwent Roux-en-Y gastric bypass with and without
the placement of a constriction ring around the pouch.
METHOD: A retrospective study, in which an analysis of medical records was
carried out, collecting data of two groups of patients: those who underwent the
operation with the placement of a constriction ring (Ring Group) and those who
underwent without the placement of a ring (No-Ring Group). The food intake data
were analyzed using three 24-hour recalls collected randomly in postoperative
nutritional accompaniment. Data on the percentage of excess weight loss and the
occurrence of vomiting were collected using the weight corresponding to the most 
recent report at the time of data collection.
RESULTS: Medical records of 60 patients were analyzed: 30 from the Ring Group
(women: 80%) and 30 from the No-Ring Group (women: 87%). The average time since
the Ring Group underwent the operation was 88 ± 17.50 months, and for the No-Ring
Group 51 ± 15.3 months. The percentage of excess weight loss did not differ
between the groups. The consumption of protein (g), protein/kg of weight,
%protein and fiber (g) were higher in the No-Ring Group. The consumption of
lipids (g) was statistically higher in the Ring Group. The percentage of patients
who never reported any occurrence was statistically higher in the No-Ring Group
(80%vs.46%). The percentage who frequently reported the occurrence was
statistically higher in the Ring Group (25%vs.0%).
CONCLUSION: The placement of a ring seems to have no advantages in weight loss,
favoring a lower intake of protein and fiber and a higher incidence of vomiting, 
factors that have definite influence in the health of the bariatric patient.

PMCID: PMC4743518
PMID: 25409965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Arq Bras Cir Dig. 2014;27 Suppl 1:13-6.

Weight loss in the first month post-gastroplasty following diet progression with 
introduction of solid food three weeks after surgery.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Andrade CG(1), Lobo A(1).

Author information: 
(1)aff1, São Sebastião do Paraíso, MG, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Bariatric surgery is an effective tool in treating severe obesity. It
provides significant weight loss in morbidly obese people accompanied by
improvement in comorbidities and quality of life.
AIM: To investigate the weight loss outcomes in the first month after bariatric
surgery after introduction of solids three weeks postoperatively.
METHODS: Thirty-two charts of patients who underwent bariatric surgery were
analyzed at a private nutritional clinic in São Sebastião do Paraíso, MG, Brazil;
93,75% of the subjects underwent Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, and 6,25% vertical
gastrectomy. The subjects were 16 to 60 years. A body mass index of 30 to 69
Kg/m2 was obtained. Patients were instructed to eat small amounts several times a
day, eat slowly, chew foods thoroughly, substitute sugar for sweetener, stop
drinking gassy beverages, set the utensils down in between meals, drink only in
between meals, avoid processed condiments and fried and greasy foods.
RESULTS: In the first month after surgery, the mean weight loss was 9,7% and the 
percentage of excess weight loss was 23,9%. It was found that there was
significant statistical difference in relation to initial and final weight
(p=0,00; p<0,05).
CONCLUSION: This protocol provides more freedom of choice in health care once one
does not have to go on food intake modifications for more than three weeks; more 
nutritional guidelines is followed and prospective weight loss is presented.

PMCID: PMC4743511
PMID: 25409958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2014 Jul-Aug;22(4):629-36.

The effects of compensatory workplace exercises to reduce work-related stress and
musculoskeletal pain.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

de Freitas-Swerts FC(1), Robazzi ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)Escola de Enfermagem de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo,
Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: to assess the effect of a compensatory workplace exercise program on 
workers with the purpose of reducing work-related stress and musculoskeletal
pain.
METHOD: quasi-experimental research with quantitative analysis of the data,
involving 30 administrative workers from a Higher Education Public Institution.
For data collection, questionnaires were used to characterize the workers, as
well as the Workplace Stress Scale and the Corlett Diagram. The research took
place in three stages: first: pre-test with the application of the questionnaires
to the subjects; second: Workplace Exercise taking place twice a week, for 15
minutes, during a period of 10 weeks; third: post-test in which the subjects
answered the questionnaires again. For data analysis, the descriptive statistics 
and non-parametric statistics were used through the Wilcoxon Test.
RESULTS: work-related stress was present in the assessed workers, but there was
no statistically significant reduction in the scores after undergoing Workplace
Exercise. However, there was a statistically significant pain reduction in the
neck, cervical, upper, middle and lower back, right thigh, left leg, right ankle 
and feet.
CONCLUSION: the Workplace Exercise promoted a significant pain reduction in the
spine, but did not result in a significant reduction in the levels of
work-related stress.

PMCID: PMC4292657
PMID: 25296147  [PubMed - in process]


35. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2014 Jul-Aug;22(4):569-75.

Pain intensity, disability and depression in individuals with chronic back pain.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Garbi Mde O(1), Hortense P(2), Gomez RR(3), da Silva Tde C(4), Castanho AC(3),
Sousa FA(5).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)Universidade Federal de São Carlos, São Carlos, SP, Brazil.
(3)Universidade Paulista, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil. (4)Escola de Enfermagem de 
Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil. (5)Escola 
de Enfermagem de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade Paulista, Ribeirão Preto, SP,
Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: to measure the pain intensity, identify the disability and depression
levels in people with chronic back pain and to correlate these variables. A
cross-sectional, descriptive and exploratory study was undertaken at the Pain
Treatment Clinic of the University of São Paulo at Ribeirão Preto Hospital das
Clínicas, between February and June 2012, after receiving approval from the
Ethics Committee at the University of São Paulo at Ribeirão Preto College of
Nursing.
METHOD: sixty subjects with chronic back pain participated. The instruments used 
were: the 11-point Numerical Category Scale, the Roland-Morris Disability
Questionnaire and the Beck Depression Inventory. To analyze the data, the
arithmetic means, standard deviations and Spearman's correlation coefficient were
calculated.
RESULTS: the findings show that the participants presented high pain, disability 
and depression levels. The correlation between pain intensity and disability and 
between pain intensity and depression was positive and weak and, between
disability and depression, positive and moderate.
CONCLUSION: the study variables showed moderate and weak indices and the mutual
correlations were positive.

PMCID: PMC4292655
PMID: 25296139  [PubMed - in process]


36. Leuk Res. 2014 Nov;38(11):1309-15. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2014.08.010. Epub 2014 
Aug 24.

Importance of a specific amino acid pairing for murine MLL leukemias driven by
MLLT1/3 or AFF1/4.

Lokken AA(1), Achille NJ(2), Chang MJ(3), Lin JJ(3), Kuntimaddi A(4), Leach
BI(4), Malik B(1), Nesbit JB(3), Zhang S(2), Bushweller JH(4), Zeleznik-Le NJ(5),
Hemenway CS(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Molecular Biology Program, Loyola University Chicago Health Sciences
Division, Maywood, IL 60153, United States. (2)Oncology Research Institute,
Loyola University Chicago Health Sciences Division, Maywood, IL 60153, United
States. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Tulane University School of Medicine, New 
Orleans, LA 70112, United States. (4)Department of Molecular Physiology and
Biological Physics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, United
States. (5)Oncology Research Institute, Loyola University Chicago Health Sciences
Division, Maywood, IL 60153, United States; Department of Medicine, Loyola
University Chicago Health Sciences Division, Maywood, IL 60153, United States.
Electronic address: nzelezn@luc.edu. (6)Oncology Research Institute, Loyola
University Chicago Health Sciences Division, Maywood, IL 60153, United States;
Department of Pediatrics, Loyola University Chicago Health Sciences Division,
Maywood, IL 60153, United States. Electronic address: chemenway@lumc.edu.

Acute leukemias caused by translocations of the MLL gene at chromosome 11 band
q23 (11q23) are characterized by a unique gene expression profile. More recently,
data from several laboratories indicate that the most commonly encountered MLL
fusion proteins, MLLT1, MLLT3, and AFF1 are found within a molecular complex that
facilitates the elongation phase of mRNA transcription. Mutational analyses
suggest that interaction between the MLLT1/3 proteins and AFF family proteins are
required for experimental transformation of hematopoietic progenitor cells
(HPCs). Here, we define a specific pairing of two amino acids that creates a salt
bridge between MLLT1/3 and AFF proteins that is critically important for
MLL-mediated transformation of HPCs. Our findings, coupled with the newly defined
structure of MLLT3 in complex with AFF1, should facilitate the development of
small molecules that block this amino acid interaction and interfere with the
activity of the most common MLL oncoproteins.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4253547
PMID: 25282333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cad Saude Publica. 2014 Aug;30 Suppl 1:S24-6.

Commitment to change.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Gomes MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)aff1, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.

Comment in
    Cad Saude Publica. 2014 Aug;30 Suppl 1:S27-31.

Comment on
    Cad Saude Publica. 2014 Aug;30 Suppl 1:S1-16.
    Cad Saude Publica. 2014 Aug;30 Suppl 1:S6.

PMID: 25167187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Molecules. 2014 Aug 19;19(8):12660-75. doi: 10.3390/molecules190812660.

Prebiotic potential of Agave angustifolia Haw fructans with different degrees of 
polymerization.

Velázquez-Martínez JR(1), González-Cervantes RM(2), Hernández-Gallegos MA(3),
Mendiola RC(4), Aparicio AR(5), Ocampo ML(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Desarrollo de Productos Bióticos, Instituto Politécnico Nacional,
P.O. Box 24, Yautepec 62730, Morelos, Mexico. jrodolfovelazquez@gmail.com.
(2)Departamento de Sistemas Biológicos, Universidad Autónoma
Metropolitana-Xochimilco, Calzada del Hueso 1100, Col. Villa Quietud, Delegación 
Coyoacán 04960, D.F., Mexico. gcrm4280@correo.xoc.uam.mx. (3)Escuela Nacional de 
Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Prolongación de Carpio y
Plan de Ayala s/n, Col. Santo Tomas, Delegación Miguel Hidalgo 11340, D.F.,
Mexico. mineaurora@gmail.com. (4)Centro de Desarrollo de Productos Bióticos,
Instituto Politécnico Nacional, P.O. Box 24, Yautepec 62730, Morelos, Mexico.
rcamposm@ipn.mx. (5)Centro de Desarrollo de Productos Bióticos, Instituto
Politécnico Nacional, P.O. Box 24, Yautepec 62730, Morelos, Mexico.
aaparici@ipn.mx. (6)Centro de Desarrollo de Productos Bióticos, Instituto
Politécnico Nacional, P.O. Box 24, Yautepec 62730, Morelos, Mexico.
mlarenas@ipn.mx.

Inulin-type fructans are the most studied prebiotic compounds because of their
broad range of health benefits. In particular, plants of the Agave genus are rich
in fructans. Agave-derived fructans have a branched structure with both ß-(2<U+2192>1)
and ß-(2<U+2192>6) linked fructosyl chains attached to the sucrose start unit with a
degree of polymerization (DP) of up to 80 fructose units. The objective of this
work was to assess the prebiotic potential of three Agave angustifolia Haw
fructan fractions (AFF) with different degrees of polymerization. The three
fructan fractions were extracted from the agave stem by lixiviation and then
purified by ultrafiltration and ion exchange chromatography: AFF1, AFF2 and AFF3 
with high (3-60 fructose units), medium (2-40) and low (2-22) DP, respectively.
The fructan profile was determined with high-performance anion exchange
chromatography with pulsed amperometric detection (HPAEC-PAD), which confirmed a 
branched fructan structure. Structural elucidation was performed by Fourier
Transform Infra-Red Spectroscopy. The AFF spectrum shows characteristic fructan
bands. The prebiotic effect of these fractions was assessed in vitro through
fermentation by Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus strains. Four growth patterns
were observed. Some bacteria did not grow with any of the AFF, while other
strains grew with only AFF3. Some bacteria grew according to the molecular weight
of the AFF and some grew indistinctly with the three fructan fractions.

PMID: 25153877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Rev Col Bras Cir. 2014 May-Jun;41(3):155-60.

Impact of bariatric surgery on depression and anxiety symptons, bulimic behaviors
and quality of life.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Tae B(1), Pelaggi ER(1), Moreira JG(1), Waisberg J(2), de Matos LL(3), D'Elia
G(4).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)aff2. (3)aff3. (4)Facudade de Medicina do ABC, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To assess psychiatric symptoms, substance use, quality of life and
eating behavior of patients undergoing bariatric surgery before and after the
procedure.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective longitudinal study of 32 women undergoing
bariatric surgery. To obtain data, the patients answered specific,
self-administered questionnaires.
RESULTS: We observed a reduction in depressive and anxious symptoms and also in
bulimic behavior, as well as an improved quality of life in the physical,
psychological and environmental domains. There was also a decrease in use of
antidepressants and appetite suppressants, but the surgery was not a cessation
factor in smoking and / or alcoholism.
CONCLUSION: a decrease in psychiatric symptoms was observed after bariatric
surgery, as well as the reduction in the use of psychoactive substances. In
addition, there was an improvement in quality of life after surgical treatment of
obesity.

PMID: 25140645  [PubMed - in process]


40. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 May;56(5):1460-5. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.954112. Epub
2014 Nov 25.

Estradiol induces gene proximity and MLL-MLLT3 fusion in an activation-induced
cytidine deaminase-mediated pathway.

Wright RL(1), Slemmons KK, Vaughan AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California at Davis ,
Sacramento, CA , USA.

Epidemiological data have linked birth control formulations to an increased risk 
of infant acute leukemia involving MLL rearrangements. Reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) studies showed that 10 nM estradiol enhanced
MLL transcription in addition to its common translocation partners, MLLT2 (AF4)
and MLLT3 (AF9). The same concentration of estradiol triggered MLL and MLLT3
co-localization without affecting the interaction of genes located on the same
chromosomes. Estradiol also stimulated the generation of MLL-MLLT3 fusion
transcripts as seen by RT-PCR. RNAi knockdown of activation-induced cytidine
deaminase (AICDA) suppressed the induction of MLL-MLLT3 fusion transcript
formation observed with estradiol. Additionally, chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) analysis showed estradiol dependent localization of AICDA in MLL intron
11, upstream of a hotspot for both DNA cleavage and rearrangement, but not
downstream within intron 12. Combined, these studies show that levels of
estradiol consistent with that observed during pregnancy have the potential to
initiate MLL fusions through an AICDA-mediated mechanism.

PMID: 25130479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2014 May-Jun;22(3):454-60.

Quality of nursing care and satisfaction of patients attended at a teaching
hospital.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Freitas JS(1), Silva AE(2), Minamisava R(2), Bezerra AL(2), Sousa MR(3).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)Faculdade de Enfermagem, Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiânia, GO, 
Brazil. (3)Faculdade de Enfermagem, Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiânia, GO,
Brasil.

OBJECTIVES: assess the quality of nursing care, the patients' satisfaction and
the correlation between both.
METHOD: cross-sectional study, involving 275 patients hospitalized at a teaching 
hospital in the Central-West of Brazil. The data were collected through the
simultaneous application of three instruments. Next, they were included in an
electronic database and analyzed in function of the positivity, median value and 
Spearman's correlation coefficients.
RESULTS: among the nursing care assessed, only two were considered safe--hygiene 
and physical comfort; nutrition and hydration--while the remainder were
classified as poor. Nevertheless, the patients were satisfied with the care
received in the domains assessed: technical-professional, confidence and
educational. This can be justified by the weak to moderate correlation that was
observed among these variables.
CONCLUSION: Despite the quality deficit, the patients' satisfaction level with
the nursing care received was high. These results indicate that the institution
needs to center its objectives on a continuing evaluation system of the care
quality, aiming to attend to the patients' expectations.

PMCID: PMC4292634
PMID: 25029057  [PubMed - in process]


42. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Apr;56(4):903-9. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.938327. Epub 2015
Jan 30.

Clinical and molecular epidemiology of neonatal leukemia in Brazil.

Moura SV(1), Andrade F, Magalhães IQ, Costa I, Silva DB, D'Andrea ML, Pinheiro
VP, Lee ML, Werneck F, Emerenciano M, Pombo-de-Oliveira MS.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology-Oncology Program, Research Center, Instituto Nacional de 
Câncer , Rio de Janeiro , Brazil.

The clinical and molecular findings of 77 cases of neonatal leukemia (NL) and 380
of infant leukemia (IL) were selected to distinguish features between NL and IL. 
Somatic gene mutations associated with acute leukemia including FLT3, RAS and
PTPN11 were revisited. There were 42 cases of congenital leukemia associated with
Down syndrome (DS) and 39 of these cases presented features of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML)-M7. Twenty-seven of the DS cases underwent spontaneous remission
and were reclassified as a transient myeloproliferative disorder. GATA1 mutations
were found in 70% of these cases. In non-DS, frequent abnormalities were MLL
rearrangements, mainly MLL-AFF1 in acute lymphoblastic leukemia and MLL-MLLT3 in 
AML. The FLT3 mutation was not found, while RAS (n = 4) and PTPN11 (n = 2)
mutations were identified and reported for the first time in NL. There was
substantial evidence to support that somatic abnormalities occur in utero. Thus, 
congenital leukemia is a good model for understanding leukemogenesis.

PMID: 24991719  [PubMed - in process]


43. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2014 Jun;69(6):438-46.

Pharmacological management of osteogenesis.

Nardone V(1), D'Asta F(2), Brandi ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)aff2.

Osteogenesis and bone remodeling are complex biological processes that are
essential for the formation of new bone tissue and its correct functioning. When 
the balance between bone resorption and formation is disrupted, bone diseases and
disorders such as Paget's disease, fibrous dysplasia, osteoporosis and fragility 
fractures may result. Recent advances in bone cell biology have revealed new
specific targets for the treatment of bone loss that are based on the inhibition 
of bone resorption by osteoclasts or the stimulation of bone formation by
osteoblasts. Bisphosphonates, antiresorptive agents that reduce bone resorption, 
are usually recommended as first-line therapy in women with postmenopausal
osteoporosis. Numerous studies have shown that bisphosphonates are able to
significantly reduce the risk of femoral and vertebral fractures. Other
antiresorptive agents indicated for the treatment of osteoporosis include
selective estrogen receptor modulators, such as raloxifene. Denosumab, a human
monoclonal antibody, is another antiresorptive agent that has been approved in
Europe and the USA. This agent blocks the RANK/RANKL/OPG system, which is
responsible for osteoclastic activation, thus reducing bone resorption. Other
approved agents include bone anabolic agents, such as teriparatide, a recombinant
parathyroid hormone that improves bone microarchitecture and strength, and
strontium ranelate, considered to be a dual-action drug that acts by both
osteoclastic inhibition and osteoblastic stimulation. Currently, anti-catabolic
drugs that act through the Wnt-ß catenin signaling pathway, serving as
Dickkopf-related protein 1 inhibitors and sclerostin antagonists, are also in
development. This concise review provides an overview of the drugs most commonly 
used for the control of osteogenesis in bone diseases.

PMCID: PMC4050321
PMID: 24964310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Elife. 2014 Apr 24;3:e02375. doi: 10.7554/eLife.02375.

AFF4 binding to Tat-P-TEFb indirectly stimulates TAR recognition of super
elongation complexes at the HIV promoter.

Schulze-Gahmen U(1), Lu H(2), Zhou Q(2), Alber T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, United States uschulze-gahmen@berkeley.edu. (2)Department of Molecular 
and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, United States.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, United States California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, QB3,
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, United States.

Superelongation complexes (SECs) are essential for transcription elongation of
many human genes, including the integrated HIV-1 genome. At the HIV-1 promoter,
the viral Tat protein binds simultaneously to the nascent TAR RNA and the CycT1
subunit of the P-TEFb kinase in a SEC. To understand the preferential recruitment
of SECs by Tat and TAR, we determined the crystal structure of a quaternary
complex containing Tat, P-TEFb, and the SEC scaffold, AFF4. Tat and AFF4 fold on 
the surface of CycT1 and interact directly. Interface mutations in the AFF4
homolog AFF1 reduced Tat-AFF1 affinity in vivo and Tat-dependent transcription
from the HIV promoter. AFF4 binding in the presence of Tat partially orders the
CycT1 Tat-TAR recognition motif and increases the affinity of Tat-P-TEFb for TAR 
30-fold. These studies indicate that AFF4 acts as a two-step filter to increase
the selectivity of Tat and TAR for SECs over P-TEFb alone.DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02375.001.

Copyright © 2014, Schulze-Gahmen et al.

PMCID: PMC4013717
PMID: 24843025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Mar 15;7(4):1800-4. eCollection 2014.

Therapy-related B lymphoblastic leukemia with t(4;11)(q21;q23)/AF4-MLL in a
patient with mantle cell lymphoma after recent aggressive chemotherapy: a unique 
case report.

Holdener SL(1), Harrington L(1), Nguyen J(1), Horna P(2), Sagatys E(2), Shah
B(3), Zhang L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of South Florida Morsani College of
Medicine Tampa, FL, USA. (2)Department of Hematopathology and Laboratory
Medicine, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute Tampa, FL, USA.
(3)Department of Hematological Malignancies, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and
Research Institute Tampa, FL, USA.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a mature B-cell lymphoma associated with the
hallmark translocation t(11;14)(q13;32), which involves the cyclin D1 (CCND1) and
immunoglobin heavy chain (IgH) genes. It may transform to a more aggressive
blastoid or pleomorphic variant, with or without acquisition of chromosomal
abnormalities. MCL could also present with a leukemic phase with marked
lymphocytosis. A literature search did not reveal any prior reports of MCL
transforming to or followed by a B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL).

PMCID: PMC4014267
PMID: 24817983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2014 Apr 29;0. pii: S0074-02762014005030579. [Epub ahead
of print]

Emerging Plasmodium vivax resistance to chloroquine in South America: an
overview.

Gonçalves LA(1), Cravo P(2), Ferreira MU(3).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)Instituto de Patologia Tropical e Saúde Pública, Universidade Federal
de Goiás, Goiânia. (3)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências
Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo.

The global emergence of Plasmodium vivax strains resistant to chloroquine (CQ)
since the late 1980s is complicating the current international efforts for
malaria control and elimination. Furthermore, CQ-resistant vivax malaria has
already reached an alarming prevalence in Indonesia, East Timor and Papua New
Guinea. More recently, in vivo studies have documented CQ-resistant P. vivax
infections in Guyana, Peru and Brazil. Here, we summarise the available data on
CQ resistance across P. vivax -endemic areas of Latin America by combining
published in vivo and in vitro studies. We also review the current knowledge
regarding the molecular mechanisms of CQ resistance in P. vivax and the prospects
for developing and standardising reliable molecular markers of drug resistance.
Finally, we discuss how the Worldwide Antimalarial Resistance Network, an
international collaborative effort involving malaria experts from all continents,
might contribute to the current regional efforts to map CQ-resistant vivax
malaria in South America.

PMID: 24789558  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


47. Braz J Biol. 2013 Nov;73(4):801-7.

The genus Dasineura Rondani, 1840 (Diptera, Cecidomyiidae) in Brazil.

Maia VC(1), Silva LO(1).

Author information: 
(1)aff1, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

Dasineura (Diptera, Cecidomyiidae) is the gall midge genus with the highest
number of known species (466 throughout the world). Only 39 species have been
described from the Neotropics, being 10 from Brazil. Many records of not
determined species are found in the literature. Furthermore, many unidentified
specimens are deposited in the Cecidomyiidae Collection of the Museu
Nacional/UFRJ, which comprises material from several Brazilian biomes. This paper
provides these data, presents new records of localities and host plants, and
discusses the representativeness of Dasineura in Brazil. The results point to the
occurrence of 32 species in Brazil and show that the genus is much more
diversified than previous knowledge indicates.

PMID: 24789397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Leukemia. 2014 Dec;28(12):2336-43. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.142. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

A revised definition for cure of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Pui CH(1), Pei D(2), Campana D(3), Cheng C(2), Sandlund JT(4), Bowman WP(5),
Hudson MM(4), Ribeiro RC(4), Raimondi SC(6), Jeha S(4), Howard SC(4), Bhojwani
D(4), Inaba H(4), Rubnitz JE(4), Metzger ML(4), Gruber TA(4), Coustan-Smith E(3),
Downing JR(6), Leung WH(7), Relling MV(8), Evans WE(8).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
USA [2] Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
TN, USA. (2)Department of Biostatistics, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN, USA. (3)Centre for Translational Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (4)Department of Oncology, St Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. (5)Department of Pediatrics, University of
North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, TX, USA. (6)Department of
Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. (7)Department 
of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Cellular Therapy, St Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. (8)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.

With improved contemporary therapy, we reassess long-term outcome in patients
completing treatment for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) to
determine when cure can be declared with a high degree of confidence. In six
successive clinical trials between 1984 and 2007, 1291 (84.5%) patients completed
all therapies in continuous complete remission. The post-therapy cumulative risk 
of relapse or development of a second neoplasm and the event-free survival rate
and overall survival were analyzed according to the presenting features and the
three treatment periods defined by relative outcome. Over the three treatment
periods, there has been progressive increase in the rate of event-free survival
(65.2% vs 74.8% vs 85.1% (P<0.001)) and overall survival (76.5% vs 81.1% vs 91.7%
(P<0.001)) at 10 years. The most important predictor of outcome after completion 
of therapy was the type of treatment. In the most recent treatment period, which 
omitted the use of prophylactic cranial irradiation, the post-treatment
cumulative risk of relapse was 6.4%, death in remission 1.5% and development of a
second neoplasm 2.3% at 10 years, with all relapses except one occurring within 4
years of therapy. None of the 106 patients with the t(9;22)/BCR-ABL1,
t(1;19)/TCF3-PBX1 or t(4;11)/MLL-AFF1 had relapsed after 2 years from completion 
of therapy. These findings demonstrate that with contemporary effective therapy
that excludes cranial irradiation, approximately 6% of children with ALL may
relapse after completion of treatment, and those who remain in remission at 4
years post treatment may be considered cured (that is, less than 1% chance of
relapse).

PMCID: PMC4214904
PMID: 24781017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Blood Cancer J. 2014 Apr 25;4:e205. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2014.25.

Sensitivity of MLL-rearranged AML cells to all-trans retinoic acid is associated 
with the level of H3K4me2 in the RARa promoter region.

Sakamoto K(1), Imamura T(1), Yano M(1), Yoshida H(1), Fujiki A(1), Hirashima
Y(1), Hosoi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Graduate
School of Medical Science, Kyoto, Japan.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) is well established as differentiation therapy for
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) in which the PML-RARa (promyelocytic
leukemia-retinoic acid receptor a) fusion protein causes blockade of the retinoic
acid (RA) pathway; however, in types of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) other than
APL, the mechanism of RA pathway inactivation is not fully understood. This study
revealed the potential mechanism of high ATRA sensitivity of mixed-lineage
leukemia (MLL)-AF9-positive AML compared with MLL-AF4/5q31-positive AML.
Treatment with ATRA induced significant myeloid differentiation accompanied by
upregulation of RARa, C/EBPa, C/EBP<U+025B> and PU.1 in MLL-AF9-positive but not in
MLL-AF4/5q31-positive cells. Combining ATRA with cytarabine had a synergistic
antileukemic effect in MLL-AF9-positive cells in vitro. The level of dimethyl
histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4me2) in the RARa gene-promoter region, PU.1 upstream
regulatory region (URE) and RUNX1+24/+25 intronic enhancer was higher in
MLL-AF9-positive cells than in MLL-AF4-positive cells, and inhibiting
lysine-specific demethylase 1, which acts as a histone demethylase inhibitor,
reactivated ATRA sensitivity in MLL-AF4-positive cells. These findings suggest
that the level of H3K4me2 in the RARa gene-promoter region, PU.1 URE and RUNX1
intronic enhancer is determined by the MLL-fusion partner. Our findings provide
insight into the mechanisms of ATRA sensitivity in AML and novel treatment
strategies for ATRA-resistant AML.

PMCID: PMC4003419
PMID: 24769646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cancer Cell. 2014 Apr 14;25(4):530-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.03.008.

Proteasome inhibitors evoke latent tumor suppression programs in pro-B MLL
leukemias through MLL-AF4.

Liu H(1), Westergard TD(2), Cashen A(2), Piwnica-Worms DR(3), Kunkle L(4), Vij
R(2), Pham CG(5), DiPersio J(2), Cheng EH(6), Hsieh JJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology & Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY 10065, USA; State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai
Institute of Hematology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. (2)Department of Medicine, Washington
University, St. Louis, MO 63105, USA. (3)BRIGHT Institute, Molecular Imaging
Center, Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO
63105, USA. (4)Pharmacyclics, Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA. (5)Human Oncology &
Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065,
USA. (6)Human Oncology & Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.
Electronic address: chenge1@mskcc.org. (7)Human Oncology & Pathogenesis Program, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of
Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA;
Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.
Electronic address: hsiehj@mskcc.org.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Apr 14;25(4):411-3.

Chromosomal translocations disrupting MLL generate MLL-fusion proteins that
induce aggressive leukemias. Unexpectedly, MLL-fusion proteins are rarely
observed at high levels, suggesting excessive MLL-fusions may be incompatible
with a malignant phenotype. Here, we used clinical proteasome inhibitors,
bortezomib and carfilzomib, to reduce the turnover of endogenous MLL-fusions and 
discovered that accumulated MLL-fusions induce latent, context-dependent tumor
suppression programs. Specifically, in MLL pro-B lymphoid, but not myeloid,
leukemias, proteasome inhibition triggers apoptosis and cell cycle arrest
involving activation cleavage of BID by caspase-8 and upregulation of p27,
respectively. Furthermore, proteasome inhibition conferred preliminary benefit to
patients with MLL-AF4 leukemia. Hence, feasible strategies to treat cancer-type
and oncogene-specific cancers can be improvised through harnessing inherent tumor
suppression properties of individual oncogenic fusions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4097146
PMID: 24735925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(11):1788-97. doi: 10.4161/cc.28756. Epub 2014 Apr 11.

Crystal structure of HIV-1 Tat complexed with human P-TEFb and AFF4.

Gu J(1), Babayeva ND(1), Suwa Y(1), Baranovskiy AG(1), Price DH(2), Tahirov
TH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases; University of
Nebraska Medical Center; Omaha, NE USA. (2)Biochemistry Department; University of
Iowa; Iowa City, IA USA.

Developing anti-viral therapies targeting HIV-1 transcription has been hampered
by the limited structural knowledge of the proteins involved. HIV-1 hijacks the
cellular machinery that controls RNA polymerase II elongation through an
interaction of HIV-1 Tat with the positive transcription elongation factor
P-TEFb, which interacts with an AF4 family member (AFF1/2/3/4) in the super
elongation complex (SEC). Because inclusion of TatP-TEFb into the SEC is
critical for HIV transcription, we have determined the crystal structure of the
TatAFF4P-TEFb complex containing HIV-1 Tat (residues 1-48), human Cyclin T1
(1-266), human Cdk9 (7-332), and human AFF4 (27-69). Tat binding to AFF4P-TEFb
causes concerted structural changes in AFF4 via a shift of helix H5' of Cyclin T1
and the a-3 10 helix of AFF4. The interaction between Tat and AFF4 provides
structural constraints that explain tolerated Tat mutations. Analysis of the
Tat-binding surface of AFF4 coupled with modeling of all other AF4 family members
suggests that AFF1 and AFF4 would be preferred over AFF2 or AFF3 for interaction 
with TatP-TEFb. The structure establishes that the Tat-TAR recognition motif
(TRM) in Cyclin T1 interacts with both Tat and AFF4, leading to the exposure of
arginine side chains for binding to TAR RNA. Furthermore, modeling of Tat Lys28
acetylation suggests that the acetyl group would be in a favorable position for
H-bond formation with Asn257 of TRM, thereby stabilizing the TRM in Cyclin T1,
and provides a structural basis for the modulation of TAR RNA binding by
acetylation of Tat Lys28.

PMCID: PMC4111725
PMID: 24727379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2014 Jun;109(3):324-9. Epub 2014 Mar 4.

Anti-Mycobacterium tuberculosis activity and cytotoxicity of Calophyllum
brasiliense Cambess (Clusiaceae).

Pires CT(1), Brenzan MA(2), Scodro RB(2), Cortez DA(2), Lopes LD(3), Siqueira
VL(2), Cardoso RF(1).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)aff2. (3)Departamento de Análises Clínicas e Biomedicina.

We evaluated the in vitro anti-Mycobacterium tuberculosis activity and the
cytotoxicity of dichloromethane extract and pure compounds from the leaves of
Calophyllum brasiliense. Purification of the dichloromethane extract yielded the 
pure compounds (-) mammea A/BB (1), (-) mammea B/BB (2) and amentoflavone (3).
The compound structures were elucidated on the basis of spectroscopic and
spectrometric data. The contents of bioactive compounds in the extracts were
quantified using high performance liquid chromatography coupled to an ultraviolet
detector. The anti-M. tuberculosis activity of the extracts and the pure
compounds was evaluated using a resazurin microtitre assay plate. The
cytotoxicity assay was performed in J774G.8 macrophages using the 3-(4,5-dimethyl
thiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide colourimetric method. The
quantification of the dichloromethane extract showed (1) and (2) at
concentrations of 31.86 ± 2.6 and 8.24 ± 1.1 µg/mg of extract, respectively. The 
dichloromethane and aqueous extracts showed anti-M. tuberculosis H37Rv activity
of 62.5 and 125 µg/mL, respectively. Coumarins (1) and (2) showed minimal
inhibitory concentration ranges of 31.2 and 62.5 µg/mL against M. tuberculosis
H37Rv and clinical isolates. Compound (3) showed no activity against M.
tuberculosis H37Rv. The selectivity index ranged from 0.59-1.06. We report the
activity of the extracts and coumarins from the leaves of C. brasiliense against 
M. tuberculosis.

PMCID: PMC4131784
PMID: 24676652  [PubMed - in process]


53. Int J Lab Hematol. 2014 Oct;36(5):571-9. doi: 10.1111/ijlh.12192. Epub 2014 Feb
25.

FISH analysis of MLL gene rearrangements: detection of the concurrent loss or
gain of the 3' signal and its prognostic significance.

Lim JH(1), Jang S, Park CJ, Chi HS, Lee JO, Seo EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Ulsan College of Medicine and
Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.

INTRODUCTION: The rearrangement of the mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) gene occurs
through translocations and insertions involving a variety of partner chromosome
genes. However, there are few studies on aberrant MLL signal patterns such as
concurrent 3' MLL deletion.
METHODS: A total of 84 patients with acute leukemia (AL) who had MLL
rearrangements detected by florescence in situ hybridization (FISH) were enrolled
in the study. The distribution of MLL fusion partner genes was analyzed, and
aberrant MLL signals were evaluated.
RESULTS: Seventy-seven (91.7%) patients had MLL rearrangements, involving
previously described translocation partner genes (TPGs). Among these TPGs, the
frequencies of MLLT3, AFF1, MLLT4, and ELL were 29.8%, 17.9%, 15.5%, and 13.1%,
respectively. A high frequency of MLLT4 in our study was due to the high
proportion of acute myeloid leukemia cases in pediatric and adult patients.
Aberrant MLL signals were found in 18 patients: 11 (61.1%) with 3' MLL signal
loss and 7 with 3' MLL signal gain. All cases with 3' MLL signal gain were due to
an extra derivative partner chromosome. The median overall survival period of
patients with 3' MLL gain was shorter than that in patients without aberrant MLL 
signal patterns.
CONCLUSION: Aberrant MLL signals were frequently detected by FISH analysis. The
3' MLL gain was associated with poor prognosis in patients with AL. Therefore, it
is important to detect aberrant MLL signal patterns using FISH analysis.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24612538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2014 May;49(5):699-703. doi: 10.1038/bmt.2014.18. Epub
2014 Mar 3.

Inhibition of S100A6 induces GVL effects in MLL/AF4-positive ALL in human
PBMC-SCID mice.

Tamai H(1), Miyake K(2), Yamaguchi H(1), Shimada T(2), Dan K(1), Inokuchi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Division of Gene Therapy Research Center
for Advanced Medical Technology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

Mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL)/AF4-positive ALL is associated with a poor prognosis
even after allogeneic hematopoietic SCT (allo-HSCT). We reported previously that 
MLL/AF4-positive ALL shows resistance to TNF-a, which is the main factor in the
GVL effect, by upregulation of S100A6 expression followed by interference with
the p53-caspase 8-caspase 3 pathway in vitro. We examined whether inhibition of
S100A6 can induce an effective GVL effect on MLL/AF4-positive ALL in a mouse
model. MLL/AF4-positive ALL cell lines (SEM) transduced with lentiviral vectors
expressing both S100A6 siRNA and luciferase (SEM-Luc-S100A6 siRNA) were produced.
SEM-Luc-S100A6 siRNA cells and SEM-Luc-control siRNA cells were injected into
groups of five SCID mice (1 × 10(7)/body). After confirmation of engraftment of
SEM cells by in vivo imaging, the mice in each group were injected with 4.8 ×
10(7) human PBMCs. SEM-Luc-S100A6 siRNA-injected mice showed significantly longer
survival periods than SEM-Luc-control siRNA-injected mice (P=0.002).
SEM-Luc-S100A6 siRNA-injected mice showed significantly slower tumor growth than 
those injected with SEM-Luc-control siRNA (P<0.0001). These results suggested
that inhibition of S100A6 may be a promising therapeutic target for
MLL/AF4-positive ALL in combination with allo-HSCT.

PMID: 24583627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 7;111(1):E15-24. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1318503111.
Epub 2013 Dec 23.

AFF1 is a ubiquitous P-TEFb partner to enable Tat extraction of P-TEFb from 7SK
snRNP and formation of SECs for HIV transactivation.

Lu H(1), Li Z, Xue Y, Schulze-Gahmen U, Johnson JR, Krogan NJ, Alber T, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Innovation Center for Cell Biology, Xiamen 
University, Xiamen 361005, Fujian, China.

The positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) stimulates RNA polymerase
elongation by inducing the transition of promoter proximally paused polymerase II
into a productively elongating state. P-TEFb itself is regulated by reversible
association with various transcription factors/cofactors to form several
multisubunit complexes [e.g., the 7SK small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle
(7SK snRNP), the super elongation complexes (SECs), and the bromodomain protein 4
(Brd4)-P-TEFb complex] that constitute a P-TEFb network controlling cellular and 
HIV transcription. These complexes have been thought to share no components other
than the core P-TEFb subunits cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) and cyclin T
(CycT, T1, T2a, and T2b). Here we show that the AF4/FMR2 family member 1 (AFF1)
is bound to CDK9-CycT and is present in all major P-TEFb complexes and that the
tripartite CDK9-CycT-AFF1 complex is transferred as a single unit within the
P-TEFb network. By increasing the affinity of the HIV-encoded transactivating
(Tat) protein for CycT1, AFF1 facilitates Tat's extraction of P-TEFb from 7SK
snRNP and the formation of Tat-SECs for HIV transcription. Our data identify AFF1
as a ubiquitous P-TEFb partner and demonstrate that full Tat transactivation
requires the complete SEC.

PMCID: PMC3890890
PMID: 24367103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 Mar;53(3):248-54. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22135. Epub
2013 Dec 5.

Clustering of genomic breakpoints at the MLL locus in therapy-related acute
leukemia with t(4;11)(q21;q23).

Hasan SK(1), Barba G, Metzler M, Divona M, Ottone T, Cicconi L, Falini B, Mecucci
C, Lo-Coco F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Tor Vergata, Rome,
Italy; Laboratorio di Neuro-Oncoematologia, Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy.

Genomic characterization of translocation breakpoints is relevant to identify
possible mechanisms underlying their origin. The consistent association of
anthracylines (e.g., epirubicin and idarubicin) in inducing therapy-related acute
leukemias (t-AL) with mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene rearrangement suggests
that MLL translocations are causative events for t-AL. Using asymmetric multiplex
PCR strategy followed by direct DNA sequencing, we characterized the genomic
breakpoints of the MLL and AFF1 genes in two patients who developed t-AL with
t(4;11)(q21;q23). Chemotherapeutic treatment of the primary disease in both
patients included topoisomerase II (topo II) targeting agents. In one case, the
MLL breakpoint was located in intron 9 at nucleotide position chr11:118354284
while the AFF1 breakpoint was in intron 3 at nucleotide position chr4:87992070.
The breakpoint junction sequences revealed an insertion of two nucleotides at the
MLL-AFF1 junction. In the other patient, the MLL breakpoint was located in intron
11 at nucleotide position chr11:118359130-32 and the AFF1 break was in intron 3
at nucleotide position chr4:87996215-17. The MLL breakpoint found in the latter
patient was identical to that of two previously reported cases, strongly
suggesting the presence of a preferential site of DNA cleavage in the presence of
topo II inhibitor. In addition, microhomologies at the breakpoint junctions were 
indicative of DNA repair by the non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) pathway. This
study further supports the evidence that MLL breakpoints in therapy-related acute
leukemia with MLL-AFF1 are clustered in the telomeric half of the breakpoint
cluster region that contains topo II recognition sites.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24310817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Leukemia. 2014 Mar;28(3):666-74. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.346. Epub 2013 Nov 18.

Ligand-independent FLT3 activation does not cooperate with MLL-AF4 to
immortalize/transform cord blood CD34+ cells.

Montes R(1), Ayllón V(1), Prieto C(2), Bursen A(3), Prelle C(3), Romero-Moya
D(2), Real PJ(1), Navarro-Montero O(1), Chillón C(4), Marschalek R(3), Bueno
C(2), Menendez P(5).

Author information: 
(1)GENYO, Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research: Pfizer, University of
Granada, Andalusian Regional Government, Granada, Spain. (2)1] GENYO, Centre for 
Genomics and Oncological Research: Pfizer, University of Granada, Andalusian
Regional Government, Granada, Spain [2] Faculty of Medicine, Department of Stem
Cells, Development and Cancer, Cell Therapy Program of the University of
Barcelona, Josep Carreras Leukemia Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology/ZAFES/DCAL, Goethe-University of
Frankfurt, Biocenter, Frankfurt, Germany. (4)Hospital Universitario de Salamanca,
Servicio de Hematología, Salamanca, Spain. (5)1] GENYO, Centre for Genomics and
Oncological Research: Pfizer, University of Granada, Andalusian Regional
Government, Granada, Spain [2] Faculty of Medicine, Department of Stem Cells,
Development and Cancer, Cell Therapy Program of the University of Barcelona,
Josep Carreras Leukemia Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain [3] Instituciò
Catalana de Reserca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA).

MLL-AF4 fusion is hallmark in high-risk infant pro-B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(pro-B-ALL). Our limited understanding of MLL-AF4-mediated transformation
reflects the absence of human models reproducing this leukemia. Hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) constitute likely targets for transformation. We
previously reported that MLL-AF4 enhanced hematopoietic engraftment and
clonogenic potential in cord blood (CB)-derived CD34+ HSPCs but was not
sufficient for leukemogenesis, suggesting that additional oncogenic lesions are
required for MLL-AF4-mediated transformation. MLL-AF4+ pro-B-ALL display enormous
levels of FLT3, and occasionally FLT3-activating mutations, thus representing a
candidate cooperating event in MLL-AF4+ pro-B-ALL. We have explored whether
FLT3.TKD (tyrosine kinase domain) mutation or increased expression of FLT3.WT
(wild type) cooperates with MLL-AF4 to immortalize/transform CB-CD34+ HSPCs. In
vivo, FLT3.TKD/FLT3.WT alone, or in combination with MLL-AF4, enhances
hematopoietic repopulating function of CB-CD34+ HSPCs without impairing migration
or hematopoietic differentiation. None of the animals transplanted with
MLL-AF4+FLT3.TKD/WT-CD34+ HSPCs showed any sign of disease after 16 weeks. In
vitro, enforced expression of FLT3.TKD/FLT3.WT conveys a transient overexpansion 
of MLL-AF4-expressing CD34+ HSPCs associated to higher proportion of cycling
cells coupled to lower apoptotic levels, but does not augment clonogenic
potential nor confer stable replating. Together, FLT3 activation does not suffice
to immortalize/transform MLL-AF4-expressing CB-CD34+ HSPCs, suggesting the need
of alternative (epi)-genetic cooperating oncogenic lesions.

PMID: 24240202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Leuk Lymphoma. 2014 Jul;55(7):1501-9. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2013.847934. Epub
2014 Feb 6.

Impact of mutations in FLT3, PTPN11 and RAS genes on the overall survival of
pediatric B cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia in Brazil.

Barbosa TC(1), Andrade FG, Lopes BA, de Andrade CF, Mansur MB, Emerenciano M,
Pombo-de-Oliveira MS.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology Program, Research Center, Instituto Nacional
de Câncer , Rio de Janeiro , Brazil.

We analyzed mutations in four genes (FLT3, KRAS/NRAS and PTPN11) that might
disrupt the RAS/mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPKinase) signaling pathway,
to evaluate their prognostic value in children younger than 16 years old with
B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Bcp-ALL). The overall survival
(OS) was determined with the Kaplan-Meier method. MAPKinase genes were mutated in
25.4% and 20.1% of childhood and infant Bcp-ALL, respectively. Children with
hyperdiploidy were more prone to harboring a MAPKinase gene mutation (odds ratio 
[OR] 3.18; 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.07-9.49). The mean OS of all cases was 
54.0 months. FLT3 and PTPN11 mutations had no impact on OS. K/NRAS mutations were
strongly associated with MLL-AFF1 (OR 5.78; 95% CI 1.00-33.24), and conferred
poorer OS (p = 0.034) in univariate analysis.

PMID: 24067137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Leuk Res. 2013 Oct;37(10):1363-73. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.06.009. Epub 2013 
Jul 17.

A method to identify new molecular markers for assessing minimal residual disease
in acute leukemia patients.

Jancuskova T(1), Plachy R, Stika J, Zemankova L, Hardekopf DW, Liehr T, Kosyakova
N, Cmejla R, Zejskova L, Kozak T, Zak P, Zavrelova A, Havlikova P, Karas M, Junge
A, Ramel C, Pekova S.

Author information: 
(1)Chambon, Laboratory for Molecular Diagnostics, Prague, Czech Republic.

Acute leukemias (AL) comprise a heterogeneous group of hematologic malignancies, 
and individual patient responses to treatment can be difficult to predict.
Monitoring of minimal residual disease (MRD) is thus very important and holds
great potential for improving treatment strategies. Common MRD targets include
recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities and mutations in important hematological
genes; unfortunately well-characterized targets are lacking in many AL patients. 
Here we demonstrate a technical approach for the identification and mapping of
novel clone-specific chromosomal abnormalities down to the nucleotide level. We
used molecular cytogenetics, chromosome microdissection, amplification of the
microdissected material, and next-generation sequencing to develop PCR-based MRD 
assays based on unique breakpoint sequences.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23870092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cancer Genet. 2013 Jun;206(6):227-32. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2013.05.017. Epub 
2013 Jul 13.

Frequency of the ETV6-RUNX1, BCR-ABL1, TCF3-PBX1, and MLL-AFF1 fusion genes in
Guatemalan pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients and their ethnic
associations.

Carranza C(1), Granados L, Morales O, Jo W, Villagran S, Tinti D, Villegas M,
Antillón F, Torselli S, Silva G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research on Genetic and Metabolic Diseases, Guatemala.
ccarranza@invegem.org

Fusion genes involved in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) occur mostly due to
genetic and environmental factors, and only a limited number of studies have
reported any ethnic influence. This study assesses whether an ethnic influence
has an effect on the frequency of any of the four fusion genes: BCR-ABL1,
ETV6-RUNX1, TCF3-PBX1, and MLL-AFF1 found in ALL. To study this ethnic influence,
mononuclear cells were obtained from bone marrow samples from 143 patients with
ALL. We performed RNA extraction and reverse transcription, then assessed the
quality of the cDNA by amplifying the ABL1 control gene, and finally evaluated
the presence of the four transcripts by multiplex polymerase chain reaction. We
found 10 patients who had the BCR-ABL1 fusion gene (7%); 3 patients (2%) were
TCF3-PBX1 positive; and 6 patients (4.5%) were ETV6-RUNX1 positive. The incidence
of this last fusion gene is quite low when compared to the values reported in
most countries. The low incidence of the ETV6-RUNX1 fusion gene found in
Guatemala matches the incidence rates that have been reported in Spain and Indian
Romani. Since it is known that an ethnic resemblance exists among these three
populations, as shown by ancestral marker studies, the ALL data suggests an
ethnic influence on the occurrence and frequency of this particular fusion gene.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23859904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Assay Drug Dev Technol. 2013 May;11(4):253-68. doi: 10.1089/adt.2012.495.

Development of a high-throughput screening-compatible assay for the discovery of 
inhibitors of the AF4-AF9 interaction using AlphaScreen technology.

Watson VG(1), Drake KM, Peng Y, Napper AD.

Author information: 
(1)High-Throughput Screening and Drug Discovery Lab, Nemours Center for Childhood
Cancer Research, A.I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, Delaware, USA.

Rearrangements of the mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) gene occur predominately in
pediatric leukemia cases and are generally predictors of a poor prognosis. These 
chromosomal rearrangements result in fusion of the protein MLL to one of more
than 60 protein partners. MLL fusions are potent inducers of leukemia through
activation of oncogene expression; therefore, targeting this transcriptional
activation function may arrest MLL-rearranged (MLL-R) leukemia. Leukemic cell
lines harboring the most common fusion protein, MLL-AF4, require the direct
interaction of AF4 with the transcription factor AF9 to survive and self-renew;
disrupting this interaction with a cell-penetrating AF4-derived peptide results
in cell death, suggesting that the AF4-AF9 interaction could be a viable target
for a novel MLL-R leukemia therapy. Here we describe the use of AlphaScreen
technology to develop a high-throughput screening (HTS) assay to detect
nonpeptidic inhibitors of AF4-AF9 binding. The assay is economical, requiring
only low nanomolar concentrations of biotinylated AF4-derived peptide and
FLAG-tagged AF9 in low-volume 384-well plates. A Z'-factor of 0.71 and a
signal-to-background ratio of 21.3 showed the assay to be robust, and sensitivity
to inhibition was demonstrated with competing AF4-derived peptides. Two pilot
screens comprising 5,680 compounds served as validation for HTS at Nemours and
the Broad Institute. Assay artifacts were excluded using a counterscreen
comprising a biotinylated FLAG peptide. This is the first reported HTS-compatible
assay to identify compounds that inhibit a key binding interaction of an MLL
fusion partner, and the results presented here demonstrate suitability for
screening large chemical libraries in high-density, low-volume plate formats.

PMCID: PMC3656630
PMID: 23679849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Leukemia. 2013 Nov;27(11):2165-76. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.135. Epub 2013 Apr 30.

The MLL recombinome of acute leukemias in 2013.

Meyer C(1), Hofmann J, Burmeister T, Gröger D, Park TS, Emerenciano M, Pombo de
Oliveira M, Renneville A, Villarese P, Macintyre E, Cavé H, Clappier E, Mass-Malo
K, Zuna J, Trka J, De Braekeleer E, De Braekeleer M, Oh SH, Tsaur G, Fechina L,
van der Velden VH, van Dongen JJ, Delabesse E, Binato R, Silva ML, Kustanovich A,
Aleinikova O, Harris MH, Lund-Aho T, Juvonen V, Heidenreich O, Vormoor J, Choi
WW, Jarosova M, Kolenova A, Bueno C, Menendez P, Wehner S, Eckert C, Talmant P,
Tondeur S, Lippert E, Launay E, Henry C, Ballerini P, Lapillone H, Callanan MB,
Cayuela JM, Herbaux C, Cazzaniga G, Kakadiya PM, Bohlander S, Ahlmann M, Choi JR,
Gameiro P, Lee DS, Krauter J, Cornillet-Lefebvre P, Te Kronnie G, Schäfer BW,
Kubetzko S, Alonso CN, zur Stadt U, Sutton R, Venn NC, Izraeli S, Trakhtenbrot L,
Madsen HO, Archer P, Hancock J, Cerveira N, Teixeira MR, Lo Nigro L, Möricke A,
Stanulla M, Schrappe M, Sedék L, Szczepanski T, Zwaan CM, Coenen EA, van den
Heuvel-Eibrink MM, Strehl S, Dworzak M, Panzer-Grümayer R, Dingermann T,
Klingebiel T, Marschalek R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Chemistry and Pharmacy, Institute of
Pharmaceutical Biology/ZAFES/Diagnostic Center of Acute Leukemia (DCAL),
Goethe-University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Chromosomal rearrangements of the human MLL (mixed lineage leukemia) gene are
associated with high-risk infant, pediatric, adult and therapy-induced acute
leukemias. We used long-distance inverse-polymerase chain reaction to
characterize the chromosomal rearrangement of individual acute leukemia patients.
We present data of the molecular characterization of 1590 MLL-rearranged biopsy
samples obtained from acute leukemia patients. The precise localization of
genomic breakpoints within the MLL gene and the involved translocation partner
genes (TPGs) were determined and novel TPGs identified. All patients were
classified according to their gender (852 females and 745 males), age at
diagnosis (558 infant, 416 pediatric and 616 adult leukemia patients) and other
clinical criteria. Combined data of our study and recently published data
revealed a total of 121 different MLL rearrangements, of which 79 TPGs are now
characterized at the molecular level. However, only seven rearrangements seem to 
be predominantly associated with illegitimate recombinations of the MLL gene (
90%): AFF1/AF4, MLLT3/AF9, MLLT1/ENL, MLLT10/AF10, ELL, partial tandem
duplications (MLL PTDs) and MLLT4/AF6, respectively. The MLL breakpoint
distributions for all clinical relevant subtypes (gender, disease type, age at
diagnosis, reciprocal, complex and therapy-induced translocations) are presented.
Finally, we present the extending network of reciprocal MLL fusions deriving from
complex rearrangements.

PMCID: PMC3826032
PMID: 23628958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Elife. 2013 Mar 5;2:e00327. doi: 10.7554/eLife.00327.

The AFF4 scaffold binds human P-TEFb adjacent to HIV Tat.

Schulze-Gahmen U(1), Upton H, Birnberg A, Bao K, Chou S, Krogan NJ, Zhou Q, Alber
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California, Berkeley 
, Berkeley , United States.

Human positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) phosphorylates RNA
polymerase II and regulatory proteins to trigger elongation of many gene
transcripts. The HIV-1 Tat protein selectively recruits P-TEFb as part of a super
elongation complex (SEC) organized on a flexible AFF1 or AFF4 scaffold. To
understand this specificity and determine if scaffold binding alters P-TEFb
conformation, we determined the structure of a tripartite complex containing the 
recognition regions of P-TEFb and AFF4. AFF4 meanders over the surface of the
P-TEFb cyclin T1 (CycT1) subunit but makes no stable contacts with the CDK9
kinase subunit. Interface mutations reduced CycT1 binding and AFF4-dependent
transcription. AFF4 is positioned to make unexpected direct contacts with HIV
Tat, and Tat enhances P-TEFb affinity for AFF4. These studies define the
mechanism of scaffold recognition by P-TEFb and reveal an unanticipated
intersubunit pocket on the AFF4 SEC that potentially represents a target for
therapeutic intervention against HIV/AIDS.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00327.001.

PMCID: PMC3589825
PMID: 23471103  [PubMed - in process]


64. Haematologica. 2013 Jun;98(6):945-52. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.081877. Epub
2013 Jan 24.

The clinical characteristics, therapy and outcome of 85 adults with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia and t(4;11)(q21;q23)/MLL-AFF1 prospectively treated in the
UKALLXII/ECOG2993 trial.

Marks DI(1), Moorman AV, Chilton L, Paietta E, Enshaie A, DeWald G, Harrison CJ, 
Fielding AK, Foroni L, Goldstone AH, Litzow MR, Luger SM, McMillan AK, Racevskis 
J, Rowe JM, Tallman MS, Wiernik P, Lazarus HM.

Author information: 
(1)Adult BMT Unit, University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust, Bristol,
UK. David.Marks@UHBristol.nhs.uk

The biology and outcome of adult t(4;11)(q21;q23)/MLL-AFF1 acute lymphoblastic
leukemia are poorly understood. We describe the outcome and delineate prognostic 
factors and optimal post-remission therapy in 85 consecutive patients (median age
38 years) treated uniformly in the prospective trial UKALLXII/ECOG2993. The
immunophenotype of this leukemia was pro-B (CD10(NEG)). Immaturity was further
suggested by high expression of the stem-cell antigens, CD133 and CD135, although
CD34 expression was significantly lower than in t(4;11)-negative patients.
Complete remission was achieved in 77 (93%) patients but only 35% survived 5
years (95% CI: 25-45%); the relapse rate was 45% (95% CI: 33-58%). Thirty-one
patients underwent allogeneic transplantation in first remission (15 sibling
donors and 16 unrelated donors): with 5-year survival rates of 56% and 67%
respectively, only 2/31 patients relapsed. This compares with a 24% survival rate
and 59% relapse rate in 46 patients who received post-remission chemotherapy. A
major determinant of outcome was age with 71% of patients aged <25 years
surviving. Younger patients had lower relapse rates (19%) but most received
allografts in first complete remission. In conclusion, multivariate analysis did 
not demonstrate an advantage of allografting over chemotherapy but only five
younger patients received chemotherapy. Prospective trials are required to
determine whether poor outcomes in older patients can be improved by
reduced-intensity conditioning allografts. NCT00002514 www.clinicaltrials.gov.

PMCID: PMC3669452
PMID: 23349309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Structure. 2013 Jan 8;21(1):176-83. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.11.011. Epub 2012 Dec
20.

Leukemia fusion target AF9 is an intrinsically disordered transcriptional
regulator that recruits multiple partners via coupled folding and binding.

Leach BI(1), Kuntimaddi A, Schmidt CR, Cierpicki T, Johnson SA, Bushweller JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion proteins cause oncogenic transformation of
hematopoietic cells by constitutive recruitment of elongation factors to HOX
promoters, resulting in overexpression of target genes. The structural basis of
transactivation by MLL fusion partners remains undetermined. We show that the
ANC1 homology domain (AHD) of AF9, one of the most common MLL translocation
partners, is intrinsically disordered and recruits multiple transcription factors
through coupled folding and binding. We determined the structure of the AF9 AHD
in complex with the elongation factor AF4 and show that aliphatic residues, which
are conserved in each of the AF9 binding partners, form an integral part of the
hydrophobic core of the complex. Nuclear magnetic resonance relaxation
measurements show that AF9 retains significant dynamic behavior which may
facilitate exchange between disordered partners. We propose that AF9 functions
as a signaling hub that regulates transcription through dynamic recruitment of
cofactors in normal hematopoiesis and in acute leukemia.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3545106
PMID: 23260655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Ticks Tick Borne Dis. 2013 Feb;4(1-2):160-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2012.08.006.
Epub 2012 Oct 5.

Immunization with adenoviral-vectored tick salivary gland proteins (SALPs) in a
murine model of Lyme borreliosis.

Ullmann AJ(1), Dolan MC, Sackal CA, Fikrig E, Piesman J, Zeidner NS.

Author information: 
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Vector-Borne Diseases,
Bacterial Disease Branch, 3156 Rampart Road, Fort Collins, CO 80521, USA.
aff1@cdc.gov

Prior exposure of vertebrate hosts to tick salivary proteins can induce specific 
immunity to tick infestation, as well as affording protection against
tick-transmitted Borrelia burgdorferi infection in the mammalian host.
Vaccination using an adenovirus expression system to deliver 4 tick salivary
proteins (Ad-Salps) derived from Ixodes scapularis, Salp15, Salp25A, Salp25D, and
Isac, was explored. Results indicate that vaccination with tick salivary proteins
in an adenoviral vector can be used to modulate a Th1 response in the host and
partially control spirochete load in immunized mice after infected tick
challenge.

Published by Elsevier GmbH.

PMCID: PMC4306421
PMID: 23141105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Korean Med Sci. 2012 Oct;27(10):1155-61. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2012.27.10.1155.
Epub 2012 Oct 2.

Rapid detection of prognostically significant fusion transcripts in acute
leukemia using simplified multiplex reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction.

Cho YU(1), Chi HS, Park CJ, Jang S, Seo EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Ulsan College of Medicine and
Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.

Multiplex reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (mRT-PCR) has recently 
emerged as an alternative to cytogenetics. We designed and used simplified
mRT-PCR system as a molecular screen for acute leukemia. Fifteen fusion
transcripts were included: BCR-ABL1, PML-RARA, ZBTB16-RARA, RUNX1-RUNX1T1,
CBFB-MYH11, DEK-NUP214, TCF3-PBX1, ETV6-RUNX1, MLL-AFF1, MLL-MLLT4, MLL-MLLT3,
MLL-MLLT10, MLL-ELL, MLL-MLLT1, and MLL-MLLT6. A total of 121 diagnostic acute
leukemia specimens were studied, comparing the mRT-PCR system with standard
cytogenetics. Fifty-six cases (46.3%) had fusion transcripts revealed by our
mRT-PCR assay. The concordance rate between mRT-PCR and cytogenetics was 91.7%.
However, false negative results were found in three cases who have inv(16),
t(4;11) or t(11;19)(q23;p13.1), respectively. Seven cryptic translocations
including ETV6-RUNX1, MLL-MLLT3, MLL-MLLT4, and PML-RARA were detected. This
mRT-PCR assay is a useful screening tool in acute leukemia because it provides
rapid and reliable detection of clinically important chimeric transcripts. In
addition, cryptic translocations provide additional genetic information that
could be clinically useful.

PMCID: PMC3468750
PMID: 23091311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Anticancer Res. 2012 Sep;32(9):3893-9.

Gene expression profiling of adult t(4;11)(q21;q23)-associated acute
lymphoblastic leukemia reveals a different signature from pediatric cases.

De Braekeleer E(1), Douet-Guilbert N, Le Bris MJ, Basinko A, Morel F, De
Braekeleer M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Laboratory of Histology, University
of Brest, Brest, France. marc.debraekeleer@univ-brest.fr

Chromosomal rearrangements involving the mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) gene,
located at chromosomal band 11q23, result in the generation of in-frame fusion
transcripts with various partner genes from more than 60 distinct gene loci.
Among them, the MLL/AFF1 (AF4/FMR2 family, member 1) fusion, associated with
rearrangements between bands 4q21 and 11q23 is a recurrent event in pre-B acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Gene expression profiling (GEP) was performed for
four adult patients with ALL. Their signatures were compared to those of ALL
patients with a fusion gene involving c-abl oncogene 1, non-receptor tyrosine
kinase (ABL1). The comparison of MLL-AFF1 cases with the ABL1 group identified
477 genes being differentially expressed at the statistically significant level
of p<0.05, with 296 and 181 genes up- and down-regulated, respectively, in the
MLL-AFF1 cases. Three GEP studies on t(4;11)(q21;q23) focusing on the age group
of the patients have been reported in the literature. Different expression
profiles based on the levels of the homeobox A (HOXA) signature were identified. 
Although comparison between studies is difficult because of differences in the
microarrays and the control samples used, our results and those from the
literature suggest that cells carrying t(4;11)(q21;q23) use different pathways to
lead to leukemogenesis. Therefore, t(4;11)-associated ALL could represent
different biological entities.

PMID: 22993334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Immunogenetics. 2012 Dec;64(12):935-8. doi: 10.1007/s00251-012-0650-0. Epub 2012 
Sep 16.

Association of AFF1 rs340630 and AFF3 rs10865035 polymorphisms with systemic
lupus erythematosus in a Chinese population.

Cen H(1), Leng RX, Wang W, Zhou M, Feng CC, Chen GM, Li R, Pan HF, Li XP, Ye DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Anhui
Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, 230032, People's Republic of
China.

The aim of this study was to evaluate whether two single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), AF4/FMR2 family, member 1 (AFF1) rs340630 and AF4/FMR2 family, member 3
(AFF3) rs10865035, show significant evidence for association with systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE) in a Chinese population. A total of 868 Chinese patients with
SLE and 975 geographically and ethnically matched healthy control subjects were
enrolled in the current study. The genotypes of these two SNPs were determined by
Sequenom MassArray technology. Significant evidence for association of AFF3
rs10865035 with SLE was detected (for A versus G, P = 4.81 × 10(-4), odds ratio
(OR) 1.26, 95% confidence interval (95% CI) 1.11-1.44). However, no association
between AFF1 rs340630 and SLE was found in the Chinese population (for A versus
G, P = 0.79, OR 0.98, 95% CI 0.86-1.12). No significant evidence for association 
of AFF3 rs10865035 polymorphism with any clinical features was detected. By
targeting a variant with convincing evidence for association with rheumatoid
arthritis, significant association of AFF3 rs10865035 with SLE was detected in
the Chinese population, indicating that AFF3 might be a common autoimmunity gene.
Further case-control studies based on larger sample sizes in diverse ethnic
populations are required to clarify the role of AFF1 rs340630 in SLE.

PMID: 22983539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Oncol. 2012 Oct;6(5):553-64. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2012.06.004. Epub 2012 Jul
14.

Genetic and clinical characterization of 45 acute leukemia patients with MLL gene
rearrangements from a single institution.

Cerveira N(1), Lisboa S, Correia C, Bizarro S, Santos J, Torres L, Vieira J,
Barros-Silva JD, Pereira D, Moreira C, Meyer C, Oliva T, Moreira I, Martins Â,
Viterbo L, Costa V, Marschalek R, Pinto A, Mariz JM, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.

Chromosomal rearrangements affecting the MLL gene are associated with high-risk
pediatric, adult and therapy-associated acute leukemia. In this study,
conventional cytogenetic, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and molecular
genetic studies were used to characterize the type and frequency of MLL
rearrangements in a consecutive series of 45 Portuguese patients with MLL-related
leukemia treated in a single institution between 1998 and 2011. In the group of
patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia and an identified MLL fusion partner, 
47% showed the presence of an MLL-AFF1 fusion, as a result of a t(4;11). In the
remaining cases, a MLL-MLLT3 (27%), a MLL-MLLT1 (20%), or MLL-MLLT4 (7%)
rearrangement was found. The most frequent rearrangement found in patients with
acute myeloid leukemia was the MLL-MLLT3 fusion (42%), followed by MLL-MLLT10
(23%), MLL-MLLT1 (8%), MLL-ELL (8%), MLL-MLLT4 (4%), and MLL-MLLT11 (4%). In
three patients, fusions involving MLL and a septin family gene (SEPT2, SEPT6, and
SEPT9), were identified. The most frequently identified chromosomal
rearrangements were reciprocal translocations, but insertions and deletions, some
cryptic, were also observed. In our series, patients with MLL rearrangements were
shown to have a poor prognosis, regardless of leukemia subtype. Interestingly,
children with 1 year or less showed a statistically significant better overall
survival when compared with both older children and adults. The use of a combined
strategy in the initial genetic evaluation of acute leukemia patients allowed us 
to characterize the pattern of MLL rearrangements in our institution, including
our previous discovery of two novel MLL fusion partners, the SEPT2 and CT45A2
genes, and a very rare MLL-MLLT4 fusion variant.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22846743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Blood Cancer J. 2011 Nov;1(11):e38. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2011.37. Epub 2011 Nov 4.

Resistance of MLL-AFF1-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia to tumor necrosis
factor-alpha is mediated by S100A6 upregulation.

Tamai H, Miyake K, Yamaguchi H, Takatori M, Dan K, Inokuchi K, Shimada T.

Mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL)-AFF1 (MLL-AF4)-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) is associated with poor prognosis, even after allogeneic hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation (allo-HSCT). The resistance to graft-versus-leukemia (GVL)
effects may be responsible for the poor effect of allo-HSCT on MLL-AFF1-positive 
ALL. Cytotoxic effector mechanisms mediated by tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-a) was reported to contribute to the GVL effect. We showed that
MLL-AFF1-positive ALL cell lines are resistant to TNF-a. To examine the mechanism
of resistance to TNF-a of MLL-AFF1-positive leukemia, we focused on S100A6 as a
possible factor. Upregulation of S100A6 expression and inhibition of the
p53-caspase 8-caspase 3 pathway were observed only in MLL-AFF1-positive ALL cell 
lines in the presence of TNF-a. The effect of S100A6 on resistance to TNF-a by
inhibition of the p53-caspase 8-caspase 3 pathway of MLL-AFF1-positive ALL cell
lines were also confirmed by analysis using small interfering RNA against S100A6.
This pathway was also confirmed in previously established MLL-AFF1 transgenic
mice. These results suggest that MLL-AFF1-positive ALL escapes from
TNF-a-mediated apoptosis by upregulation of S100A6 expression, followed by
interfering with p53-caspase 8-caspase 3 pathway. These results suggest that
S100A6 may be a promising therapeutic target for MLL-AFF1-positive ALL in
combination with allo-HSCT.

PMCID: PMC3256756
PMID: 22829076  [PubMed]


72. Mol Vis. 2012;18:1384-94. Epub 2012 May 31.

The locus for an inherited cataract in sheep maps to ovine chromosome 6.

Wilson GR(1), Morton JD, Palmer DN, McEwan JC, Gately K, Anderson RM, Dodds KG.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Lincoln University, Lincoln, New
Zealand.

PURPOSE: Cataracts are an important cause of blindness in humans but there are
few large animal models available. One of these animal models is Ovine Heritable 
Cataract, a bilateral cortical cataract which develops after birth. This cataract
has been used as a model for human cataracts in drug trials, but the gene
responsible for the cataract trait is unknown. A genetic test for cataract would 
improve the efficiency of the model by predicting which animals would develop
cataracts. Identifying the genetic basis of the cataract would indicate its
relevance to human cataract.
METHODS: A genome scan was performed on 20 sheep chromosomes, representing 86% of
the genome, to determine the position of the cataract locus. Additional
microsatellite markers were tested on chromosome 6 using a larger pedigree. Fine 
mapping was performed using a breakpoint panel of 36 animals and novel
microsatellite markers taken from the bovine genome assembly. All exons of the
candidate gene nudix (nucleoside diphosphate linked moiety X)-type motif 9
(NUDT9) were sequenced in normal and affected sheep.
RESULTS: Significant linkage was found between cataract status and markers on
chromosome 6. Linkage analysis on the larger pedigree showed the most likely
position of the cataract locus was between 112.3 and 132.9 cM from the
centromere. During fine mapping, NUDT9 was considered as a positional candidate
for the cataract gene because it was located within the linked interval and is
expressed in the lens. The gene was ruled out as the cataract gene after
extensive genotype analysis, but a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) inside it
provided a useful restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) marker for
further fine mapping. Twelve new markers were found and used to map the cataract 
locus to between 131.1 and 131.8 cM from the centromere.
CONCLUSIONS: A region of ovine chromosome 6 strongly linked to cataract has been 
identified, and a genetic test for cataract based on a SNP within this region has
been developed. The best candidate gene within this region is AF4/FMR2 family,
member 1 (AFF1), the mouse equivalent of which is associated with an inherited
cataract.

PMCID: PMC3370893
PMID: 22690116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jul;32(13):2608-17. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00182-12. Epub 2012 Apr 
30.

The super elongation complex family of RNA polymerase II elongation factors: gene
target specificity and transcriptional output.

Luo Z(1), Lin C, Guest E, Garrett AS, Mohaghegh N, Swanson S, Marshall S, Florens
L, Washburn MP, Shilatifard A.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, USA.

The elongation stage of transcription is highly regulated in metazoans. We
previously purified the AFF1- and AFF4-containing super elongation complex (SEC) 
as a major regulator of development and cancer pathogenesis. Here, we report the 
biochemical isolation of SEC-like 2 (SEC-L2) and SEC-like 3 (SEC-L3) containing
AFF2 and AFF3 in association with P-TEFb, ENL/MLLT1, and AF9/MLLT3. The SEC
family members demonstrate high levels of polymerase II (Pol II) C-terminal
domain kinase activity; however, only SEC is required for the proper induction of
the HSP70 gene upon stress. Genome-wide mRNA-Seq analyses demonstrated that
SEC-L2 and SEC-L3 control the expression of different subsets of genes, while
AFF4/SEC plays a more dominant role in rapid transcriptional induction in cells. 
MYC is one of the direct targets of AFF4/SEC, and SEC recruitment to the MYC gene
regulates its expression in different cancer cells, including those in acute
myeloid or lymphoid leukemia. These findings suggest that AFF4/SEC could be a
potential therapeutic target for the treatment of leukemia or other cancers
associated with MYC overexpression.

PMCID: PMC3434493
PMID: 22547686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jul 1;18(13):3697-704. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0191. 
Epub 2012 Apr 26.

Impact of MiRSNPs on survival and progression in patients with multiple myeloma
undergoing autologous stem cell transplantation.

de Larrea CF(1), Navarro A, Tejero R, Tovar N, Díaz T, Cibeira MT, Rosiñol L,
Ferrer G, Rovira M, Rozman M, Monzó M, Bladé J.

Author information: 
(1)Amyloidosis and Myeloma Unit, Department of Hematology, Hospital Clínic,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

PURPOSE: A distinctive new group of polymorphisms is constituted by
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in miRNA processing machinery in miRNA
precursor molecules and in miRNA-binding sites, known as miRSNPs. The aim of this
study was to ascertain the prognostic impact of six miRSNPs in patients with
multiple myeloma and analyze the functional consequences.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: One hundred and thirty-seven patients with chemosensitive
multiple myeloma (73M/64F) intensified with autologous stem cell transplantation 
(ASCT) were studied. The median follow-up was 4 years. The genes and SNPs
evaluated in genomic DNA by allelic discrimination were KRT81 (rs3660), AFF1
(rs17703261), FAM179b (rs1053667), and MIR196A2 (rs11614913) for miRNA target
genes and TRBP (rs784567) and XPO5 (rs11077) for miRNA biogenesis pathway.
RESULTS: Overall survival (OS) was significantly longer in patients with KRT81
rs3660 C/C variant (P = 0.037). Functional analysis showed that the presence of C
variant in KRT81 3' untranslated region (UTR) is related with a reduction of the 
protein levels. Moreover, the reduction of KRT81 protein levels by siRNA in
multiple myeloma cell lines is related to a decreased proliferation. On the other
hand, OS was significantly longer in patients with C/C or A/C variant in XPO5
rs11077 (P = 0.012). There was also a significantly longer progression-free
survival (PFS) for this SNP (P = 0.013). This SNP retained its prognostic impact 
on PFS and OS in a multivariate regression analysis (P = 0.028 and P = 0.014,
respectively).
CONCLUSION: This is the first report that relates miRSNPs with prognosis in
multiple myeloma either in a keratin gene (KRT81), target of diverse miRNA
multiple myeloma clusters, or in the miRNA biogenesis pathway-related protein
exportin-5.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22539802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Cell. 2012 May 11;46(3):325-34. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.03.007. Epub 2012 
Apr 5.

The ubiquitin ligase Siah1 controls ELL2 stability and formation of super
elongation complexes to modulate gene transcription.

Liu M(1), Hsu J, Chan C, Li Z, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.

Super elongation complexes (SECs) contain two different transcription elongation 
factors, P-TEFb and ELL1/2, linked by the scaffolding protein AFF4 or AFF1. They 
stimulate the expression of both normal and disease-related genes, especially
those of HIV or those involved in leukemogenesis. Among all SEC subunits, ELL2 is
stoichiometrically limiting and uniquely regulated at the level of protein
stability. Here we identify the RING domain protein Siah1, but not the homologous
Siah2, as the E3 ubiquitin ligase for ELL2 polyubiquitination and proteasomal
degradation. Siah1 cannot access and ubiquitinate ELL2 bound to AFF4, although,
at high concentrations, it also degrades AFF4/1 to destroy SECs. Prostratin and
HMBA, two well-studied activators of HIV transcription and latency, enhance ELL2 
accumulation and SECs formation largely through decreasing Siah1 expression and
ELL2 polyubiquitination. Given its importance in formation of SECs, the Siah1
ubiquitination pathway provides a fresh avenue for developing strategies to
control disease-related transcription.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3360964
PMID: 22483617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Bull Entomol Res. 2012 Aug;102(4):435-43. doi: 10.1017/S0007485312000016. Epub
2012 Feb 24.

Random mating and reproductive compatibility among Argentinean and southern
Brazilian populations of Anastrepha fraterculus (Diptera: Tephritidae).

Rull J(1), Abraham S(2), Kovaleski A(3), Segura DF(4), Islam A(5), Wornoayporn
V(5), Dammalage T(5), Tomas US(5), Vera MT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Ecología, A.C., Apartado Postal 63, 91000 Xalapa, Veracruz,
México. (2)Cátedra de Terapéutica Vegetal, Departamento de Sanidad Vegetal,
Facultad de Agronomía y Zootecnia, UNT, Tucumán, Argentina. (3)Embrapa Uva e
Vinho, Estação Experimental de Vacaria, Vacaria, Brazil. (4)Comisión Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), CABA, Argentina. (5)Insect Pest
Control Laboratory, FAO/IAEA Agriculture and Biotechnology Laboratories,
Seibersdorf, Austria.

As a prerequisite for area-wide application of the sterile insect technique in an
area encompassing northern Argentina and southern Brazil, prezygotic and
postzygotic reproductive compatibility among three geographically distant
populations in the area was tested. In field cages, sexually mature adults of
each population were found to be sexually compatible, mating duration was not
affected by fly origin and there was no clear evidence of spatial partition of
mating location. In the laboratory, homotypic and heterotypic crosses for all
possible combinations displayed similar levels of fertility and yielded F1 adults
without distortion of the sex ratio. Finally, F1 hybrid and parental adults
produced equally viable F2 eggs. Put together, our results and those from earlier
studies suggest that a large area, ranging from Buenos Aires to the surroundings 
of São Paulo, could be managed using a single A. fraterculus mass-reared strain. 
At the northern margin of this area, two A. fraterculus morphotypes appear to
coexist in sympatry. We delineate future research to further delimit the
distribution of the aff1 morphotype (Argentina-southern Brazil) and to gain
insight into evolutionary patterns producing divergence and radiation of tropical
fruit fly species.

PMID: 22360877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Cancer Res. 2012 Apr 15;72(8):1929-34. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3589. Epub
2012 Feb 14.

The mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion-associated gene AF4 promotes CD133
transcription.

Mak AB(1), Nixon AM, Moffat J.

Author information: 
(1)Donnelley Centre and Banting and Best Department of Medical Research,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The AC133 epitope has been used as a marker for both normal and cancer stem cells
from multiple tissue lineages. To identify transcription factors that regulate
CD133 expression, we conducted parallel large-scale RNA interference screens in
Caco-2 cancer cells that endogenously express CD133 and in engineered HEK293
cells that express CD133 from a heterologous promoter. The transcription factor
AF4 was identified following a comparative analysis between the two screens. We
then showed that AF4 is a promoter of CD133 transcription in multiple cancer cell
lines. Knockdown of AF4 resulted in a dramatic reduction in CD133 transcript
levels. Importantly, a subset of pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALL)
harbor a fusion oncogene results from a chromosomal translocation that juxtaposes
the mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) gene and the AF4 gene. An investigation of the
functional role of CD133 in the MLL-AF4-dependent ALL cells revealed that CD133
was required for leukemia cell survival. Together, our findings show
AF4-dependent regulation of CD133 expression, which is required for the growth of
ALL cells. CD133 may therefore represent a therapeutic target in a subset of
cancers.

PMID: 22337994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. PLoS Genet. 2012 Jan;8(1):e1002455. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002455. Epub 2012 
Jan 26.

A genome-wide association study identified AFF1 as a susceptibility locus for
systemic lupus eyrthematosus in Japanese.

Okada Y(1), Shimane K, Kochi Y, Tahira T, Suzuki A, Higasa K, Takahashi A, Horita
T, Atsumi T, Ishii T, Okamoto A, Fujio K, Hirakata M, Amano H, Kondo Y, Ito S,
Takada K, Mimori A, Saito K, Kamachi M, Kawaguchi Y, Ikari K, Mohammed OW,
Matsuda K, Terao C, Ohmura K, Myouzen K, Hosono N, Tsunoda T, Nishimoto N, Mimori
T, Matsuda F, Tanaka Y, Sumida T, Yamanaka H, Takasaki Y, Koike T, Horiuchi T,
Hayashi K, Kubo M, Kamatani N, Yamada R, Nakamura Y, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Autoimmune Diseases, Center for Genomic Medicine, RIKEN,
Yokohama, Japan.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease that causes multiple 
organ damage. Although recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have
contributed to discovery of SLE susceptibility genes, few studies has been
performed in Asian populations. Here, we report a GWAS for SLE examining 891 SLE 
cases and 3,384 controls and multi-stage replication studies examining 1,387 SLE 
cases and 28,564 controls in Japanese subjects. Considering that expression
quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) have been implicated in genetic risks for
autoimmune diseases, we integrated an eQTL study into the results of the GWAS. We
observed enrichments of cis-eQTL positive loci among the known SLE susceptibility
loci (30.8%) compared to the genome-wide SNPs (6.9%). In addition, we identified 
a novel association of a variant in the AF4/FMR2 family, member 1 (AFF1) gene at 
4q21 with SLE susceptibility (rs340630; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>8.3×10(-9), odds ratio<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.21). The
risk A allele of rs340630 demonstrated a cis-eQTL effect on the AFF1 transcript
with enhanced expression levels (P<0.05). As AFF1 transcripts were prominently
expressed in CD4(+) and CD19(+) peripheral blood lymphocytes, up-regulation of
AFF1 may cause the abnormality in these lymphocytes, leading to disease onset.

PMCID: PMC3266877
PMID: 22291604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Food Prot. 2012 Jan;75(1):85-94. doi: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-11-268.

Development of a PCR protocol to detect aflatoxigenic molds in food products.

Luque MI(1), Rodríguez A, Andrade MJ, Martín A, Córdoba JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Higiene y Seguridad Alimentaria, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad de
Extremadura, Avda. de la Universidad s/n, 10003-Cáceres, Spain.

Aflatoxins are secondary metabolites produced mainly by Aspergillus species
growing in foodstuffs. Because aflatoxins have important health effects, the
detection of early contamination of foods by aflatoxigenic molds should be
useful. In the present work, a reliable conventional PCR method for detecting
aflatoxigenic molds of various species was developed. Fifty-six aflatoxigenic and
nonaflatoxigenic strains commonly reported in foodstuffs were tested. Aflatoxin
production was first confirmed by micellar electrokinetic capillary
electrophoresis or/and high-pressure liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.
Based on the conserved regions of the O-methyltransferase gene (omt-1) involved
in the aflatoxin biosynthetic pathway, six primer pairs were designed. With only 
the designed primer pair AFF1-AFR3, the expected PCR product (381 bp) was
obtained in all of the tested aflatoxigenic strains of various species and
genera. Amplification products were not obtained with this primer pair for any of
the nonaflatoxigenic reference molds. However, an amplicon of 453 bp was obtained
for all aflatoxigenic and nonaflatoxigenic mold reference strains with a PCR
protocol based on the constitutive fungal ß-tubulin gene, which was used as a
positive fungal control. The PCR protocol based on omt-1 detected as little as 15
pg of DNA from aflatoxigenic molds and 10(2) to 10(3) CFU/g in contaminated food 
samples. This PCR protocol should be used as a routine technique to detect
aflatoxigenic molds in foods.

PMID: 22221359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Blood. 2012 Feb 23;119(8):1872-81. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-382861. Epub 2011
Dec 30.

Gene expression profiles predictive of outcome and age in infant acute
lymphoblastic leukemia: a Children's Oncology Group study.

Kang H(1), Wilson CS, Harvey RC, Chen IM, Murphy MH, Atlas SR, Bedrick EJ,
Devidas M, Carroll AJ, Robinson BW, Stam RW, Valsecchi MG, Pieters R, Heerema NA,
Hilden JM, Felix CA, Reaman GH, Camitta B, Winick N, Carroll WL, Dreyer ZE,
Hunger SP, Willman CL.

Author information: 
(1)University of New Mexico Cancer Center and Department of Internal Medicine,
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA.

Gene expression profiling was performed on 97 cases of infant ALL from Children's
Oncology Group Trial P9407. Statistical modeling of an outcome predictor revealed
3 genes highly predictive of event-free survival (EFS), beyond age and MLL
status: FLT3, IRX2, and TACC2. Low FLT3 expression was found in a group of
infants with excellent outcome (n = 11; 5-year EFS of 100%), whereas differential
expression of IRX2 and TACC2 partitioned the remaining infants into 2 groups with
significantly different survivals (5-year EFS of 16% vs 64%; P < .001). When
infants with MLL-AFF1 were analyzed separately, a 7-gene classifier was developed
that split them into 2 distinct groups with significantly different outcomes
(5-year EFS of 20% vs 65%; P < .001). In this classifier, elevated expression of 
NEGR1 was associated with better EFS, whereas IRX2, EPS8, and TPD52 expression
were correlated with worse outcome. This classifier also predicted EFS in an
independent infant ALL cohort from the Interfant-99 trial. When evaluating
expression profiles as a continuous variable relative to patient age, we further 
identified striking differences in profiles in infants less than or equal to 90
days of age and those more than 90 days of age. These age-related patterns
suggest different mechanisms of leukemogenesis and may underlie the differential 
outcomes historically seen in these age groups.

PMCID: PMC3293641
PMID: 22210879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Oncol. 2011 Dec;5(6):555-63. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2011.08.003. Epub 2011 Aug
26.

Identification of MLL partner genes in 27 patients with acute leukemia from a
single cytogenetic laboratory.

De Braekeleer E(1), Meyer C, Douet-Guilbert N, Basinko A, Le Bris MJ, Morel F,
Berthou C, Marschalek R, Férec C, De Braekeleer M.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Brest, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la Santé, Brest,
France.

Chromosomal rearrangements involving the MLL gene have been associated with many 
different types of hematological malignancies. Fluorescent in situ hybridization 
with a panel of probes coupled with long distance inverse-PCR was used to
identify chromosomal rearrangements involving the MLL gene. Between 1995 and
2010, 27 patients with an acute leukemia were found to have a fusion gene
involving MLL. All seven ALL patients with B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
were characterized by the MLL/AFF1 fusion gene resulting from a translocation (5 
patients) or an insertion (2 patients). In the 19 AML patients with acute
myeloblastic leukemia, 31.6% of all characterized MLL fusion genes were
MLL/MLLT3, 21.1% MLL/ELL, 10.5% MLL/MLLT6 and 10.5% MLL/EPS15. Two patients had
rare or undescribed fusion genes, MLL/KIAA0284 and MLL/FLNA. Seven patients (26%)
had a complex chromosomal rearrangement (three-way translocations, insertions,
deletions) involving the MLL gene. Splicing fusion genes were found in three
patients, leading to a MLL/EPS15 fusion in two and a MLL/ELL fusion in a third
patient. This study showed that fusion involving the MLL gene can be generated
through various chromosomal rearrangements such as translocations, insertions and
deletions, some being complex or cryptic. A systematic approach should be used in
all cases of acute leukemia starting with FISH analyses using a commercially
available MLL split signal probe. Then, the analysis has to be completed, if
necessary, by further molecular cytogenetic and genomic PCR methods.

Copyright © 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21900057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2011 Aug;52(8):679-85.

[Molecular mechanisms of leukemogenesis in MLL-leukemias].

[Article in Japanese]

Yokoyama A.

PMID: 21897075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Sep 20;108(38):15751-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1111498108. Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Function of leukemogenic mixed lineage leukemia 1 (MLL) fusion proteins through
distinct partner protein complexes.

Biswas D(1), Milne TA, Basrur V, Kim J, Elenitoba-Johnson KS, Allis CD, Roeder
RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY 10065, USA.

A number of acute leukemias arise from fusion of the mixed lineage leukemia 1
protein (MLL) N terminus to a variety of fusion partners that have been reported 
to reside in one or more poorly defined complexes linked to transcription
elongation through interactions with the histone H3-K79 methyltransferase DOT1
and positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). Here we first identify
natural complexes (purified through fusion partners AF9, AF4, and ELL) with
overlapping components, different elongation activities, and different cofactor
associations that suggest dynamic interactions. Then, through reconstitution of
defined, functionally active minimal complexes, we identify stable subcomplexes
that, through newly defined protein-protein interactions, form distinct higher
order complexes. These definitive analyses show, for example, that (i) through
direct interactions with AF9 and cyclinT1, family members AF4 and AFF4
independently mediate association of P-TEFb with AF9, (ii) P-TEFb, through direct
interactions, provides the link for association of ELL and ELL-associated factors
1 and 2 (EAF1 and EAF2) with AF4, and (iii) in the absence of other factors, DOT1
forms a stable complex with AF9 and does not interact with AF9AF4P-TEFb
complexes. Finally, we show the importance of defined higher order complex
formation in MLL-AF9-mediated transcriptional up-regulation and cell
immortalization potential in vivo. Thus, our study provides direct mechanistic
insight into the role of fusion partners in MLL fusion-mediated leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3179097
PMID: 21896721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Biochem J. 2011 Aug 15;438(1):121-31. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101633.

Protein network study of human AF4 reveals its central role in RNA Pol
II-mediated transcription and in phosphorylation-dependent regulatory mechanisms.

Esposito G(1), Cevenini A, Cuomo A, de Falco F, Sabbatino D, Pane F, Ruoppolo M, 
Salvatore F.

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate, s.c.a r.l., Via G. Salvatore 486, 80145 Naples,
Italy.

AF4 belongs to a family of proteins implicated in childhood lymphoblastic
leukaemia, FRAXE (Fragile X E site) mental retardation and ataxia. AF4 is a
transcriptional activator that is involved in transcriptional elongation.
Although AF4 has been implicated in MLL (mixed-lineage leukaemia)-related
leukaemogenesis, AF4-dependent physiological mechanisms have not been clearly
defined. Proteins that interact with AF4 may also play important roles in
mediating oncogenesis, and are potential targets for novel therapies. Using a
functional proteomic approach involving tandem MS and bioinformatics, we
identified 51 AF4-interacting proteins of various Gene Ontology categories.
Approximately 60% participate in transcription regulatory mechanisms, including
the Mediator complex in eukaryotic cells. In the present paper we report one of
the first extensive proteomic studies aimed at elucidating AF4 protein
cross-talk. Moreover, we found that the AF4 residues Thr(220) and Ser(212) are
phosphorylated, which suggests that AF4 function depends on phosphorylation
mechanisms. We also mapped the AF4-interaction site with CDK9 (cyclin-dependent
kinase 9), which is a direct interactor crucial for the function and regulation
of the protein. The findings of the present study significantly expand the number
of putative members of the multiprotein complex formed by AF4, which is
instrumental in promoting the transcription/elongation of specific genes in human
cells.

© 2011 The Author(s)

PMCID: PMC3174057
PMID: 21574958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 May 15;20(10):1873-85. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr069. Epub 2011 Feb
17.

Functional characterization of the AFF (AF4/FMR2) family of RNA-binding proteins:
insights into the molecular pathology of FRAXE intellectual disability.

Melko M(1), Douguet D, Bensaid M, Zongaro S, Verheggen C, Gecz J, Bardoni B.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 6097, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of
Nice-Sophia Antipolis, 06560 Valbonne, France.

The AFF (AF4/FMR2) family of genes includes four members: AFF1/AF4, AFF2/FMR2,
AFF3/LAF4 and AFF4/AF5q31. AFF2/FMR2 is silenced in FRAXE intellectual
disability, while the other three members have been reported to form fusion genes
as a consequence of chromosome translocations with the myeloid/lymphoid or mixed 
lineage leukemia (MLL) gene in acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALLs). All AFF
proteins are localized in the nucleus and their role as transcriptional
activators with a positive action on RNA elongation was primarily studied. We
have recently shown that AFF2/FMR2 localizes to nuclear speckles, subnuclear
structures considered as storage/modification sites of pre-mRNA splicing factors,
and modulates alternative splicing via the interaction with the G-quadruplex
RNA-forming structure. We show here that similarly to AFF2/FMR2, AFF3/LAF4 and
AFF4/AF5q31 localize to nuclear speckles and are able to bind RNA, having a high 
apparent affinity for the G-quadruplex structure. Interestingly, AFF3/LAF4 and
AFF4/AF5q31, like AFF2/FMR2, modulate, in vivo, the splicing efficiency of a
mini-gene containing a G-quadruplex structure in one alternatively spliced exon. 
Furthermore, we observed that the overexpression of AFF2/3/4 interferes with the 
organization and/or biogenesis of nuclear speckles. These findings fit well with 
our observation that enlarged nuclear speckles are present in FRAXE fibroblasts. 
Furthermore, our findings suggest functional redundancy among the AFF family
members in the regulation of splicing and transcription. It is possible that
other members of the AFF family compensate for the loss of AFF2/FMR2 activity and
as such explain the relatively mild to borderline phenotype observed in FRAXE
patients.

PMID: 21330300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Leuk Res. 2011 May;35(5):697. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.12.025. Epub 2011 Jan
31.

Authors' comments: t(4;11) leukemias display addiction to MLL-AF4 but not to
AF4-MLL.

Kumar AR(1), Yao Q, Li Q, Sam TA, Kersey JH.

Author information: 
(1)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
ashish.kumar@cchmc.org

PMID: 21277021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Leukemia. 2011 Apr;25(4):663-70. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.308. Epub 2011 Jan 14.

The heterodimerization domains of MLL-FYRN and FYRC--are potential target
structures in t(4;11) leukemia.

Pless B(1), Oehm C, Knauer S, Stauber RH, Dingermann T, Marschalek R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology/ZAFES, Goethe-University of Frankfurt,
Biocenter, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

The chromosomal translocation t(4;11)(q21;q23) is a frequent genetic aberration
of the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene, predominantly associated with high-risk
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in pediatric patients. Previous studies
demonstrated that mice transplanted with hematopoietic cells expressing the
AF4-MLL fusion protein develop proB ALL. The AF4-MLL oncoprotein becomes
activated by Taspase1-mediated hydrolysis, which subsequently leads to a
heterodimer of the cleavage products AF4-MLL·N and MLL·C. This protein-protein
interaction is due to the FYRN and FYRC interaction domains present in both
protein fragments. Heterodimerization subsequently induces high-molecular-weight 
protein complex formation that is protected against SIAH1/2-mediated
polyubiquitinylation. Here, we attempted to selectively block this initial
heterodimerization step, aiming to prevent the oncogenic activation of the
AF4-MLL multiprotein complex. The minimal interaction interface was
experimentally defined first in a bacterial two-hybrid system, and then in
mammalian cells by using a biosensor assay. Expression of the FYRC domain, or
smaller portions thereof, resulted in the inhibition of heterodimer formation,
and blocked AF4-MLL multiprotein complex formation with subsequent destruction of
the AF4-MLL oncoprotein. Thus, it is in principle possible to specifically target
the AF4-MLL protein. This knowledge can now be exploited to design inhibitory
decoys in order to destroy the AF4-MLL oncoprotein.

PMID: 21233834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Leuk Res. 2011 Mar;35(3):424-5. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.10.003. Epub 2010 Nov
11.

It takes two-to-leukemia: about addictions and requirements.

Marschalek R.

PMID: 21074267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Gene. 2011 Feb 1;472(1-2):7-17. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2010.10.014. Epub 2010 Oct
31.

The gsdf gene locus harbors evolutionary conserved and clustered genes
preferentially expressed in fish previtellogenic oocytes.

Gautier A(1), Le Gac F, Lareyre JJ.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UR SCRIBE, IFR, BioGenOuest, Rennes, France.

The gonadal soma-derived factor (GSDF) belongs to the transforming growth
factor-ß superfamily and is conserved in teleostean fish species. Gsdf is
specifically expressed in the gonads, and gene expression is restricted to the
granulosa and Sertoli cells in trout and medaka. The gsdf gene expression is
correlated to early testis differentiation in medaka and was shown to stimulate
primordial germ cell and spermatogonia proliferation in trout. In the present
study, we show that the gsdf gene localizes to a syntenic chromosomal fragment
conserved among vertebrates although no gsdf-related gene is detected on the
corresponding genomic region in tetrapods. We demonstrate using quantitative
RT-PCR that most of the genes localized in the synteny are specifically expressed
in medaka gonads. Gsdf is the only gene of the synteny with a much higher
expression in the testis compared to the ovary. In contrast, gene expression
pattern analysis of the gsdf surrounding genes (nup54, aff1, klhl8, sdad1, and
ptpn13) indicates that these genes are preferentially expressed in the female
gonads. The tissue distribution of these genes is highly similar in medaka and
zebrafish, two teleostean species that have diverged more than 110 million years 
ago. The cellular localization of these genes was determined in medaka gonads
using the whole-mount in situ hybridization technique. We confirm that gsdf gene 
expression is restricted to Sertoli and granulosa cells in contact with the
premeiotic and meiotic cells. The nup54 gene is expressed in spermatocytes and
previtellogenic oocytes. Transcripts corresponding to the ovary-specific genes
(aff1, klhl8, and sdad1) are detected only in previtellogenic oocytes. No
expression was detected in the gonocytes in 10 dpf embryos. In conclusion, we
show that the gsdf gene localizes to a syntenic chromosomal fragment harboring
evolutionary conserved genes in vertebrates. These genes are preferentially
expressed in previtelloogenic oocytes, and thus, they display a different
cellular localization compared to that of the gsdf gene indicating that the later
gene is not co-regulated. Interestingly, our study identifies new clustered genes
that are specifically expressed in previtellogenic oocytes (nup54, aff1, klhl8,
sdad1).

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21047546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Leukemia. 2011 Jan;25(1):135-44. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.249. Epub 2010 Oct 29.

The leukemogenic AF4-MLL fusion protein causes P-TEFb kinase activation and
altered epigenetic signatures.

Benedikt A(1), Baltruschat S, Scholz B, Bursen A, Arrey TN, Meyer B, Varagnolo L,
Müller AM, Karas M, Dingermann T, Marschalek R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology/ZAFES, Goethe-University of Frankfurt,
Biocenter, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Expression of the AF4-MLL fusion protein in murine hematopoietic progenitor/stem 
cells results in the development of proB acute lymphoblastic leukemia. In this
study, we affinity purified the AF4-MLL and AF4 protein complexes to elucidate
their function. We observed that the AF4 complex consists of 11 binding partners 
and exhibits positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb)-mediated
activation of promoter-arrested RNA polymerase (pol) II in conjunction with
several chromatin-modifying activities. In contrast, the AF4-MLL complex consists
of at least 16 constituents including P-TEFb kinase, H3K4(me3) and H3K79(me3)
histone methyltransferases (HMT), a protein arginine N-methyltransferase and a
histone acetyltransferase. These findings suggest that the AF4-MLL protein
disturbs the fine-tuned activation cycle of promoter-arrested RNA Pol II and
causes altered histone methylation signatures. Thus, we propose that these two
processes are key to trigger cellular reprogramming that leads to the onset of
acute leukemia.

PMID: 21030982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Leuk Res. 2011 Mar;35(3):305-9. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.08.011. Epub 2010 Sep
25.

t(4;11) leukemias display addiction to MLL-AF4 but not to AF4-MLL.

Kumar AR(1), Yao Q, Li Q, Sam TA, Kersey JH.

Author information: 
(1)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
ashish.kumar@cchmc.org

The most frequent MLL-gene rearrangement found in leukemia is a reciprocal
translocation with AF4 on chromosome 4 resulting in the formation of the MLL-AF4 
and the AF4-MLL fusion genes. The oncogenic role of MLL-AF4 is documented but the
significance of the reciprocal product - AF4-MLL in leukemia is less clear. In
the human leukemia cell lines - RS4;11 and SEMK2-M1, both of which express
MLL-AF4 and AF4-MLL, we knocked down the expression of AF4-MLL using siRNA. Loss 
of AF4-MLL had no effect on the growth of either RS4;11 or SEMK2-M1 cells.
Furthermore, in SEMK2-M1 cells there were no changes in cell cycle or apoptosis
with loss of AF4-MLL. In contrast, knockdown of MLL-AF4 significantly inhibited
growth of both RS4;11 and SEMK2-M1. Additionally, in SEMK2-M1 cells, loss of
MLL-AF4 led to G2/M cell cycle arrest and increased apoptosis. Overall, these
results demonstrate that in t(4;11) leukemia, the MLL-AF4 fusion protein is
critical for leukemia cell proliferation and survival while the AF4-MLL fusion
product is dispensable.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3011030
PMID: 20869771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Nov;30(11):2264-76. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.201020. Epub 2010 Sep 23.

Genetic variants influencing circulating lipid levels and risk of coronary artery
disease.

Waterworth DM(1), Ricketts SL, Song K, Chen L, Zhao JH, Ripatti S, Aulchenko YS, 
Zhang W, Yuan X, Lim N, Luan J, Ashford S, Wheeler E, Young EH, Hadley D,
Thompson JR, Braund PS, Johnson T, Struchalin M, Surakka I, Luben R, Khaw KT,
Rodwell SA, Loos RJ, Boekholdt SM, Inouye M, Deloukas P, Elliott P, Schlessinger 
D, Sanna S, Scuteri A, Jackson A, Mohlke KL, Tuomilehto J, Roberts R, Stewart A, 
Kesäniemi YA, Mahley RW, Grundy SM; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium,
McArdle W, Cardon L, Waeber G, Vollenweider P, Chambers JC, Boehnke M, Abecasis
GR, Salomaa V, Järvelin MR, Ruokonen A, Barroso I, Epstein SE, Hakonarson HH,
Rader DJ, Reilly MP, Witteman JC, Hall AS, Samani NJ, Strachan DP, Barter P, van 
Duijn CM, Kooner JS, Peltonen L, Wareham NJ, McPherson R, Mooser V, Sandhu MS.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, GlaxoSmithKline R&D, King of Prussia, PA, USA.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Nov;30(11):2084-6.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic studies might provide new insights into the biological
mechanisms underlying lipid metabolism and risk of CAD. We therefore conducted a 
genome-wide association study to identify novel genetic determinants of
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol
(HDL-C), and triglycerides.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We combined genome-wide association data from 8 studies,
comprising up to 17 723 participants with information on circulating lipid
concentrations. We did independent replication studies in up to 37 774
participants from 8 populations and also in a population of Indian Asian descent.
We also assessed the association between single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
at lipid loci and risk of CAD in up to 9 633 cases and 38 684 controls. We
identified 4 novel genetic loci that showed reproducible associations with lipids
(probability values, 1.6×10(-8) to 3.1×10(-10)). These include a potentially
functional SNP in the SLC39A8 gene for HDL-C, an SNP near the MYLIP/GMPR and
PPP1R3B genes for LDL-C, and at the AFF1 gene for triglycerides. SNPs showing
strong statistical association with 1 or more lipid traits at the CELSR2, APOB,
APOE-C1-C4-C2 cluster, LPL, ZNF259-APOA5-A4-C3-A1 cluster and TRIB1 loci were
also associated with CAD risk (probability values, 1.1×10(-3) to 1.2×10(-9)).
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified 4 novel loci associated with circulating lipids. 
We also show that in addition to those that are largely associated with LDL-C,
genetic loci mainly associated with circulating triglycerides and HDL-C are also 
associated with risk of CAD. These findings potentially provide new insights into
the biological mechanisms underlying lipid metabolism and CAD risk.

PMCID: PMC3891568
PMID: 20864672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Br J Haematol. 2010 Oct;151(2):132-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08314.x.

Detection of prognostically relevant genetic abnormalities in childhood B-cell
precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: recommendations from the Biology and
Diagnosis Committee of the International Berlin-Frankfürt-Münster study group.

Harrison CJ(1), Haas O, Harbott J, Biondi A, Stanulla M, Trka J, Izraeli S;
Biology and Diagnosis Committee of International Berlin-Frankfürt-Münster study
group.

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia Research Cytogenetics Group, Northern Institute for Cancer Research,
Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK. christine.harrison@newcastle.ac.uk

Treatment of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) has improved
considerably in recent years. A contributing factor has been the improved
stratification for treatment according to a number of factors, including genetic 
determinants of outcome. Here we review the current diagnostic criteria of
genetic abnormalities in precursor B-ALL (BCP-ALL), including the relevant
technical approaches and the application of the most appropriate methods for the 
detection of each abnormality. The abnormalities with the most significant impact
for treatment and management of BCP-ALL are t(9;22)(q34;q11)/BCR-ABL1,
t(4;11)(q21;q23)/MLL-AFF1 and near-haploidy/low hypodiploidy for high risk
stratification and, to a lesser extent, t(12;21)(p13;q22)/ETV6-RUNX1 and high
hyperdiploidy for good risk management. Apart from the numerical abnormalities,
these can be routinely tested for by reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction, providing a basic yet informative screen. However, cytogenetics,
particularly fluorescence in situ hybridization may provide reliable alternative 
detection methods dependent upon the preferred technical approach within each
protocol.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 20701601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Aug;201(1):48-51. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.05.002.

A translocation in acute lymphoblastic leukemia that cytogenetically mimics the
recurrent MLL-AFF1 translocation and fuses SEPT11 to MLL.

Stevens SJ(1), Meers LE, Albrechts JC, Mebis-Verhees K, Bos GM, Engelen JJ,
Janssen JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Unit of Cytogenetics, Maastricht University
Medical Center, Maastricht, the Netherlands. servi.stevens@gen.unimaas.nl

A 55-year-old man sought care for aggressive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), 
which developed 8 years after he had received chemotherapeutic treatment for
nephrotic syndrome. The sole cytogenetic abnormality observed in bone
marrow-derived metaphases was a t(4;11)(q21;q23), which is a frequently occurring
translocation in ALL. However, subsequent reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain 
reaction for the expected mixed lineage leukemia [trithorax homolog, Drosophila] 
(MLL)-AFF1 fusion transcript was negative. Further fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis narrowed the 4q21 breakpoint down to a 250-kb
region proximal of AFF1. This comprised four genes, of which septin11 (SEPT11)
was further analyzed. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction revealed
expression of a chimeric MLL-SEPT11 transcript, thus identifying what is to our
knowledge a hitherto undescribed translocation in ALL. Sequence analysis of cDNA 
showed in-frame fusion of MLL exon 11 to SEPT11 exon 2. This MLL-SEPT11 fusion is
cytogenetically indistinguishable from the recurrent t(4;11)(q21;q23). Thus, it
is crucial to characterize cytogenetic aberrations in leukemia by molecular
methods, even in cases where a known recurrent translocation is presumed. This
report expands the spectrum of ALL-related translocations and hypothesizes on the
mechanism leading to the MLL-SEPT11 fusion. Five septins have been identified
thus far as MLL fusion partners in leukemia. Their putative oncogenic role may be
related to forced MLL dimerization by the septin coiled coil and GTP-binding
domains, which could convert MLL to an oncogene.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20633769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Mol Diagn. 2010 Jul;12(4):441-52. doi: 10.2353/jmoldx.2010.090214. Epub 2010
Jun 10.

Development of five dual-color, double-fusion fluorescence in situ hybridization 
assays for the detection of common MLL translocation partners.

Keefe JG(1), Sukov WR, Knudson RA, Nguyen LP, Williamson C, Sinnwell JP,
Ketterling RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Division of Laboratory
Genetics, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Chromosomal rearrangements involving the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene at
11q23 are frequent in adult and childhood acute leukemia and have been associated
with an unfavorable prognosis. Recent evidence suggests that MLL gene partners
may influence prognosis. Five translocations account for approximately 80% of MLL
rearrangements: t(4;11)(q21;q23), AFF1/MLL; t(6;11)(q27;q23), MLLT4/MLL;
t(9;11)(p22;q23), MLLT3/MLL; t(11;19)(q23;p13.1), MLL/ELL; and
t(11;19)(q23;p13.3), MLL/MLLT1. We have designed dual-color, double-fusion
fluorescence in situ hybridization (D-FISH) probe sets to identify these
translocations. A blinded study was performed for each probe set using 25 normal 
bone marrow samples, 25 t(4;11), 20 t(6;11), 20 t(9;11), 18 t(11;19p13.1), and 20
t(11;19p13.3) leukemia specimens as defined by chromosome analysis. The findings 
demonstrated abnormal D-FISH results for 24 of 25 AFF1/MLL, 19 of 20 MLLT4/MLL,
all 20 MLLT3/MLL, all 18 MLL/ELL, and all 20 MLL/MLLT1 samples, confirming the
efficacy of these D-FISH assays in detecting these common MLL/partner
translocations. Our D-FISH assays were more accurate than chromosome analysis at 
distinguishing disruption of 19p13.1/ELL from that of 19p13.3/MLLT1. We also
demonstrated a statistically significant increase in complex/unbalanced
MLL/partner translocations occurring in pediatric patients versus adult patients 
(P = 0.02). A normal cutoff of 0.6% was established, suggesting an application
for these assays in minimal residual disease detection and disease monitoring.

PMCID: PMC2893628
PMID: 20539022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Cell. 2010 May 14;38(3):439-51. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.04.012.

HIV-1 Tat assembles a multifunctional transcription elongation complex and stably
associates with the 7SK snRNP.

Sobhian B(1), Laguette N, Yatim A, Nakamura M, Levy Y, Kiernan R, Benkirane M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire, Institut de Génétique Humaine,
CNRS-UPR1142, Montpellier, France. bijan.sobhian@igh.cnrs.fr

HIV-1 transactivator Tat has greatly contributed to our understanding of
transcription elongation by RNAPII. We purified HIV-1 Tat-associated factors from
HeLa nuclear extract and show that Tat forms two distinct and stable complexes.
Tatcom1 consists of the core active P-TEFb, MLL-fusion partners involved in
leukemia (AF9, AFF4, AFF1, ENL, and ELL), and PAF1 complex. Importantly, Tatcom1 
formation relies on P-TEFb while optimal CDK9 CTD-kinase activity is AF9
dependent. MLL-fusion partners and PAF1 are required for Tat transactivation.
Tatcom2 is composed of CDK9, CycT1, and 7SK snRNP lacking HEXIM. Tat remodels 7SK
snRNP by interacting directly with 7SK RNA, leading to the formation of a
stress-resistant 7SK snRNP particle. Besides the identification of factors
required for Tat transactivation and important for P-TEFb function, our data show
a coordinated control of RNAPII elongation by different classes of transcription 
elongation factors associated in a single complex and acting at the same
promoter.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3595998
PMID: 20471949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Blood. 2010 Apr 29;115(17):3570-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-229542. Epub 2010
Mar 1.

The AF4.MLL fusion protein is capable of inducing ALL in mice without requirement
of MLL.AF4.

Bursen A(1), Schwabe K, Rüster B, Henschler R, Ruthardt M, Dingermann T,
Marschalek R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology/ZAFES/DCAL, Goethe-University of
Frankfurt, Biocenter, Frankfurt, Germany.

The chromosomal translocation t(4;11)(q21;q23) is the most frequent genetic
aberration of the human MLL gene, resulting in high-risk acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL). To elucidate the leukemogenic potential of the fusion proteins
MLL.AF4 and AF4.MLL, Lin(-)/Sca1(+) purified cells (LSPCs) were retrovirally
transduced with either both fusion genes or with MLL.AF4 or AF4.MLL alone.
Recipients of AF4.MLL- or double-transduced LSPCs developed pro-B ALL, B/T
biphenotypic acute leukemia, or mixed lineage leukemia. Transplantation of
MLL.AF4- or mock-transduced LSPCs did not result in disease development during an
observation period of 13 months. These findings indicate that the expression of
the AF4.MLL fusion protein is capable of inducing acute lymphoblastic leukemia
even in the absence of the MLL.AF4 fusion protein. In view of recent findings,
these results may imply that t(4;11) leukemia is based on 2 oncoproteins,
providing an explanation for the very early onset of disease in humans.

PMID: 20194896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Leukemia. 2010 Apr;24(4):903-7. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.14. Epub 2010 Feb 18.

Bimodal distribution of genomic MLL breakpoints in infant acute lymphoblastic
leukemia treatment.

Jung R, Jacobs U, Krumbholz M, Langer T, Keller T, De Lorenzo P, Valsecchi MG,
van der Velden VH, Moericke A, Stanulla M, Teigler-Schlegel A, Panzer-Gruemayer
ER, van Dongen JJ, Schrappe M, den Boer ML, Pieters R, Rascher W, Metzler M.

PMID: 20164851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cancer Cell. 2010 Feb 17;17(2):198-212. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.12.040.

A higher-order complex containing AF4 and ENL family proteins with P-TEFb
facilitates oncogenic and physiologic MLL-dependent transcription.

Yokoyama A(1), Lin M, Naresh A, Kitabayashi I, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan. ayokoyam@ncc.go.jp

AF4 and ENL family proteins are frequently fused with MLL, and they comprise a
higher order complex (designated AEP) containing the P-TEFb transcription
elongation factor. Here, we show that AEP is normally recruited to MLL-target
chromatin to facilitate transcription. In contrast, MLL oncoproteins fused with
AEP components constitutively form MLL/AEP hybrid complexes to cause sustained
target gene expression, which leads to transformation of hematopoietic
progenitors. Furthermore, MLL-AF6, an MLL fusion with a cytoplasmic protein, does
not form such hybrid complexes, but nevertheless constitutively recruits AEP to
target chromatin via unknown alternative mechanisms. Thus, AEP recruitment is an 
integral part of both physiological and pathological MLL-dependent
transcriptional pathways. Bypass of its normal recruitment mechanisms is the
strategy most frequently used by MLL oncoproteins.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2824033
PMID: 20153263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Nat Prod Res. 2010 Feb;24(3):266-73. doi: 10.1080/14786410902986894.

A new anti-inflammatory flavonol glycoside from Alchornea floribunda leaves.

Okoye FB(1), Osadebe PO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Nigeria, Nsukka, 410001 Enugu State,
Nigeria. basdenc@yahoo.com

Alchornea floribunda leaves are widely used in African ethnomedicine for the
management of acute and chronic inflammatory disorders. In the present study,
bioactivity-guided fractionation of the ethyl acetate fraction of the methanol
leaf extract of the plant material led to the isolation of a new flavonol
glycoside (AFF1). The anti-inflammatory activity of this novel compound was
evaluated using egg albumen-induced rat paw oedema as a model of inflammation.
AFF1 showed significant inhibition of the rat paw oedema in a dose-dependent
manner. The activity of AFF1 (50 mg kg(-1)) was higher than that of the standard 
anti-inflammatory drug, aspirin (100 mg kg(-1)). The compound also significantly 
(p < 0.001) inhibited heat-induced haemolysis of human erythrocytes in vitro. The
structure of AFF1 was elucidated as
3,5,7,3'-tetrahydroxyflavone-3-O-alpha-L-rhamnoside, using a combination of UV,
IR, 1D and 2D (COSY) 1H-NMR spectroscopy. This compound, in part, accounts for
the anti-inflammatory effect of A. floribunda leaves.

PMID: 20140805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Haematologica. 2010 May;95(5):837-40. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.009035. Epub
2010 Jan 27.

The therapeutic response and clinical outcome of adults with ALL1(MLL)/AF4 fusion
positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia according to the GIMEMA experience.

Cimino G(1), Cenfra N, Elia L, Sica S, Luppi M, Meloni G, Vignetti M, Paoloni F, 
Foà R, Mandelli F.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology, University "Sapienza", Via Benevento 6, 00161 Rome; Italy.
cimino@bce.uniroma1.it

The clinical outcome of 21 adults with ALL1(MLL)/AF4 positive acute lymphoblastic
leukemia enrolled in the GIMEMA LAL 2000 trial and of 25 patients entered into
the previous 0496 study is reported. LAL 2000 included more intensive
consolidation and transplants. Complete remission rates were 90% and 88% in the
LAL 2000 and 0496 trials, respectively. Fifteen patients were transplanted (5
autologous, 10 allogeneic). At 36 months, overall and disease free survivals were
32.9%, 31.8%, 28% and 27.3%, in LAL 2000 and 0496 trials, respectively. Relapses 
remained the main reason of failure occurring in 10 and 16 of the 19 and 22
responding patients. In the LAL 2000 study, 4 relapses were observed before
transplant. Thus, ALL1(MLL)/AF4 abnormality characterized a subset of patients
with adverse prognosis in which the overall strategy adopted in the LAL 2000
study, rather than transplants per se, failed to improve the patient clinical
outcome.

PMCID: PMC2864392
PMID: 20107154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Neurosci. 2009 Dec 9;29(49):15366-74. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5188-09.2009.

AF4 is a critical regulator of the IGF-1 signaling pathway during Purkinje cell
development.

Bitoun E(1), Finelli MJ, Oliver PL, Lee S, Davies KE.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Functional Genomics Unit, and Department of
Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QX, United
Kingdom.

Deregulation of the insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) signaling pathway is a
recurrent finding in mouse models and human patients with cerebellar ataxia and
thus represents a common pathological cascade in neuronal cell death that may be 
targeted for therapy. We have previously identified a point mutation in AF4, a
transcription cofactor of RNA polymerase II elongation and chromatin remodeling, 
that causes progressive and highly specific Purkinje cell (PC) death in the
ataxic mouse mutant robotic, leading to the accumulation of AF4 in PCs. Here we
confirm that the spatiotemporal pattern of PC degeneration in the robotic
cerebellum correlates with the specific profile of AF4 upregulation. To identify 
the underlying molecular pathways, we performed microarray gene expression
analysis of PCs obtained by laser capture microdissection (LCM) at the onset of
degeneration. Igf-1 was significantly downregulated in robotic PCs compared with 
wild-type controls before and throughout the degenerative process. Consistently, 
we observed a decrease in the activation of downstream signaling molecules
including type 1 IGF receptor (IGF-1R) and the extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) 1 and ERK2. Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed that Igf-1 is a 
direct and the first validated target of the AF4 transcriptional regulatory
complex, and treatment of presymptomatic robotic mice with IGF-1 indeed markedly 
delayed the progression of PC death. This study demonstrates that small changes
in the levels of a single transcriptional cofactor can deleteriously affect
normal cerebellum function and opens new avenues of research for the manipulation
of the IGF-1 pathway in the treatment of cerebellar ataxia in humans.

PMID: 20007461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Br J Haematol. 2010 Feb;148(3):394-401. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.07966.x.
Epub 2009 Nov 4.

Antigen receptor gene rearrangements reflect on the heterogeneity of adult Acute 
Lymphoblastic Leukaemia (ALL) with implications of cell-origin of ALL subgroups -
a UKALLXII study.

Rai L(1), Casanova A, Moorman AV, Richards S, Buck G, Goldstone AH, Fielding AK, 
Foroni L.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Department, Royal Free Hospital, Pond Street, London, NW3 2QG, UK.
l.rai@medsch.ucl.ac.uk

Cytogenetic and molecular investigations of Acute Lymphoblastic Leukaemia (ALL)
have identified the existence of distinct clinical subgroups. Molecular
monitoring of clonal Immunoglobulin and T cell receptor (IG/TR) gene
rearrangements has become an important tool in stratification of therapy of ALL. 
In order to determine whether certain features of the patient-specific
rearrangements could hold further prognostic clues or provide information on the 
cell of origin of ALL, a comprehensive analysis of structural and biological
features (V gene usage, coding frame and mutational status and
complementarity-determining region -III length) of 473 IG/TR rearrangements
identified in 229 adults with ALL was carried out. Distinct variable-gene usage
profiles were identified between ALL subgroups, particularly for patients
positive for BCR-ABL1 compared to MLL-AFF1 positive leukaemias; suggesting that
the former is derived from a more mature B progenitor. Interestingly, occurrence 
of TRGV1-TRGV8 was prognostic for better event-free survival (31% at 4 years with
vs. 0% at 4 years without, P = 0.05). The heterogeneity in clinical outcome is
suggested by the basic molecular processes of antigen receptor gene
rearrangements as shown in this work.

PMID: 19895613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cerebellum. 2009 Sep;8(3):175-83. doi: 10.1007/s12311-009-0101-0. Epub 2009 Apr
2.

The robotic mouse: understanding the role of AF4, a cofactor of transcriptional
elongation and chromatin remodelling, in purkinje cell function.

Bitoun E(1), Davies KE.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Functional Genomics Unit, Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, 
University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK.

Neurological disorders represent a large share of the disease burden worldwide,
and the incidence of age-related forms will continue to rise with life
expectancy. Gene targeting has been and will remain a valuable approach to the
generation of clinically relevant mouse models from which to elucidate the
underlying molecular basis. However, as the aetiology of the majority of these
conditions is still unknown, a reverse approach based on large-scale random
chemical mutagenesis is now being used in an attempt to identify new genes and
associated signalling pathways that control neuronal cell death and survival.
Here, we review the characterisation of a novel model of autosomal dominant
cerebellar ataxia which shows general growth retardation and develops adult-onset
region-specific Purkinje cell loss as well as cataracts and defects in early
T-cell maturation. We have previously established that the mutated protein Af4,
which is a member of the AF4/LAF4/FMR2 (ALF) family of transcription cofactors
frequently translocated in childhood leukaemia, undergoes slower proteasomal
turnover through the ubiquitin pathway and abnormally accumulates in Purkinje
cells of the cerebellum. We have also shown that Af4 functions as part of a large
multiprotein complex that stimulates RNA polymerase II elongation and mediates
chromatin remodelling during transcription. With the forthcoming identification
of the gene targets that trigger Purkinje cell death in the robotic cerebellum,
and the functional conservation among the ALF proteins, the robotic mouse
promises to deliver important insights into the pathogenesis of human ataxia, but
also of mental retardation to which FMR2 and LAF4 have been linked.

PMID: 19340490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Leukemia. 2009 Aug;23(8):1490-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2009.33. Epub 2009 Mar 5.

New insights to the MLL recombinome of acute leukemias.

Meyer C(1), Kowarz E, Hofmann J, Renneville A, Zuna J, Trka J, Ben Abdelali R,
Macintyre E, De Braekeleer E, De Braekeleer M, Delabesse E, de Oliveira MP, Cavé 
H, Clappier E, van Dongen JJ, Balgobind BV, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, Beverloo
HB, Panzer-Grümayer R, Teigler-Schlegel A, Harbott J, Kjeldsen E, Schnittger S,
Koehl U, Gruhn B, Heidenreich O, Chan LC, Yip SF, Krzywinski M, Eckert C, Möricke
A, Schrappe M, Alonso CN, Schäfer BW, Krauter J, Lee DA, Zur Stadt U, Te Kronnie 
G, Sutton R, Izraeli S, Trakhtenbrot L, Lo Nigro L, Tsaur G, Fechina L,
Szczepanski T, Strehl S, Ilencikova D, Molkentin M, Burmeister T, Dingermann T,
Klingebiel T, Marschalek R.

Author information: 
(1)Diagnostic Center of Acute Leukemia, Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology,
ZAFES, University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Chromosomal rearrangements of the human MLL gene are associated with high-risk
pediatric, adult and therapy-associated acute leukemias. These patients need to
be identified, treated appropriately and minimal residual disease was monitored
by quantitative PCR techniques. Genomic DNA was isolated from individual acute
leukemia patients to identify and characterize chromosomal rearrangements
involving the human MLL gene. A total of 760 MLL-rearranged biopsy samples
obtained from 384 pediatric and 376 adult leukemia patients were characterized at
the molecular level. The distribution of MLL breakpoints for clinical subtypes
(acute lymphoblastic leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia, pediatric and adult) and
fused translocation partner genes (TPGs) will be presented, including novel MLL
fusion genes. Combined data of our study and recently published data revealed 104
different MLL rearrangements of which 64 TPGs are now characterized on the
molecular level. Nine TPGs seem to be predominantly involved in genetic
recombinations of MLL: AFF1/AF4, MLLT3/AF9, MLLT1/ENL, MLLT10/AF10, MLLT4/AF6,
ELL, EPS15/AF1P, MLLT6/AF17 and SEPT6, respectively. Moreover, we describe for
the first time the genetic network of reciprocal MLL gene fusions deriving from
complex rearrangements.

PMID: 19262598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Leuk Res. 2009 Jul;33(7):937-47. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.01.018. Epub 2009
Feb 20.

Molecular targeting of MLL-rearranged leukemia cell lines with the synthetic
peptide PFWT synergistically enhances the cytotoxic effect of established
chemotherapeutic agents.

Bennett CA(1), Winters AC, Barretto NN, Hemenway CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70112, United
States.

MLL leukemias are characterized cytogenetically by reciprocal translocations of
the MLL gene at 11q23 and clinically by unfavorable outcomes. Evidence indicating
that MLL leukemias are resistant to apoptosis encourages the identification of
agents that induce cell death by other mechanisms. The AF4-mimetic peptide PFWT
induces necrosis in the t(4;11) leukemia cell line, MV4-11. Treatment of MV4-11
cells with PFWT in combination with four chemotherapeutic compounds results in
sequence-dependent synergy, induction of both apoptotic and necrotic cell death, 
and inhibition of MV4-11 clonogenicity. Therefore, PFWT holds promise as a
therapy for MLL leukemias that augments the effects of several clinically
available chemotherapeutic agents.

PMCID: PMC2710145
PMID: 19232721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Blood. 2009 Mar 12;113(11):2375-85. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-09-113597. Epub 2008 
Dec 3.

HOXA9 is required for survival in human MLL-rearranged acute leukemias.

Faber J(1), Krivtsov AV, Stubbs MC, Wright R, Davis TN, van den Heuvel-Eibrink M,
Zwaan CM, Kung AL, Armstrong SA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Mar 12;113(11):2372-3.

Leukemias that harbor translocations involving the mixed lineage leukemia gene
(MLL) possess unique biologic characteristics and often have an unfavorable
prognosis. Gene expression analyses demonstrate a distinct profile for
MLL-rearranged leukemias with consistent high-level expression of select Homeobox
genes, including HOXA9. Here, we investigated the effects of HOXA9 suppression in
MLL-rearranged and MLL-germline leukemias using RNA interference. Gene expression
profiling after HOXA9 suppression demonstrated co-down-regulation of a program
highly expressed in human MLL-AML and murine MLL-leukemia stem cells, including
HOXA10, MEIS1, PBX3, and MEF2C. We demonstrate that HOXA9 depletion in 17 human
AML/ALL cell lines (7 MLL-rearranged, 10 MLL-germline) induces proliferation
arrest and apoptosis specifically in MLL-rearranged cells (P = .007). Similarly, 
assessment of primary AMLs demonstrated that HOXA9 suppression induces apoptosis 
to a greater extent in MLL-rearranged samples (P = .01). Moreover, mice
transplanted with HOXA9-depleted t(4;11) SEMK2 cells revealed a significantly
lower leukemia burden, thus identifying a role for HOXA9 in leukemia survival in 
vivo. Our data indicate an important role for HOXA9 in human MLL-rearranged
leukemias and suggest that targeting HOXA9 or downstream programs may be a novel 
therapeutic option.

PMCID: PMC2656267
PMID: 19056693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Feb;9(2):83-93. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2008.10.004. Epub
2008 Oct 25.

Expression of Leukaemia associated transcription factor Af9/Mllt3 in the cerebral
cortex of the mouse.

Vogel T(1), Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Georg-August-University Goettingen, Centre of Anatomy, Department of
Neuroanatomy, Kreuzbergring 36, 37075 Goettingen, Germany. tvogel1@gwdg.de

Mutations of leukaemia associated AF9/MLLT3 are implicated in neurodevelopmental 
diseases such as epilepsia and ataxia. This study shows for the first time, that 
murine Af9 is transcribed in various CNS structures including the subventricular 
zone (SVZ) of the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, cerebellar cortex, septum and
various thalamic structures, the choroid plexus, and the midbrain/hindbrain
boundary. Expression of Af9 in the SVZ overlaps with Svet1, Cux2, and partially
with Tbr2, confining its activity to the neurogenic compartment of the SVZ. In
contrast to Svet1 and Cux2 expression, Af9 transcription is not limited to upper 
layer neurons but is found in the entire cortical plate. As part of an extensive 
network of interacting proteins involved in epigenetic DNA modification, we could
show overlapping expression of Af9 with Af4/Aff1 and Fmr2/Aff2, two genes that
are also related to neurodevelopmental diseases, as well as with the highly
homologous Enl.

PMID: 19000783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Oct 1;178(1):61-4.

Molecular characterization of a rare MLL-AF4 (MLL-AFF1) fusion rearrangement in
infant leukemia.

Bizarro S(1), Cerveira N, Correia C, Lisboa S, Peixoto A, Norton L, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Rua Dr. António
Bernardino de Almeida, 4200-072 Porto, Portugal.

The t(4;11)(q21;q23) involving the genes MLL and AF4 (alias for AFF1) is detected
in 50-70% of infant leukemia. We characterize at both the DNA and RNA level a
rare MLL-AF4 fusion transcript identified in a 15-month-old girl with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Direct sequence analysis of the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction product showed an in-frame fusion between
MLL exon 9 and AF4 exon 6. We further demonstrated that the genomic breakpoints
were located 1,553 bp downstream of MLL exon 9 and 1,239 bp upstream of AF4 exon 
6. Four Alu repeats were detected in MLL intron 9 and two Alu repeats and one
LINE1 repetitive element were identified downstream of AF4 exon 5. Finally, a
9-bp polypurine (A) tract and an 8-bp polypyrimidine (T) tract were found
flanking the translocation breakpoint. In summary, we have characterized at both 
the RNA and the DNA level a rare MLL-AF4 fusion variant that was presumably
mediated by Alu repeats or polypurine and polypyrimidine tracts located in the
vicinity of genomic breakpoints.

PMID: 17889710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Sep;177(2):143-6.

Translocation (4;11)(p12;q23) with rearrangement of FRYL and MLL in
therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia.

Sait SN(1), Claydon MA, Conroy JM, Nowak NJ, Barcos M, Baer MR.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Cytogenetics Laboratory, DNA Microarray and Genomics Facility,
Departments of Pathology and Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm and
Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA. Sheila.Sait@roswellpark.org

Reciprocal chromosomal translocations involving the MLL gene at chromosome region
11q23 are recurring cytogenetic abnormalities in both de novo and therapy-related
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. We report a
t(4;11)(p12;q23) with rearrangement of MLL and FRYL (also known as AF4p12), a
human homolog to the furry gene of Drosophila, in an adult patient with
therapy-related AML after fludarabine and rituximab therapy for small lymphocytic
lymphoma and radiation therapy for breast carcinoma. To our knowledge,
t(4;11)(p12;q23) has been reported in two previous patients, and MLL and FRYL
rearrangement was demonstrated in one of them. Both of the previous patients had 
therapy-related leukemias after exposure to topoisomerase II inhibitors, whereas 
our patient had received cytotoxic therapy that did not include a topoisomerase
II inhibitor. Thus, t(4;11)(p12;q23) with MLL and FRYL involvement represents a
new recurring 11q23 translocation, to date seen only in therapy-related acute
leukemias.

PMID: 17854671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Behav Brain Res. 2007 Aug 6;181(2):239-47. Epub 2007 Apr 24.

Behavioural characterisation of the robotic mouse mutant.

Oliver PL(1), Keays DA, Davies KE.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Functional Genetics Unit, Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, 
University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK.

The ataxic mouse mutant robotic is characterised by progressive adult-onset
Purkinje cell loss that occurs in a distinctive region-specific pattern. We
report the first behavioural characterisation of this mutant and quantify its
performance on tests of motor function, locomotor and exploratory activity over a
time course that reflects specific stages of cell loss in the cerebellum. Robotic
mutants are significantly impaired on the rotarod and static rod tests of
coordination and their performance declined during aging. In addition, gait
analysis revealed an increase in the severity of the ataxia displayed by mutants 
over time. Interestingly, spontaneous alternation testing in a T-maze was not
significantly affected in robotic mice, unlike other ataxic mutants with more
rapid and extensive cerebellar degeneration; robotic therefore provides an
opportunity to investigate the necessity of specific Purkinje cell populations
for various behavioural tasks.

PMID: 17532061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Feb;173(1):17-22.

A multicenter evaluation of comprehensive analysis of MLL translocations and
fusion gene partners in acute leukemia using the MLL FusionChip device.

Harrison CJ(1), Griffiths M, Moorman F, Schnittger S, Cayuela JM, Shurtleff S,
Gottardi E, Mitterbauer G, Colomer D, Delabesse E, Castéras V, Maroc N.

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia Research Cytogenetics Group, Cancer Sciences Division, University of
Southampton, MP 822 Duthie Building, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton
SO16 6YD, UK. harrison@soton.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Dec;179(2):167.

Rearrangements of the MLL gene are significant in acute leukemia. Among the most 
frequent translocations are t(4;11)(q21;q23) and t(9;11)(p22;q23), which give
rise to the MLL-AFF1 and MLL-MLLT3 fusion genes (alias MLL-AF4 and MLL-AF9) in
acute lymphoblastic and acute myeloid leukemia, respectively. Current evidence
suggests that determining the MLL status of acute leukemia, including precise
identification of the partner gene, is important in defining appropriate
treatment. This underscores the need for accurate detection methods. A novel
molecular diagnostic device, the MLL FusionChip, has been successfully used to
identify MLL fusion gene translocations in acute leukemia, including the precise 
breakpoint location. This study evaluated the performance of the MLL FusionChip
within a routine clinical environment, comprising nine centers worldwide, in the 
analysis of 21 control and 136 patient samples. It was shown that the assay
allowed accurate detection of the MLL fusion gene, regardless of the breakpoint
location, and confirmed that this multiplex approach was robust in a global
multicenter trial. The MLL FusionChip was shown to be superior to other detection
methods. The type of molecular information provided by MLL FusionChip gave an
indication of the appropriate primers to design for disease monitoring of MLL
patients following treatment.

PMID: 17284365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Leukemia. 2006 Dec;20(12):2155-61. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

Allogeneic stem cell transplantation improves the outcome of adults with
t(1;19)/E2A-PBX1 and t(4;11)/MLL-AF4 positive B-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia: results of the prospective multicenter LALA-94 study.

Vey N(1), Thomas X, Picard C, Kovascovicz T, Charin C, Cayuela JM, Dombret H,
Dastugue N, Huguet F, Bastard C, Stamatoulas A, Giollant M, Tournilhac O,
Macintyre E, Buzyn A, Bories D, Kuentz M, Dreyfus F, Delannoy A, Raynaud S,
Gratecos N, Bordessoule D, de Botton S, Preudhomme C, Reman O, Troussard X,
Pigneux A, Bilhou C, Vernant JP, Boucheix C, Gabert J; GET-LALA Group the Swiss
Group for Clinical Cancer Research (SAKK).

Author information: 
(1)Département of Hematology, The Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.
veyn@marseille.fnclcc.fr

Adult patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and t(1;19)/E2A-PBX1 or
t(4;11)/MLL-AF4 have a poor outcome. We have evaluated the impact of an
intensified post-remission therapy using a high-dose chemotherapy course followed
by allogeneic or autologous SCT on the outcome of 58 patients with
t(1;19)/E2A-PBX1 (E2A group, n=24) or t(4;11)/MLL-AF4 (MLL group, n=34) treated
in the LALA-94 multicenter prospective study. Patients in the MLL group had
higher WBC counts and more frequent DIC. CR rates achieved by MLL and E2A groups 
were similar to other B-cell ALL (87, 82 and 86% respectively). While in CR,
patients with a donor were assigned to alloSCT (n=22), the remaining patients
with were randomized between autoSCT (n=15) or chemotherapy (n=8). Five-year
overall survival was 31 and 45% for E2A and MLL groups, respectively. In both
groups, DFS was higher in the alloSCT arm as compared to autoSCT and chemotherapy
arms. The results of this study show that chemotherapy intensification did not
overcome the poor prognosis of adults with t(1;19)/E2A-PBX1. Allogeneic SCT
should thus be offered in first CR to patients with t(1;19)/E2A-PBX1 or
t(4;11)/MLL-AF4. New therapeutic approaches are needed for patients without
donor.

PMID: 17039234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2006 Aug;45(8):740-53.

BglII-based panhandle and reverse panhandle PCR approaches increase capability
for cloning der(II) and der(other) genomic breakpoint junctions of MLL
translocations.

Robinson BW(1), Slater DJ, Felix CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Panhandle PCR techniques to amplify known sequence flanked by unknown sequence
have been useful for MLL genomic breakpoint junctions and fusion transcripts
because MLL has a large number of partner genes. However, genomic panhandle PCR
approaches are impeded when the restriction fragment that contains the breakpoint
junction is too large to amplify. We devised new panhandle PCR approaches for MLL
genomic breakpoint junctions that create the template from BglII restriction
fragments by attaching MLL sequence to a BglII site in the partner gene. This
leads to the annealing of MLL and its complement in the handle and creates an
intrastrand loop containing the breakpoint junction sequence for amplification
with primers all from MLL. BglII panhandle PCR for der(11) breakpoint junctions
was accomplished by ligating a phosphorylated oligonucleotide containing a BglII 
overhang and sequence complementary to MLL exon 7 to the 3' ends of BglII
digested DNA, and forming the template from the sense strand of DNA. In BglII
reverse panhandle PCR for der(other) breakpoint junctions, a phosphorylated
oligonucleotide containing a BglII overhang and the complement of antisense
sequence in MLL exon 10 was ligated to the 3' ends of BglII digested DNA, and the
template was formed from the antisense strand of DNA. These approaches amplified 
5'-MLL-MLLT4-3' and 5'-AFF1-MLL-3' breakpoint junctions. The former is
significant because few t(6;11) genomic breakpoint junctions have been sequenced.
BglII panhandle PCR approaches increase the possibilities for cloning MLL genomic
breakpoint junctions where there is heterogeneity in partner genes and breakpoint
locations.

PMID: 16703585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. BMC Cancer. 2006 Jan 24;6:20.

Simultaneous localization of MLL, AF4 and ENL genes in interphase nuclei by
3D-FISH: MLL translocation revisited.

Gué M(1), Sun JS, Boudier T.

Author information: 
(1)USM 0503, Département Régulations, Développement et Diversité Moléculaire,
Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, UMR 5153 CNRS-MNHN, U 565 INSERM, 43 rue
Cuvier, CP26, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France. michael.gue@curie.u-psud.fr

BACKGROUND: Haematological cancer is characterised by chromosomal translocation
(e.g. MLL translocation in acute leukaemia) and two models have been proposed to 
explain the origins of recurrent reciprocal translocation. The first, established
from pairs of translocated genes (such as BCR and ABL), considers the spatial
proximity of loci in interphase nuclei (static "contact first" model). The second
model is based on the dynamics of double strand break ends during repair
processes (dynamic "breakage first" model). Since the MLL gene involved in 11q23 
translocation has more than 40 partners, the study of the relative positions of
the MLL gene with both the most frequent partner gene (AF4) and a less frequent
partner gene (ENL), should elucidate the MLL translocation mechanism.
METHODS: Using triple labeling 3D FISH experiments, we have determined the
relative positions of MLL, AF4 and ENL genes, in two lymphoblastic and two
myeloid human cell lines.
RESULTS: In all cell lines, the ENL gene is significantly closer to the MLL gene 
than the AF4 gene (with P value < 0.0001). According to the static "contact
first" model of the translocation mechanism, a minimal distance between loci
would indicate a greater probability of the occurrence of t(11;19)(q23;p13.3)
compared to t(4;11)(q21;q23). However this is in contradiction to the
epidemiology of 11q23 translocation.
CONCLUSION: The simultaneous multi-probe hybridization in 3D-FISH is a new
approach in addressing the correlation between spatial proximity and occurrence
of translocation. Our observations are not consistent with the static "contact
first" model of translocation. The recently proposed dynamic "breakage first"
model offers an attractive alternative explanation.

PMCID: PMC1388228
PMID: 16433901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Insect Mol Biol. 2005 Apr;14(2):217-22.

Genome size and organization in the blacklegged tick, Ixodes scapularis and the
Southern cattle tick, Boophilus microplus.

Ullmann AJ(1), Lima CM, Guerrero FD, Piesman J, Black WC 4th.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vector-Borne Infectious Diseases, National Center for Infectious
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Fort Collins, CO 80522,
USA. aff1@cdc.gov

Genome sizes and the organization of repetitive DNA were determined in the hard
ticks Ixodes scapularis and Boophilus microplus using reassociation kinetics. The
I. scapularis genome contains approximately 2.15 pg (2.1x10(3) Mbp) of DNA and
consists of no foldback (FB), 27% highly repetitive (HR), 39% moderately
repetitive (MR), and 34% unique DNA. The B. microplus genome contains 7.5 pg
(7.1x10(3) Mbp) DNA, and consists of 0.82% FB, 31% HR, 38% MR, and 30% unique
DNA. In both species, repetitive sequences occur in a mixture of long and short
period interspersion but most (65-80%) of the DNA follows a pattern of short
period interspersion. Genome size and organization in the three tick species so
far examined are distinct from other arthropods in having a greater proportion of
MR, a lower proportion of unique and HR DNA of very low sequence complexity.

PMID: 15796755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Oct 12;101(41):14901-6. Epub 2004 Sep 30.

Mediation of Af4 protein function in the cerebellum by Siah proteins.

Oliver PL(1), Bitoun E, Clark J, Jones EL, Davies KE.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Functional Genetics Unit, Department of Human Anatomy
and Genetics, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK.

We have established that the gene AF4, which had long been recognized as
disrupted in childhood leukemia, also plays a role in the CNS. Af4 is mutated in 
the robotic mouse that is characterized by ataxia and Purkinje cell loss. To
determine the molecular basis of this mutation, we carried out a yeast two-hybrid
screen and show that Af4 binds the E3 ubiquitin ligases Drosophila seven in
absentia (sina) homologues (Siah)-1a and Siah-2 in the brain. Siah-1a and Af4 are
expressed in Purkinje cells and colocalize in the nucleus of human embryonic
kidney 293T and P19 cells. In vitro binding assays and coimmunoprecipitation
reveal a significant reduction in affinity between Siah-1a and robotic mutant Af4
compared with wild-type, which correlates with the almost complete abolition of
mutant Af4 degradation by Siah-1a. These data strongly suggest that an
accumulation of mutant Af4 occurs in the robotic mouse due to a reduction in its 
normal turnover by the proteasome. A significant increase in the transcriptional 
activity of mutant Af4 relative to wild-type was obtained in mammalian cells,
suggesting that the activity of Af4 is controlled through Siah-mediated
degradation. Another member of the Af4 family, Fmr2, which is involved in mental 
handicap in humans, binds Siah proteins in a similar manner. These results
provide evidence that a common regulatory mechanism exists that controls levels
of the Af4/Fmr2 protein family. The robotic mouse thus provides a unique
opportunity to understand how these proteins play a role in disorders as diverse 
as leukemia, mental retardation, and neurodegenerative disease.

PMCID: PMC522018
PMID: 15459319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Exp Mol Med. 2004 Jun 30;36(3):279-82.

Real-Time PCR analysis of af4 and dek genes expression in acute promyelocytic
leukemia t (15;17) patients.

Savli H(1), Sirma S, Nagy B, Aktan M, Dincol G, Salcioglu Z, Sarper N, Ozbek U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Kocaeli,
Kocaeli, Turkey.

Among several newly identified oncogenes, dek and af4 are attractive targets for 
researchers interested with leukemia. In this study quantitative Real-Time RT-PCR
technique was used to define alterations in expression of dek and af4 genes
associated with acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) t (15; 17). RNA samples
obtained from bone marrow aspirates of fourteen APL patients, cDNA portions were 
labelled with Syber Green 1 dye and LightCycler analysis have been performed.
Expression changes in patients were found not significant in comparison to
healthy donors for af4 (P = 0.192) and dek (P = 0.0895). We suggest that af4 gene
may have a role in leukomogenesis restricted to lymphoblastic lineage; also
further studies must carry on with a larger series of patients in order to
understand the relationship between the dek gene and APL. Our study was the first
attempt for analysing dek and af4 genes in APL t (15; 17) patients by
quantitative Real-Time RT-PCR. This rapid and sensitive method could be used to
screen these genes in different types of leukaemia.

PMID: 15272241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Oncogene. 2004 Aug 19;23(37):6237-49.

Interaction of AF4 wild-type and AF4.MLL fusion protein with SIAH proteins:
indication for t(4;11) pathobiology?

Bursen A(1), Moritz S, Gaussmann A, Moritz S, Dingermann T, Marschalek R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology, Biocenter N230, University of
Frankfurt/Main, Marie-Curie-Str. 9, Frankfurt/Main D-60439, Germany.

The human AF4 (ALL-1 fused gene on chromosome 4) gene (4q11) is recurrently
involved in reciprocal translocations to the MLL (mixed lineage leukemia) gene
(11q23), correlated with high-risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in infants 
and early childhood. The t(4;11) translocation is one of the most frequent MLL
translocations known today. In general, MLL translocations are the result of an
illegitimate recombination process leading to reciprocal fusions of unrelated
translocation partner (TP) genes with the MLL gene. Owing to the constant
presence of the derivative (11) product, it was hypothesised that only MLL.TP
fusion genes are responsible for the leukemogenic process. This concept has been 
successfully tested for some known MLL fusions, while other MLL fusions failed.
Here, we demonstrate growth-transforming potential of AF4 wild-type and the
AF4.MLL fusion protein. The underlying oncogenic mechanism involves the two E3
ubiquitin ligases SIAH1 and SIAH2, the N-terminal portion of AF4 and the
protection of the AF4.MLL fusion protein against proteosomal degradation.

PMID: 15221006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Genesis. 2004 Mar;38(3):151-8.

A reliable lacZ expression reporter cassette for multipurpose, knockout-first
alleles.

Testa G(1), Schaft J, van der Hoeven F, Glaser S, Anastassiadis K, Zhang Y,
Hermann T, Stremmel W, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Biotec, Technische Universität Dresden, c/o Max Planck Institute of Molecular 
cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany.

Alteration of the mouse genome through homologous recombination in embryonic stem
(ES) cells is the most accurate and versatile way to dissect gene function in a
vertebrate model. Most often, a selectable marker is used to create a knockout
allele by replacing an essential part of the gene. However, knockout strategies
are limited because the mutation is present constitutively. Conditional
approaches based on the Cre-loxP site-specific recombination (SSR) system address
this limitation; however, it requires that all parts of the targeted gene remain 
in ES cells. Here we report success with a "knockout-first" strategy that ablates
gene function by insertion of RNA processing signals without deletion of any of
the target gene. Incorporation of site-specific recombination target sites
creates a multipurpose allele for both knockout and conditional applications.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15048813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Parasitol. 2003 Dec;89(6):1256-7.

Bacteriolytic activity of selected vertebrate sera for Borrelia burgdorferi sensu
stricto and Borrelia bissettii.

Ullmann AJ(1), Lane RS, Kurtenbach K, Miller M, Schriefer ME, Zeldner N, Piesman 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vector-Borne Infectious Diseases, National Center for Infectious
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Fort Collins, Colorado
80522, USA. aff1@cdc.gov

An in vitro assay to evaluate the bacteriolytic activity of the complement
pathway was applied to 2 strains of Borrelia bissettii, CO501 and DN127, and
compared with that of B. burgdorferi sensu stricto B31. Sera from mule deer
(Odocoileus hemionus) and the Western Fence lizard (Sceloporus occidentalis) were
completely borreliacidal for B. burgdorferi and for both strains of B. bissettii.
Serum from Bobwhite quail (Colinus virginianus) was nonlytic for B. burgdorferi
and partially lytic for B. bissettii strains, CO-501 and DN127. Serum from a New 
Zealand White rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus) was partially lytic for all 3
strains of Borrelia, whereas serum from white-footed mice (Peromyscus leucopus)
were nonlytic for all 3 Borrelia strains. The spectrum of complement sensitivity 
of B. bissettii appears to be similar to that of European B. afzelii in that
tested rodent serum is not lytic to these 2 genospecies. Interestingly, both B.
bissettii and B. afzelii have been found to be closely associated with rodents.
Complement sensitivity demonstrated in these experiments may suggest and possibly
predict specific reservoir-host associations.

PMID: 14740924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Leukemia. 2004 Jan;18(1):92-102.

MLL fusion partners AF4 and AF9 interact at subnuclear foci.

Erfurth F(1), Hemenway CS, de Erkenez AC, Domer PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
ferfurt@lumc.edu

The MLL gene is involved in translocations associated with both acute
lymphoblastic and acute myelogenous leukemia. These translocations fuse MLL with 
one of over 30 partner genes. Collectively, the MLL partner genes do not share a 
common structural motif or biochemical function. We have identified a protein
interaction between the two most common MLL fusion partners AF4 and AF9. This
interaction is restricted to discrete nuclear foci we have named 'AF4 bodies'.
The AF4 body is non-nucleolar and is not coincident with any known nuclear
structures we have examined. The AF4-AF9 interaction is maintained by the MLL-AF4
fusion protein, and expression of the MLL-AF4 fusion can alter the subnuclear
localization of AF9. In view of other research indicating that other MLL fusion
partners also interact with one another, these results suggest that MLL fusion
partners may participate in a web of protein interactions with a common
functional goal. The disruption of this web of interactions by fusion with MLL
may be important to leukemogenesis.

PMID: 14603337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Exp Appl Acarol. 2002;28(1-4):107-26.

A preliminary linkage map of the tick, Ixodes scapularis.

Ullmann AJ(1), Piesman J, Dolan MC, Black WC 4th.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vector-Borne Infectious Diseases, National Center for Infectious
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Rampart Road, Foothills
Campus, Fort Collins, CO 80522, USA. aff1@cdc.gov

A linkage map of the Ixodes scapularis genome was constructed based upon
segregation amongst 127 loci. These included 84 random amplified polymorphic DNA 
(RAPD) markers, 32 Sequence-Tagged RAPD (STAR) markers, 5 cDNAs, and 5
microsatellites in 232 F1 intercross progeny from a single, field-collected P1
female. A preliminary linkage map of 616 cM was generated across 14 linkage
groups with one marker every 10.8 cM. Assuming a genome size of approximately
10(9) bp, the relationship of physical to genetic distance is approximately 300
kb/cM in the I. scapularis genome.

PMID: 14570121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Leukemia. 2003 Dec;17(12):2454-9.

B-cell development in the presence of the MLL/AF4 oncoprotein proceeds in the
absence of HOX A7 and HOX A9 expression.

Bertrand FE(1), Spengeman JD, Shah N, LeBien TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine at East
Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27858, USA.

Infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is frequently characterized by the
t(4;11)(q21;q23) cytogenetic abnormality encoding the MLL/AF4 oncogene, increased
HOX gene expression and a pro-B/monocytoid phenotype. We have previously
established a novel MLL/AF4-positive cell line, B-lineage 3 (BLIN-3), which
retains several features of normal B-lineage development (functional Ig gene
rearrangement and apoptotic sensitivity to stromal cell withdrawal) not generally
observed in infant ALL. We now use microarray analysis to identify patterns of
gene expression in BLIN-3 that may modulate MLL/AF4 oncogenesis and contribute to
the retention of normal B-lineage developmental characteristics. Comparison of
6815 expressed genes in BLIN-3 with published microarray data on leukemic blasts 
from t(4;11) patients indicated that BLIN-3 was unique in lacking the expression 
of certain HOX-A cluster genes. These results were validated by RT-PCR showing no
expression of HOX A7 or HOX A9 in BLIN-3. A HOX C8 promoter reporter was active
in BLIN-3, indicating that lack of HOX gene expression in BLIN-3 was not due to a
nonfunctional MLL/AF4. Our results suggest that B-lineage development can proceed
in t(4;11) leukemic blasts in the absence of HOX-A gene expression.

PMID: 14562113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Leukemia. 2003 Aug;17(8):1557-65.

Computational analysis of flow-cytometry antigen expression profiles in childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia: an MLL/AF4 identification.

De Zen L(1), Bicciato S, te Kronnie G, Basso G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Padova, via Giustiniani, Padova,
Italy.

Precursor B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (pB-ALL) is a heterogeneous disease and 
multiparameter flow cytometry, molecular genetics, and cytogenetic studies have
all contributed to classification of subgroups with prognostic significance.
Recently, gene expression microarray technology has been used to investigate
lymphoblastic leukemias, demonstrating that known and novel pB-ALL subclasses can
be separated on the basis of gene expression profiles. The strength of microarray
technique lays in part in the multivariate nature of the expression data. We
propose a parallel multiparametric approach based on immunophenotypic
flow-cytometry expression data for the analysis of leukemia patients.
Specifically, we tested the potential of this approach on a data set of 145
samples of pediatric pB-ALL that included 46 samples positive for mixed lineage
leukemia (MLL) translocations (MLL+) and 99 control pB-ALLs, negative for this
translocation (MLL-). The expression levels of 16 marker proteins have been
monitored by four-color flow cytometry using a standardized diagnostic panel of
antibodies. The protein expression database has been then analyzed using those
univariate and multivariate computational techniques normally applied to mine and
model large microarray data sets. Marker protein expression profiling not only
allowed separating pB-ALL cases with an MLL rearrangement from other ALLs, but
also demonstrates that MLL+ leukemias constitute a heterogeneous group in which
MLL/AF4 leukemias represent a homogenous subclass described by a specific
expression fingerprint.

PMID: 12886243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2003 Jul;37(3):326-31.

Insertion of MLL sequences into chromosome band 5q31 results in an MLL-AF5Q31
fusion and is a rare but recurrent abnormality associated with infant leukemia.

Deveney R(1), Chervinsky DS, Jani-Sait SN, Grossi M, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
Gaithersburg, Maryland 20892, USA.

MLL gene rearrangements leading to production of MLL fusion proteins are commonly
detected in infant leukemia patients; the most common MLL fusion associated with 
infant leukemia is the MLL-AF4 fusion. A single case of chromosomal rearrangement
leading to production of an MLL fusion with AF5Q31, a gene structurally similar
to AF4, has been detected recently in the malignant cells of an infant leukemia
patient. We have identified a second case of MLL-AF5Q31 fusion, arising from an
insertion of MLL sequences into chromosome 5, also in an infant leukemia patient.
Because MLL and AF5Q31 are transcribed in opposite orientations, a simple
balanced chromosomal translocation cannot produce a fusion protein, and complex
chromosomal rearrangements such as insertions and inversions are required to
produce an MLL-AF5Q31 fusion protein. This report demonstrates that chromosomal
insertion of MLL sequences is a rare but recurrent abnormality associated with
infant leukemia.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12759932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Oncogene. 2003 May 8;22(18):2851-5.

Fusion of an AF4-related gene, LAF4, to MLL in childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia with t(2;11)(q11;q23).

Hiwatari M(1), Taki T, Taketani T, Taniwaki M, Sugita K, Okuya M, Eguchi M, Ida
K, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

We showed that the LAF4 gene on 2q11.2-12 was fused to the MLL gene on 11q23 in a
pediatric patient with CD10 positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) having
t(2;11)(q11;q23). The LAF4 gene, which encodes a lymphoid nuclear protein of 1227
amino acids with transactivation potential, is thought to have a role in early
lymphoid development. The LAF4 protein was homologous to AF4 and AF5q31 proteins 
that are fused to MLL in infant early pre-B ALL and the breakpoint of LAF4 was
located within the region homologous to the transactivation domain of AF4 and
AF5q31. Expression of the 8.5-kb LAF4 transcript was detected in the adult heart,
brain, and placenta and in the fetal brain. LAF4 expression was found to be
higher in ALL cell lines than in AML and Epstein-Barr virus-transformed
B-lymphocyte cell lines. These findings suggest that LAF4, AF4 and AF5q31 might
define a new family particularly involved in the pathogenesis of 11q23-associated
ALL.

PMID: 12743608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Insect Mol Biol. 2003 Apr;12(2):201-10.

A preliminary linkage map of the hard tick, Ixodes scapularis.

Ullmann AJ(1), Piesman J, Dolan MC, Iv WC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vector-Borne Infectious Diseases, National Center for Infectious
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Fort Collins, Colorado
80522, USA. aff1@cdc.gov

A linkage map of the Ixodes scapularis genome was constructed, based upon
segregation amongst 127 loci. These included 84 random amplified polymorphic DNA 
(RAPD) markers, 32 Sequence-Tagged RAPD (STAR) markers, 5 cDNAs, and 5
microsatellites in 232 F1 intercross progeny from a single, field-collected P1
female. A preliminary linkage map of 616 cM was generated across 14 linkage
groups with one marker every 10.8 cM. Assuming a genome size of approximately 109
bp, the relationship of physical to genetic distance was found to be
approximately 300 kb/cM in the I. scapularis genome.

PMID: 12653942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Neurosci. 2003 Mar 1;23(5):1631-7.

A mutation in Af4 is predicted to cause cerebellar ataxia and cataracts in the
robotic mouse.

Isaacs AM(1), Oliver PL, Jones EL, Jeans A, Potter A, Hovik BH, Nolan PM, Vizor
L, Glenister P, Simon AK, Gray IC, Spurr NK, Brown SD, Hunter AJ, Davies KE.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Functional Genetics Unit, Department of Human Anatomy
and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QX, United Kingdom.

The robotic mouse is an autosomal dominant mutant that arose from a large-scale
chemical mutagenesis program. It has a jerky, ataxic gait and develops
adult-onset Purkinje cell loss in the cerebellum in a striking region-specific
pattern, as well as cataracts. Genetic and physical mapping of the disease locus 
led to the identification of a missense mutation in a highly conserved region of 
Af4, a putative transcription factor that has been previously implicated in
leukemogenesis. We demonstrate that Af4 is specifically expressed in Purkinje
cells, and we hypothesize that the expression of mutant Af4 leads to
neurodegeneration. This function was not identified through knock-out studies,
highlighting the power of phenotype-driven mutagenesis in the mouse to identify
new pathways involved in neurological disease.

PMID: 12629167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Genet Genomics. 2002 Dec;268(4):553-62. Epub 2002 Nov 7.

The Schizosaccharomyces pombe genes sep10 and sep11 encode putative general
transcriptional regulators involved in multiple cellular processes.

Szilagyi Z(1), Grallert A, Nemeth N, Sipiczki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, and Research Group for Microbial
Development, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, University of Debrecen, Egyetem-ter
1, P.O. Box 56, Debrecen, 4010 Hungary.

We have previously described the genetic analysis of eleven complementation
groups ( sep6- sep16) defined by Schizosaccharomyces pombe mutants that are
defective in cell separation and sexual differentiation. Here we report on the
cloning and characterisation of two members of this set, sep10 and sep11.
Sequencing of the full-length sep10 revealed a continuous ORF that encodes a
conserved protein with possible functions in general transcriptional regulation. 
The coding region of sep11 is interrupted by introns and the putative s ep11
protein shows no sequence similarity with known proteins of other species.
Disruption of each gene causes temperature sensitivity. Simultaneous disruption
of both genes is lethal, demonstrating that sep10 and sep11 perform related,
overlapping functions. Overexpression of aff1/ste11, a pivotal regulator of
sexual development, suppresses the sterility of sep10 (-) cells, which suggests
that sep10 is needed for the activity of aff1/ste11.

PMID: 12471453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Blood. 2002 Dec 1;100(12):4247-8.

A novel MLL/AF4 fusion gene lacking the AF4 transactivating domain in infant
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Pane F, Intrieri M, Izzo B, Quintarelli C, Vitale D, Migliorati R, Sebastio L,
Salvatore F.

PMID: 12433702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2002 Sep;35(1):92-6.

LAF4, an AF4-related gene, is fused to MLL in infant acute lymphoblastic
leukemia.

von Bergh AR(1), Beverloo HB, Rombout P, van Wering ER, van Weel MH, Beverstock
GC, Kluin PM, Slater RM, Schuuring E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2003 May;37(1):106-9.

Infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with MLL gene rearrangements is
characterized by a proB phenotype and a poor clinical outcome. We analyzed an
infant proB ALL with t(2;11)(p15;p14) and an MLL rearrangement on Southern blot
analysis. Rapid amplification of cDNA ends-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
reverse transcriptase-PCR identified the LAF4 gene mapped on chromosome region
2q11.2-q12 as a fusion partner of the MLL gene. The LAF4 gene was identified
previously by its high sequence homology to the AF4 protein and encodes a protein
of 1,227 amino acids. The t(4;11)(q21;q23), creating the MLL-AF4 chimeric
transcripts, is the predominant 11q23 chromosome translocation in infant ALL and 
is associated with an extremely poor prognosis. Our findings further suggest that
fusion of MLL to one of the AF4 family members (AF4/LAF4/AF5Q31) might determine 
a proB-cell phenotype in infant leukemia.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12203795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 2;99(7):4568-73.

Panhandle and reverse-panhandle PCR enable cloning of der(11) and der(other)
genomic breakpoint junctions of MLL translocations and identify complex
translocation of MLL, AF-4, and CDK6.

Raffini LJ(1), Slater DJ, Rappaport EF, Lo Nigro L, Cheung NK, Biegel JA, Nowell 
PC, Lange BJ, Felix CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Joseph Stokes, Jr. Research Institute, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

We used panhandle PCR to clone the der(11) genomic breakpoint junction in three
leukemias with t(4;11) and devised reverse-panhandle PCR to clone the breakpoint 
junction of the other derivative chromosome. This work contributes two elements
to knowledge on MLL translocations. First is reverse-panhandle PCR for cloning
breakpoint junctions of the other derivative chromosomes, sequences of which are 
germane to understanding the MLL translocation process. The technique revealed
duplicated sequences in one case of infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and
small deletions in a case of treatment-related ALL. The second element is
discovery of a three-way rearrangement of MLL, AF-4, and CDK6 in another case of 
infant ALL. Cytogenetic analysis was unsuccessful at diagnosis, but suggested
t(4;11) and del(7)(q21q31) at relapse. Panhandle PCR analysis of the diagnostic
marrow identified a breakpoint junction of MLL intron 8 and AF-4 intron 3.
Reverse-panhandle PCR identified a breakpoint junction of CDK6 from band 7q21-q22
and MLL intron 9. CDK6 encodes a critical cell cycle regulator and is the first
gene of this type disrupted by MLL translocation. Cdk6 is overexpressed or
disrupted by translocation in many cancers. The in-frame CDK6-MLL transcript is
provocative with respect to a potential contribution of the predicted Cdk6-MLL
fusion protein in the genesis of the ALL, which also contains an in-frame MLL-AF4
transcript. The sequences in these three cases show additional MLL genomic
breakpoint heterogeneity. Each breakpoint junction suggests nonhomologous end
joining and is consistent with DNA damage and repair. CDK6-MLL is a new fusion of
both genes.

PMCID: PMC123688
PMID: 11930009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Aug 14;98(17):9802-7. Epub 2001 Aug 7.

Near-precise interchromosomal recombination and functional DNA topoisomerase II
cleavage sites at MLL and AF-4 genomic breakpoints in treatment-related acute
lymphoblastic leukemia with t(4;11) translocation.

Lovett BD(1), Lo Nigro L, Rappaport EF, Blair IA, Osheroff N, Zheng N, Megonigal 
MD, Williams WR, Nowell PC, Felix CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Research Institute, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA.

We analyzed the der(11) and der(4) genomic breakpoint junctions of a t(4;11) in
the leukemia of a patient previously administered etoposide and dactinomycin by
molecular and biochemical approaches to gain insights about the translocation
mechanism and the relevant drug exposure. The genomic breakpoint junctions were
amplified by PCR. Cleavage of DNA substrates containing the normal homologues of 
the MLL and AF-4 translocation breakpoints was examined in vitro upon incubation 
with human DNA topoisomerase IIalpha and etoposide, etoposide catechol, etoposide
quinone, or dactinomycin. The der(11) and der(4) genomic breakpoint junctions
both involved MLL intron 6 and AF-4 intron 3. Recombination was precise at the
sequence level except for the overall gain of a single templated nucleotide. The 
translocation breakpoints in MLL and AF-4 were DNA topoisomerase II cleavage
sites. Etoposide and its metabolites, but not dactinomycin, enhanced cleavage at 
these sites. Assuming that DNA topoisomerase II was the mediator of the breakage,
processing of the staggered nicks induced by DNA topoisomerase II, including
exonucleolytic deletion and template-directed polymerization, would have been
required before ligation of the ends to generate the observed genomic breakpoint 
junctions. These data are inconsistent with a translocation mechanism involving
interchromosomal recombination by simple exchange of DNA topoisomerase II
subunits and DNA-strand transfer; however, consistent with reciprocal DNA
topoisomerase II cleavage events in MLL and AF-4 in which both breaks became
stable, the DNA ends were processed and underwent ligation. Etoposide and/or its 
metabolites, but not dactinomycin, likely were the relevant exposures in this
patient.

PMCID: PMC55533
PMID: 11493704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Hum Genet. 2001;46(5):251-9.

Fragile XE-associated familial mental retardation protein 2 (FMR2) acts as a
potent transcription activator.

Hillman MA(1), Gecz J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, Department of Cytogenetics and Molecular
Genetics, Women's and Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia.

Expansion of the FRAXE CCG repeat to a full mutation is associated with
methylation and transcriptional silencing of the FMR2 gene, and as a consequence,
mild-to-borderline mental retardation. FMR2 is a member of a family of four
proteins, AF4, LAF4, FMR2, and AF5q31. The proteins associated with this family
localize to the cell nucleus. Various regions of FMR2, and each of the other
members of the protein family, were cloned and analyzed for transcription
activation in yeast and mammalian cells. In both yeast and mammalian cells, FMR2 
showed strong transcription activation. AF4 activation potential was several-fold
lower. Interestingly, isoforms of both FMR2 and LAF4 lacking exon 3 activated
transcription better than the larger isoforms containing exon 3. Compared with
the other members of the family, activation by FMR2 was the strongest. Our
results show that FMR2 is a potent transcription activator and that its function 
is conserved. Elucidation of the function of the FMR2 protein as a transcription 
activator may place FMR2 within the molecular signalling pathways involved in
nonspecific X-linked mental retardation (MRX).

PMID: 11355014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Br J Haematol. 2000 Dec;111(4):1065-70.

Myeloperoxidase gene expression in non-infant pro-B acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
with or without ALL1/AF4 transcript.

Serrano J(1), Lo Coco F, Sprovieri T, Elia L, Vitale A, Gregorj C, Tafuri A,
Sánchez J, Román J, Torres A, Cimino G.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Department, University Hospital Reina Sofia, Cordoba, Spain.

In this study, we examined myeloperoxidase (MPO) gene expression in a series of
31 non-infant pro-B acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) patients that included 16
cases with the t(4;11) translocation and/or the resultant ALL1/AF4 chimaeric
gene. Sixteen out of 31 cases (51%) were MPO mRNA positive/enzyme negative. MPO
mRNA was detected in nine out of 16 (56%) and seven out of 15 (47%) patients with
and without the ALL1/AF4 fusion transcript respectively. The comparative study
between MPO mRNA positive and negative cases showed statistically significant
differences with regard to age and white blood cell (WBC) count, and was 39.5
years vs. 26.3 years (P = 0.016) and 71.4 x 10(9)/l vs. 157.8 x 10(9)/l (P =
0.046) in the MPO mRNA positive and negative groups respectively. The correlation
analysis between MPO mRNA expression, age, WBC count and leukaemic relapse
according to the presence/absence of the ALL1/AF4 fusion showed that the
statistically significant differences observed in the whole group were related
mostly to the ALL1/AF4-positive ALL patients. In fact, in this latter group, the 
mean WBC count and patients' age were 85 +/- 79 x 10(9)/l vs. 289.8 +/- 102 x
10(9)/l (P = 0.0005) and 44.8 +/- 15.3 years vs. 26.7 +/- 13.7 years (P = 0.01)
in patients with and without MPO mRNA expression respectively. It appears,
therefore, that the assessment of MPO mRNA expression enables a further
dissection of leukaemia heterogeneity in apparently homogeneous
genetic/immunophenotypic ALL subsets.

PMID: 11167741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Blood. 2000 Jul 15;96(2):705-10.

Altered lymphoid development in mice deficient for the mAF4 proto-oncogene.

Isnard P(1), Coré N, Naquet P, Djabali M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'immunologie INSERM-CNRS de Marseille Luminy, Marseille Cedex 9,
France.

Some chromosomal translocations in acute leukemias involve the fusion of the
trithorax-related protein Mll (also called HRX, All1, Htrx,) with a variety of
heterologous proteins. In acute lymphoblastic leukemia associated with the
t(4;11)(q21;q23) translocation, the 4q21 gene that fuses with Mll is AF4. To gain
insight into the potential role of AF4 in leukemogenesis and development, this
gene was inactivated by homologous recombination in mice. As expected from the
tissue distribution of the AF4 transcript, development of both B and T cells is
affected in AF4 mutant mice. A severe reduction of the thymic double positive
CD4/CD8 (CD4(+)/CD8(+)) population was observed; in addition most double- and
single-positive cells expressed lower levels of CD4 and CD8 coreceptors. Most
importantly, the reconstitution of the double-positive compartment by expansion
of the double-negative cell compartment was severely impaired in these mutant
mice. In the bone marrow pre-B and mature B-cell numbers are reduced. These
results demonstrate that the function of the mAF4 gene is critical for normal
lymphocyte development. This raises the possibility that the disruption of the
normal AF4 gene or its association with Mll function by translocation may orient 
the oncogenic process toward the lymphoid lineage. This represents the first
functional study using a knock-out strategy on one of the Mll partner genes in
translocation-associated leukemias. (Blood. 2000;96:705-710)

PMID: 10887138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Dec 7;96(25):14535-40.

AF5q31, a newly identified AF4-related gene, is fused to MLL in infant acute
lymphoblastic leukemia with ins(5;11)(q31;q13q23).

Taki T(1), Kano H, Taniwaki M, Sako M, Yanagisawa M, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with MLL gene rearrangements is
characterized by early pre-B phenotype (CD10(-)/CD19(+)) and poor treatment
outcome. The t(4;11), creating MLL-AF4 chimeric transcripts, is the predominant
11q23 chromosome translocation in infant ALL and is associated with extremely
poor prognosis as compared with other 11q23 translocations. We analyzed an infant
early preB ALL with ins(5;11)(q31;q13q23) and identified the AF5q31 gene on
chromosome 5q31 as a fusion partner of the MLL gene. The AF5q31 gene, which
encoded a protein of 1,163 aa, was located in the vicinity of the cytokine
cluster region of chromosome 5q31 and contained at least 16 exons. The AF5q31
gene was expressed in fetal heart, lung, and brain at relatively high levels and 
fetal liver at a low level, but the expression in these tissues decreased in
adults. The AF5q31 protein was homologous to AF4-related proteins, including AF4,
LAF4, and FMR2. The AF5q31 and AF4 proteins had three homologous regions,
including the transactivation domain of AF4, and the breakpoint of AF5q31 was
located within the region homologous to the transactivation domain of AF4.
Furthermore, the clinical features of this patient with the MLL-AF5q31 fusion
transcript, characterized by the early pre-B phenotype (CD10(-)/CD19(+)) and poor
outcome, were similar to those of patients having MLL-AF4 chimeric transcripts.
These findings suggest that AF5q31 and AF4 might define a new family particularly
involved in the pathogenesis of 11q23-associated-ALL.

PMCID: PMC24471
PMID: 10588740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Oncogene. 1999 Aug 19;18(33):4663-71.

A DNA damage repair mechanism is involved in the origin of chromosomal
translocations t(4;11) in primary leukemic cells.

Gillert E(1), Leis T, Repp R, Reichel M, Hösch A, Breitenlohner I, Angermüller S,
Borkhardt A, Harbott J, Lampert F, Griesinger F, Greil J, Fey GH, Marschalek R.

Author information: 
(1)Chair of Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Staudtstr. 5, D-91058
Erlangen, Germany.

Some chromosomal translocations involved in the origin of leukemias and lymphomas
are due to malfunctions of the recombinatorial machinery of immunoglobulin and
T-cell receptor-genes. This mechanism has also been proposed for translocations
t(4;11)(q21;q23), which are regularly associated with acute pro-B cell leukemias 
in early childhood. Here, reciprocal chromosomal breakpoints in primary biopsy
material of fourteen t(4;11)-leukemia patients were analysed. In all cases,
duplications, deletions and inversions of less than a few hundred nucleotides
indicative of malfunctioning DNA repair mechanisms were observed. We concluded
that these translocation events were initiated by several DNA strand breaks on
both participating chromosomes and subsequent DNA repair by 'error-prone-repair' 
mechanisms, but not by the action of recombinases of the immune system.

PMID: 10467413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Cancer Res. 1999 Jul 15;59(14):3357-62.

Rapid isolation of chromosomal breakpoints from patients with t(4;11) acute
lymphoblastic leukemia: implications for basic and clinical research.

Reichel M(1), Gillert E, Breitenlohner I, Repp R, Greil J, Beck JD, Fey GH,
Marschalek R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany.

Chromosomal translocations t(4;11)(q21;q23) are associated with a group of acute 
lymphoblastic leukemias with very poor prognosis. From the complete sequences of 
the breakpoint cluster regions of the human MLL and AF-4 translocation partner
genes, a novel set of 66 oligonucleotides that facilitates the rapid
identification of translocation breakpoints by PCR analysis of genomic DNA was
designed. For each breakpoint, a pair of optimally snited primers can be
assigned, which improves the monitoring of the disease during treatment.
Comparison of the breakpoints with the corresponding parental sequences also
contributes to our better understanding of the illegitimate recombination events 
leading to these translocations.

PMID: 10416593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Oncogene. 1998 Dec 10;17(23):3035-44.

Fine structure of translocation breakpoints in leukemic blasts with chromosomal
translocation t(4;11): the DNA damage-repair model of translocation.

Reichel M(1), Gillert E, Nilson I, Siegler G, Greil J, Fey GH, Marschalek R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Chromosomal translocations t(4;11) are regularly associated with a specific type 
of acute leukemias and probably initiate the development of this disease. It has 
been proposed by others, that these translocations are mediated by recombinases
of the immune system. The breakpoints on both derivative chromosomes for three
t(4;11) leukemia-derived cell lines and primary blasts from two patients have
been analysed here in detail. The results revealed that: (a) multiple double- or 
single-stranded DNA breaks must have occured near the translocation breakpoints
on both participating chromosomes; and (b) DNA fragments flanked by these breaks 
must have either been deleted, inverted or duplicated during the translocation
process. We found no evidence for the involvement of specific target sequences
and recombinases of the immune system. Similar characteristic features were
observed by re-interpretation of published t(6;11) and t(9;22) translocation
data. Therefore we present a new model for the generation of these translocations
which poses, that these translocations are reciprocal but not balanced at the
fine structure level and that the DNA damage-repair machinery is likely involved 
in producing the final structure of the translocation breakpoint.

PMID: 9881706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mamm Genome. 1998 Dec;9(12):1065-8.

cDNA cloning, expression and chromosomal localization of the murine AF-4 gene
involved in human leukemia.

Isnard P(1), Depetris D, Mattei MG, Ferrier P, Djabali M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'immunologie INSERM-CNRS de Marseille Luminy, Case 906, 13288
Marseille Cedex 9, France.

PMID: 9880680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Blood. 1998 Nov 15;92(10):3841-7.

AF4 encodes a ubiquitous protein that in both native and MLL-AF4 fusion types
localizes to subnuclear compartments.

Li Q(1), Frestedt JL, Kersey JH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota Cancer Center and Departments of Pediatrics and
Laboratory Medicine/Pathology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Acute leukemia with t(4;11)(q21,q23) translocation results from the in-frame
fusion of the MLL to the AF4/FEL gene. In previous studies, we and others
demonstrated that AF4 transcripts are present in a variety of hematopoietic and
nonhematopoietic human cells. To further study the wild-type and leukemia fusion 
AF4, we used glutathione S-transferase (GST)-fusion proteins as immunogens to
produce rabbit polyclonal antibodies that were specific for normal and chimeric
AF4 proteins. Using Western blotting analysis, we demonstrated that the AF4 gene 
encodes proteins with apparent molecular weight of 125 and 145 kD. A 45-kD
protein coprecipitated with AF4 protein in immunoprecipitation. Also, the
anticipated MLL-AF4-encoded 240-kD protein was detected in all cell lines with
t(4;11) translocations; fusion proteins were present in lesser quantity than the 
wild-type AF4. The proteins recognized by the antibodies are of the predicted
sizes of the AF4 and MLL-AF4-encoded proteins based on previous DNA sequencing
analysis. The MLL-AF4 fusion protein had a similar subcellular distribution as
AF4. Both t(4;11) and non-t(4;11) leukemic cells showed a similar pattern of
punctate nuclear staining in all cell lines tested using confocal
immunofluorescence microscopy. AF4 antibodies should be useful for further
elucidation of the function of AF4 in normal cellular physiology, as well as the 
function of MLL-AF4 in leukemogenesis. The antibodies should also be helpful for 
the diagnosis of the MLL-AF4 fusion proteins in t(4;11) leukemias.

PMID: 9808577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Leukemia. 1998 Oct;12(10):1561-4.

Resistance of t(4;11) (MLL-AF4 fusion gene) leukemias to stress-induced cell
death: possible mechanism for extensive extramedullary accumulation of cells and 
poor prognosis.

Kersey JH(1), Wang D, Oberto M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota Cancer Center, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

Acute leukemias of the t(4;11) (MLL-AF4 fusion gene) type frequently have high
white blood counts and extramedullary disease in multiple organs. In the present 
study we evaluated the hypotheses that this extensive disease is the result of
extramedullary survival of leukemia cells due to resistance to stress-induced
cell death. Leukemias with t(4;11)(MLL-AF4) were found to be resistant to the
cell death that results from serum deprivation in vitro when compared with B
lineage acute leukemias without t(4;11)(MLL-AF4). Cells with t(4;11)(MLL-AF4) did
not have increased doubling time or increased numbers of cells in cycle. These
results suggest that the alteration in cellular homeostasis in these leukemias is
due to abnormalities of cellular destruction rather than cellular proliferation
when compared to other leukemias. Our results are consistent with the hypothesis 
that death of non-t(4;11) leukemias occurs in the microenvironment outside of the
bone marrow as a result of deficient cellular and humoral growth factors.
Resistance to death signals in t(4;11) leukemias results in extensive
accumulation of leukemia cells in extramedullary sites and likely contributes to 
the poor prognosis of these leukemias.

PMID: 9766500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Dec 9;94(25):13950-4.

Backtracking leukemia to birth: identification of clonotypic gene fusion
sequences in neonatal blood spots.

Gale KB(1), Ford AM, Repp R, Borkhardt A, Keller C, Eden OB, Greaves MF.

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia Research Fund Centre at the Institute of Cancer Research, Chester
Beatty Laboratories, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, United Kingdom.

Epidemiological evidence has suggested that some pediatric leukemias may be
initiated in utero and, for some pairs of identical twins with concordant
leukemia, this possibility has been strongly endorsed by molecular studies of
clonality. Direct evidence for a prenatal origin can only be derived by
prospective or retrospective detection of leukemia-specific molecular
abnormalities in fetal or newborn samples. We report a PCR-based method that has 
been developed to scrutinize neonatal blood spots (Guthrie cards) for the
presence of numerically infrequent leukemic cells at birth in individuals who
subsequently developed leukemia. We demonstrate that unique or clonotypic MLL-AF4
genomic fusion sequences are present and detectable in neonatal blood spots from 
individuals who were diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukemia at ages 5 months
to 2 years and, therefore, have arisen during fetal hematopoiesis in utero. This 
result provides unequivocal evidence for a prenatal initiation of acute leukemia 
in young patients. The method should be applicable to other fusion genes in
children with common subtypes of leukemia and will be of value in attempts to
unravel the natural history and etiology of this major subtype of pediatric
cancer.

PMCID: PMC28413
PMID: 9391133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Leuk Res. 1997 Oct;21(10):911-7.

The FEL (AF-4) protein donates transcriptional activation sequences to Hrx-Fel
fusion proteins in leukemias containing T(4;11)(Q21;Q23) chromosomal
translocations.

Morrissey JJ(1), Raney S, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Motorola, Biological Research Program, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33322, USA.

The t(4;11) chromosomal translocation marks a subset of acute lymphoblastic and
secondary myeloid leukemias. It results in the fusion of the FEL (AF-4) gene on
chromosome band 4q21 with the HRX (MLL) gene on chromosome band 11q23. This
translocation results in the expression of fusion transcripts from both
translocated chromosomes, with the derivative 11 product (fusing the
amino-terminal third of the Hrx protein to the C-terminal two-thirds of the Fel
protein) thought to be involved in leukemic transformation. The mechanism of
transformation by Hrx-Fel in leukemic cells, however, is unknown and the specific
leukemogenic contributions of Fel have not been defined. In this study, we
demonstrate that Fel is capable of activating transcription from a minimal
adenoviral E1b promoter as a Gal4-Fel fusion protein in transient transcriptional
assays. The Fel transactivating sequences were localized to amino acids 365-572
which are consistently retained by Hrx-Fel fusion proteins created by t(4;11)
translocations in leukemias. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the transactivation
properties of Fel vary in different cell types. While Gal4-Fel constructs
strongly activated transcription in Cos-7 cells and the MCF-7 breast tumor cell
line, they displayed low to no activity in the precursor B-cell line REH, breast 
tumor cell line Gl-101A and epithelial-derived A431 cells. These data are
consistent with a potential role of Hrx-Fel as a chimeric transcription factor in
which Fel contributes transcriptional effector properties and suggest the
requirement for cell-specific accessory factors.

PMID: 9403001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Oncogene. 1997 Oct 16;15(16):1967-78.

Cloning and developmental expression of the murine homolog of the acute leukemia 
proto-oncogene AF4.

Baskaran K(1), Erfurth F, Taborn G, Copeland NG, Gilbert DJ, Jenkins NA,
Iannaccone PM, Domer PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

AF4 is the 4q21 gene involved in the acute lymphoblastic leukemia associated
t(4;11)(q21;q23) where it forms a fusion gene with MLL. In order to gain insight 
into AF4's role in leukemogenesis we have studied its functional domains and
expression pattern during murine development. We have cloned the murine homolog, 
Af4. We have demonstrated that 5' half of Af4 encodes a region with
transcriptional transactivation activity which is disrupted by the t(4;11) in
human leukemias. We have also localized the murine AF4 protein to the nucleus
supporting a role for AF4 in transcription. The developmental expression pattern 
of Af4 was determined in situ hybridization and suggests Af4 plays an important
role in the development of the hematopoietic, cardiovascular, skeletal and
central nervous systems. A repeating pattern of Af4 expression in development is 
down-regulation with differentiation of a tissue. Among the cell types where this
pattern of down-regulation is noted are B-lymphocytes. These findings raise the
possibility that the disruption of normal AF4 function by the translocation may
contribute to leukemogenesis.

PMID: 9365243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Br J Haematol. 1997 Jul;98(1):157-69.

Exon/intron structure of the human AF-4 gene, a member of the AF-4/LAF-4/FMR-2
gene family coding for a nuclear protein with structural alterations in acute
leukaemia.

Nilson I(1), Reichel M, Ennas MG, Greim R, Knörr C, Siegler G, Greil J, Fey GH,
Marschalek R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

The AF-4 gene on human chromosome 4q21 is involved in reciprocal translocations
to the ALL-1 gene on chromosome 11q23, which are associated with acute
lymphoblastic leukaemias. A set of recombinant phage carrying genomic fragments
for the coding region and flanking sequences of the AF-4 gene were isolated.
Phage inserts were assembled into four contigs with 21 exons, and an intron phase
map was produced enabling the interpretation of translocation-generated fusion
proteins. The gene contains two alternative first exons, 1a and 1b, both
including a translation initiation codon. The translocation breakpoint cluster
region is flanked by exons 3 and 6 and two different polyadenylation signals were
identified. Polyclonal antisera directed against three different portions of the 
AF-4 protein were produced and used to detect a 116 kD protein in cellular
extracts of human B-lymphoblastoid and proB cell lines. In mitogen-stimulated
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells the AF-4 antigen was predominantly
located in the nucleus. The AF-4 gene is a member of the AF-4, LAF-4 and FMR-2
gene family. The members of this family encode serine-proline-rich proteins with 
properties of nuclear transcription factors. Comparison of AF-4 protein coding
sequences with the LAF-4 and FMR-2 sequences revealed five highly conserved
domains of potential functional relevance.

PMID: 9233580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Leuk Lymphoma. 1997 Apr;25(3-4):191-9.

Molecular analysis of infant acute leukemia.

Hilden JM(1), Frestedt JL, Kersey JH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota Cancer Center, St Paul, USA.

Infant acute leukemia, known to have a poor outcome with conventional therapy,
usually has a molecular rearrangement at chromosome band 11q23. The 11q23
translocation partner is typically at 4q21 in infant ALL, but other 11q23
translocation partners occur in infant ALL and AML. The MLL gene at 11q23, and
the AF4 gene at 4q21, have been extensively studied to identify heterogeneity of 
structural rearrangement and prognostic indicators, to look for clues as to
etiology, and to improve therapy.

PMID: 9168430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. DNA Cell Biol. 1996 Aug;15(8):669-78.

AF4/FEL, a gene involved in infant leukemia: sequence variations, gene structure,
and possible homology with a genomic sequence on 5q31.

Frestedt JL(1), Hilden JM, Kersey JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis 55455, USA.

The most common chromosome abnormality among infants with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia is a t(4;11)(q2l;q23) and patients with this 4;11 translocation have a
very poor prognosis. This unique genetic rearrangement fuses the
MLL/ALL-1/HRX-Htrx gene at 11q23 with the AF4/FEL gene at 4q21. The resulting
chimeric mRNAs presumably encode chimeric proteins which contribute to the
leukemogenic state. The AF4 gene remains poorly understood with an unknown
function. In this report, we describe the cDNA sequence information from human
placental tissue where AF4 mRNA is highly expressed. We identified six
intron-exon boundaries in the AF4 genomic structure and discussed more than 30
AF4 cDNA sequence variations reported in the literature. In addition, we
identified three overlapping genomic sequences in GenBank entitled the
"interleukin growth hormone cluster on chromosome 5q31," which, when aligned and 
translated, had three regions that suggested homology to the predicted AF4
protein sequence (32% amino acid sequence identity over 314 amino acids, 43% over
63 amino acids, and 50% over 40 amino acids). Of interest, this same chromosome
5q31 region has also been implicated in MLL gene rearrangements in human
leukemia.

PMID: 8769569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Br J Haematol. 1996 Mar;92(3):659-64.

Clinical relevance of residual disease monitoring by polymerase chain reaction in
patients with ALL-1/AF-4 positive-acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Cimino G(1), Elia L, Rivolta A, Rapanotti MC, Rossi V, Alimena G, Annino L,
Canaani E, Lo Coco F, Biondi A.

Author information: 
(1)Departimento de Biopatologia Umana, Universita La Sapienza di Roma, Italy.

In this study we used reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
for the longitudinal monitoring of minimal residual disease in 12 patients with
All-1/AF-4 positive ALL. Of these, seven also showed at presentation a typical
t(4;11) cytogenetic translocation. Seven patients were infants <18 months of age 
and five were adults. Eleven patients were treated with high-dose intensive
induction and consolidation chemotherapy without bone marrow transplantation and 
one received conservative treatment due to poor performance status. Three had
resistant disease, four relapsed within 12 months after achieving complete
remission, and five are in continuous complete remission (CCR) at 32, 39, 52, 53 
and 61 months from diagnosis, respectively. The sequential analysis of the
ALL-1/AF-4 hybrid transcript showed a persistently negative RT-PCR in the five
CCR long-term survivors. The PCR analysis resulted persistently positive in the
remaining seven cases, including the four cases who relapsed after the
achievement of clinical CR. These data emphasize the clinical relevance of PCR
monitoring analysis in t(4;11) ALL patients and should be considered in order to 
better determine variable post-remission treatment according to risk prediction.

PMID: 8616032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Blood. 1996 Jan 15;87(2):734-45.

LAF-4 encodes a lymphoid nuclear protein with transactivation potential that is
homologous to AF-4, the gene fused to MLL in t(4;11) leukemias.

Ma C(1), Staudt LM.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

A novel human gene, LAF-4, was isolated from a subtracted cDNA library that
showed strong sequence similarity to AF-4, a gene that is translocated in
t(4;11)(q21;q23) acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALLs). In t(4;11) ALL, the AF-4
gene at 4q21 is translocated into the MLL locus at 11q23, resulting in the
expression of an MLL/AF-4 fusion protein that is the presumptive oncoprotein.
AF-4 and LAF-4 are homologous throughout their coding regions, yet neither
protein is related to previously cloned genes. Human LAF-4 readily hybridized
with genes in mouse and chicken, thus showing that this gene family has been
highly conserved during vertebrate evolution. In mouse tissues, LAF-4 mRNA was
found to be present at highest levels in lymphoid tissues, present at lower
levels in brain and lung, and absent from other tissues. In human and mouse
lymphoid cell lines, LAF-4 expression was highest in pre-B cells, intermediate in
mature B cells, and absent in plasma cells, thus pointing to a potential
regulatory role for LAF-4 in lymphoid development. Antibodies to LAF-4 showed it 
to be a nuclear protein that showed an uneven, granular immunofluorescence
pattern. In vitro-translated LAF-4 was able to bind strongly to double-stranded
DNA cellulose. Furthermore, both LAF-4 and AF-4 had domains that activated
transcription strongly when fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain. Interestingly, 
the AF-4 transactivation domain is retained in the MLL/AF-4 fusion protein; thus,
it may contribute to the transforming potential of the oncoprotein. Therefore,
the cloning of LAF-4 has defined a new family of potential regulatory proteins
that may function in lymphoid development and oncogenesis.

PMID: 8555498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Genet Anal. 1996 Jan;12(3-4):147-9.

Differential expression of AF4/FEL mRNA in human tissues.

Frestedt JL(1), Hilden JM, Moore RO, Kersey JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota
Medical School, Minneapolis 55455, USA. frest001@maroon.tc.umn.edu

This manuscript reports the differential expression of the AF4 gene among human
tissues. AF4 mRNA is highly expressed in normal placental tissue which correlates
with the newborn age of patients presenting with leukemia characterized by the
MLL/AF4 gene rearrangement.

PMID: 8673740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Dec 19;92(26):12160-4.

Domains with transcriptional regulatory activity within the ALL1 and AF4 proteins
involved in acute leukemia.

Prasad R(1), Yano T, Sorio C, Nakamura T, Rallapalli R, Gu Y, Leshkowitz D, Croce
CM, Canaani E.

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Cancer Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA
19107, USA.

The ALLI gene, located at chromosome band 11q23, is involved in acute leukemia
through a series of chromosome translocations and fusion to a variety of genes,
most frequently to A4 and AF9. The fused genes encode chimeric proteins proteins.
Because the Drosophila homologue of ALL1, trithorax, is a positive regulator of
homeotic genes and acts at the level of transcription, it is conceivable that
alterations in ALL1 transcriptional activity may underlie its action in malignant
transformation. To begin studying this, we examined the All1, AF4, AF9, and AF17 
proteins for the presence of potential transcriptional regulatory domains. This
was done by fusing regions of the proteins to the yeast GAL4 DNA binding domain
and assaying their effect on transcription of a reporter gene. A domain of 55
residues positioned at amino acids 2829-2883 of ALL1 was identified as a very
strong activator. Further analysis of this domain by in vitro mutagenesis pointed
to a core of hydrophobic and acidic residues as critical for the activity. An
ALL1 domain that repressed transcription of the reporter gene coincided with the 
sequence homologous to a segment of DNA methyltransferase. An AF4 polypeptide
containing residues 480-560 showed strong activation potential. The C-terminal
segment of AF9 spanning amino acids 478-568 transactivated transcription of the
reporter gene in HeLa but not in NIH 3T3 cells. These results suggest that ALL1, 
AF4, and probably AF9 interact with the transcriptional machinery of the cell.

PMCID: PMC40316
PMID: 8618864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Blood. 1995 Nov 15;86(10):3876-82.

Molecular analysis of infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia: MLL gene rearrangement
and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction for t(4; 11)(q21; q23).

Hilden JM(1), Frestedt JL, Moore RO, Heerema NA, Arthur DC, Reaman GH, Kersey JH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota, Children's National Medical Center, Minneapolis
55455, USA.

Molecular techniques to detect MLL (11q23) and AF-4 (4q21) gene rearrangements
are being evaluated for use in stratification of patients into prognostic groups.
We studied 15 cases of infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with Southern
blotting for MLL gene rearrangement and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) for t(4;11) fusion transcripts and compared the results to
cytogenetic and clinical data. Our results indicate that classic t(4;11)(q21;q23)
translocations are detected by RT-PCR; however, unusual 4;11 translocations still
require additional investigation. We also extended and updated our original study
of MLL gene rearrangement in infant ALL to 40 patients with longer follow-up and 
show that the group with germline configuration of the MLL gene continues to have
an excellent outcome. The results of salvage therapy (bone marrow transplantation
or chemotherapy) suggest that transplant may show advantage. Preliminary results 
of the use of RT-PCR to assess minimal disease are also reported.

PMID: 7579356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Ann Hematol. 1995 Jan;70(1):31-5.

Secondary acute myeloid leukemia with translocation (4;11) and MLL/AF4
rearrangement in a 15-year-old boy treated for common acute lymphoblastic
leukemia 11 years earlier.

Blütters-Sawatzki R(1), Borkhardt A, Grathwohl J, Repp R, Rheinisch-Becker I,
Bohle RM, Lampert F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hematology and Oncology, University of Giessen,
Germany.

Secondary acute myeloid leukemia occurring in a 15-year-old boy 11 years after
initial treatment of a common lymphoblastic leukemia (c-ALL) is described.
Initial complete remission was terminated after 4 years by an isolated testicular
relapse, followed by first bone marrow relapse within 18 months. After he
achieved remission again, an allogeneic bone marrow transplantation from his
HLA-identical brother was performed. Five years and 9 months later, the patient
developed thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and anemia, but bone marrow biopsies at
this time demonstrated only myelofibrosis, with no blast cell population present.
A polymerase chain reaction assay of a peripheral blood sample recognized the
mRNA fusion region for the MLL/AF4 rearrangement, i.e., the molecular equivalent 
of the translocation (4;11)(q21,q23). Four weeks later, a blast cell population
with AML-M1 morphology according to the FAB classification appeared in the bone
marrow, and translocation (4;11) was detected by cytogenetics. Thus, secondary
leukemias with chromosomal 11q23 rearrangement can develop after a long latency
period and can be diagnosed earlier with the PCR technique.

PMID: 7827204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Blood. 1994 Dec 1;84(11):3835-42.

Pre-pre-B acute lymphoblastic leukemia: high frequency of alternatively spliced
ALL1-AF4 transcripts and absence of minimal residual disease during complete
remission.

Janssen JW(1), Ludwig WD, Borkhardt A, Spadinger U, Rieder H, Fonatsch C,
Hossfeld DK, Harbott J, Schulz AS, Repp R, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics II, University of Ulm, Germany.

We used the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to detect ALL1-AF4 rearrangements,
the molecular hallmark of t(4;11) in a series of 46 pre-pre-B (CD19+, CD24+,
CD10/CD20/cylgM/sIgM-) acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALL). Eighteen patients
(39%) exhibited fusion transcripts including 4 of 12 children and 14 of 34
adults. This genetic defect was associated with hyperleukocytosis (median
leukocyte count 176 x 10(9)/L) and expression of myeloid-associated antigens
(CDw65+). In contrast, only two patients from a group of 67 common (CD19/CD10+,
cylgM/sIgM-) and pre-B ALLs (CD19/cylgM+, CD10 +/-, sIgM-) showed ALL1-AF4 mRNA. 
All PCR-positive cases showed multiple amplification products representing
alternative splicing events. Moreover, reciprocal der (4)-derived AF4-ALL1
transcripts were observed in 65% of the cases analyzed. Eight of the 18 pre-pre-B
ALL patients with an ALL1-AF4 recombination are currently in complete continuous 
remission for up to 54 months (median, 26 months). Twelve remission samples were 
available from seven cases, and all of them lacked evidence of minimal residual
disease. Overall this study documents a similarly high incidence of ALL1-AF4
recombinations in children (infants excluded) and adults with pre-pre-B ALL and
demonstrates the decline of the leukemic cell clone below the detection level of 
PCR in a remarkable proportion of patients under intense treatment protocols.

PMID: 7949140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Leukemia. 1994 Apr;8(4):549-53.

Molecular analysis of MLL-1/AF4 recombination in infant acute lymphoblastic
leukemia.

Borkhardt A(1), Repp R, Haupt E, Brettreich S, Buchen U, Gossen R, Lampert F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hematology and Oncology, University of Giessen,
Germany.

We examined ten cases of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in infants (less than
1 year of age) by RT-nested PCR for a MLL-1/AF4 rearrangement. Five patients
revealed a positive result. The specific PCR product differed in size from
approximately 380-670 bp indicating various splicing variants in the MLL-1/AF4
rearrangement. Three patients had a fusion between exon 6 of the MLL-1 gene and
codon 362 of the known AF4 cDNA sequence. Moreover, in two patients more than one
specific PCR product was detected, possibly due to alternative splicing. In the
first case, sequencing of these products revealed a hybrid mRNA consisting of
MLI-1 exon 7 or exon 8, respectively, fused to the AF4 gene at codon 348. In the 
second case with alternative splicing, again, exon 7 or 8 of the MLL-1 gene were 
fused to the AF4 gene as in case 1. The AF4 sequence involved in this patient,
however, started at codon 362. The AF4 break was, therefore, identical to the
three MLL-1/AF4 positive patients as described above. Moreover, we investigated
all ten patients for the reciprocal mRNA transcript AF4/MLL-1 by a similar PCR
approach. In none of these patients, including the five MLL-1/AF4 positive cases 
was a specific PCR product obtained. However, in the MV411 cell line bearing a
t(4;11), which served as a positive control in our MLL-1/AF4-PCR assay, the
reciprocal AF4/MLL-1 mRNA was detected. Our results indicate that a MLL-1/AF4
rearrangement occurs in about 50% of infants with ALL. In contrast, the
reciprocal hybrid mRNA can only rarely be detected, if at all.

PMID: 8152249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Blood. 1994 Jan 15;83(2):330-5.

The der(11)-encoded MLL/AF-4 fusion transcript is consistently detected in
t(4;11)(q21;q23)-containing acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Downing JR(1), Head DR, Raimondi SC, Carroll AJ, Curcio-Brint AM, Motroni TA,
Hulshof MG, Pullen DJ, Domer PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105.

The t(4;11)(q21;q23) is the most common translocation involving band 11q23 and is
found predominantly in acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALLs) of infants. Recent
studies have shown that this translocation involves the MLL gene on chromosome 11
and the AF-4 gene on chromosome 4. Using oligonucleotide primers derived from
these genes, we established reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) assays for the detection of the fusion transcripts from both the der(11)
and der(4) chromosomes. Using these assays we analyzed 23 pediatric cases of
t(4;11) containing ALL. RT-PCR analysis for the der(11)-derived MLL/AF-4 fusion
transcript resulted in its detection in every case at a sensitivity of greater
than 1 leukemic cell in 10(5) cells. Sequence analysis of MLL/AF-4 PCR products
demonstrated fusion mRNAs resulting from breaks in MLL introns 6, 7, or 8, with
alternative splicing to one of three exons in the AF-4 gene. In contrast,
analysis for the der(4)-derived transcript resulted in the detection of this
chimeric mRNA in only 84% of the cases analyzed. These data suggest that the
critical chimeric gene product involved in the establishment of the leukemic
clone is derived from the der(11) chromosome. Moreover, these data demonstrate
the utility of the RT-PCR assay for the der(11)-encoded message both for
diagnosing t(4;11)-containing leukemia and for monitoring patients for minimal
residual disease.

PMID: 8286732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Semin Cancer Biol. 1993 Dec;4(6):377-85.

Rearrangements involving chromosome band 11Q23 in acute leukaemia.

Rowley JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Chicago Medical Center, Illinois
60637-1470.

Rearrangements involving chromosome band 11q23 are very common in acute
leukaemia, both lymphoblastic and myeloid (monoblastic), and are less common in
lymphoma. Although several different genes have been cloned from translocation
breakpoints, the great majority of translocations involve the MLL
(myeloid-lymphoid leukaemia) gene. The MLL gene has several different names,
ALL1, Htrx, HRX; the central part of the gene codes for multiple zinc fingers
which show strong homology to the Drosophila trithorax gene. MLL is involved in
four common translocations as well as in 25 uncommon or rare translocations,
insertions and deletions. The translocation breakpoints occur within an 8.3 kb
region which can be detected with a 0.74 kb cDNA probe. Twenty-five percent of
patients have a deletion 3' of the breakpoint which includes the zinc finger
region. Patients who previously received drugs that inhibit topoisomerase II
often develop acute leukaemia with translocations involving 11q23. These
translocations break MLL in the same 8.3 kb region. In the three breakpoints
cloned to date, the translocation has led to a fusion gene on the derivative 11
chromosome with a chimaeric transcript, consisting of 5' MLL and the 3' segment
of the other gene. Although transcripts were also cloned from the other
derivative chromosome, all the evidence indicates that the critical fusion gene
is on the derivative 11 chromosome. The molecular dissection of these
rearrangements will provide insights into the biology of MLL and into the
interaction of MLL with topoisomerase II inhibitors. In addition, this research
has provided DNA probes that will be important for diagnosis and for monitoring
patients during the course of their disease.

PMID: 8142623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 May 15;90(10):4631-5.

Genes on chromosomes 4, 9, and 19 involved in 11q23 abnormalities in acute
leukemia share sequence homology and/or common motifs.

Nakamura T(1), Alder H, Gu Y, Prasad R, Canaani O, Kamada N, Gale RP, Lange B,
Crist WM, Nowell PC, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Cancer Institute, Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107.

Chromosome translocations involving band 11q23 are associated with human acute
leukemias. These translocations fuse the ALL-1 gene, homolog of Drosophila
trithorax and located at chromosome band 11q23, to genes from a variety of
chromosomes. We cloned and sequenced cDNAs derived from transcripts of the AF-4
and AF-9 genes involved in the most common chromosome abnormalities,
t(4:11)(q21:q23) and t(9:11)(p22:q23), respectively. Sequence analysis indicates 
high homology between the AF-9 gene protein product and the protein encoded by
the ENL gene fused to ALL-1 in (11:19) chromosome translocations. AF-4, AF-9, and
ENL proteins contain nuclear targeting sequences as well as serine-rich and
proline-rich regions. Stretches abundant in basic amino acids are also present in
the three proteins. These results suggest that the different proteins fused to
ALL-1 polypeptide(s) provide similar functional domains.

PMCID: PMC46566
PMID: 8506309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Curr Genet. 1991 Jul;20(1-2):79-85.

Pheromone production and response in sterile mutants of fission yeast.

Leupold U(1), Sipiczki M, Egel R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Microbiology, University of Bern, Switzerland.

Genetically heterothallic strains of various sterile mutants were assayed for
residual production of the corresponding mating pheromone as well as
responsiveness towards the opposite pheromone. No sexual activities were detected
in ste11 strains (previously referred to as aff1 or steX, which we show are
allelic), whilst the production of M factor was unaffected by ste1 to ste10
mutations. P factor production was still possible in class I ste mutants (ste5,
ste6 and ste10), which also allow meiosis in diploid strains. With the exception 
of the leaky ste10-F23 mutant, no changes in cell morphology were induced by
exposure to the opposite pheromone in the ste mutant strains.

PMID: 1934121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Gen Genet. 1988 Aug;213(2-3):529-34.

The role of sterility genes (ste and aff) in the initiation of sexual development
in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Sipiczki M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, L.K. University, Debrecen, Hungary.

Haploid homothallic strains of Schizosaccharomyces pombe with mutations in any of
nine "sterility genes" (ste) do not mate with wild-type fertile strains. Those
defective in genes ste1 to ste4 and ste7 to ste9 are also deficient in meiosis
and sporulation. I found that the ste1, ste3 and ste8 genes act very early in the
sexual development, presumably before the pat1-controlled conjugation-specific
event. ste5 and ste6 exert their function downstream of pat1 in the initiation of
conjugation and do not play any role in the meiotic pathway. ste2, ste4, ste7 and
ste9 are involved in both sexual pathways: they seem to act downstream of pat1 in
conjugation but upstream of pat1 in the initiation of meiosis. A new gene, aff1, 
whose defective allele suppresses the pat1-114-provoked haploid sporulation and
arrest of vegetative growth is also described. It is supposed that the aff1+ gene
product participates in a cascade of regulatory events, as a factor antagonistic 
to pat1.

PMID: 3185514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


