
1. Rev Assoc Med Bras. 2016 Feb;62(1):21-3. doi: 10.1590/1806-9282.62.01.21.

Facial extensive ulcer.

Fernández-Crehuet P(1), Ruiz-Villaverde R(2).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)aff2.

Basosquamous carcinoma (BSC), as described in 1910, is a distinctive variety of
skin cancer and its etiology and pathological characteristics have generated much
controversy over the years. Currently, BSC is considered a basal cell carcinoma
(BCC) subtype with aggressive behavior and greater tendency for recurrence and
metastases. We present a clinical case recently reported in our unit.

PMID: 27008486  [PubMed - in process]


2. Clin Genet. 2016 Jan 14. doi: 10.1111/cge.12738. [Epub ahead of print]

Wide allelic heterogeneity with predominance of large IDS gene complex
rearrangements in a sample of Mexican patients with Hunter syndrome.

Alcántara-Ortigoza MA(1), García-de Teresa B(1), González-Del Angel A(1), Berumen
J(2,)(3), Guardado-Estrada M(3), Fernández-Hernández L(1), Navarrete-Martínez
Juana I(4), Maza-Morales M(5), Rius-Domínguez R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Biología Molecular, Departamento de Genética Humana, Instituto 
Nacional de Pediatría, Avenida Insurgentes Sur 3700-C, Insurgentes-Cuicuilco,
Coyoacán, 04530, México, Distrito Federal. (2)Departamento de Medicina
Experimental, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Dr. 
Balmis 148, Cuauhtémoc, Doctores, 06726, México, Distrito Federal. (3)Unidad de
Medicina Genómica, Hospital General de México, Dr. Balmis 148, Cuauhtémoc,
Doctores, 06726, México, Distrito Federal. (4)Servicio de Genética. Hospital de
Alta Especialidad PEMEX Picacho Sur. Boulevard Adolfo Ruíz Cortínez-Periférico
Sur 4091, Fuentes del Pedregal, Tlalpan, 14140, México, Distrito Federal.
(5)Médico Residente de Pediatría, Instituto Nacional de Pediatría, Avenida
Insurgentes Sur 3700-C, Insurgentes-Cuicuilco, Coyoacán, 04530, México, Distrito 
Federal. (6)Médico Residente de Genética Médica, Departamento de Genética Humana,
Instituto Nacional de Pediatría, Avenida Insurgentes Sur 3700-C, Insurgentes
Cuicuilco, Coyoacán, 04530, Distrito Federal, México.

Hunter syndrome or mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPSII) is caused by pathogenic 
variants in the IDS gene. This is the first study that examines the mutational
spectrum in 25 unrelated Mexican MPSII families. The responsible genotype was
identified in 96% of the families (24/25) with ten novel pathogenic variants:
c.133G>C, c.1003C>T, c.1025A>C, c.463_464delinsCCGTATAGCTGG, c.754_767del,
c.1132_1133del, c.1463del, c.508-1G>C, c.1006+1G>T and c.(-217_103del). Extensive
IDS gene deletions were identified in four patients; by DNA microarray analysis
two patients showed the loss of the entire AFF2 gene, and epilepsy developed in
only one of them. Wide allelic heterogeneity was noted, with large gene
alterations (e.g., IDS/IDSP1 gene inversions, partial to extensive IDS deletions,
and one chimeric IDS-IDSP1 allele) that occurred at higher frequencies than
previously reported (36% vs. 18.9-29%). The frequency of carrier mothers (80%) is
consistent with previous descriptions (>70%). Carrier assignment allowed
molecular prenatal diagnoses. Notably, somatic and germline mosaicism was
identified in one family, and two patients presented thrombocytopenic purpura and
pancytopenia after idursulfase enzyme replacement treatment. Our findings suggest
a wide allelic heterogeneity in Mexican MPSII patients; DNA microarray analysis
contributes to further delineation of the resulting phenotype for IDS and
neighboring loci deletions.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26762690  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2015 Sep-Oct;23(5):880-7. doi:
10.1590/0104-1169.0059.2627.

Factors associated with the patient safety climate at a teaching hospital.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Luiz RB(1), Simões AL(2), Barichello E(2), Barbosa MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)aff2. (2)Universidade Federal do Triângulo Mineiro, Uberaba, MG, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: to investigate the association between the scores of the patient
safety climate and socio-demographic and professional variables.
METHODS: an observational, sectional and quantitative study, conducted at a large
public teaching hospital. The Safety Attitudes Questionnaire was used, translated
and validated for Brazil. Data analysis used the software Statistical Package for
Social Sciences. In the bivariate analysis, we used Student's t-test, analysis of
variance and Spearman's correlation of (a=0.05). To identify predictors for the
safety climate scores, multiple linear regression was used, having the safety
climate domain as the main outcome (a=0.01).
RESULTS: most participants were women, nursing staff, who worked in direct care
to adult patients in critical areas, without a graduate degree and without any
other employment. The average and median total score of the instrument
corresponded to 61.8 (SD=13.7) and 63.3, respectively. The variable professional 
performance was found as a factor associated with the safety environment for the 
domain perception of service management and hospital management (p=0.01).
CONCLUSION: the identification of factors associated with the safety environment 
permits the construction of strategies for safe practices in the hospitals.

PMCID: PMC4660410
PMID: 26487138  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Neuroinflammation. 2015 Aug 16;12:150. doi: 10.1186/s12974-015-0369-6.

Active immunization against complement factor C5a: a new therapeutic approach for
Alzheimer's disease.

Landlinger C(1), Oberleitner L(2), Gruber P(3), Noiges B(4), Yatsyk K(5), Santic 
R(6), Mandler M(7), Staffler G(8).

Author information: 
(1)AFFiRiS AG, Karl-Farkas-Gasse 22, Vienna, 1030, Austria.
christine.landlinger@affiris.com. (2)AFFiRiS AG, Karl-Farkas-Gasse 22, Vienna,
1030, Austria. lisa.oberleitner@affiris.com. (3)AFFiRiS AG, Karl-Farkas-Gasse 22,
Vienna, 1030, Austria. petra.gruber@affiris.com. (4)AFFiRiS AG, Karl-Farkas-Gasse
22, Vienna, 1030, Austria. bnoiges@gmx.at. (5)AFFiRiS AG, Karl-Farkas-Gasse 22,
Vienna, 1030, Austria. kristyna.yatsyk@affiris.com. (6)AFFiRiS AG,
Karl-Farkas-Gasse 22, Vienna, 1030, Austria. radmila.santic@affiris.com.
(7)AFFiRiS AG, Karl-Farkas-Gasse 22, Vienna, 1030, Austria.
markus.mandler@affiris.com. (8)AFFiRiS AG, Karl-Farkas-Gasse 22, Vienna, 1030,
Austria. guenther.staffler@affiris.com.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disease
characterized by neuronal loss due to amyloid beta aggregations, neurofibrillary 
tangles, and prominent neuroinflammation. Recently, interference with
neuroinflammation as a new therapeutic approach for AD treatment gained great
interest. Microglia cells, one of the major contributors in neuroinflammation,
are activated in response to misfolded proteins such as amyloid ß and cell debris
leading to a sustained release of pro-inflammatory mediators. Especially,
complement factor C5a and its receptor have been found to be up-regulated in
microglia in the immediate surroundings of cerebral amyloid plaques and blocking 
of C5aR resulted in a reduction of pathological markers in a model of AD. Here,
we investigate the effect of active vaccination against the complement factor C5a
to interfere with neuroinflammation and neuropathologic alterations in a mouse
model of AD.
METHODS: Short antigenic peptides AFF1 and AFF2, which mimic a C-terminal epitope
of C5a, were selected and formulated to vaccines. These vaccines are able to
induce a highly specific antibody response to the target protein C5a. Tg2576
mice, a common model of AD, were immunized with these two C5a-peptide vaccines
and the induced immune response toward C5a was analyzed by ELISA and Western blot
analysis. The influence on memory retention was assessed by a contextual fear
conditioning test. Microglia activation and amyloid plaque deposition in the
brain was visualized by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Both C5a-targeting vaccines were highly immunogenic and induced
sustained antibody titers against C5a. Tg2576 mice vaccinated at early stages of 
the disease showed significantly improved contextual memory accompanied by the
reduction of microglia activation in the hippocampus and cerebral amyloid plaque 
load compared to control mice. Late-stage immunization also showed a decrease in 
the number of activated microglia, and improved memory function, however, had no 
influence on the amyloid ß load.
CONCLUSION: C5a-peptide vaccines represent a safe and well-tolerated
immunotherapy, which is able to induce a strong and specific immune response
against the pro-inflammatory molecule C5a. In a mouse model of AD, C5a-peptide
vaccines reduce microglia activation and thus neuroinflammation, which is
supposed to lead to reduced neuronal dysfunction and AD symptomatic decline.

PMCID: PMC4537556
PMID: 26275910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Rev Bras Ginecol Obstet. 2015 May;37(5):216-21. doi:
10.1590/SO100-720320150005272.

Do induced twin pregnancies influence the obstetric and neonatal results of
multiple births born before 32 weeks? Comparison to spontaneous gestation.

Dinis SR(1), Domingues AP(1), Belo A(2), Couto D(1), Fonseca E(1), Moura P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal. (2)aff2, Coimbra, Portugal.

PURPOSE: To compare obstetric outcomes of induced preterm twin births (under 32
weeks gestation) with those spontaneously conceived.
METHODS: Prospective study of twin pregnancies (25 induced and 157 spontaneously 
conceived) developed over a period of 16 years in a tertiary obstetric center.
Demographic factors, obstetric complications, gestational age at delivery, mode
of delivery, birth weight and immediate newborn outcome were compared.
RESULTS: The analysis of obstetrical complications concerning urinary or other
infections, hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, gestational diabetes, fetal
malformations, intrauterine fetal death, intrauterine growth restriction and
intrauterine discordant growth reveal no significant statistical differences
between the two groups. First trimester bleeding was higher in the induced group 
(24 versus 8.3%, p=0.029). The cesarean delivery rate was 52.2% in spontaneous
gestations and 64% in induced gestations. Gestational age at delivery, birth
weight, Apgar scores at first and fifth minutes, admissions to Neonatal Intensive
Care Unit and puerperal complications show no statistically significant
differences between the two groups. These results were independent of
chorionicity and induction method.
CONCLUSION: The mode of conception did not influence obstetric and neonatal
outcomes. Although induced pregnancies have higher risk of first trimester
bleeding, significant differences were not observed regarding other obstetric and
puerperal complications and neonatal results.

PMID: 26107572  [PubMed - in process]


6. Cad Saude Publica. 2015 May;31(5):947-59. doi: 10.1590/0102-311X00039514.

An evaluation of coordination relationships during earthquake emergency rescue
using entropy theory.

Rong H(1), Xuedong L(1), Guizhi Z(1), Yulin Y(2), Da W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. (2)aff2, Chengdu, China. (3)Sichuan
Aerospace Industry Corporation, Chengdu, China.

Emergency rescue after an earthquake is complex work which requires the
participation of relief and social organizations. Studying earthquake emergency
coordination efficiency can not only help rescue organizations to define their
own rescue missions, but also strengthens inter-organizational communication and 
collaboration tasks, improves the efficiency of emergency rescue, and reduces
loss. In this paper, collaborative entropy is introduced to study earthquake
emergency rescue operations. To study the emergency rescue coordination
relationship, collaborative matrices and collaborative entropy functions are
established between emergency relief work and relief organizations, and the
collaborative efficiency of the emergency rescue elements is determined based on 
this entropy function. Finally, the Lushan earthquake is used as an example to
evaluate earthquake emergency rescue coordination efficiency.

PMID: 26083170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2015 Feb-Apr;23(2):200-7. doi:
10.1590/0104-1169.0247.2543.

Effectiveness of individual and group interventions for people with type 2
diabetes.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Imazu MF(1), Faria BN(2), de Arruda GO(3), Sales CA(4), Marcon SS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unimed do Brasil, Londrina, PR, Brazil. (2)aff2, Brazil. (3)Universidade
Estadual de Maringá, Maringá, PR, Brazil. (4)Centro de Ciências da Saúde,
Universidade Estadual de Maringá, Maringá, PR, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: to compare the effectiveness of two educational interventions used by 
a healthcare provider in the monitoring of individuals with type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM), regarding knowledge of the disease, impact on quality of life
and adoption of self-care actions.
METHODS: comparative, longitudinal, prospective study performed with 150 subjects
with type 2 diabetes, analyzed according to the type of participation in the
program (individual and/or group). Participants of the individual intervention
(II) received nursing consultations every six months and those of the group
intervention (GI) took part in weekly meetings for three months. Data were
collected through four questionnaires: Identification questionnaire, Problem
Areas in Diabetes Questionnaire (PAID), Summary of Diabetes Self-Care Activities 
Questionnaire (SDSCA) and the Diabetes Knowledge Scale (DKN-A). Data were
analyzed using the Friedman and Mann Whitney tests, considering a statistical
significance of p = 0.05.
RESULTS: there was an increase in knowledge about the disease in the II (p<0.003)
and GI (p<0.007), with reduction of the impact on the quality of life in the II
(p<0.007) and improvement in self-care actions in the GI (p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: in both intervention models improvements were observed in the
indicators, over the six month monitoring period.

PMCID: PMC4458992
PMID: 26039289  [PubMed - in process]


8. Dental Press J Orthod. 2015 Mar-Apr;20(2):100-9. doi:
10.1590/2176-9451.20.2.100-109.oar.

Orthodontic management of bilateral maxillary canine-first premolar transposition
and bilateral agenesis of maxillary lateral incisors: a case report.

Di Palma E(1), Di Giuseppe B(2), Tepedino M(1), Chimenti C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Clinical Sciences and Biotechnology, University of
L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy. (2)aff2, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Maxillary canine-first premolar transposition (Mx.C.P1) is an
uncommon dental positional anomaly that may create many orthodontic problems from
both esthetic and functional points of view.
OBJECTIVE: In this report we show the orthodontic management of a case of Mx.C.P1
associated with bilateral maxillary lateral incisor agenesis and unilateral
mandibular second premolar agenesis
METHODS: The patient was treated with a multibracket appliance and the extraction
of the lower premolar.
RESULTS: treatment was completed without the need for any prosthetic replacement.

PMCID: PMC4445232
PMID: 25992994  [PubMed - in process]


9. BMC Genomics. 2015 Mar 25;16:241. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1463-y.

X-inactivation informs variance-based testing for X-linked association of a
quantitative trait.

Ma L(1,)(2), Hoffman G(3,)(4), Keinan A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD, 20740, USA. lima@umd.edu. (2)Department of Biological Statistics and
Computational Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14850, USA. lima@umd.edu. 
(3)Department of Biological Statistics and Computational Biology, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY, 14850, USA. gh258@cornell.edu. (4)Present address: Icahn 
Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Department of Genetics and Genomic
Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, USA.
gh258@cornell.edu. (5)Department of Biological Statistics and Computational
Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14850, USA. ak735@cornell.edu.

BACKGROUND: The X chromosome plays an important role in human diseases and
traits. However, few X-linked associations have been reported in genome-wide
association studies, partly due to analytical complications and low statistical
power.
RESULTS: In this study, we propose tests of X-linked association that capitalize 
on variance heterogeneity caused by various factors, predominantly the process of
X-inactivation. In the presence of X-inactivation, the expression of one copy of 
the chromosome is randomly silenced. Due to the consequent elevated randomness of
expressed variants, females that are heterozygotes for a quantitative trait locus
might exhibit higher phenotypic variance for that trait. We propose three tests
that build on this phenomenon: 1) A test for inflated variance in heterozygous
females; 2) A weighted association test; and 3) A combined test. Test 1 captures 
the novel signal proposed herein by directly testing for higher phenotypic
variance of heterozygous than homozygous females. As a test of variance it is
generally less powerful than standard tests of association that consider means,
which is supported by extensive simulations. Test 2 is similar to a standard
association test in considering the phenotypic mean, but differs by accounting
for (rather than testing) the variance heterogeneity. As expected in light of
X-inactivation, this test is slightly more powerful than a standard association
test. Finally, test 3 further improves power by combining the results of the
first two tests. We applied the these tests to the ARIC cohort data and
identified a novel X-linked association near gene AFF2 with blood pressure, which
was not significant based on standard association testing of mean blood pressure.
CONCLUSIONS: Variance-based tests examine overdispersion, thereby providing a
complementary type of signal to a standard association test. Our results point to
the potential to improve power of detecting X-linked associations in the presence
of variance heterogeneity.

PMCID: PMC4381508
PMID: 25880738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2015 Apr;212(4):533.e1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2015.02.011.
Epub 2015 Feb 14.

Fetal DNA methylation of autism spectrum disorders candidate genes: association
with spontaneous preterm birth.

Behnia F(1), Parets SE(2), Kechichian T(1), Yin H(1), Dutta EH(1), Saade GR(1),
Smith AK(3), Menon R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine and Perinatal Research, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX.
(2)Genetics and Molecular Biology Program, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA. (3)Genetics and Molecular Biology Program, Emory University School
of Medicine, Atlanta, GA; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA. (4)Division of Maternal-Fetal
Medicine and Perinatal Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX. Electronic address:
ra2menon@utmb.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is associated with preterm birth (PTB),
although the reason underlying this relationship is still unclear. Our objective 
was to examine DNA methylation patterns of 4 ASD candidate genes in human fetal
membranes from spontaneous PTB and uncomplicated term birth.
STUDY DESIGN: A literature search for genes that have been implicated in ASD
yielded 14 candidate genes (OXTR, SHANK3, BCL2, RORA, EN2, RELN, MECP2, AUTS2,
NLGN3, NRXN1, SLC6A4, UBE3A, GABA, AFF2) that were epigenetically modified in
relation to ASD. DNA methylation in fetal leukocyte DNA in 4 of these genes
(OXTR, SHANK3, BCL2, and RORA) was associated with PTB in a previous study. This 
study evaluated DNA methylation, transcription (reverse transcription polymerase 
chain reaction), and translation patterns (immunostaining and Western blot) in
fetal membrane from term labor (n = 14), term not in labor (TNIL; n = 29), and
spontaneous preterm birth (PTB; n = 27). Statistical analysis was performed with 
analysis of variance; a probability value of < .05 was significant.
RESULTS: Higher methylation of the OXTR promoter was seen in fetal membranes from
PTB, compared with term labor or TNIL. No other gene showed any methylation
differences among groups. Expression of OXTR was not different among groups, but 
the 70 kDa OXTR protein was seen only in PTB, and immunostaining was more intense
in PTB amniocytes than term labor or TNIL.
CONCLUSION: Among the 4 genes that were studied, fetal membranes from PTB
demonstrate differences in OXTR methylation and regulation and expression, which 
suggest that epigenetic alteration of this gene in fetal membrane may likely be
indicating an in utero programing of this gene and serve as a surrogate in a
subset of PTB. The usefulness of OXTR hypermethylation as a surrogate for a link 
to ASD should be further evaluated in longitudinal and in vitro studies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25687563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2014 Nov-Dec;22(6):1041-7. doi:
10.1590/0104-1169.0129.2514. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

Prevalence of metabolic components in university students.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

da Silva AR(1), de Sousa LS(2), Rocha Tde S(3), Cortez RM(4), Macêdo LG(5), de
Almeida PC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Enfermagem, Universidade Federal do Piauí, Picos, PI, Brazil. 
(2)aff2. (3)Prefeitura Municipal de São Raimundo Nonato, São Raimundo Nonato, PI,
Brazil. (4)Prefeitura Municipal de Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, PI, Brazil.
(5)Prefeitura Municipal de Itainópolis, Itainópolis, PI, Brazil. (6)Departamento 
de Enfermagem, Universidade Estadual do Ceará, Fortaleza, Fortaleza, CE, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: to identify the frequency of components of Metabolic Syndrome (MetS)
among university students.
METHOD: descriptive study with 550 students, from various courses run by a public
university. The socioeconomic data, lifestyle, and components of MetS were filled
out using a questionnaire. Blood sample collection was undertaken in the
university itself by a contracted clinical analysis laboratory.
RESULTS: 66.2% were female, with a mean age of 22.6±4.41; 71.7% were sedentary;
1.8% stated that they smoke; and 48.5% were classified as at medium risk for
alcoholism. 5.8% had raised abdominal circumference and 20.4% had excess weight; 
1.3% and 18.9% had raised fasting blood glucose levels and triglycerides,
respectively; 64.5% had low HDL cholesterol and 8.7% had blood pressure levels
compatible with borderline high blood pressure. Thus, of the sample, 64.4% had at
least one component for MetS; 11.6% had two, and 3.5% had three or more.
CONCLUSION: a significant proportion of the population already has the components
for metabolic syndrome, and this profile reinforces the importance of early
diagnosis so as to reduce the risk of developing chronic comorbidities.

PMCID: PMC4309241
PMID: 25591101  [PubMed - in process]


12. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Feb;11(2):843-50. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2775. Epub 2014 Oct 27.

Identification of differential splicing genes in gliomas using exon expression
profiling.

Yu F(1), Fu WM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital, College of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310009, P.R. China.

Diffuse gliomas are the most common type of malignant primary brain tumor, and
their initiation and/or progression are often associated with alternative
splicing. They produce an enormous economic burden on society and greatly impair 
the quality of life of those affected. The aim of the current study was to
explore the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) observed in glioblastoma (GBM) 
and oligodendroglioma (OD) at the splicing level, and to analyze their functions 
in order to identify the underlying molecular mechanisms of gliomas. The
exon-level expression profile data GSE9385 was downloaded from the Gene
Expression Omnibus database, and included 26 GBM samples, 22 OD samples and 6
control brain samples. The differentially expressed exon-level probes were
analyzed using the microarray detection of alternative splicing algorithm
combined with the splicing index method, and the corresponding DEGs were
identified. Next, a Gene Ontology enrichment analysis of the DEGs was performed. 
Additionally, the protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks were constructed
based on the depth-first search algorithm. A total of 300 DEGs were identified to
be shared by GBM and OD, including 97 upregulated and 203 downregulated DEGs.
Furthermore, screening with a defined threshold identified 6 genes that were
highly expressed in GBM, including AFF2, CACNA2D3 and ARPP21, while the 6 highly 
expressed genes in OD notably included CNTN2. The TP53 and HIST1H3A genes were
the hub nodes in the PPI network of DEGs from GBM, while CNTN2 was linked to the 
highest degree in the OD PPI network. The present study provides a comprehensive 
bioinformatics analysis of DEGs in GBM and OD, which may provide a basis for
understanding the initiation and/or progression of glioma development.

PMCID: PMC4262513
PMID: 25351872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2014 Jul-Aug;22(4):662-9.

Prevalence and intensity of chronic pain and self-perceived health among elderly 
people: a population-based study.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Pereira LV(1), de Vasconcelos PP(2), Souza LA(3), Pereira Gde A(4), Nakatani
AY(1), Bachion MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Enfermagem, Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiânia, GO, Brazil.
(2)aff2. (3)Hospital das Clínicas, Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiânia, GO,
Brazil. (4)Departamento de Enfermagem em Educação e Saúde Comunitária,
Universidade Federal do Triângulo Mineiro, Uberaba, MG, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: to identify the prevalence and intensity of chronic pain among elderly
people of the community and to analyze associations with the self-perceived
health status.
METHOD: cross-sectional study with a populational sample (n=934), conducted
through household interviews in the city of Goiânia, Brazil. The intensity of
chronic pain (existing for 6 months or more) was measured using a numerical scale
(0-10) and the self-perceived health through a verbal scale (very good, good,
fair, poor, very poor). For the statistical analysis, the absolute frequency and 
percentage, CI (95%), Chi-square test, Odds ratio, and regression analysis were
used. Significance of 5%.
RESULTS: The prevalence of chronic pain was 52.8% [CI (95%):49.4-56.1]; most
frequently located in the lower limbs (34.5%) and lumbar region (29.5%); with
high or the worst possible intensity for 54.6% of the elderly people. The
occurrence of chronic pain was associated with (p<0.0001) a worse self-perception
of health (OR=4.2:2.5-7.0), a greater number of chronic diseases
(OR=1.8:1.2-2.7), joint disease (OR=3.5:2.4-5.1) and the female gender
(OR=2.3:1.7-3.0). A lower intensity of chronic pain was associated with a better 
self-perception of health (p<0.0001).
CONCLUSION: the majority of the elderly people of the community reported chronic 
pain, of a severe intensity, and located in areas related to movement activities,
thus influencing the morbidity and mortality of this population.

PMCID: PMC4292652
PMID: 25296151  [PubMed - in process]


14. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2014 Jul-Aug;22(4):604-10.

Child safety from the perspective of essential needs.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

de Mello DF(1), Henrique NC(2), Pancieri L(2), Veríssimo Mde L(3), Tonete VL(4), 
Malone M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Escola de Enfermagem de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão
Preto, SP, Brazil. (2)aff2. (3)Escola de Enfermagem, Universidade de São Paulo,
São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (4)Departamento de Enfermagem, Faculdade de Medicina de
Botucatu, Universidade Estadual Paulista Júlio de Mesquita Filho, Botucatu, SP,
Brazil. (5)King's College, London, England.

OBJECTIVE: to characterize the maternal care for children under one year of age
with a view to child health promotion at home.
METHOD: exploratory study with qualitative data analysis, thematic mode, based on
the conceptual framework of the essential needs of children, based on interviews 
recorded with 16 mothers.
RESULTS: the analysis of the maternal narratives showed elements that facilitate 
the promotion of child safety: presence and involvement of the parents, constant 
surveillance for physical and emotional protection, experiences to stimulate
child development, support networks for childcare at home; and inhibiting
elements of child safety: limited perception of characteristics of child
development and of children's singularities, overprotection and difficulties to
set limits.
CONCLUSION: the study enhances the understanding of home care in child health
promotion, directing professional actions to guarantee ongoing nurturing
relationships, protection, respect for individual differences, experiences
appropriate to child development, limit setting and construction of stable and
supportive social networks. In addition, the relevance of considering the
maternal perspective in child health care is considered, as a strategy to
apprehend aspects related to the attendance of the growth and development needs, 
particularly for child health promotion at home.

PMCID: PMC4292654
PMID: 25296144  [PubMed - in process]


15. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Dec;164A(12):3206-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36768. Epub 2014 
Sep 24.

Partial AFF2 microduplication in a patient with auditory processing disorder,
emotional impairment and macrosomia.

da Rocha NB(1), dos Santos PA, Safatle HP, de Melo RM, Pereira RW, de Oliveira
SF, Pic-Taylor A, Ferrari I, Mazzeu JF.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-graduação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade de Brasília, DF, 
Brazil.

PMID: 25256661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Rev Bras Ginecol Obstet. 2014 Sep;36(9):393-7. Epub 2014 Sep 12.

Triplet pregnancies: perinatal outcome evolution.

Almeida P(1), Domingues AP(1), Belo A(2), Fonseca E(1), Moura P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. (2)aff2.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the obstetric and perinatal outcomes evolution of triplet
pregnancies.
METHODS: A prospective observational study was conducted in triplet pregnancies
delivered over 16 years in a tertiary obstetric center with differentiated
perinatal support. Evaluation of demographic factors, obstetric complications,
gestational age at delivery, mode of delivery, birth weight and immediate newborn
outcome were done over a 16 years period. A global characterization of the sample
was performed considering the listed parameters. Variables were categorized in
three groups according to year of occurrence: 1996-2000, 2001-2006, 2007-2011,
and all parameters were compared.
RESULTS: Of the 33 triplets included, 72.7% resulted from induced pregnancies.
All except one patient received prenatal corticosteroids and five received
tocolytics. All women delivered prenatally and no significant differences were
seen in the mean gestational age at delivery or birth weight towards time. There 
were three intrauterine fetal deaths. Neonatal immediate outcomes were not
significantly different over the years.
CONCLUSION: Despite remarkable progresses in perinatal and neonatal cares, no
noticeable impact in triplet gestations' outcomes was seen, sustaining that
triplets should be avoided due to their great risk of prematurity and neonatal
morbidities, either by limiting the numbers of embryos transferred or by fetal
reduction.

PMID: 25230283  [PubMed - in process]


17. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo. 2014 Sep-Oct;56(5):455-7.

Prevalence of Calodium hepaticum (SYN. Capillaria hepatica) in Rattus norvegicus 
in the urban area of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Simões RO(1), Luque JL(2), Faro MJ(3), Motta E(4), Maldonado A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Post-Graduate Program in Veterinary Science, Universidade Federal Rural do Rio
de Janeiro (UFRRJ), Seropédica, RJ, Brazil. (2)aff2. (3)Laboratório de Biologia e
Parasitologia de Mamíferos Silvestres Reservatórios, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation
(FIOCRUZ), RJ, Brazil. (4)aff4.

The nematode Calodium hepaticum (syn. Capillaria hepatica) is a zoonotic helminth
found mainly infecting rats. It was studied the prevalence of C. hepaticum
infection in Rattus norvegicus in an urban area of Rio de Janeiro (Brazil), with 
low urban planning and sanitation. The presence of C. hepaticum was identified
through visible yellowish-white lesions in liver tissue and histological
analyses. The total prevalence of infection was 45%, with no significant
differences between sex and age. The presence of infected rodents near the
peridomestic area poses substantial risk to human health.

PMCID: PMC4172121
PMID: 25229230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mol Cell Probes. 2014 Oct-Dec;28(5-6):279-83. doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2014.08.003.
Epub 2014 Aug 27.

Point mutation frequency in the FMR1 gene as revealed by fragile X syndrome
screening.

Handt M(1), Epplen A(2), Hoffjan S(2), Mese K(1), Epplen JT(3), Dekomien G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health, Witten/Herdecke University, Alfred-Herrhausen-Straße 50,
58448 Witten, Germany. (2)Human Genetics, Ruhr-University, Universitätsstraße
150, 44801 Bochum, Germany. (3)Faculty of Health, Witten/Herdecke University,
Alfred-Herrhausen-Straße 50, 58448 Witten, Germany; Human Genetics,
Ruhr-University, Universitätsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany. (4)Human
Genetics, Ruhr-University, Universitätsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany.
Electronic address: gabriele.dekomien@rub.de.

Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is a common cause of intellectual disability,
developmental delay and autism spectrum disorders. This syndrome is due to a
functional loss of the FMR1 gene product FMRP, and, in most cases, it is caused
by CGG repeat expansion in the FMR1 promoter. Yet, also other FMR1 mutations may 
cause a FXS-like phenotype. Since standard molecular testing does not include the
analysis of the FMR1 coding region, the prevalence of point mutations causing FXS
is not well known. Here, high resolution melting (HRM) was used to screen for
FMR1 gene mutations in 508 males with clinical signs of mental retardation and
developmental delay, but without CGG and GCC repeat expansions in the FMR1 gene
and AFF2 genes, respectively. Sequence variations were identified by HRM analysis
and verified by direct DNA sequencing. Two novel missense mutations (p.Gly482Ser 
in one patient and p.Arg534His in two unrelated patients), one intronic and two
3'-untranslated region (UTR) variations were identified in the FMR1 gene.
Missense mutations in the FMR1 gene might account for a considerable proportion
of cases in male patients with FXS-related symptoms, such as those linked to
mental retardation and developmental delay.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25171808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Molecules. 2014 Aug 19;19(8):12660-75. doi: 10.3390/molecules190812660.

Prebiotic potential of Agave angustifolia Haw fructans with different degrees of 
polymerization.

Velázquez-Martínez JR(1), González-Cervantes RM(2), Hernández-Gallegos MA(3),
Mendiola RC(4), Aparicio AR(5), Ocampo ML(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Desarrollo de Productos Bióticos, Instituto Politécnico Nacional,
P.O. Box 24, Yautepec 62730, Morelos, Mexico. jrodolfovelazquez@gmail.com.
(2)Departamento de Sistemas Biológicos, Universidad Autónoma
Metropolitana-Xochimilco, Calzada del Hueso 1100, Col. Villa Quietud, Delegación 
Coyoacán 04960, D.F., Mexico. gcrm4280@correo.xoc.uam.mx. (3)Escuela Nacional de 
Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Prolongación de Carpio y
Plan de Ayala s/n, Col. Santo Tomas, Delegación Miguel Hidalgo 11340, D.F.,
Mexico. mineaurora@gmail.com. (4)Centro de Desarrollo de Productos Bióticos,
Instituto Politécnico Nacional, P.O. Box 24, Yautepec 62730, Morelos, Mexico.
rcamposm@ipn.mx. (5)Centro de Desarrollo de Productos Bióticos, Instituto
Politécnico Nacional, P.O. Box 24, Yautepec 62730, Morelos, Mexico.
aaparici@ipn.mx. (6)Centro de Desarrollo de Productos Bióticos, Instituto
Politécnico Nacional, P.O. Box 24, Yautepec 62730, Morelos, Mexico.
mlarenas@ipn.mx.

Inulin-type fructans are the most studied prebiotic compounds because of their
broad range of health benefits. In particular, plants of the Agave genus are rich
in fructans. Agave-derived fructans have a branched structure with both ß-(2<U+2192>1)
and ß-(2<U+2192>6) linked fructosyl chains attached to the sucrose start unit with a
degree of polymerization (DP) of up to 80 fructose units. The objective of this
work was to assess the prebiotic potential of three Agave angustifolia Haw
fructan fractions (AFF) with different degrees of polymerization. The three
fructan fractions were extracted from the agave stem by lixiviation and then
purified by ultrafiltration and ion exchange chromatography: AFF1, AFF2 and AFF3 
with high (3-60 fructose units), medium (2-40) and low (2-22) DP, respectively.
The fructan profile was determined with high-performance anion exchange
chromatography with pulsed amperometric detection (HPAEC-PAD), which confirmed a 
branched fructan structure. Structural elucidation was performed by Fourier
Transform Infra-Red Spectroscopy. The AFF spectrum shows characteristic fructan
bands. The prebiotic effect of these fractions was assessed in vitro through
fermentation by Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus strains. Four growth patterns
were observed. Some bacteria did not grow with any of the AFF, while other
strains grew with only AFF3. Some bacteria grew according to the molecular weight
of the AFF and some grew indistinctly with the three fructan fractions.

PMID: 25153877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Rev Col Bras Cir. 2014 May-Jun;41(3):155-60.

Impact of bariatric surgery on depression and anxiety symptons, bulimic behaviors
and quality of life.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Tae B(1), Pelaggi ER(1), Moreira JG(1), Waisberg J(2), de Matos LL(3), D'Elia
G(4).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)aff2. (3)aff3. (4)Facudade de Medicina do ABC, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To assess psychiatric symptoms, substance use, quality of life and
eating behavior of patients undergoing bariatric surgery before and after the
procedure.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective longitudinal study of 32 women undergoing
bariatric surgery. To obtain data, the patients answered specific,
self-administered questionnaires.
RESULTS: We observed a reduction in depressive and anxious symptoms and also in
bulimic behavior, as well as an improved quality of life in the physical,
psychological and environmental domains. There was also a decrease in use of
antidepressants and appetite suppressants, but the surgery was not a cessation
factor in smoking and / or alcoholism.
CONCLUSION: a decrease in psychiatric symptoms was observed after bariatric
surgery, as well as the reduction in the use of psychoactive substances. In
addition, there was an improvement in quality of life after surgical treatment of
obesity.

PMID: 25140645  [PubMed - in process]


21. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2014 May-Jun;47(3):327-33.

Occurrence of potentially pathogenic Vibrio in oysters (Crassostrea gigas) and
waters from bivalve mollusk cultivations in the South Bay of Santa Catarina.

Ramos RJ(1), Miotto LA(1), Miotto M(1), Silveira Junior N(2), Cirolini A(1),
Silva HS(1), Rodrigues Ddos P(3), Vieira CR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Microbiologia de Alimentos, Departamento de Ciência e
Tecnologia de Alimentos, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis,
SC. (2)aff2, Florianópolis, SC. (3)Laboratório de Enterobactérias, Instituto
Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil.

INTRODUCTION: This research aimed to identify and quantify potentially pathogenic
Vibrio from different cultivations of bivalve shellfish in the State of Santa
Catarina, Brazil, and water regions in the South Bay, as well as correlate the
incidence of these microorganisms with the physicochemical parameters of marine
waters.
METHODS: Between October 2008 and March 2009, 60 oyster and seawater samples were
collected from six regions of bivalve mollusk cultivation, and these samples were
submitted for Vibrio counts.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine (48.3%) oyster samples were revealed to be contaminated with
one or more Vibrio species. The Vibrio parahaemolyticus and Vibrio vulnificus
counts in the samples ranged from < 0.5 log10 Most Probable Number (MPN) g(-1) to
2.3 log10 MPN g(-1) oyster and from < 0.5 log10 MPN g(-1) to 2.1 log10 MPN g(-1) 
oyster, respectively. Of the 60 seawater samples analyzed, 44 (73.3%) showed
signs of contamination with one or more vibrio species. The counts of V.
parahaemolyticus and V. vulnificus in the samples ranged from < 0.3 log10
MPN·100mL(-1) to 1.7 log10MPN·100mL(-1) seawater and from < 0.3 log10
MPN·100mL(-1) to 2.0 log10 MPN·100mL(-1) seawater, respectively. A positive
correlation between V. vulnificus counts and the seawater temperature as well as 
a negative correlation between the V. parahaemolyticus counts and salinity were
observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest the need to implement strategies to prevent
vibrio diseases from being transmitted by the consumption of contaminated bivalve
shellfish.

PMID: 25075484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Autism Dev Disord. 2015 Mar;45(3):888-92. doi: 10.1007/s10803-014-2185-8.

Autism spectrum disorder: FRAXE mutation, a rare etiology.

Correia F(1), Café C, Almeida J, Mouga S, Oliveira G.

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Pediatria, Centro Hospitalar do Alto Ave, Rua dos Cutileiros,
Creixomil, 4835-044, Guimarães, Portugal.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by impaired social interaction
and communication, restricted interests and repetitive behaviors. Fragile X E is 
associated with X-linked non-specific mild intellectual disability (ID) and with 
behavioral problems. Most of the known genetic causes of ASD are also causes of
ID, implying that these two identities share common genetic bases. We present a
child with an ASD with a normal range of intelligence quotient, that later
evolved to compulsive behavior. FRAXE locus analysis by polymerase chain reaction
revealed a complete mutation of the FMR 2 gene. This report stresses the
importance of clinicians being aware of the association between a full mutation
of FMR2 and ASD associated with compulsive behavior despite normal intellectual
level.

PMID: 25035088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Braz J Phys Ther. 2014 May-Jun;18(3):259-67.

Brazilian version of the instrument of environmental assessment Craig Hospital
Inventory of Environmental Factors (CHIEF): translation, cross-cultural
adaptation and reliability.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Furtado SR(1), Sampaio RF(1), Vaz DV(1), Pinho BA(2), Nascimento IO(2), Mancini
MC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Physical Therapy Department, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, MG, Brazil. (2)aff2, Brazil. (3)Occupational Therapy Department, UFMG,
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Environmental factors are essential for the characterization of human
functioning and disability; however, the shortage of standardized instruments to 
assess environmental factors has limited the design of scientific investigations 
directed at identifying barriers to and facilitators of social participation of
people with disabilities.
OBJECTIVES: To translate to Brazilian Portuguese, cross-culturally adapt, and
verify the reliability of an environmental assessment questionnaire, entitled
Craig Hospital Inventory of Environmental Factors (CHIEF).
METHOD: The questionnaire was translated to Portuguese, analyzed, translated back
to English, and compared with the original version. The final version (CHIEF-BR) 
was submitted to 47 caregivers of children and adolescents with cerebral palsy
(CP). The intra-rater reliability was tested using quadratic kappa and intraclass
correlation coefficients (ICC), through interviews of 23 caregivers drawn from
the total sample, on two occasions 10 days apart. Results : During submission of 
the questionnaires, it was observed that examples were needed in order to
facilitate the understanding of the questions related to the politics sub-scale. 
Quadratic kappa showed that test-retest reliability of each question varied from 
0.28 to 1.0 for the frequency score and from 0.30 to 0.98 for the magnitude
score. Intraclass correlation coefficients for total scores showed high
consistency indices (ICC = 0.92) for test-retest.
CONCLUSION: The Brazilian version of the CHIEF was reproducible and applicable to
the study sample. It may serve as an instrument to characterize the environmental
barriers as well as a way to document the effects of interventions aimed at
minimizing the impact of such barriers on the participation of children and
adolescents with CP.

PMCID: PMC4183498
PMID: 25003279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2014 Jun;69(6):438-46.

Pharmacological management of osteogenesis.

Nardone V(1), D'Asta F(2), Brandi ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)aff2.

Osteogenesis and bone remodeling are complex biological processes that are
essential for the formation of new bone tissue and its correct functioning. When 
the balance between bone resorption and formation is disrupted, bone diseases and
disorders such as Paget's disease, fibrous dysplasia, osteoporosis and fragility 
fractures may result. Recent advances in bone cell biology have revealed new
specific targets for the treatment of bone loss that are based on the inhibition 
of bone resorption by osteoclasts or the stimulation of bone formation by
osteoblasts. Bisphosphonates, antiresorptive agents that reduce bone resorption, 
are usually recommended as first-line therapy in women with postmenopausal
osteoporosis. Numerous studies have shown that bisphosphonates are able to
significantly reduce the risk of femoral and vertebral fractures. Other
antiresorptive agents indicated for the treatment of osteoporosis include
selective estrogen receptor modulators, such as raloxifene. Denosumab, a human
monoclonal antibody, is another antiresorptive agent that has been approved in
Europe and the USA. This agent blocks the RANK/RANKL/OPG system, which is
responsible for osteoclastic activation, thus reducing bone resorption. Other
approved agents include bone anabolic agents, such as teriparatide, a recombinant
parathyroid hormone that improves bone microarchitecture and strength, and
strontium ranelate, considered to be a dual-action drug that acts by both
osteoclastic inhibition and osteoblastic stimulation. Currently, anti-catabolic
drugs that act through the Wnt-ß catenin signaling pathway, serving as
Dickkopf-related protein 1 inhibitors and sclerostin antagonists, are also in
development. This concise review provides an overview of the drugs most commonly 
used for the control of osteogenesis in bone diseases.

PMCID: PMC4050321
PMID: 24964310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. PLoS Genet. 2014 Apr 24;10(4):e1004242. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004242.
eCollection 2014.

FRA2A is a CGG repeat expansion associated with silencing of AFF3.

Metsu S(1), Rooms L(1), Rainger J(2), Taylor MS(2), Bengani H(2), Wilson DI(3),
Chilamakuri CS(4), Morrison H(2), Vandeweyer G(1), Reyniers E(1), Douglas E(5),
Thompson G(6), Haan E(7), Gecz J(8), Fitzpatrick DR(2), Kooy RF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Medical and Developmental Genetics Section, MRC Human Genetics Unit, IGMM,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. (3)University of Southampton,
Centre for Human Development, Stem Cells and Regeneration, Human Genetics,
Southampton, United Kingdom. (4)Department of Tumor Biology, Institute for Cancer
Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (5)Genetics and Molecular
Pathology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (6)Department of
Paediatrics, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia;
Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Flinders University, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia. (7)Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; South Australian Clinical Genetic Service, 
SA Pathology (at Women's and Children's Hospital), Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia. (8)Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia; Department of Paediatrics, The University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Folate-sensitive fragile sites (FSFS) are a rare cytogenetically visible subset
of dynamic mutations. Of the eight molecularly characterized FSFS, four are
associated with intellectual disability (ID). Cytogenetic expression results from
CGG tri-nucleotide-repeat expansion mutation associated with local CpG
hypermethylation and transcriptional silencing. The best studied is the FRAXA
site in the FMR1 gene, where large expansions cause fragile X syndrome, the most 
common inherited ID syndrome. Here we studied three families with FRA2A
expression at 2q11 associated with a wide spectrum of neurodevelopmental
phenotypes. We identified a polymorphic CGG repeat in a conserved, brain-active
alternative promoter of the AFF3 gene, an autosomal homolog of the X-linked
AFF2/FMR2 gene: Expansion of the AFF2 CGG repeat causes FRAXE ID. We found that
FRA2A-expressing individuals have mosaic expansions of the AFF3 CGG repeat in the
range of several hundred repeat units. Moreover, bisulfite sequencing and
pyrosequencing both suggest AFF3 promoter hypermethylation. cSNP-analysis
demonstrates monoallelic expression of the AFF3 gene in FRA2A carriers thus
predicting that FRA2A expression results in functional haploinsufficiency for
AFF3 at least in a subset of tissues. By whole-mount in situ hybridization the
mouse AFF3 ortholog shows strong regional expression in the developing brain,
somites and limb buds in 9.5-12.5dpc mouse embryos. Our data suggest that there
may be an association between FRA2A and a delay in the acquisition of motor and
language skills in the families studied here. However, additional cases are
required to firmly establish a causal relationship.

PMCID: PMC3998887
PMID: 24763282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(11):1788-97. doi: 10.4161/cc.28756. Epub 2014 Apr 11.

Crystal structure of HIV-1 Tat complexed with human P-TEFb and AFF4.

Gu J(1), Babayeva ND(1), Suwa Y(1), Baranovskiy AG(1), Price DH(2), Tahirov
TH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases; University of
Nebraska Medical Center; Omaha, NE USA. (2)Biochemistry Department; University of
Iowa; Iowa City, IA USA.

Developing anti-viral therapies targeting HIV-1 transcription has been hampered
by the limited structural knowledge of the proteins involved. HIV-1 hijacks the
cellular machinery that controls RNA polymerase II elongation through an
interaction of HIV-1 Tat with the positive transcription elongation factor
P-TEFb, which interacts with an AF4 family member (AFF1/2/3/4) in the super
elongation complex (SEC). Because inclusion of TatP-TEFb into the SEC is
critical for HIV transcription, we have determined the crystal structure of the
TatAFF4P-TEFb complex containing HIV-1 Tat (residues 1-48), human Cyclin T1
(1-266), human Cdk9 (7-332), and human AFF4 (27-69). Tat binding to AFF4P-TEFb
causes concerted structural changes in AFF4 via a shift of helix H5' of Cyclin T1
and the a-3 10 helix of AFF4. The interaction between Tat and AFF4 provides
structural constraints that explain tolerated Tat mutations. Analysis of the
Tat-binding surface of AFF4 coupled with modeling of all other AF4 family members
suggests that AFF1 and AFF4 would be preferred over AFF2 or AFF3 for interaction 
with TatP-TEFb. The structure establishes that the Tat-TAR recognition motif
(TRM) in Cyclin T1 interacts with both Tat and AFF4, leading to the exposure of
arginine side chains for binding to TAR RNA. Furthermore, modeling of Tat Lys28
acetylation suggests that the acetyl group would be in a favorable position for
H-bond formation with Asn257 of TRM, thereby stabilizing the TRM in Cyclin T1,
and provides a structural basis for the modulation of TAR RNA binding by
acetylation of Tat Lys28.

PMCID: PMC4111725
PMID: 24727379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Syndromol. 2014 Feb;5(2):76-80. doi: 10.1159/000357931. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Decreased expression of genes associated with memory and x-linked mental
retardation in boys with non-syndromic cryptorchidism and high infertility risk.

Hadziselimovic F(1), Hadziselimovic NO(2), Demougin P(3), Oakeley EJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Andrology, Liestal, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Andrology, Liestal, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland ;
Division of Molecular Neuroscience, Department of Psychology, University of
Basel, Basel, Switzerland. (3)Department of Molecular Biology, Biozentrum,
Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland. (4)Department of
Molecular Biology, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel,
Switzerland.

An elevated odds ratio for low IQ has been found for cryptorchid boys.
Furthermore, poor school performance has been observed in cryptorchid boys with
impaired mini-puberty. Gene expression analysis, qPCR and immunohistology were
performed on testicular biopsies from 7 boys who underwent orchiopexy and had
testicular histology typical of a high risk of infertility (HIR). The results
were compared with 12 biopsies from cryptorchid boys with a low risk for
developing infertility. The following genes associated with mental retardation
were identically expressed: GDI1, OPHN1, PAK3, ARHGEF6, IL1RAPL, ACSL4, MECP2,
RPS6KA3, ARX, and ATRX. However, boys in the HIR group had low or no expression
of EGR4, FMR2 (AFF2) and VCX3A. In conclusion, impaired expression of genes known
to encode proteins involved in signaling pathways that regulate cytoskeletal
organization, synaptic vesicle transport and the establishment of connections
between neuronal cells may contribute to reduced intellectual and cognitive
functioning in infertile cryptorchid males.

PMCID: PMC3977316
PMID: 24715854  [PubMed]


28. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2014 Jun;109(3):324-9. Epub 2014 Mar 4.

Anti-Mycobacterium tuberculosis activity and cytotoxicity of Calophyllum
brasiliense Cambess (Clusiaceae).

Pires CT(1), Brenzan MA(2), Scodro RB(2), Cortez DA(2), Lopes LD(3), Siqueira
VL(2), Cardoso RF(1).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)aff2. (3)Departamento de Análises Clínicas e Biomedicina.

We evaluated the in vitro anti-Mycobacterium tuberculosis activity and the
cytotoxicity of dichloromethane extract and pure compounds from the leaves of
Calophyllum brasiliense. Purification of the dichloromethane extract yielded the 
pure compounds (-) mammea A/BB (1), (-) mammea B/BB (2) and amentoflavone (3).
The compound structures were elucidated on the basis of spectroscopic and
spectrometric data. The contents of bioactive compounds in the extracts were
quantified using high performance liquid chromatography coupled to an ultraviolet
detector. The anti-M. tuberculosis activity of the extracts and the pure
compounds was evaluated using a resazurin microtitre assay plate. The
cytotoxicity assay was performed in J774G.8 macrophages using the 3-(4,5-dimethyl
thiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide colourimetric method. The
quantification of the dichloromethane extract showed (1) and (2) at
concentrations of 31.86 ± 2.6 and 8.24 ± 1.1 µg/mg of extract, respectively. The 
dichloromethane and aqueous extracts showed anti-M. tuberculosis H37Rv activity
of 62.5 and 125 µg/mL, respectively. Coumarins (1) and (2) showed minimal
inhibitory concentration ranges of 31.2 and 62.5 µg/mL against M. tuberculosis
H37Rv and clinical isolates. Compound (3) showed no activity against M.
tuberculosis H37Rv. The selectivity index ranged from 0.59-1.06. We report the
activity of the extracts and coumarins from the leaves of C. brasiliense against 
M. tuberculosis.

PMCID: PMC4131784
PMID: 24676652  [PubMed - in process]


29. Science. 2014 Feb 28;343(6174):1002-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1245831.

Promoter-bound trinucleotide repeat mRNA drives epigenetic silencing in fragile X
syndrome.

Colak D(1), Zaninovic N, Cohen MS, Rosenwaks Z, Yang WY, Gerhardt J, Disney MD,
Jaffrey SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University,
New York, NY 10065, USA.

Epigenetic gene silencing is seen in several repeat-expansion diseases. In
fragile X syndrome, the most common genetic form of mental retardation, a CGG
trinucleotide-repeat expansion adjacent to the fragile X mental retardation 1
(FMR1) gene promoter results in its epigenetic silencing. Here, we show that FMR1
silencing is mediated by the FMR1 mRNA. The FMR1 mRNA contains the transcribed
CGG-repeat tract as part of the 5' untranslated region, which hybridizes to the
complementary CGG-repeat portion of the FMR1 gene to form an RNA·DNA duplex.
Disrupting the interaction of the mRNA with the CGG-repeat portion of the FMR1
gene prevents promoter silencing. Thus, our data link trinucleotide-repeat
expansion to a form of RNA-directed gene silencing mediated by direct
interactions of the trinucleotide-repeat RNA and DNA.

PMCID: PMC4357282
PMID: 24578575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2014 Mar-Apr;22(2):293-300. doi:
10.1590/0104-1169.3240.2415.

Post-abortion contraception: care and practices.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Borges AL(1), Monteiro RL(2), Hoga LA(1), Fujimori E(1), Chofakian CB(1), dos
Santos OA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Escola de Enfermagem, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)aff2.

OBJECTIVE: to analyze assistance regarding contraception methods received by
women during hospitalization due to abortion, and contraceptive practices the
month after this episode.
METHODS: a longitudinal study of women hospitalized due to abortion in a public
hospital in the city of São Paulo. Face-to-face interviews (n=170) followed by
telephone interviews in the subsequent month (n=147) were conducted between May
and December of 2011.
RESULTS: a small number of women reported they received guidance on, and
prescription for, contraceptive methods at hospital discharge. A trend of
statistical significance was identified for prescription of contraceptive methods
at discharge and its use in the following month, when adjusted for age. Most
women reported sexual intercourse (69.4%) with the use of contraceptive method
(82.4%), but no health professional guidance (63.1%).
CONCLUSION: despite the fact that post-abortion contraception assistance was
lower than the recommended guidelines by public health policies, women
demonstrated willingness to use contraceptive methods.

PMCID: PMC4292596
PMID: 26107838  [PubMed - in process]


31. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Aug 5;14:80. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-80.

Development and validation of a multiplex-PCR assay for X-linked intellectual
disability.

Jorge P(1), Oliveira B, Marques I, Santos R.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Genética Médica Dr, Jacinto Magalhães, CHP, Praça Pedro Nunes 88,
4099-028, Porto, Portugal. jorgpaula@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: X-linked intellectual disability is a common cause of inherited
cognitive deficit affecting mostly males. There are several genetic causes
implicated in this condition, which has hampered the establishment of an accurate
diagnosis. We developed a multiplex-PCR assay for the mutational hotspot regions 
of the FMR1, AFF2 and ARX genes.
METHODS: The multiplex-PCR was validated in a cohort of 100 males selected to
include known alleles for the FMR1 repetitive region: five full mutations
(250-650 CGGs), ten premutations (70-165 CGGs) and eighty-five in the normal
range (19-42 CGGs). Sequencing or Southern blotting was used to confirm the
results, depending on the allele class. In this cohort, with the exception of one
sample showing an AFF2 intermediate-sized allele, all other samples were normal
(8-34 CCGs). No ARX variant was found besides the c.429_452dup. The validated
assay was applied to 5000 samples (64.4% males and 35.6% females).
RESULTS: The normal-allelic range of both FMR1 and AFF2 genes as well as the
nature of ARX variants identified was similar in both genders. The rate of
homozygosity observed in female samples, 27.5% for FMR1 and 17.8% for AFF2
alleles, is comparable to that published by others. Two FMR1 premutations were
identified, in a male (58 CGGs) and a female case [(CGG)(47)/(CGG)(61)], as well 
as several FMR1 or AFF2 intermediate-sized alleles. One AFF2 premutation (68
CCGs) and two putative full expansions were picked up in male subjects, which
seems relevant considering the rarity of reported AFF2 mutations found in the
absence of a family history.
CONCLUSIONS: We developed a robust multiplex-PCR that can be used to screen the
mutational hotspot regions of FMR1, AFF2 and ARX genes. Moreover, this strategy
led to the identification of variants in all three genes, representing not only
an improvement in allele-sizing but also in achieving a differential diagnosis.
Although the distinction between females who are truly homozygous and those with 
a second pre- or full mutation sized allele, as well as a definitive diagnosis,
requires a specific downstream technique, the use of this multiplex-PCR for
initial screening is a cost-effective approach which widens the scope of
detection.

PMCID: PMC3751858
PMID: 23914978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Aug 8;93(2):249-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.06.012. Epub
2013 Jul 11.

Detection of clinically relevant genetic variants in autism spectrum disorder by 
whole-genome sequencing.

Jiang YH(1), Yuen RK, Jin X, Wang M, Chen N, Wu X, Ju J, Mei J, Shi Y, He M, Wang
G, Liang J, Wang Z, Cao D, Carter MT, Chrysler C, Drmic IE, Howe JL, Lau L,
Marshall CR, Merico D, Nalpathamkalam T, Thiruvahindrapuram B, Thompson A, Uddin 
M, Walker S, Luo J, Anagnostou E, Zwaigenbaum L, Ring RH, Wang J, Lajonchere C,
Wang J, Shih A, Szatmari P, Yang H, Dawson G, Li Y, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Neurobiology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) demonstrates high heritability and familial
clustering, yet the genetic causes remain only partially understood as a result
of extensive clinical and genomic heterogeneity. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS)
shows promise as a tool for identifying ASD risk genes as well as unreported
mutations in known loci, but an assessment of its full utility in an ASD group
has not been performed. We used WGS to examine 32 families with ASD to detect de 
novo or rare inherited genetic variants predicted to be deleterious
(loss-of-function and damaging missense mutations). Among ASD probands, we
identified deleterious de novo mutations in six of 32 (19%) families and X-linked
or autosomal inherited alterations in ten of 32 (31%) families (some had
combinations of mutations). The proportion of families identified with such
putative mutations was larger than has been previously reported; this yield was
in part due to the comprehensive and uniform coverage afforded by WGS.
Deleterious variants were found in four unrecognized, nine known, and eight
candidate ASD risk genes. Examples include CAPRIN1 and AFF2 (both linked to FMR1,
which is involved in fragile X syndrome), VIP (involved in social-cognitive
deficits), and other genes such as SCN2A and KCNQ2 (linked to epilepsy), NRXN1,
and CHD7, which causes ASD-associated CHARGE syndrome. Taken together, these
results suggest that WGS and thorough bioinformatic analyses for de novo and rare
inherited mutations will improve the detection of genetic variants likely to be
associated with ASD or its accompanying clinical symptoms.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3738824
PMID: 23849776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Aug 1;22(15):2984-91. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt155. Epub 2013 Apr 
5.

Loss of FMR2 further emphasizes the link between deregulation of immediate early 
response genes FOS and JUN and intellectual disability.

Melko M(1), Nguyen LS, Shaw M, Jolly L, Bardoni B, Gecz J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 7275, 660 Route 
des Lucioles, F-06560 Valbonne, France.

Loss of FMR2 causes Fragile X E (FRAXE) site-associated intellectual disability
(ID). FMR2 regulates transcription, promotes alternative splicing with preference
for G-quartet structure harbouring exons and is localized to the nuclear
speckles. In primary skin fibroblasts from FRAXE patients (n = 8), we found a
significant reduction in the number, but a significant increase in the size, of
nuclear speckles, when compared with the controls (n = 4). Since nuclear speckles
are enriched with factors involved in pre-mRNA processing, we explored the
consequence of these defects and the loss of FMR2 on the transcriptome. We
performed whole genome expression profiling using total RNA extracted from these 
cell lines and found 27 genes significantly deregulated by at least 2-fold at P <
0.05 in the patients. Among these genes, FOS was significantly upregulated and
was further investigated due to its established role in neuronal cell function.
We showed that (i) 30% depletion of Fmr2 in mouse primary cortical neurons led to
a 2-fold increase in Fos expression, (ii) overexpression of FMR2 significantly
decreased FOS promoter activity in luciferase assays, and (iii) as FOS promoter
contains a serum response element, we found that not FOS, but JUN, which encodes 
for a protein that forms a transcriptional activator complex with FOS, was
significantly upregulated in the patients' cell lines upon mitogen stimulation.
These results suggest that FMR2 is an upstream regulator of FOS and JUN, and
further link deregulation of the immediate early response genes to the pathology 
of ID- and FRAXE-associated ID in particular.

PMID: 23562910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Oct 1;21(19):4356-64. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds267. Epub 2012 Jul 
5.

Excess variants in AFF2 detected by massively parallel sequencing of males with
autism spectrum disorder.

Mondal K(1), Ramachandran D, Patel VC, Hagen KR, Bose P, Cutler DJ, Zwick ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a heterogeneous disorder with substantial
heritability, most of which is unexplained. ASD has a population prevalence of
one percent and affects four times as many males as females. Patients with
fragile X E (FRAXE) intellectual disability, which is caused by a silencing of
the X-linked gene AFF2, display a number of ASD-like phenotypes. Duplications and
deletions at the AFF2 locus have also been reported in cases with moderate
intellectual disability and ASD. We hypothesized that other rare X-linked
sequence variants at the AFF2 locus might contribute to ASD. We sequenced the
AFF2 genomic region in 202 male ASD probands and found that 2.5% of males
sequenced had missense mutations at highly conserved evolutionary sites. When
compared with the frequency of missense mutations in 5545 X chromosomes from
unaffected controls, we saw a statistically significant enrichment in patients
with ASD (OR: 4.9; P < 0.014). In addition, we identified rare AFF2 3' UTR
variants at conserved sites which alter gene expression in a luciferase assay.
These data suggest that rare variation in AFF2 may be a previously unrecognized
ASD susceptibility locus and may help explain some of the male excess of ASD.

PMCID: PMC3441129
PMID: 22773736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jul;32(13):2608-17. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00182-12. Epub 2012 Apr 
30.

The super elongation complex family of RNA polymerase II elongation factors: gene
target specificity and transcriptional output.

Luo Z(1), Lin C, Guest E, Garrett AS, Mohaghegh N, Swanson S, Marshall S, Florens
L, Washburn MP, Shilatifard A.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, USA.

The elongation stage of transcription is highly regulated in metazoans. We
previously purified the AFF1- and AFF4-containing super elongation complex (SEC) 
as a major regulator of development and cancer pathogenesis. Here, we report the 
biochemical isolation of SEC-like 2 (SEC-L2) and SEC-like 3 (SEC-L3) containing
AFF2 and AFF3 in association with P-TEFb, ENL/MLLT1, and AF9/MLLT3. The SEC
family members demonstrate high levels of polymerase II (Pol II) C-terminal
domain kinase activity; however, only SEC is required for the proper induction of
the HSP70 gene upon stress. Genome-wide mRNA-Seq analyses demonstrated that
SEC-L2 and SEC-L3 control the expression of different subsets of genes, while
AFF4/SEC plays a more dominant role in rapid transcriptional induction in cells. 
MYC is one of the direct targets of AFF4/SEC, and SEC recruitment to the MYC gene
regulates its expression in different cancer cells, including those in acute
myeloid or lymphoid leukemia. These findings suggest that AFF4/SEC could be a
potential therapeutic target for the treatment of leukemia or other cancers
associated with MYC overexpression.

PMCID: PMC3434493
PMID: 22547686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Dev Dyn. 2012 Mar;241(3):553-62. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23738. Epub 2012 Jan 25.

Drosophila lilliputian is required for proneural gene expression in retinal
development.

Distefano GM(1), Gangemi AJ, Khandelwal PJ, Saunders AJ, Marenda DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Proper neurogenesis in the developing Drosophila retina requires the 
regulated expression of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proneural transcription
factors Atonal (Ato) and Daughterless (Da). Factors that control the timing and
spatial expression of these bHLH proneural genes in the retina are required for
the proper formation and function of the adult eye and nervous system.
RESULTS: Here we report that lilliputian (lilli), the Drosophila homolog of the
FMR2/AF4 family of proteins, regulates the transcription of ato and da in the
developing fly retina. We find that lilli controls ato expression at multiple
enhancer elements. We also find that lilli contributes to ato auto-regulation in 
the morphogenetic furrow by first regulating the expression of da prior to ato.
We show that FMR2 regulates the ato and da homologs MATH5 and TCF12 in human
cells, suggesting a conservation of this regulation from flies to humans.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that lilliputian is part of the genetic program that
regulates the expression of proneural genes in the developing retina.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22275119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Child Neurol. 2012 Jun;27(6):786-90. doi: 10.1177/0883073811425860. Epub 2011
Dec 21.

Severe Hunter syndrome (mucopolysaccharidosis II) phenotype secondary to large
deletion in the X chromosome encompassing IDS, FMR1, and AFF2 (FMR2).

Burruss DM(1), Wood TC, Espinoza L, Dwivedi A, Holden KR.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC,
USA.

A 2-year-old boy with an initial diagnosis of Hunter syndrome
(mucopolysaccharidosis II) had a more severe phenotype than expected, which
warranted further evaluation. The patient had severe infantile global
neurodevelopmental delays, macrocephaly with a prominent forehead, coarse facial 
features with clear corneas, chronic congestion with snoring, wide-spaced teeth, 
short thick neck, hepatomegaly, an inguinal hernia repaired, early clawhand
deformities, and severe generalized hypotonia. X chromosome microarray revealed a
large deletion encompassing the genes IDS, FMR1, and AFF2 (FMR2) confirming the
diagnoses of both Hunter and fragile X syndromes. This case is also a reminder to
clinicians that for optimum patient care, further diagnostic testing is warranted
if there is concern that a patient's phenotype is more severe or complex than
would be expected for the initial neurogenetic diagnosis.

PMID: 22190500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Dec;155A(12):3110-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34345. Epub 2011 
Nov 7.

Microdeletion of Xq28 involving the AFF2 (FMR2) gene in two unrelated males with 
developmental delay.

Sahoo T(1), Theisen A, Marble M, Tervo R, Rosenfeld JA, Torchia BS, Shaffer LG.

Author information: 
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories, PerkinElmer, Inc., Spokane, Washington, USA.
trilochan.x.sahoo@questdiagnostics.com

Fragile X E (FRAXE) is an X-linked form of intellectual disability characterized 
by mild to moderate cognitive impairment, speech delay, hyperactivity, and
autistic behavior. The folate-sensitive fragile site FRAXE is located in Xq28
approximately 600<U+2009>kb distal to the fragile X syndrome fragile site (FRAXA) and
harbors an unstable GCC (CCG) triplet repeat adjacent to a CpG island in the 5'
untranslated region of the AFF2 (FMR2) gene. The disorder results from
amplification and methylation of the GCC repeat and resultant silencing of AFF2. 
Although chromosome abnormalities that disrupt AFF2 have been reported in two
individuals with mild-moderate intellectual disability, microdeletions of Xq28
that delete only AFF2 have not been described as a potential cause of
FRAXE-intellectual disability. We performed clinical and molecular
characterization of two males with 240 and 499<U+2009>kb deletions, respectively, at
Xq28, both of which encompassed only one gene, AFF2. The 240<U+2009>kb deletion in
Patient 1 was intragenic and lead to the loss of 5' exons 2-4 of AFF2; the 499<U+2009>kb
deletion in Patient 2 removed the 5' exons 1-2 of AFF2 including approximately
350<U+2009>kb upstream of the gene. Both individuals had developmental and speech delay,
and one had mild dysmorphism. We predict disruption of AFF2 in these two patients
is likely the cause of their overlapping phenotypes.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22065534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Aug;155A(8):2003-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34122. Epub 2011
Jul 7.

Familial intellectual disability and autistic behavior caused by a small FMR2
gene deletion.

Stettner GM(1), Shoukier M, Höger C, Brockmann K, Auber B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Neurology, Georg August University,
Göttingen, Germany.

Alterations of the Fragile Mental Retardation 2 gene (FMR2, synonym AFF2) can
result in non-specific, mild to borderline X-linked intellectual disability
(XLID), and behavioral problems. The well-known molecular pathomechanism of this 
condition, also referred to as FRAXE, is a (CCG)(n) trinucleotide repeat
expansion which leads to silencing of the FMR2 gene. However, deletions within
the FMR2 gene may also be causative of the disorder. Here, we report on two
brothers diagnosed with FRAXE in whom a small deletion in the FMR2 gene was
detected by whole genome array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). The
deletion was also present in their clinically healthy mother and maternal uncle
who was similarly affected, but not in a healthy older brother of the two
patients. Our observation demonstrates that FMR2 gene deletions may contribute to
the FRAXE phenotype. Therefore, we suggest that screening for FMR2 gene deletions
using array CGH should be considered in patients with non-specific XLID and
absent trinucleotide expansion.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21739600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 May 15;20(10):1873-85. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr069. Epub 2011 Feb
17.

Functional characterization of the AFF (AF4/FMR2) family of RNA-binding proteins:
insights into the molecular pathology of FRAXE intellectual disability.

Melko M(1), Douguet D, Bensaid M, Zongaro S, Verheggen C, Gecz J, Bardoni B.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 6097, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of
Nice-Sophia Antipolis, 06560 Valbonne, France.

The AFF (AF4/FMR2) family of genes includes four members: AFF1/AF4, AFF2/FMR2,
AFF3/LAF4 and AFF4/AF5q31. AFF2/FMR2 is silenced in FRAXE intellectual
disability, while the other three members have been reported to form fusion genes
as a consequence of chromosome translocations with the myeloid/lymphoid or mixed 
lineage leukemia (MLL) gene in acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALLs). All AFF
proteins are localized in the nucleus and their role as transcriptional
activators with a positive action on RNA elongation was primarily studied. We
have recently shown that AFF2/FMR2 localizes to nuclear speckles, subnuclear
structures considered as storage/modification sites of pre-mRNA splicing factors,
and modulates alternative splicing via the interaction with the G-quadruplex
RNA-forming structure. We show here that similarly to AFF2/FMR2, AFF3/LAF4 and
AFF4/AF5q31 localize to nuclear speckles and are able to bind RNA, having a high 
apparent affinity for the G-quadruplex structure. Interestingly, AFF3/LAF4 and
AFF4/AF5q31, like AFF2/FMR2, modulate, in vivo, the splicing efficiency of a
mini-gene containing a G-quadruplex structure in one alternatively spliced exon. 
Furthermore, we observed that the overexpression of AFF2/3/4 interferes with the 
organization and/or biogenesis of nuclear speckles. These findings fit well with 
our observation that enlarged nuclear speckles are present in FRAXE fibroblasts. 
Furthermore, our findings suggest functional redundancy among the AFF family
members in the regulation of splicing and transcription. It is possible that
other members of the AFF family compensate for the loss of AFF2/FMR2 activity and
as such explain the relatively mild to borderline phenotype observed in FRAXE
patients.

PMID: 21330300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2011 Apr;15(4):281-4. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2010.0167.
Epub 2011 Jan 23.

Distribution of CGG/GCC repeats at the FMR1 and FMR2 genes in an Indian
population with mental retardation of unknown etiology.

Katikala L(1), Guruju MR, Madireddi S, Vallamkonda O, Vallamkonda N, Persha A,
Spurgeon AM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Hospital for Genetic Diseases, Osmania University,
Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India.

AIMS: Fragile X syndrome is one of the X-linked disorders associated with
moderate to severe mental retardation. Fragile X A syndrome (FRAXA) and fragile X
E syndrome (FRAXE) are caused by trinucleotide repeat expansion of CGG and GCC
repeats at the 5' untranslated region of the FMR1 and FMR2 genes, respectively.
The present study was undertaken to identify the repeat polymorphism and to
estimate the risk of transmission in Andhra Pradesh and surrounding states of
South India.
RESULTS: The FRAXA and FRAXE allelic polymorphisms were studied by radioactive
polymerase chain reaction that revealed 25 FRAXA among 344 X-chromosomes and 20
FRAXE allelic variants among 212 X-chromosomes in our population. The most
frequent FRAXA allele size was of 29 CGG repeats (27.5%) followed by allele sizes
of 28 (20.8%) and 31 (7.2%), and that of FRAXE was 15 GCC repeats (24.0%)
followed by allele containing 18 repeats (18.4%) and 16 repeats (11.3%).
CONCLUSIONS: CGG/GCC repeat polymorphism at the FMR1 and FMR2 loci observed in
this study demonstrated a racial and ethnic variation among the populations.

PMID: 21254876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Jan;155A(1):221-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33515. Epub 2010
Dec 10.

FMR1, FMR2, and SLITRK2 deletion inside a paracentric inversion involving bands
Xq27.3-q28 in a male and his mother.

Cavani S(1), Prontera P, Grasso M, Ardisia C, Malacarne M, Gradassi C, Cecconi M,
Mencarelli A, Donti E, Pierluigi M.

Author information: 
(1)Galliera Hospital, Genoa, Italy. simona.cavani@galliera.it

PMID: 21204236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Mar;37(4):1269-79. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn1058. Epub 2009
Jan 9.

FRAXE-associated mental retardation protein (FMR2) is an RNA-binding protein with
high affinity for G-quartet RNA forming structure.

Bensaid M(1), Melko M, Bechara EG, Davidovic L, Berretta A, Catania MV, Gecz J,
Lalli E, Bardoni B.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 6097-Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Valbonne,
France.

FRAXE is a form of mild to moderate mental retardation due to the silencing of
the FMR2 gene. The cellular function of FMR2 protein is presently unknown. By
analogy with its homologue AF4, FMR2 was supposed to have a role in
transcriptional regulation, but robust evidences supporting this hypothesis are
lacking. We observed that FMR2 co-localizes with the splicing factor SC35 in
nuclear speckles, the nuclear regions where splicing factors are concentrated,
assembled and modified. Similarly to what was reported for splicing factors,
blocking splicing or transcription leads to the accumulation of FMR2 in enlarged,
rounded speckles. FMR2 is also localized in the nucleolus when splicing is
blocked. We show here that FMR2 is able to specifically bind the
G-quartet-forming RNA structure with high affinity. Remarkably, in vivo, in the
presence of FMR2, the ESE action of the G-quartet situated in mRNA of an
alternatively spliced exon of a minigene or of the putative target FMR1 appears
reduced. Interestingly, FMR1 is silenced in the fragile X syndrome, another form 
of mental retardation. All together, our findings strongly suggest that FMR2 is
an RNA-binding protein, which might be involved in alternative splicing
regulation through an interaction with G-quartet RNA structure.

PMCID: PMC2651778
PMID: 19136466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Feb;9(2):83-93. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2008.10.004. Epub
2008 Oct 25.

Expression of Leukaemia associated transcription factor Af9/Mllt3 in the cerebral
cortex of the mouse.

Vogel T(1), Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Georg-August-University Goettingen, Centre of Anatomy, Department of
Neuroanatomy, Kreuzbergring 36, 37075 Goettingen, Germany. tvogel1@gwdg.de

Mutations of leukaemia associated AF9/MLLT3 are implicated in neurodevelopmental 
diseases such as epilepsia and ataxia. This study shows for the first time, that 
murine Af9 is transcribed in various CNS structures including the subventricular 
zone (SVZ) of the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, cerebellar cortex, septum and
various thalamic structures, the choroid plexus, and the midbrain/hindbrain
boundary. Expression of Af9 in the SVZ overlaps with Svet1, Cux2, and partially
with Tbr2, confining its activity to the neurogenic compartment of the SVZ. In
contrast to Svet1 and Cux2 expression, Af9 transcription is not limited to upper 
layer neurons but is found in the entire cortical plate. As part of an extensive 
network of interacting proteins involved in epigenetic DNA modification, we could
show overlapping expression of Af9 with Af4/Aff1 and Fmr2/Aff2, two genes that
are also related to neurodevelopmental diseases, as well as with the highly
homologous Enl.

PMID: 19000783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nat Methods. 2007 Nov;4(11):907-9. Epub 2007 Oct 14.

Microarray-based genomic selection for high-throughput resequencing.

Okou DT(1), Steinberg KM, Middle C, Cutler DJ, Albert TJ, Zwick ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, 615 Michael
Street, Suite 301, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Methods. 2007 Nov;4(11):891-2.

We developed a general method, microarray-based genomic selection (MGS), capable 
of selecting and enriching targeted sequences from complex eukaryotic genomes
without the repeat blocking steps necessary for bacterial artificial chromosome
(BAC)-based genomic selection. We demonstrate that large human genomic regions,
on the order of hundreds of kilobases, can be enriched and resequenced with
resequencing arrays. MGS, when combined with a next-generation resequencing
technology, can enable large-scale resequencing in single-investigator
laboratories.

PMID: 17934469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Jun 15;143A(12):1358-65.

Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) detects a large X chromosome deletion
including FMR1, FMR2, and IDS in a female patient with mental retardation.

Probst FJ(1), Roeder ER, Enciso VB, Ou Z, Cooper ML, Eng P, Li J, Gu Y, Stratton 
RF, Chinault AC, Shaw CA, Sutton VR, Cheung SW, Nelson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) by array-based comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) is a new clinical test for the detection of
well-characterized genomic disorders caused by chromosomal deletions and
duplications that result in gene copy number variation (CNV). This powerful assay
detects an abnormality in approximately 7-9% of patients with various clinical
phenotypes, including mental retardation. We report here on the results found in 
a 6-year-old girl with mildly dysmorphic facies, obesity, and marked
developmental delay. CMA was requested and showed a heterozygous loss in copy
number with clones derived from the genomic region cytogenetically defined as
Xq27.3-Xq28. This loss was not cytogenetically visible but was seen on FISH
analysis with clones from the region. Further studies confirmed a loss of one
copy each of the FMR1, FMR2, and IDS genes (which are mutated in Fragile X
syndrome, FRAXE syndrome, and Hunter syndrome, respectively). Skewed
X-inactivation has been previously reported in girls with deletions in this
region and can lead to a combined Fragile X/Hunter syndrome phenotype in affected
females. X-inactivation and iduronate 2-sulfatase (IDS) enzyme activity were
therefore examined. X-inactivation was found to be random in the child's
peripheral leukocytes, and IDS enzyme activity was approximately half of the
normal value. This case demonstrates the utility of CMA both for detecting a
submicroscopic chromosomal deletion and for suggesting further testing that could
possibly lead to therapeutic options for patients with developmental delay.

PMID: 17506108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Apr 1;143A(7):687-93.

Clinical and molecular cytogenetic characterization of two patients with
non-mutational aberrations of the FMR2 gene.

Honda S(1), Hayashi S, Kato M, Niida Y, Hayasaka K, Okuyama T, Imoto I, Mizutani 
S, Inazawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Medical Research Institute and Graduate 
School of Biomedical Science, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

We report on two patients; a female having mild mental retardation (MR) with a
balanced translocation, 46,XX,t(X;15)(q28;p11.2), and a male diagnosed as having 
mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II or Hunter syndrome) with atypical
early-onset MR and a normal male karyotype. Molecular cytogenetic analyses,
including fluorescence in situ hybridization and array-based comparative genomic 
hybridization using an in-house X-tiling array, revealed that first patient to
have a breakpoint at Xq28 lying within the FMR2 gene and the second to have a
small deletion at Xq28 including part of FMR2 together with the IDS gene
responsible for MPS II. In Patient 1, X-chromosome inactivation predominantly
occurred in the normal X in her lymphocytes, suggesting that her MR might be
explained by a disruption of the FMR2 gene on der(X) t(X;15) concomitant with the
predominant inactivation of the intact FMR2 gene in another allele. We compared
phenotypes of Patient 2 with those of MPS II cases with deletion of the IDS gene 
alone reported previously, suggesting that the early-onset MR might be affected
by the additional deletion of FMR2.

PMID: 17343270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Exp Mol Pathol. 2007 Apr;82(2):190-6. Epub 2006 Dec 28.

Mapping of an origin of DNA replication in the promoter of fragile X gene FMR1.

Brylawski BP(1), Chastain PD 2nd, Cohen SM, Cordeiro-Stone M, Kaufman DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, C.B. #7525, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7525, USA.
bruna_brylawski@pathology.unc.edu

An origin of bidirectional DNA replication was mapped to the promoter of the FMR1
gene in human chromosome Xq27.3, which has been linked to the fragile X syndrome.
This origin is adjacent to a CpG island and overlaps the site of expansion of the
triplet repeat (CGG) at the fragile X instability site, FRAXA. The promoter
region of FMR2 in the FRAXE site (approximately 600 kb away, in chromosome band
Xq28) also includes an origin of replication, as previously described [Chastain
II, P.D., Cohen, S.M., Brylawski, B.P., Cordeiro-Stone, M., Kaufman, D.G., 2006. 
A late origin of DNA replication in the trinucleotide repeat region of the human 
FMR2 gene. Cell Cycle 5, 869-872]. FMR1 transcripts were detected in foreskin and
male fetal lung fibroblasts, while FMR2 transcripts were not. However, both FMR1 
and FMR2 were found to replicate late in S phase (approximately 6 h into the S
phase of normal human fibroblasts). The position of the origin of replication
relative to the CGG repeat, and perhaps the late replication of these genes,
might be important factors in the susceptibility to triplet repeat amplification 
at the FRAXA and FRAXE sites.

PMCID: PMC1934615
PMID: 17196195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Jan 1;16(1):92-106. Epub 2006 Nov 29.

The mixed-lineage leukemia fusion partner AF4 stimulates RNA polymerase II
transcriptional elongation and mediates coordinated chromatin remodeling.

Bitoun E(1), Oliver PL, Davies KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, Medical Research Council
Functional Genetics Unit, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QX,
UK.

AF4 gene, frequently translocated with mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) in childhood 
acute leukemia, encodes a putative transcriptional activator of the AF4/LAF4/FMR2
(ALF) protein family previously implicated in lymphopoiesis and Purkinje cell
function in the cerebellum. Here, we provide the first evidence for a direct role
of AF4 in the regulation of transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II (Pol 
II). We demonstrate that mouse Af4 functions as a positive regulator of Pol II
transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) kinase and, in complex with MLL fusion
partners Af9, Enl and Af10, as a mediator of histone H3-K79 methylation by
recruiting Dot1 to elongating Pol II. These pathways are interconnected and
tightly regulated by the P-TEFb-dependent phosphorylation of Af4, Af9 and Enl
which controls their transactivation activity and/or protein stability.
Consistently, increased levels of phosphorylated Pol II and methylated H3-K79 are
observed in the ataxic mouse mutant robotic, an over-expression model of Af4.
Finally, we confirm the functional relevance of Af4, Enl and Af9 to the
regulation of gene transcription as their over-expression strongly stimulates
P-TEFb-dependent transcription of a luciferase reporter gene. Our findings
uncover a central role for these proteins in the regulation of transcriptional
elongation and coordinated histone methylation, providing valuable insight into
their contribution to leukemogenesis and neurodegeneration. Since these
activities likely extend to the entire ALF protein family, this study also
significantly inputs our understanding of the molecular basis of FRAXE mental
retardation syndrome in which FMR2 expression is silenced.

PMID: 17135274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cell Cycle. 2006 Apr;5(8):869-72. Epub 2006 Apr 17.

A late origin of DNA replication in the trinucleotide repeat region of the human 
FMR2 gene.

Chastain PD 2nd(1), Cohen SM, Brylawski BP, Cordeiro-Stone M, Kaufman DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7525, USA.

We confirmed that the replication of the fragile-X E site (FRAXE) in human
chromosomal band Xq28 occurs at six hours into the eight-hour S phase of normal
human fibroblasts. In this late-replicating region, we mapped an origin of DNA
replication within the promoter of FMR2. This origin is coincident with CpG
islands, the trinucleotide repeat, and exon 1 of the FMR2 gene. Identification of
this origin may aid in the investigation of the mechanism of trinucleotide repeat
expansion and its effect on FMR2 expression. In addition, knowledge of the
chromosomal locations and sequence characteristics of both early and late origins
of DNA replication, such as the one described in this report, will facilitate
studies of the molecular determinants of the time of activation of different
origins of replication and allow us to refine our insights concerning origin
inactivation in response to the DNA damage-induced intra-S checkpoint.

PMID: 16582587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Neurosci Lett. 2006 Apr 24;397(3):245-8. Epub 2006 Feb 15.

Lack of FMR3 expression in a male with non-syndromic mental retardation and a
microdeletion immediately distal to FRAXE CCG repeat.

Santos-Rebouças CB(1), Abdalla CB, Fullston T, Campos M Jr, Pimentel MM, Gécz J.

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Genética Humana, Departamento de Biologia Celular e Genética,
Instituto de Biologia Roberto Alcântara Gomes, Universidade do Estado do Rio de
Janeiro, Rua São Francisco Xavier, 524, PHLC, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
cbs@uerj.br

FRAXE fragile site associated mental retardation (FRAXE MR) belongs to a group of
non-syndromic X-linked mental retardation. Two genes, FMR2 and FMR3 (likely a
non-coding RNA) are transcribed from the FRAXE CpG island in the opposite
directions. While the contribution of the FMR2 gene to FRAXE MR has been
demonstrated, the role of the FMR3 gene is not known. We have screened 441
Brazilian mentally handicapped males for CCG repeat expansions in the FMR2 gene
and identified a boy with a mutation (c.-414_-357del58) immediately distal to the
FRAXE CCG repeat. We have established a skin fibroblast cell line from this
patient and tested expression of both FMR2 and FMR3 genes. Reverse transcriptase 
PCR studies on the FMR2 and FMR3 genes showed that only the FMR3 gene
transcription was abolished, suggesting a possible causal relationship between
the lack of FMR3 expression and mental retardation in this patient. In the
literature, there have been few deletions described near the FRAXE CCG repeat,
but none was followed with expression studies. This is the first study showing
missing expression in the FMR3 gene with normal FMR2 transcription leading to
FRAXE mutation-likely phenotype. The FMR3 gene is likely a non-coding RNA gene.
So far all individuals with FRAXE CCG repeat expansions and cytogenetically
detectable FRAXE fragile site have both FMR2 and FMR3 gene expression abolished. 
Although the function of the FMR3 gene is not known, our present study together
with previous studies on FRAXE MR suggest that it may play role in the processes 
underpinning normal learning and memory.

PMID: 16469443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Med Sci (Paris). 2006 Jan;22(1):41-6.

[The fragile X syndrome: one protein missing and 1001 disoriented mRNAs].

[Article in French]

Davidovic L(1), Tremblay S, Gravel M, De Koninck P, Khandjian EW.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de recherche en génétique humaine et moléculaire, Centre de recherche
Hôpital Saint-François d'Assise, CHUQ, Québec, Canada.

Fragile X syndrome is the most common form of inherited mental retardation. This 
X-linked disease is due to transcriptional silencing of the Fragile Mental
Retardation 1 (FMR1) gene and the absence of its gene product, FMRP. This protein
is an RNA-binding protein present in mRNP complexes associated with the
translation machinery and is thought to be a key player in the control of mRNA
transport in neurons. However, the exact role of FMRP in translation remains
unclear. Two homologous proteins, FXR1P and FXR2P, are also found in RNP
complexes containing FMRP, suggesting that FMRP's functions are much more complex
than first thought. The molecular mechanisms altered in cells lacking FMRP still 
remain to be elucidated, as well as the putative roles of FXR1P and FXR2P as
compensatory molecules. Here, we review the various possible functions of FMRP in
RNA localization and transport in highly differentiated cells containing
dendritic extensions such as neurons.

PMID: 16386219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Neurogenet. 2003 Apr-Sep;17(2-3):223-30.

Prevalence of the fragile X syndrome in Yugoslav patients with non-specific
mental retardation.

Major T(1), Culjkovic B, Stojkovic O, Gucscekic M, Lakic A, Romac S.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology, School of Medicine, University Belgrade,11000, Yugoslavia.

Mutations at two fragile sites, FRAXA and FRAXE, loci are caused by an expansion 
of a CGG/GCC trinucleotide repeat and are characterized by mental retardation.
Here we report molecular screening survey of 97 unrelated individuals diagnosed
with non-specific mental retardation (MR), which produced positive test for FRAXA
in two boys and none positive for the FRAXE mutation. In addition, we studied
allelic frequency distribution for the FRAXA locus in this group of mentally
retarded patients, as well as in the 99 healthy subjects of Yugoslav population. 
The distribution of FMR1 CGG repeat size in both groups was similar: the most
common allele contained 29 repeats (32.86% in the healthy population and 54.54%
in MR population), followed by the allele with 28 CGG repeats (21.43% in the
healthy and 12.2% in MR population). Premutation alleles with more than 45
repeats were not found in control nor in the MR group.

PMID: 14668200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2003;100(1-4):129-39.

FMR2 function: insight from a mouse knockout model.

Gu Y(1), Nelson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The FMR2 gene is dysregulated by the fragile X E triplet repeat expansion in
patients with FRAXE mental retardation syndrome. A CCG triplet, located in the 5'
untranslated region of the FRAXE gene undergoes expansion and methylation in
these patients, eliminating detectable gene transcription. FRAXE syndrome is
distinct from fragile X syndrome, a more common genetic form of mental
retardation caused by expansion and methylation of a similar repeat in the FMR1
gene located 600 kb proximal to FRAXE. FRAXE syndrome is rare, and patients'
phenotypes are highly variable, leading to difficulties with predicting specific 
FMR2 functions based on the human disease. Recently, Lilliputian(Lilli), a
Drosophila FMR2 orthologue, was identified; this gene has been linked with
several signal transduction pathways, including the transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-beta) pathway, the Raf/MEK/MAP kinase (MAPK) pathway, and the
P13K/PKB pathway. Mutation of Lilli shows defects in germinal band extension,
cytoskeletal structure, cell growth, and organ development. The Lilli gene
suggests possible functions for FMR2 (and related genes) in humans and mice, but 
cannot predict specific functions. Modeling FMR2 mutation in the mouse will be
useful to understand specific functions of this gene in vertebrates. This review 
presents what has been learned thus far from the FMR2 knockout mouse model and
suggests future studies on this model in order to compare it with the human FRAXE
mental retardation disorder, Lilli mutants in Drosophila and other mouse models
of genes in this family.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14526173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Int J Mol Med. 2003 Sep;12(3):385-9.

The influence of expanded unmethylated alleles for FRAXA/FRAXE loci in the
intellectual performance among Brazilian mentally impaired males.

Barros Santos C(1), Gonçalves Pimentel MM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Celular e Genética, Instituto de Biologia Roberto
Alcântara Gomes, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil.

Both fragile X (FRAXA) syndrome and fragile XE (FRAXE) disorder are caused by an 
expansion of a polymorphic trinucleotide repeat and are associated with mental
impairment. Based on the size and methylation status of the expansion,
individuals are classified as having normal, intermediate, premutation or full
mutation alleles. Unlike individuals with full mutations, carriers of
intermediate and premutated alleles should not exhibit obvious clinical symptoms,
since the FMR1 (FRAXA) or FMR2 (FRAXE) genes are not transcriptionally silenced. 
However, there are data suggesting a phenotype consequence of the FRAXA
premutation alleles. We have investigated a population consisted of 276 males
with idiopathic mental retardation or learning disability and a control sample of
207 non-affected boys in order to determine if there was a possible phenotype
consequence of the expanded unmethylated alleles for FRAXA/FRAXE loci. Direct
molecular diagnosis for the FRAXA/FRAXE loci were performed in both populations
by using PCR technique and sizing of the amplification products by
electrophoresis in denaturing polyacrilamide gels. No FRAXA/FRAXE premutations or
FRAXE mutated alleles were observed. The 25 FRAXA full mutations alleles detected
were confirmed by Southern blot analysis. We found an excess of intermediate
alleles for both FRAXA and FRAXE in the target population, but it did not reach
statistically significant difference. This suggests that relatively large
unmethylated repeats may not be associated with an abnormal cognitive and/or
behavioral phenotype. However, recent evidence that FRAXA premutation alleles in 
males have increased FMR1 message levels emphasizes the need of more studies
using large sample sizes and proper control population to resolve this
contradictory observation.

PMID: 12883656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Genetika. 2003 Mar;39(3):433-8.

[Analysis of the allelic polymorphism of the five X-linked (CA)n dinucleotide
repeats in Russia].

[Article in Russian]

Drozd OV(1), Strel'nikov VV, Babenko OV, Zemliakova VV, Nemtsova MV, Zaletaev DV.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences,
Moscow, 115478 Russia.

A PCR-based survey of allelic polymorphism of three microsatellite markers,
DXS998, DXS548, and FRAXAC1, mapped to chromosome region Xp27.3, and two
microsatellite markers, DXS8091 and DXS1691 located on Xq28 was carried out using
a series of DNA samples obtained from 98 unrelated individuals from Russia. The
number of alleles detected on electrophregrams for each marker tested was 4, 6,
4, 5, and 3, respectively. The values of heterozygosity index for the markers
examined were 0.65, 0.27, 0.38, 0.70, and 0.29, respectively. The observed
distribution of the allelic frequencies for each microsatellite marker examined
fitted Hardy--Weinberg expectations. The values of individualization potential
determined for each marker were 0.24, 0.53, 0.43, 0.12, and 0.52, respectively.
In the sample tested the genotype distribution with regard to above loci was
determined. The perspectives of using the analyzed allelic polymorphisms for
indirect DNA diagnostics of the monogenic diseases located in this chromosome
region (X-linked mental retardations, FRAXA and FRAXE) as well as for human
population genetics and personal identification is discussed.

PMID: 12722645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Genet Test. 2002 Winter;6(4):335-9.

Molecular screening of FRAXA and FRAXE in Indian patients with unexplained mental
retardation.

Pandey UB(1), Phadke S, Mittal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of
Medical Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 226014, India.

Fragile-X mental retardation is the commonest form of inherited mental
retardation. We have studied 146 Indian patients (174 X chromosomes) with
unexplained mental retardation by molecular methods. All study subjects were
unrelated. Three of the 118 males were found to have the FMR1 full mutation. None
of the patients tested were positive for the FMR2 full mutation. The Fragile X
prevalence was 2.5% among males, which is lower than previously reported in
Indian mentally retarded patients. Screening for Fragile X among patients with
nonspecific mental retardation is important, even if there is no family history
of mental retardation or typical behavioral or physical features associated with 
the Fragile-X phenotype. Identification of positive cases is also very important 
for the families, because of the high recurrence risk of the disease. Large
multicenter screening programs with uniform criteria would be worthwhile to
determine the prevalence of Fragile-X mental retardation in the Indian
population.

PMID: 12537661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Hum Genet. 2002;47(11):567-75.

A high-density SNP map for the FRAX region of the X chromosome. Single-nucleotide
polymorphisms.

Brightwell G(1), Wycherley R, Potts G, Waghorn A.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire SP2 8BJ, UK. galebrightwell@hotmail.com

Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are the most common type of genetic
variation within the human genome, occurring approximately once every kilobase.
However, for association studies, SNPs are not as informative as microsatellite
markers and a large number of SNPs and substantial population sizes are required 
for linkage and mapping studies. A SNP map was generated for the FRAX region of
the X chromosome, approximately 0.8 Mb proximal and 1.8 Mb distal to the FRAXA
repeat, at a density of at least 1 SNP every 100 kb. SNPs were identified in a
population of 28 women with a FRAXA expan-sion (including three women with a
FRAXE expansion) on a background of different DXS548, CA1 and CA2 haplotypes, and
a normal X chromosome with a different microsatellite haplotype. Fifty-four
polymorphisms were identified in a total of 52 257 bp distributed over 2.6 Mb.
This represented about 1 SNP every 1024 bp, which was consistent with a nondesert
region (1 : 1000 bp). Because the SNPs identified in this study have haplotype
and frequency data from an affected population, they should provide a useful
resource for researchers to investigate the genetic mechanisms behind instability
and expansion of both FRAXA and FRAXE triplet repeats.

PMID: 12436192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Genomics. 2002 Jul;80(1):31-7.

The mouse Laf4 gene: exon/intron organization, cDNA sequence, alternative
splicing, and expression during central nervous system development.

Britanova O(1), Lukyanov S, Gruss P, Tarabykin V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077, Göttingen, Germany.

The cerebral cortex is a tissue with a high degree of neuronal diversity. It
consists of six cell layers with a unique set of neuronal subtypes. A crucial
step in the process of cortical differentiation is the transition from a
mitotically active neuroblast to a postmitotic young neuron. To identify genes
involved in the control of this transition, we applied a novel method of cDNA
subtraction based on mirror-orientation selection. One of the genes we have
identified in our screening proved to be a mouse homolog of the human putative
transcription factor LAF4. We identified alternatively spliced forms of mouse
Laf4 that encode several forms of putative protein with potentially different
transactivation functions. Two forms are expressed mainly during embryogenesis,
whereas the other forms are expressed mainly in adults. We have found that Laf4
transcription becomes very quickly upregulated as soon as young cortical neurons 
leave the ventricular zone (VZ), the cortical-proliferative compartment. This
coincides with the initial steps of cortical differentiation. Laf4 becomes
downregulated in postnatal cortex, indicating its involvement in the
transcriptional regulation of the early steps of cortical differentiation. We
have also examined Laf4 expression in the brains of Sey and reeler mutants. Laf4 
was downregulated in the lateroventral part of the cerebral cortex and completely
lost in the piriform cortex of the Sey mutant embryos. We also compared its
expression during central nervous system development with that of its closest
homolog, Fmr2, a gene implicated in mental retardation in humans.

PMID: 12079280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Neurosci. 2002 Apr 1;22(7):2753-63.

Impaired conditioned fear and enhanced long-term potentiation in Fmr2 knock-out
mice.

Gu Y(1), McIlwain KL, Weeber EJ, Yamagata T, Xu B, Antalffy BA, Reyes C,
Yuva-Paylor L, Armstrong D, Zoghbi H, Sweatt JD, Paylor R, Nelson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

FRAXE mental retardation results from expansion and methylation of a CCG
trinucleotide repeat located in exon 1 of the X-linked FMR2 gene, which results
in transcriptional silencing. The product of FMR2 is a member of a family of
proteins rich in serine and proline, members of which have been associated with
transcriptional activation. We have developed a murine Fmr2 gene knock-out model 
by replacing a fragment containing parts of exon 1 and intron 1 with the
Escherichia coli lacZ gene, placing lacZ under control of the Fmr2 promoter.
Expression of lacZ in the knock-out animals indicates that Fmr2 is expressed in
several tissues, including brain, bone, cartilage, hair follicles, lung, tongue, 
tendons, salivary glands, and major blood vessels. In the CNS, Fmr2 expression
begins at the time that cells in the neuroepithelium differentiate into
neuroblasts. Mice lacking Fmr2 showed a delay-dependent conditioned fear
impairment. Long-term potentiation (LTP) was found to be enhanced in hippocampal 
slices of Fmr2 knock-out compared with wild-type littermates. To our knowledge,
this mouse knock-out is the first example of an animal model of human mental
retardation with impaired learning and memory performance and increased LTP.
Thus, although a number of studies have suggested that diminished LTP is
associated with memory impairment, our data suggest that increased LTP may be a
mechanism that leads to impaired cognitive processing as well.

PMID: 11923441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Med Genet. 2002 Mar;39(3):200-1.

Mosaicism for FMR1 and FMR2 deletion: a new case.

Fengler S, Fuchs S, König R, Arnemann J.

PMCID: PMC1735074
PMID: 11897824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Med Genet. 2001 Sep;38(9):624-9.

Microdeletion in the FMR-1 gene: an apparent null allele using routine clinical
PCR amplification.

Hegde MR, Chong B, Fawkner M, Lambiris N, Peters H, Kenneson A, Warren ST, Love
DR, McGaughran J.

PMCID: PMC1734938
PMID: 11565550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Hum Mutat. 2001 Aug;18(2):157-62.

A new PCR assay useful for screening of FRAXE/FMR2 mental impairment among males.

Santos CB(1), Costa Lima MA, Pimentel MM.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
cbs@alternex.com.br

FRAXE (FMR2) is a fragile site associated with mental impairment located in Xq28,
600 kb distal to FRAXA (FMR1), the fragile X syndrome fragile site. The FRAXE
mutation is an expansion of a CCG repeat that results in methylation of a nearby 
CpG island. FRAXE alleles could be divided into four categories: normal (6-30 CCG
repeats), intermediate (31-60 CCG repeats), premutation (61-200 CCG repeats), and
full mutation (over 200 repeats). We have developed a non-isotopic polymerase
chain reaction (PCR)-based assay for the identification of FRAXE full mutation
alleles among mentally impaired men. In this novel PCR test for the FRAXE locus, 
we used three primers to permit an amplification of a 223 bp monomorphic internal
control fragment in addition to the amplification of a 419 bp (CCG)(16) FRAXE
locus band. A linear series of 93 male patients referred for FRAXE testing but
found to be negative for the (CCG)(n) expansion in the FMR2 gene by Southern
blotting analysis were retested by our PCR technique. In addition, we analyzed
two positive controls consisting of a FRAXE fully mutated male and one male with 
a Xq terminal deletion. The developed PCR test showed accuracy of 100% in the
normal individuals retested by PCR analysis, as well as in the two positive
control samples utilized, in which the strategy of multiplex amplification worked
as expected. Although not suitable for medical diagnosis of females and mosaics, 
it constitutes an important strategy for PCR typing and for FRAXE population
screening.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11462240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Ann Hum Genet. 2001 Mar;65(Pt 2):127-35.

Distribution of FMR1 and FMR2 alleles in Javanese individuals with developmental 
disability and confirmation of a specific AGG-interruption pattern in Asian
populations.

Faradz SM(1), Leggo J, Murray A, Lam-Po-Tang PR, Buckley MF, Holden JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cytogenetics Unit, Dept of Haematology, Prince of Wales
Hospital, Sidney, Australia.

The number of trinucleotide repeats in the 5' untranslated regions of the FMR1
and FMR2 genes was determined by PCR in 254 Fragile XA-negative Javanese male
children with developmental disabilities. The distribution of FMR1 and FMR2
trinucleotide repeat alleles was found to be significantly different in the
Indonesian population with developmental disability compared to that in
developmentally disabled populations in North America and Europe (p & 0.021).
Sequence analysis was performed on the trinucleotide repeat arrays of the 27
individuals with FMR1 alleles in the 'grey zone' (35-54 repeats). A repeat array 
structure of 9A9A6A9 was found in 16 unrelated individuals with 36 repeats,
confirming earlier observations in intellectually normal Japanese. We propose
that this FMR1 array pattern is specific for Asian populations and that Javanese 
and Japanese populations arose from a single progenitor population.

PMID: 11427173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Hum Genet. 2001;46(5):251-9.

Fragile XE-associated familial mental retardation protein 2 (FMR2) acts as a
potent transcription activator.

Hillman MA(1), Gecz J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, Department of Cytogenetics and Molecular
Genetics, Women's and Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia.

Expansion of the FRAXE CCG repeat to a full mutation is associated with
methylation and transcriptional silencing of the FMR2 gene, and as a consequence,
mild-to-borderline mental retardation. FMR2 is a member of a family of four
proteins, AF4, LAF4, FMR2, and AF5q31. The proteins associated with this family
localize to the cell nucleus. Various regions of FMR2, and each of the other
members of the protein family, were cloned and analyzed for transcription
activation in yeast and mammalian cells. In both yeast and mammalian cells, FMR2 
showed strong transcription activation. AF4 activation potential was several-fold
lower. Interestingly, isoforms of both FMR2 and LAF4 lacking exon 3 activated
transcription better than the larger isoforms containing exon 3. Compared with
the other members of the family, activation by FMR2 was the strongest. Our
results show that FMR2 is a potent transcription activator and that its function 
is conserved. Elucidation of the function of the FMR2 protein as a transcription 
activator may place FMR2 within the molecular signalling pathways involved in
nonspecific X-linked mental retardation (MRX).

PMID: 11355014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Ann Hum Genet. 2000 Mar;64(Pt 2):95-106.

The FMR2 gene, FRAXE and non-specific X-linked mental retardation: clinical and
molecular aspects.

Gecz J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Centre for Medical
Genetics, Women's and Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, SA, Australia.
jgecz@mad.adelaide.edu.au

FRAXE fragile site associated mental retardation remains unique among X-linked
mental retardation phenotypes due to its very mild to borderline nature (50< IQ< 
85). It is the most prevalent form of non-specific X-linked mental retardation so
far delineated, with an estimated incidence of at least 1/50-100,000 males, and
with more than 50 families known worldwide. The FRAXE site is within, or
immediately adjacent to, the 5' untranslated region of the FMR2 gene.
Hyperexpansion of the FRAXE CCG repeat silences transcription of the gene. The
structure of FMR2 has been characterized, but its function remains unknown. Gene 
localizations for numerous (> 75) large families with non-specific X-linked
mental retardation (MRX) have been determined so far. Recently the molecular
basis for some of them has been unravelled by identification of the responsible
genes, which participate in complex common signalling pathways. This review
summarises the new data on FRAXE associated mental retardation and the FMR2 gene 
in the light of the recent discoveries of new genes responsible for other forms
of non-specific X-linked mental retardation.

PMID: 11246464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Genet Epidemiol. 2001 Jan;20(1):129-144.

Expansion mutation frequency and CGG/GCC repeat polymorphism in FMR1 and FMR2
genes in an Indian population.

Sharma D(1), Gupta M, Thelma BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Delhi South Campus, New Delhi, India.

Based on molecular screening, we estimated the frequencies of fragile X syndrome 
and FRAXE syndrome in an institutionalized population (n = 130) in New Delhi,
India. Eligibility criteria for inclusion of subjects in the study were
mild/moderate mental retardation, with/without family history, and the fragile X 
clinical phenotype. Screening by Southern hybridization revealed an overall
frequency of 0.077 of the syndrome in the sample population. The disorder was
observed with a high frequency (0.1) among males as compared to females (0.027). 
No expansions of FMR2 allele were observed in the same study sample. CGG/GCC
allelic polymorphism of FMR1 and FMR2 were established from a total of 392 X
chromosomes, using the radioactive polymerase chain reaction-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis method. Distinct repeat sizes, repeat ranges, and repeat modes
characterised the FMR1 and FMR2 alleles. In the X chromosomes of both MR
individuals and unaffected controls, unimodal values of 29 and 15 repeats in FMR1
and FMR2 genes, respectively, were observed. Allele frequency distribution was
symmetrical at the FMR1 locus whereas a significant positive skew was observed
for the FMR2 alleles. The observed heterozygosity of the FMR1 gene was 0.772
compared to 0.839 of FMR2. Correlation of CGG/GCC repeats of FMR1 and FMR2 did
not show any association of repeat sizes at these two loci (correlation
coefficient, rho = 0.09). CGG/GCC repeat variation at FMR1 and FMR2 loci observed
in this study sample are different from that reported for the other Caucasian and
Asian populations.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11119302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Med Genet. 2000 Oct;37(10):782-4.

FMR3 is a novel gene associated with FRAXE CpG island and transcriptionally
silent in FRAXE full mutations.

Gécz J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Centre for Medical
Genetics, Women's and Children's Hospital, 72 King William Road, North Adelaide, 
SA 5006, Australia. jgecz@medicine.adelaide.edu.au

We have identified a novel gene, FMR3, originating from the FRAXE CpG island. The
FMR3 gene is transcribed from the opposite strand to the FMR2 gene. Analogous to 
the silencing of the FMR1 and FMR2 genes, FMR3 transcription is extinguished by
FRAXE full mutation. Although the role of FMR3 in FRAXE associated mild to
borderline mental retardation is not yet clear, lack of expression of FMR3 in
FRAXE full mutation males means that the FMR3 gene is potentially involved.

PMCID: PMC1757153
PMID: 11015457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Clin Neurophysiol. 2000 Sep;111(9):1632-6.

Does a peculiar EEG pattern exist also for FRAXE mental retardation?

Musumeci SA(1), Scuderi C, Ferri R, Anello G, Salluzzo R, Bosco P, Elia M.

Author information: 
(1)Oasi Institute for Research on Mental Retardation and Brain Aging, Via Conte
Ruggero, 73, 94018, Troina, Italy.

Comment in
    Clin Neurophysiol. 2001 Oct;112(10):1954-5.

OBJECTIVE: FRAXE mental retardation, a recently identified rare genetic
condition, is due to a mutation of the FMR2 gene, located at Xq28 region. The
phenotype is non-specific and characterized by developmental delay, speech,
reading and writing problems, poor adaptive skills, anxiety, aggressiveness,
obsessive-compulsive disturbance, and hyperactivity. The objective of this study 
was to describe the characteristic EEG pattern found in one patient with FRAXE
mental retardation.
METHODS: EEG (with photic stimulation and hand/foot tapping) and median nerve
somatosensory evoked potentials were recorded in a 8-year-old male patient with
FRAXE mental retardation (diagnosis confirmed by molecular genetic analysis) and 
speech disturbances.
RESULTS: The patient never presented seizures; however, sleep enhanced multifocal
spikes were found in the EEG. Moreover, tactile stimulation of hands and feet, as
well as intermittent photic stimulation, provoked the appearance of spikes.
Somatosensory evoked potentials from the median nerves showed a 'giant' component
at around 60 ms.
CONCLUSIONS: Considering the rarity of both FRAXE mental retardation and tactile 
evoked spikes, their association in the same subject might be considered as not
casual. If confirmed by future studies, these neurophysiological findings might
be considered as a marker for FRAXE mental retardation.

PMID: 10964075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2000 Jun;9(2):75-80.

Implication of screening for FMR1 and FMR2 gene mutation in individuals with
nonspecific mental retardation in Taiwan.

Tzeng CC(1), Tzeng PY, Sun HS, Chen RM, Lin SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Cheng Kung University Medical Center,
Tainan, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common form of familial mental retardation
(MR), attributable to (CGG)n expansion in the FMR1 gene. FRAXE is less frequent, 
associated with a similar mutation of the FMR2 gene. This study attempted to
ascertain the prevalence of both disorders in Taiwan, as well as to develop a
method to effectively find carriers. A total of 321 patients with nonspecific MR 
were screened for the FMR1 and FMR2 mutation. Four of 206 boys and men (1.9%) and
1 in 115 girls and women (0.9%) were identified as having FXS. All four FXS boys 
or men could be identified by Southern blot analysis, as well as by a simple
nonradioactive polymerase chain reaction analysis. None of the 206 boys or men
had FMR2 full mutation. This confirmed the low incidence of FRAXE in Chinese. FXS
appears to be more prevalent among patients with mild MR, because 4 of the 5
patients with FXS were from the 115 with mild MR (3.48%) and only 1 was from the 
other 206 with severe MR (0.49%). All five FXS cases were maternally inherited.
Other family members were resistant to further searching for carriers. It is
worth noting that none of these mothers had a discernible premarital family
history of MR. Thus the negative family history could not preclude the
possibility that a woman was a carrier. To identify female carriers of
childbearing age, beyond the scope of family history, is thus worthy of further
exploration. Screening men for carriers using this inexpensive method is probably
feasible, even though normal transmitting men have no immediate risk of producing
a child with the disease. Female carriers can then be effectively identified from
these normal transmitting men and can take all preventive measures.

PMID: 10850542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Eur J Hum Genet. 2000 Mar;8(3):157-62.

FRAXE mutation in a mentally retarded subject and in his phenotypically normal
twin brother.

Lo Nigro C(1), Faravelli F, Cavani S, Perroni L, Novello P, Vitali M, Bricarelli 
FD, Grasso M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Genoa, Italy.

The FRAXE fragile site, 600 kb distal to the more common FRAXA, has been reported
to be expressed in subjects with mild non-syndromal mental retardation (MR).
Amplification of more than 200 GCC repeats, associated with methylation of the
adjacent CpG island at Xq28, leads to the expression of the fragile site. In 1996
a large gene, FMR2, transcribed distally from the CpG island and downregulated by
repeat expansion and methylation, was identified. Among 232 mentally retarded
patients, tested FRAXA negative, we identified an Italian family segregating a
hypermethylated expansion at the FRAXE locus in two dizygotic twin brothers,
their sister and their mother. The index case was referred at 23 years of age
with severe MR, epilepsy, a dysmorphic face with a high arched palate, marfanoid 
habitus and hyperreflexia of the lower limbs. His brother was referred to as
normal and psychometric tests confirmed he is not mentally retarded. All members 
of the family underwent FRAXE molecular analysis, after cytogenetic expression of
the fraX site and negative FRAXA test. Interestingly, an expansion and a
hypermethylation at the FRAXE locus were found in all of them. Fibroblasts from
the clinically normal brother were assayed for FMR2 expression and the
transcription of the gene was found to be silenced. The presence of a
phenotypically normal male with absent FMR2 expression in fibroblasts suggests
that the relationship between the FRAXE mutation, FMR2 expression and MR needs to
be further investigated.

PMID: 10780779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Eur J Neurosci. 2000 Jan;12(1):381-4.

Localization of the fragile X mental retardation 2 (FMR2) protein in mammalian
brain.

Miller WJ(1), Skinner JA, Foss GS, Davies KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford
OX1 3QX, UK.

The transcriptional silencing of the FMR2 gene has been implicated in FRAXE
mental retardation. FRAXE individuals have been shown to exhibit learning
deficits, including speech delay, reading and writing problems. FMR2 encodes a
large protein of 1311 amino acids and is a member of a gene family encoding
proline-serine-rich proteins that have properties of nuclear transcription
factors. To characterize the expression of the fragile X mental retardation 2
(FMR2) protein, polyclonal antibodies were raised against two regions of the
human FMR2 protein and used in immunofluorescence experiments on mouse brain
cryosections. Our results demonstrate for the first time that the FMR2 protein is
localized in neurons of the neocortex, Purkinje cells of the cerebellum and the
granule cell layer of the hippocampus. FMR2 staining is shown to colocalize with 
the nuclear stain 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) confirming that FMR2 is a
nuclear protein. The localization of FMR2 protein to the mammalian hippocampus
and other brain structures involved with cognitive function is consistent with
the learning deficits seen in FRAXE individuals.

PMID: 10651894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Int J Mol Med. 2000 Jan;5(1):67-9.

FRAXE mutation in mentally retarded patients using the OxE18 probe.

Mulatinho MV(1), Llerena JC, Pimentel MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Universidade do Estado do Rio de
Janeiro (UERJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

The folate-sensitive fragile site FRAXE is located in proximal Xq28 of the human 
X chromosome and lies approximately 600 kb distal to the fragile X syndrome
(FRAXA) fragile site at Xq27.3. Although FRAXA and FRAXE are indistinguishable by
means of conventional cytogenetics, they can now be delineated at the molecular
level and provides the basis for a proper diagnosis. The screening for CGG
amplifications in the FMR1 gene was based on standard protocols using EcoRI
digests on Southern blots and hybridization with the StB12.3 probe. The FRAXE
mutation was analyzed by digestion with HindIII and the filters were probed with 
OxE20. We present the results of 144 patients referred for fragile X testing but 
negative for the FMR1 gene trinucleotide expansion, that were also screened for
the FMR2 expansion. For FRAXE mutation a molecular protocol for OxE18 probe was
used, in the DNA samples digested with EcoRI on the same blots as those used for 
detection of FRAXA. None of the patients tested were positive for the FRAXE
expansion. This technique was successfully established into our laboratory
routine showing the practical use of testing for FRAXA and FRAXE in a large
series of patients.

PMID: 10601577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Dec 7;96(25):14535-40.

AF5q31, a newly identified AF4-related gene, is fused to MLL in infant acute
lymphoblastic leukemia with ins(5;11)(q31;q13q23).

Taki T(1), Kano H, Taniwaki M, Sako M, Yanagisawa M, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with MLL gene rearrangements is
characterized by early pre-B phenotype (CD10(-)/CD19(+)) and poor treatment
outcome. The t(4;11), creating MLL-AF4 chimeric transcripts, is the predominant
11q23 chromosome translocation in infant ALL and is associated with extremely
poor prognosis as compared with other 11q23 translocations. We analyzed an infant
early preB ALL with ins(5;11)(q31;q13q23) and identified the AF5q31 gene on
chromosome 5q31 as a fusion partner of the MLL gene. The AF5q31 gene, which
encoded a protein of 1,163 aa, was located in the vicinity of the cytokine
cluster region of chromosome 5q31 and contained at least 16 exons. The AF5q31
gene was expressed in fetal heart, lung, and brain at relatively high levels and 
fetal liver at a low level, but the expression in these tissues decreased in
adults. The AF5q31 protein was homologous to AF4-related proteins, including AF4,
LAF4, and FMR2. The AF5q31 and AF4 proteins had three homologous regions,
including the transactivation domain of AF4, and the breakpoint of AF5q31 was
located within the region homologous to the transactivation domain of AF4.
Furthermore, the clinical features of this patient with the MLL-AF5q31 fusion
transcript, characterized by the early pre-B phenotype (CD10(-)/CD19(+)) and poor
outcome, were similar to those of patients having MLL-AF4 chimeric transcripts.
These findings suggest that AF5q31 and AF4 might define a new family particularly
involved in the pathogenesis of 11q23-associated-ALL.

PMCID: PMC24471
PMID: 10588740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Med Genet. 1999 Oct;36(10):767-70.

Microdeletions in FMR2 may be a significant cause of premature ovarian failure.

Murray A(1), Webb J, Dennis N, Conway G, Morton N.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury,
Wiltshire, UK.

Genetic causes of premature ovarian failure (POF) include X chromosome deletions 
and fragile X (FRAXA) premutations. While screening a cohort of women with POF
for FRAXA premutations, a more distal trinucleotide repeat, FRAXE, was also
tested. We found an unexpected excess of FRAXE alleles with apparently fewer than
11 repeats in the POF group. However, sequence analysis of these alleles showed
that the excess was caused by three females who carry cryptic deletions in FMR2, 
the gene associated with FRAXE. We propose that microdeletions within FMR2 may be
a significant cause of premature ovarian failure, being found in 1.5% of women
with the condition, and in only 0.04% of the general female population. The
deletions may affect transcription of either FMR2 or an adjacent gene.

PMCID: PMC1734234
PMID: 10528856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Med Genet. 1999 Jul;36(7):565-6.

Fragile X syndrome with FMR1 and FMR2 deletion.

Moore SJ(1), Strain L, Cole GF, Miedzybrodzka Z, Kelly KF, Dean JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Aberdeen Royal Hospitals Trust, Foresterhill, 
UK.

We report a 13 year old boy with fragile X syndrome resulting from a de novo
deletion of the FMR1 and FMR2 genes extending from (and including) DXS7536
proximally to FMR2 distally. The patient has severe developmental delay,
epilepsy, and behavioural difficulties, including autistic features. He has
epicanthic folds, in addition to facial features typical of fragile X syndrome,
and marked joint hypermobility. We compare our patient to the three other cases
reported in which both FMR1 and FMR2 are deleted. This case has the smallest
deletion reported to date. All four patients have epilepsy and a more severe
degree of mental retardation than is usual in fragile X syndrome resulting from
FMR1 triplet repeat expansion. Three of the patients have joint laxity and two
have epicanthic folds. We suggest that these features, in particular severe
developmental delay and epilepsy, may form part of the characteristic phenotype
resulting from deletion of both FMR1 and FMR2 genes. The diagnosis in this case
was delayed because routine cytogenetics showed no abnormality and standard
molecular tests for FMR1 triplet repeat expansion (PCR and Southern blotting)
failed. Further DNA studies should be undertaken to investigate for a deletion
where clinical suspicion of fragile X syndrome is strong and routine laboratory
tests fail.

PMCID: PMC1734406
PMID: 10424820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Am J Med Genet. 1999 May 28;84(3):304-5.

Improved amplification of the FMR2 GCC repeat from dried blood spots.

Leggo J, Holden JJ.

PMID: 10331613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Am J Med Genet. 1999 May 28;84(3):184-90.

Molecular screening of fragile X (FRAXA) and FRAXE mental retardation syndromes
in the Hellenic population of Greece and Cyprus: incidence, genetic variation,
and stability.

Patsalis PC(1), Sismani C, Hettinger JA, Boumba I, Georgiou I, Stylianidou G,
Anastasiadou V, Koukoulli R, Pagoulatos G, Syrrou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytogenetics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics,
Nicosia. patsalis@mdrtc.cing.ac.cy

This study presents the first large, population-based molecular investigation of 
the fragile X (FRAXA) and FRAXE mental retardation syndromes in the Hellenic
populations of Greece and Cyprus. The aims of this population screening were to
determine the prevalence of FRAXA and FRAXE syndromes among idiopathic mentally
retarded (IMR) individuals, to estimate the incidence in the general population, 
and to investigate the molecular mechanism of instability and expansion of the
FMR1-repeat. Ten FRAXA patients were identified to have either the full mutation 
(eight) or premutation (two) from a Hellenic population of 866 unrelated IMR
individuals (611 males and 255 females, age range 3-25 years). No FRAXE patients 
were identified among the 611 IMR males. The incidence of FRAXA in the Hellenic
population of Cyprus is estimated at 1 in 4,246 males. The repeat sites from the 
FMR1 and FMR2 alleles were accurately determined and showed similar distribution 
and frequencies with other population studies. The analysis of AGG interspersion 
within the FMR1-repeat in normal males revealed long, pure CGG repeats within the
"gray zone" as well as variation within the 3' end showing polarity of
instability. This finding supports the hypothesis that the AGG interspersion and 
the length of the pure repeat are major factors in determining allele stability. 
Analysis of FRAXAC1, DXS548, and FRAXAC2 identified particular alleles and
haplotypes to have a significant association with either gray zone alleles or
alleles >15 pure CGG repeats. We hypothesize that this subgroup of alleles and
haplotypes are associated with long pure CGGs (>15 CGG) or 35 repeats and, having
shared an evolutionary past, would have the tendency to expand.

PMID: 10331587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Nihon Rinsho. 1999 Apr;57(4):955-9.

[FRAXE mental retardation].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamagata T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Jichi Medical School.

The folate sensitive fragile site FRAXE is located in Xq28, 600 kb distal to the 
fragile X syndrome (FRAXA) fragile site. An unstable GCC triplet repeat
responsible for FRAXE exists in the 5' untranslated region of FMR2 gene. Normal
alleles range from 10-35 repeats and more frequently 15-20 GCCs. An expanded GCC 
repeat over 200 is methylated, inactivates FMR2, and results in FRAXE mental
retardation. Affected individuals show mild mental retardation and/or autistic
symptoms FMR2 is a large gene consisting of 21 exons spanning about 600 kb. FMR2 
mRNA is about 9.5 kb and is expressed in the brain(especially in the hippocampus 
and the amygdala) in adults and also in placenta. The FMR2 protein is 1311 amino 
acids, contains nuclear localization signals, and is a putative transcription
factor.

PMID: 10222796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Am J Med Genet. 1999 Apr 2;83(4):350-1.

Molecular screening for fragile X syndrome among Indonesian children with
developmental disability.

Faradz SM, Buckley M, Lam-Po-Tang, Leigh D, Holden JJ.

PMID: 10208179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Eur J Hum Genet. 1999 Feb-Mar;7(2):157-62.

Characterisation and expression of a large, 13.7 kb FMR2 isoform.

Gecz J(1), Mulley JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Women's and Children's
Hospital, Adelaide, Australia. jgecz@mad.adelaide.edu.au

FMR2 is the gene associated with FRAXE fragile site non-specific mental
retardation (FRAXE MRX). Previously a male patient was identified with
developmental delay and speech problems who had a deletion within intron 3 of
FMR2. No known FMR2 exonic sequences were missing in this patient. Detailed
northern blot analysis revealed existence of a new large isoform of FRM2 in
foetal brain. This isoform was characterised and found to be due entirely to an
addition of an extra 4.9 kb of the 3' UTR to the previously characterised 8.755
kb FMR2 transcript. This excluded involvement of the large FMR2 isoform in the
MRX phenotype of three individuals now known to have the same deletion of intron 
3 FMR2 sequences. Expression studies on the new 13.7 kb FMR2 isoform show that it
is expressed predominantly in foetal brain and adult pituitary gland, whilst the 
expression of the shorter previously characterised 8.755 kb isoform is broader,
including testis, thymus and placenta. Possible consequences of the alternative
processing and expression of FMR2 for the molecular pathology of FRAXE MRX are
discussed.

PMID: 10196698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Mar;7(3):441-8.

Expression of the murine homologue of FMR2 in mouse brain and during development.

Chakrabarti L(1), Bristulf J, Foss GS, Davies KE.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, Biochemistry Department, Oxford University, South Parks Road,
Oxford, OX1 3QU, UK.

The expression of the FRAXE fragile site on the human X chromosome is associated 
with the expansion of a CCG repeat at the 5' end of the FMR2 gene. The repeat
expansion results in transcriptional silencing of the gene and this event has
been found to be associated with mild mental handicap in families. We have
previously shown that the gene is particularly abundantly expressed in the
hippocampus and amygdala by northern analysis. Here we demonstrate the expression
pattern of the homologous gene in adult mouse brain and early mouse embryos. High
levels of fmr2 mRNA were noted in the hippocampus, the piriform cortex, Purkinje 
cells and the cingulate gyrus. Expression of fmr2 occurs on, or before, day 7 in 
the embryo and reaches its highest levels at 10.5-11.5 days. A more detailed
analysis shows that the fmr2 expression in the embryo at 11 days is more specific
and evident to the roof of the hind brain and the lateral ventricle of the brain.
The coding sequence of the mouse fmr2 gene shows very high conservation with 88% 
amino acid identity to the human FMR2 sequence.

PMID: 9467002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Am J Med Genet. 1997 Dec 31;73(4):447-55.

Instability of the FMR2 trinucleotide repeat region associated with expanded FMR1
alleles.

Brown TC(1), Tarleton JC, Go RC, Longshore JW, Descartes M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA.
tcbrown@box-y.nih.gov

The fragile sites FRAXA and FRAXE, located approximately 600 kb apart on Xq27.3
and Xq28, respectively, are due to a CGG trinucleotide repeat expansion. Although
the expansion mechanism for these and other trinucleotide repeat disorders
remains unknown, the similarities between the FRAXA and FRAXE regions suggest a
possible association between the 2 sites. DNA from 953 individuals was analyzed
to determine the distribution of FRAXE repeat sizes in this population and to
ascertain potential association between FRAXA and FRAXE repeat sizes. Thirty-four
FMR2 alleles ranging from 3-42 repeats were identified. No FRAXE expansions were 
found in this population, supporting previous findings that FRAXE expansions are 
rare. However, in the fragile X syndrome affected group, a FMR2 delection, 2
cases of FRAXE repeat instability and a FRAXE mosaic male were identified. Also, 
a previously identified, rare FMR2 polymorphism was observed. Statistical
analysis showed no correlation between normal FRAXA and FRAXE repeat sizes
studied, although there was a significant size difference in larger FMR2 alleles 
that segregated with expanded FMR1 alleles. These findings support the idea of an
association between repeat expansion in the FMR1 gene and instability or
deletions in the FMR2 gene.

PMID: 9415473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Hum Genet. 1997 Oct;100(5-6):503-7.

Screening for FMR1 and FMR2 mutations in 222 individuals from Spanish special
schools: identification of a case of FRAXE-associated mental retardation.

Milà M(1), Sànchez A, Badenas C, Brun C, Jiménez D, Villa MP, Castellví-Bel S,
Estivill X.

Author information: 
(1)Servei de Genètica, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. montse@medicina.ub.es

Fragile X syndrome is the most common inherited form of familial mental
retardation. It results from a (CGG)n trinucleotide expansion in the FMR1 gene
leading to the typical Martin-Bell phenotype. Clinical features vary depending on
age and sex. Expansion of a (CCG)n repeat in the FMR2 gene corresponds to the
FRAXE fragile site which lies distal to FRAXA and is also associated with mental 
retardation, but it is less frequent and lacks a consistent phenotype. Analysis
of repeat expansions in these two genes allows the molecular diagnosis of these
different entities. We report here the screening of the FRAXA and FRAXE mutations
in 222 unrelated mentally retarded individuals attending Spanish special schools.
PCR and/or Southern blotting methods were used. We detected full mutations in the
FMR1 gene in 11 boys (4.9%) and 1 boy (0.5%) with a CCG repeat expansion in the
FMR2 gene. The latter shows mild mental retardation with psychotic behaviour and 
no remarkable physical traits. Molecular studies revealed a mosaicism for
methylation in the FMR2 gene. This case supports the observation that expansions 
greater than 100 repeats can be partially methylated and cause the phenotype.

PMID: 9341861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Genomics. 1997 Sep 1;44(2):201-13.

Gene structure and subcellular localization of FMR2, a member of a new family of 
putative transcription activators.

Gecz J(1), Bielby S, Sutherland GR, Mulley JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Women's and Children's
Hospital, Adelaide, SA 5006, Australia. jgecz@mad.adelaide.edu.au

FMR2 is the gene associated with FRAXE mental retardation. It is expressed as an 
8.7-kb transcript in placenta and adult brain. A fetal-specific FMR2 transcript
of approximately 12 kb was detected in fetal brain and at a lower level in fetal 
lung and kidney. FMR2 is a large gene composed of 22 exons spanning at least 500 
kb on Xq28. Alternative splicing involving exons 2, 3, 5, 7, and 21 was not
tissue specific as tested on mRNA from human fetal and infant brain. FMR2 is
translated into a 1311-amino-acid nuclear protein with putative transcription
transactivation potential. Subcellular localization studies with green
fluorescent protein as a reporter show that both nuclear addresses found in the
FMR2 sequence are functional and direct the FMR2 protein into the nucleus. FMR2
together with AF4 and LAF4 forms a new family of nuclear proteins with
DNA-binding capacity and transcription transactivation potential. BLAST searches 
of the dbEST database revealed the presence of at least two other groups of
nonoverlapping ESTs showing high similarity to the FMR2-related family of
proteins. One of them, represented by the EST W26686, maps to chromosome 5q31.
Amino acid similarity among the proteins encoded by members of the gene family is
high in the NH2 terminus, low in the middle, and high again in the COOH end.
Available information from members of the family shows that genomic organization 
is conserved. This FMR2-related gene family encodes nuclear proteins with
involvement in mental retardation (FMR2), cancer (AF4), and lymphocyte
differentiation (LAF4) or with unknown function (EST W26686 and/or AA025630).

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9299237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Br J Haematol. 1997 Jul;98(1):157-69.

Exon/intron structure of the human AF-4 gene, a member of the AF-4/LAF-4/FMR-2
gene family coding for a nuclear protein with structural alterations in acute
leukaemia.

Nilson I(1), Reichel M, Ennas MG, Greim R, Knörr C, Siegler G, Greil J, Fey GH,
Marschalek R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

The AF-4 gene on human chromosome 4q21 is involved in reciprocal translocations
to the ALL-1 gene on chromosome 11q23, which are associated with acute
lymphoblastic leukaemias. A set of recombinant phage carrying genomic fragments
for the coding region and flanking sequences of the AF-4 gene were isolated.
Phage inserts were assembled into four contigs with 21 exons, and an intron phase
map was produced enabling the interpretation of translocation-generated fusion
proteins. The gene contains two alternative first exons, 1a and 1b, both
including a translation initiation codon. The translocation breakpoint cluster
region is flanked by exons 3 and 6 and two different polyadenylation signals were
identified. Polyclonal antisera directed against three different portions of the 
AF-4 protein were produced and used to detect a 116 kD protein in cellular
extracts of human B-lymphoblastoid and proB cell lines. In mitogen-stimulated
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells the AF-4 antigen was predominantly
located in the nucleus. The AF-4 gene is a member of the AF-4, LAF-4 and FMR-2
gene family. The members of this family encode serine-proline-rich proteins with 
properties of nuclear transcription factors. Comparison of AF-4 protein coding
sequences with the LAF-4 and FMR-2 sequences revealed five highly conserved
domains of potential functional relevance.

PMID: 9233580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Hum Mol Genet. 1997 Mar;6(3):479-86.

Molecular and phenotypic variation in patients with severe Hunter syndrome.

Timms KM(1), Bondeson ML, Ansari-Lari MA, Lagerstedt K, Muzny DM, Dugan-Rocha SP,
Nelson DL, Pettersson U, Gibbs RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Severe Hunter syndrome is a fatal X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by
iduronate-2-sulphatase (IDS) deficiency. Patients with complete deletion of the
IDS locus often have atypical phenotypes including ptosis, obstructive sleep
apnoea, and the occurrence of seizures. We have used genomic DNA sequencing to
identify several new genes in the IDS region. DNA deletion patients with atypical
symptoms have been analysed to determine whether these atypical symptoms could be
due to involvement of these other loci. The occurrence of seizures in two
individuals correlated with a deletion extending proximal of IDS, up to and
including part of the FMR2 locus. Other (non-seizure) symptoms were associated
with distal deletions. In addition, a group of patients with no variant symptoms,
and a characteristic rearrangement involving a recombination between the IDS gene
and an adjacent IDS pseudogene (IDS psi), showed normal expression of loci distal
to IDS. Together, these results identify FMR2 as a candidate gene for seizures,
when mutated along with IDS.

PMID: 9147653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Hum Mol Genet. 1997 Mar;6(3):435-41.

FMR2 expression in families with FRAXE mental retardation.

Gécz J(1), Oostra BA, Hockey A, Carbonell P, Turner G, Haan EA, Sutherland GR,
Mulley JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Women's and Children's
Hospital, Adelaide, Australia.

Normal individuals express the two alternative transcripts, FMR2 and Ox19, from
the FRAXE-associated CpG island. Molecular analysis of the Ox19 transcript
suggests that it is a truncated isoform of the FMR2 gene with an alternative 3'
end. Both isoforms showed a similar pattern of expression, with the Ox19 isoform 
expressed at a much lower level. Fibroblasts, chorionic villi and hair roots
showed the highest level of FMR2 expression, whole blood cells and amniocytes
showed very low expression, and the transcript was not detected in lymphoblasts. 
Fibroblasts of 11 individuals from seven families segregating FRAXE were assayed 
for FMR2 expression and FRAXE CpG island methylation. A man with an unmethylated 
expansion of 0.6 kb expressed FMR2 and represents a pre-mutation carrier. All
chromosomes with FRAXE CCG expansions of 0.8 kb or greater were fully methylated 
and did not express the FMR2 gene, analogous to the mechanism of silencing the
FMR1 gene in carriers of the FRAXA full mutation. The boundary between FRAXE
pre-mutation and FRAXE full mutation is between 0.7 and 0.8 kb. Two men with
absence of FMR2 expression in fibroblasts were not mentally impaired, suggesting 
that IQ in some men with FRAXE full mutation may remain within the normal range. 
Although molecular tools to study FRAXE non-specific mental retardation are now
available, further psychometric and molecular studies are needed to characterize 
the effect of the FRAXE full mutation for the purpose of genetic counselling.

PMID: 9147647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Am J Med Genet. 1997 Feb 21;74(1):73-81.

Cognitive, behavioral, and neuroanatomical assessment of two unrelated male
children expressing FRAXE.

Abrams MT(1), Doheny KF, Mazzocco MM, Knight SJ, Baumgardner TL, Freund LS,
Davies KE, Reiss AL.

Author information: 
(1)Behavioral Neurogenetics and Neuroimaging Research Center, Kennedy Krieger
Institute, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Standardized cognitive, behavioral, and neuroanatomical data are presented on 2
unrelated boys with the FRAXE (FMR2) GCC expansion mutation. In the context of
normal IQ, both boys had a history of developmental delay, including significant 
problems with communication, attention, and overactivity. Additionally, one child
was diagnosed with autistic disorder. Data from these 2 cases are compared to
analogous information from previous reports about individuals with the FRAXE or
FRAXA (FMR1) mutation. These comparisons support the idea that FRAXE is
associated with nonspecific developmental delay and possibly high-functioning
autism.

PMID: 9034011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Am J Hum Genet. 1996 Oct;59(4):847-54.

Expansion and methylation status at FRAXE can be detected on EcoRI blots used for
FRAXA diagnosis: analysis of four FRAXE families with mild mental retardation in 
males.

Biancalana V(1), Taine L, Bouix JC, Finck S, Chauvin A, De Verneuil H, Knight SJ,
Stoll C, Lacombe D, Mandel JL.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Diagnostic Génétique, Institut de Chimie Biologique, Strasbourg,
France.

The original test for the analysis of the CCG expansion at the FRAXE locus
involves Southern blot analysis of HindIII digests. We show that, by using a
different probe, the FRAXE mutation can be detected easily on the same EcoRI or
EagI+EcoRI blots as are used for detection of FRAXA. Unexpectedly, we found that 
both the expansion and methylation status can be determined on a single EcoRI
digest, because of the presence of a methylation-sensitive EcoRI site very close 
to the CCG repeat. We thus detected in a series of mentally retarded individuals 
previously tested for FRAXA expansion a FRAXE proband who led to the
identification of a large sibship (7 of 10 children carrying a mutation). We also
show that two fragile X families without FRAXA mutation that previously have been
described by Oberlé et al. have the FRAXE expansion. In another family also
ascertained initially by cytogenetic finding of a fragile X site, we performed
the combined cytogenetic and molecular prenatal diagnosis of a mutated male
fetus. All nine males (>3 years old) in whom we found a methylated mutation had
mild mental retardation. Our results suggest that the threshold of repeat length 
for abnormal methylation and fragile-site expression may be smaller at FRAXE than
at FRAXA.

PMCID: PMC1914785
PMID: 8808600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Nat Genet. 1996 May;13(1):109-13.

Identification of FMR2, a novel gene associated with the FRAXE CCG repeat and CpG
island.

Gu Y(1), Shen Y, Gibbs RA, Nelson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Human Genome Center, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Five folate-sensitive fragile sites have been identified at the molecular level
to date. Each is characterized by an expanded and methylated trinucleotide repeat
CGG (CCG). Of the three X chromosome sites, FRAXA, FRAXE and FRAXF, the former
two are associated with mental retardation in their expanded forms. FRAXA
expansion results in fragile X syndrome due to down regulation of expression of
the FMR1 gene, which carries the hypermutable CGG repeat in the 5' untranslated
portion of its first exon. Mild mental retardation without consistent physical
findings has been found associated with expanded CCG repeats at FRAXE. We have
identified a large gene (FMR2) transcribed distally from the CpG island at FRAXE,
and down-regulated by repeat expansion and methylation. The gene is novel,
expressed in adult brain and placenta, and shows similarity with another human
protein, MLLT2, expressed from a gene at chromosome 4q21 involved in
translocations found in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) cells. Identification
of this gene will facilitate further studies to determine the role of its product
in FRAXE associated mental deficiency.

PMID: 8673086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Nat Genet. 1996 May;13(1):105-8.

Identification of the gene FMR2, associated with FRAXE mental retardation.

Gecz J(1), Gedeon AK, Sutherland GR, Mulley JC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, Department of Cytogenetics and Molecular
Genetics, Women's and Children's Hospital, Adelaide, Australia.

Five folate-sensitive fragile sites have been characterized at the molecular
level (FRAXA, FRAXE, FRAXF, FRA16A and FRA11B). Three of them (FRAXA, FRAXE and
FRA11B) are associated with clinical problems, and two of the genes (FMR1 in
FRAXA and CBL2 in FRA11B) have been identified. All of these fragile sites are
associated with (CCG)n/(CGG)n triplet expansions which are hypermethylated beyond
a critical size. FRAXE is a rare folate sensitive fragile site only recently
recognized. Its cytogenetic expression was found to involve the amplification of 
a (CCG)n repeat adjacent to a CpG island. Normal alleles vary from 6 to 25
copies. Expansions of greater than 200 copies were found in FRAXE expressing
males and their FRAXE associated CpG island was fully methylated. An association 
of FRAXE expression with concurrent methylation of the CpG island and mild
non-specific mental handicap in males has been reported by several groups. We now
report the cloning and characterization of a gene (FMR2) adjacent to FRAXE.
Elements of FMR2 were initially identified from sequences deleted from a
developmentally delayed boy. We correlate loss of FMR2 expression with (CCG)n
expansion at FRAXE, demonstrating that this is a gene associated with the CpG
island adjacent to FRAXE and contributes for FRAXE-associated mild mental
retardation.

PMID: 8673085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


