
1. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2016;24:e2680. doi: 10.1590/1518-8345.0852.2680. Epub 2016
Mar 28.

Stigma and prejudice: the experience of crack users.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Bard ND(1), Antunes B(1), Roos CM(2), Olschowsky A(1), Pinho LB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Escola de Enfermagem, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre,
RS, Brazil. (2)aff3.

Objective to evaluate the stigma and prejudice experienced by crack users in
their social context. Method a qualitative study developed through the Fourth
Generation Evaluation, conducted with four interest groups (ten users, eleven
families, eight employees, and seven managers), components of the mental health
care network. For data collection, we used observation and individual interview. 
The analysis was performed through the constant comparative method. Results crack
users suffer prejudice and are stigmatized as those who do not fit in the systems
established by society (without family links, formal employment and dwelling),
and are thus excluded. They exhibit undisciplined behavior and, therefore, are
discriminated, marginalized and considered as criminals, losing their uniqueness 
and living in vulnerable situations. Conclusion the evaluation process emphasized
the need to demystify the social imaginary that demonizes the chemically
dependent, being thus important to develop public policies with actions focused
on health, prevention, information and combat to stigma.

PMID: 27027678  [PubMed - in process]


2. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol. 2016 Mar 18. doi: 10.1002/arch.21326. [Epub ahead of
print]

INVOLVEMENT OF PEPTIDOGLYCAN RECOGNITION PROTEIN L6 IN ACTIVATION OF IMMUNE
DEFICIENCY PATHWAY IN THE IMMUNE RESPONSIVE SILKWORM CELLS.

Tanaka H(1), Sagisaka A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Insect-Microbe Research Unit, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

The immune deficiency (Imd) signaling pathway is activated by Gram-negative
bacteria for producing antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). In Drosophila melanogaster,
the activation of this pathway is initiated by the recognition of Gram-negative
bacteria by peptidoglycan (PGN) recognition proteins (PGRPs), PGRP-LC and
PGRP-LE. In this study, we found that the Imd pathway is involved in enhancing
the promoter activity of AMP gene in response to Gram-negative bacteria or
diaminopimelic (DAP) type PGNs derived from Gram-negative bacteria in an immune
responsive silkworm cell line, Bm-NIAS-aff3. Using gene knockdown experiments, we
further demonstrated that silkworm PGRP L6 (BmPGRP-L6) is involved in the
activation of E. coli or E. coli-PGN mediated AMP promoter activation. Domain
analysis revealed that BmPGRP-L6 contained a conserved PGRP domain, transmembrane
domain, and RIP homotypic interaction motif like motif but lacked signal peptide 
sequences. BmPGRP-L6 overexpression enhances AMP promoter activity through the
Imd pathway. BmPGRP-L6 binds to DAP-type PGNs, although it also binds to
lysine-type PGNs that activate another immune signal pathway, the Toll pathway in
Drosophila. These results indicate that BmPGRP-L6 is a key PGRP for activating
the Imd pathway in immune responsive silkworm cells.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26991439  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo. 2016;58. pii: S0036-46652016005000202. doi:
10.1590/S1678-9946201658003. Epub 2016 Feb 23.

IDENTIFICATION OF CANINE VISCERAL LEISHMANIASIS IN A PREVIOUSLY UNAFFECTED AREA
BY CONVENTIONAL DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES AND CELL-BLOCK FIXATION.

Abrantes TR(1), Madeira Mde F(1), Silva DA(1), Perié Cdos S(2), V Mendes Júnior
AA(1), Menezes RC(1), Silva VL(3), Figueiredo FB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Infectologia Evandro Chagas, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio 
de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil. (2)aff3, Brasil. (3)Escola Nacional de Saúde Pública,
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil.

After the report of a second case of canine visceral leishmaniasis (CVL) in São
Bento da Lagoa, Itaipuaçu, in the municipality of Maricá, Rio de Janeiro State,
an epidemiological survey was carried out, through active search, totaling 145
dogs. Indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA), and rapid chromatographic immunoassay based on dual-path platform
(DPP(r)) were used to perform the serological examinations. The parasitological
diagnosis of cutaneous fragments was performed by parasitological culture,
histopathology, and immunohistochemistry. In the serological assessment, 21 dogs 
were seropositive by IFA, 17 by ELISA, and 11 by DPP(r), with sensitivity of
66.7%, 66.7% and 50%, and specificity of 87.2%, 90.2% and 94%, respectively for
each technique. The immunohistochemistry of bone marrow using the cell-block
technique presented the best results, with six positive dogs found, three of
which tested negative by the other parasitological techniques. Leishmania sp. was
isolated by parasitological culture in three dogs. The detection of autochthonous
Leishmania infantum in Itaipuaçu, and the high prevalence of seropositive dogs
confirm the circulation of this parasite in the study area and alert for the risk
of expansion in the State of Rio de Janeiro.

PMID: 26910449  [PubMed - in process]


4. Genes Dev. 2016 Jan 1;30(1):92-101. doi: 10.1101/gad.270413.115.

Regulation of the imprinted Dlk1-Dio3 locus by allele-specific enhancer activity.

Luo Z(1), Lin C(2), Woodfin AR(3), Bartom ET(3), Gao X(2), Smith ER(3),
Shilatifard A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA; Stowers
Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA; (2)Stowers
Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA; (3)Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA; (4)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Genetics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University,
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA; Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas
City, Missouri 64110, USA; Robert H. Lurie National Cancer Institute
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Genomic imprinting is a critical developmental process characteristic of parent
of origin-specific gene expression. It is well accepted that differentially
DNA-methylated regions (DMRs) and enhancers are two major classes of cis-elements
determining parent of origin-specific gene expression, with each recruiting
different sets of transcription factors. Previously, we identified the AF4/FMR2
(AFF) family protein AFF3 within the transcription elongation complex SEC-L3.
Here, we report that AFF3 can specifically bind both gametic DMRs (gDMRs) and
enhancers within imprinted loci in an allele-specific manner. We identify the
molecular regulators involved in the recruitment of AFF3 to gDMRs and provide
mechanistic insight into the requirement of AFF3 at an enhancer for the
expression of an ~200-kb polycistronic transcript within the imprinted Dlk1-Dio3 
locus. Our data suggest that the heterochromatic environment at the gDMR
reinforces silencing of its related enhancer by controlling the binding and
activity of AFF3 in an allele-specific manner. In summary, this study provides
molecular details about the regulation of dosage-critical imprinted gene
expression through the regulated binding of the transcription elongation factor
AFF3 between a DMR and an enhancer.

© 2016 Luo et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4701981 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26728555  [PubMed - in process]


5. J Biomed Inform. 2015 Dec;58:175-85. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2015.10.002. Epub 2015
Oct 19.

High-throughput alternative splicing detection using dually constrained
correspondence analysis (DCCA).

Baty F(1), Klingbiel D(2), Zappa F(3), Brutsche M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Cantonal Hospital St. Gallen, Switzerland.
Electronic address: florent.baty@kssg.ch. (2)Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer
Research (SAKK), Bern, Switzerland. (3)Oncology Institute of Southern
Switzerland, Regional Hospital San Giovanni, Bellinzona, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Cantonal Hospital St. Gallen, Switzerland.

Alternative splicing is an important component of tumorigenesis. Recent advent of
exon array technology enables the detection of alternative splicing at a
genome-wide scale. The analysis of high-throughput alternative splicing is not
yet standard and methodological developments are still needed. We propose a novel
statistical approach-Dually Constrained Correspondence Analysis-for the detection
of splicing changes in exon array data. Using this methodology, we investigated
the genome-wide alteration of alternative splicing in patients with non-small
cell lung cancer treated by bevacizumab/erlotinib. Splicing candidates reveal a
series of genes related to carcinogenesis (SFTPB), cell adhesion (STAB2, PCDH15, 
HABP2), tumor aggressiveness (ARNTL2), apoptosis, proliferation and
differentiation (PDE4D, FLT3, IL1R2), cell invasion (ETV1), as well as tumor
growth (OLFM4, FGF14), tumor necrosis (AFF3) or tumor suppression (TUSC3, CSMD1, 
RHOBTB2, SERPINB5), with indication of known alternative splicing in a majority
of genes. DCCA facilitates the identification of putative biologically relevant
alternative splicing events in high-throughput exon array data.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26483173  [PubMed - in process]


6. Oncogenesis. 2015 Jul 27;4:e161. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2015.20.

Combined transcriptome studies identify AFF3 as a mediator of the oncogenic
effects of ß-catenin in adrenocortical carcinoma.

Lefèvre L(1), Omeiri H(1), Drougat L(1), Hantel C(2), Giraud M(1), Val P(3),
Rodriguez S(1), Perlemoine K(1), Blugeon C(4), Beuschlein F(2), de Reyniès A(5), 
Rizk-Rabin M(1), Bertherat J(6), Ragazzon B(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Inserm, U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France [2] Cnrs, UMR8104, Paris,
France [3] Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, France. (2)Endocrine 
Research Unit, Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Klinikum der Universität
München, Munich, Germany. (3)1] Clermont Université, Université Blaise Pascal,
GReD, Clermont-Ferrand Cedex 1, France [2] CNRS, UMR 6293, GReD, Aubière Cedex,
France [3] Inserm, U1103, GReD, Aubière Cedex, France. (4)1] Ecole Normale
Supérieure, Institut de Biologie de l'ENS, IBENS, Plateforme Génomique, Paris,
France [2] Inserm, U1024, Paris, France [3] CNRS, UMR 8197, Paris, France.
(5)Programme Cartes d'Identité des Tumeurs, Ligue Nationale Contre Le Cancer,
Paris, France. (6)1] Inserm, U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France [2] Cnrs,
UMR8104, Paris, France [3] Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
France [4] Department of Endocrinology, Referral Center for Rare Adrenal
Diseases, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.

Adrenocortical cancer (ACC) is a very aggressive tumor, and genomics studies
demonstrate that the most frequent alterations of driver genes in these cancers
activate the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. However, the adrenal-specific
targets of oncogenic ß-catenin-mediating tumorigenesis have not being
established. A combined transcriptomic analysis from two series of human tumors
and the human ACC cell line H295R harboring a spontaneous ß-catenin activating
mutation was done to identify the Wnt/ß-catenin targets. Seven genes were
consistently identified in the three studies. Among these genes, we found that
AFF3 mediates the oncogenic effects of ß-catenin in ACC. The Wnt response element
site located at nucleotide position -1408 of the AFF3 transcriptional start sites
(TSS) mediates the regulation by the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. AFF3
silencing decreases cell proliferation and increases apoptosis in the ACC cell
line H295R. AFF3 is located in nuclear speckles, which play an important role in 
RNA splicing. AFF3 overexpression in adrenocortical cells interferes with the
organization and/or biogenesis of these nuclear speckles and alters the
distribution of CDK9 and cyclin T1 such that they accumulate at the sites of
AFF3/speckles. We demonstrate that AFF3 is a new target of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway 
involved in ACC, acting on transcription and RNA splicing.

PMCID: PMC4521181
PMID: 26214578  [PubMed]


7. Cad Saude Publica. 2015 Jun;31(6):1234-46. doi: 10.1590/0102-311X00084614. Epub
2015 Jun 1.

[A sociography of elderly victims of family violence in Portugal].

[Article in Portuguese]

Gil AP(1), Santos AJ(1), Kislaya I(1), Santos C(2), Mascoli L(3), Ferreira AI(3),
Vieira DN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)Instituto Nacional de Medicina Legal e Ciências Forenses, Coimbra, Portugal.
(3)aff3, Portugal.

This article presents data on violence against persons aged 60 years or older and
living in Portugal for at least 12 months. The cross-sectional descriptive study 
collected data with a face-to-face questionnaire applied to victims that had
sought assistance at three government institutions and one non-governmental
support service for victims. The non-probabilistic sample included 510 victims of
violence in family settings. Physical and psychological violence were the most
common (87.8% and 69.6%, respectively). Financial violence was reported by 47.5% 
of the victims, followed by sexual assault (7.5%) and neglect (6.5%). The
majority of victims (74.1%) reported more than one type of violence. Victims were
mostly women, and mean age was 70.7 years. Most of the perpetrators belonged to
the nuclear family, namely spouses or partners, sons/sons-in-law, and
daughters/daughters-in-law. However, differences were observed according to
victim's gender. The results indicate that violence is not a uniform phenomenon, 
presenting different configurations.

PMID: 26200371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Rev Gaucha Enferm. 2015 Mar;36(1):21-7. doi: 10.1590/1983-1447.2015.01.47694.

[Assessment of bariatric surgery results].

[Article in Portuguese]

Barros LM(1), Frota NM(2), Moreira RA(3), de Araújo TM(4), Caetano JÁ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal do Ceará, Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil. (2)UFC, Fortaleza,
Ceará, Brazil. (3)aff3, Brazil. (4)Department of Nursing, Universidade da
Integração Internacional da Lusofonia Afro-brasileira, Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil. 
(5)Department of Nursing, UFC, Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil.

The objective was to evaluate the results of bariatric surgery in patients in the
late postoperative period using the Bariatric Analysis and Reporting Outcome
System (BAROS). This cross-sectional study was conducted from November 2011 to
June 2012 at a hospital in the state of Ceará, Brazil. Data were collected from
92 patients using the BAROS protocol, which analyzes weight loss, improved
comorbidities, complications, reoperations and Quality of Life (QoL). Data were
analysed using the chi-squared test, Fischer's exact test and the Mann-Whitney
test. There was a reduction in the Body Mass Index (47.2±6.8 kg/m2 in the
pre-operatory and 31.3±5.0 kg/m2 after surgery, p<0.001). The comorbidity with
the highest resolution was arterial hypertension (p<0.001), and QV improved in
94.6% of patients. The main complications were hair loss, incisional hernia and
cholelithiasis. The surgery provided satisfactory weight loss and improvements in
the comorbidities associated to a better QL. Use of the BAROS protocol allows
nurses to plan interventions and maintain the good results.

PMID: 26098798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Orthop Res. 2015 Oct;33(10):1412-23. doi: 10.1002/jor.22944. Epub 2015 Jun 19.

Genetic loci that regulate ectopic calcification in response to knee trauma in
LG/J by SM/J advanced intercross mice.

Rai MF(1), Schmidt EJ(1), Hashimoto S(1), Cheverud JM(2), Sandell LJ(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Musculoskeletal Research Center, Washington
University School of Medicine at Barnes-Jewish Hospital, 425 S. Euclid Avenue MS 
8233, St. Louis, Missouri, 63110. (2)Department of Biology, Loyola University,
1050 W. Sheridan Road, Chicago, Illinois, 60660. (3)Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis at Engineering and Applied
Sciences, Whitaker Hall, MS 1097, St. Louis, MO, 63130. (4)Department of Cell
Biology and Physiology, Washington University School, of Medicine at
Barnes-Jewish Hospital, 425 S. Euclid Avenue MS 8233, St. Louis, Missouri, 63110.

This study reports on genetic susceptibility to ectopic calcification in the LG/J
and SM/J advanced intercross mice. Using 347 mice in 98 full-sibships,
destabilization of medial meniscus (DMM) was performed to induce joint injury. We
found that joint destabilization instigated ectopic calcifications as detected
and quantified by micro-CT. We performed quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis 
to map ectopic calcification phenotypes to discrete genomic locations. To
validate the functional significance of the selected QTL candidate genes, we
compared mRNA expression between parental LG/J and SM/J inbred strains. Overall, 
we detected 20 QTLs affecting synovial and meniscus calcification phenotypes with
11 QTLs linked to synovial calcification. Functional and bioinformatic analyses
of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) identified functional classifications
relevant to angiogenesis (Myo1e, Kif26b, Nprl3, Stab2, Fam105b), bone
metabolism/calcification (Tle3, Tgfb2, Lipc, Nfe2l1, Ank, Fam105b), arthritis
(Stab2, Tbx21, Map4k4, Hoxb9, Larp6, Col1a2, Adam10, Timp3, Nfe2l1, Trpm3), and
ankylosing-spondylitis (Ank, Pon1, Il1r2, Tbkbp1) indicating that ectopic
calcification involves multiple mechanisms. Furthermore, the expression of 11 out
of 78 candidate genes was significantly different between LG/J and SM/J.
Correlation analysis showed that Aff3, Fam81a, Syn3, and Ank were correlated with
synovial calcification. Taken together, our findings of multiple genetic loci
suggest the involvement of multiple genes contributing to ectopic calcification.

© 2015 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25989359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Lab Invest. 2015 Jun;95(6):603-9. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2015.50. Epub 2015 Apr
13.

RNA sequencing of sarcomas with simple karyotypes: identification and enrichment 
of fusion transcripts.

Hofvander J(1), Tayebwa J(1), Nilsson J(1), Magnusson L(1), Brosjö O(2), Larsson 
O(3), von Steyern FV(4), Domanski HA(5), Mandahl N(1), Mertens F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University and Regional Laboratories, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. (2)Department of Orthopedics, Karolinska University
Hospital, Solna, Sweden. (3)Department of Pathology, Karolinska University
Hospital, Solna, Sweden. (4)Department of Orthopedics, Skåne University Hospital,
Lund University, Lund, Sweden. (5)Department of Pathology, University and
Regional Laboratories, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Gene fusions are neoplasia-associated mutations arising from structural
chromosomal rearrangements. They have a strong impact on tumor development and
constitute important diagnostic markers. Malignant soft tissue tumors (sarcomas) 
constitute a heterogeneous group of neoplasms with >50 distinct subtypes, each of
which is rare. In addition, there is considerable morphologic overlap between
sarcomas and benign lesions. Several subtypes display distinct gene fusions,
serving as excellent biomarkers. The development of methods for deep sequencing
of the complete transcriptome (RNA-Seq) has substantially improved the
possibilities for detecting gene fusions. With the aim of identifying new gene
fusions of biological and clinical relevance, eight sarcomas with simple
karyotypes, ie, only one or a few structural rearrangements, were subjected to
massively parallel paired-end sequencing of mRNA. Three different algorithms were
used to identify fusion transcripts from RNA-Seq data. Three novel
(KIAA2026-NUDT11, CCBL1-ARL1, and AFF3-PHF1) and two previously known fusions
(FUS-CREB3L2 and HAS2-PLAG1) were found and could be verified by other methods.
These findings show that RNA-Seq is a powerful tool for detecting gene fusions in
sarcomas but also suggest that it is advisable to use more than one algorithm to 
analyze the output data as only two of the confirmed fusions were reported by
more than one of the gene fusion detection software programs. For all of the
confirmed gene fusions, at least one of the genes mapped to a chromosome band
implicated by the karyotype, suggesting that sarcomas with simple karyotypes
constitute an excellent resource for identifying novel gene fusions.

PMID: 25867764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Genet Genomics. 2015 Mar 20;42(3):107-17. doi: 10.1016/j.jgg.2015.02.003. Epub 
2015 Feb 17.

Genome-wide linkage and positional association analyses identify associations of 
novel AFF3 and NTM genes with triglycerides: the GenSalt study.

Li C(1), Bazzano LA(2), Rao DC(3), Hixson JE(4), He J(2), Gu D(5), Gu CC(3),
Shimmin LC(4), Jaquish CE(6), Schwander K(3), Liu DP(7), Huang J(5), Lu F(8), Cao
J(5), Chong S(9), Lu X(5), Kelly TN(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Tulane University School of Public Health and
Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. (2)Department of Epidemiology,
Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, LA 
70112, USA; Department of Medicine, Tulane University School of Medicine, New
Orleans, LA 70112, USA. (3)Division of Biostatistics, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110-1093, USA. (4)Department of Epidemiology,
Human Genetics and Environmental Sciences, University of Texas School of Public
Health, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (5)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular
Disease, Fuwai Hospital, National Center of Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100037,
China. (6)Division of Prevention and Population Sciences, National Heart, Lung,
Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892-7936, USA. (7)National Laboratory of Medical 
Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, China.
(8)Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Ji'nan
250062, China. (9)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Nanjing Medical
University School of Public Health, Nanjing 210029, China. (10)Department of
Epidemiology, Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine,
New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. Electronic address: tkelly@tulane.edu.

We conducted a genome-wide linkage scan and positional association study to
identify genes and variants influencing blood lipid levels among participants of 
the Genetic Epidemiology Network of Salt-Sensitivity (GenSalt) study. The GenSalt
study was conducted among 1906 participants from 633 Han Chinese families. Lipids
were measured from overnight fasting blood samples using standard methods.
Multipoint quantitative trait genome-wide linkage scans were performed on the
high-density lipoprotein, low-density lipoprotein, and log-transformed
triglyceride phenotypes. Using dense panels of single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), single-marker and gene-based association analyses were conducted to
follow-up on promising linkage signals. Additive associations between each SNP
and lipid phenotypes were tested using mixed linear regression models. Gene-based
analyses were performed by combining P-values from single-marker analyses within 
each gene using the truncated product method (TPM). Significant associations were
assessed for replication among 777 Asian participants of the Multi-ethnic Study
of Atherosclerosis (MESA). Bonferroni correction was used to adjust for multiple 
testing. In the GenSalt study, suggestive linkage signals were identified at
2p11.2<U+2012>2q12.1 [maximum multipoint LOD score (MML) = 2.18 at 2q11.2] and
11q24.3<U+2012>11q25 (MML = 2.29 at 11q25) for the log-transformed triglyceride
phenotype. Follow-up analyses of these two regions revealed gene-based
associations of charged multivesicular body protein 3 (CHMP3), ring finger
protein 103 (RNF103), AF4/FMR2 family, member 3 (AFF3), and neurotrimin (NTM)
with triglycerides (P = 4 × 10(-4), 1.00 × 10(-5), 2.00 × 10(-5), and 1.00 ×
10(-7), respectively). Both the AFF3 and NTM triglyceride associations were
replicated among MESA study participants (P = 1.00 × 10(-7) and 8.00 × 10(-5),
respectively). Furthermore, NTM explained the linkage signal on chromosome 11. In
conclusion, we identified novel genes associated with lipid phenotypes in linkage
regions on chromosomes 2 and 11.

Copyright © 2015 Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, and Genetics Society of China. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4761343
PMID: 25819087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Insect Physiol. 2015 Sep;80:31-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2015.02.011. Epub
2015 Mar 12.

Identification of two juvenile hormone inducible transcription factors from the
silkworm, Bombyx mori.

Matsumoto H(1), Ueno C(1), Nakamura Y(1), Kinjoh T(2), Ito Y(1), Shimura S(1),
Noda H(1), Imanishi S(1), Mita K(1), Fujiwara H(3), Hiruma K(4), Shinoda T(1),
Kamimura M(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(2)National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan;
Faculty of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Hirosaki University, Hirosaki, Aomori, 
Japan. (3)Department of Integrated Biosciences, Graduate School of Frontier
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan. (4)Faculty of
Agriculture and Life Sciences, Hirosaki University, Hirosaki, Aomori, Japan.
(5)National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
Electronic address: kamimura@affrc.go.jp.

Juvenile hormone (JH) regulates many physiological processes in insects. However,
the signal cascades in which JH is active have not yet been fully elucidated,
particularly in comparison to another major hormone ecdysteroid. Here we
identified two JH inducible transcription factors as candidate components of JH
signaling pathways in the silkworm, Bombyx mori. DNA microarray analysis showed
that expression of two transcription factor genes, E75 and Enhancer of split mß
(E(spl)mß), was induced by juvenile hormone I (JH I) in NIAS-Bm-aff3 cells. Real 
time RT-PCR analysis confirmed that expression of four E75 isoforms (E75A, E75B, 
E75C and E75D) and E(spl)mß was 3-8 times greater after JH I addition. Addition
of the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide did not suppress JH-induced
expression of the genes, indicating that they were directly induced by JH.
JH-induced expression of E75 and E(spl)mß was also observed in four other B. mori
cell lines and in larval hemocytes of final instar larvae. Notably, E75A
expression was induced very strongly in larval hemocytes by topical application
of the JH analog fenoxycarb; the level of induced expression was comparable to
that produced by feeding larvae with 20-hydroxyecdysone. These results suggest
that E75 and E(spl)mß are general and direct target genes of JH and that the
transcription factors encoded by these genes play important roles in JH
signaling.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25770979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Dental Press J Orthod. 2015 Jan-Feb;20(1):108-17. doi:
10.1590/2176-9451.20.1.108-117.oar.

Orthodontic treatment in patient with idiopathic root resorption: a case report.

Rey D(1), Smit RM(1), Gamboa L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, CES University, Medellín, Colombia. (2)aff3.

Multiple idiopathic external root resorption is a rare pathological condition
usually detected as an incidental radiographic finding. External root resorption 
of permanent teeth is a multifactorial process related to several local and
systemic factors. If an etiological factor cannot be identified for root
resorption, the term "idiopathic" is applied. This report presents a case of
multiple idiopathic apical root resorption. The condition was found in a young
female patient seeking orthodontic treatment due to malocclusion. This kind of
resorption starts apically and progresses coronally, causing a gradual shortening
and rounding of the remaining root. Patients with this condition are not the
ideal candidates for orthodontic treatment; however, the aim of this report is to
describe an unusual case of idiopathic root resorption involving the entire
dentition, and to present the orthodontic treatment of this patient. It describes
the progress and completion of orthodontic therapy with satisfactory end results.

PMCID: PMC4373023
PMID: 25741832  [PubMed - in process]


14. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 24;10(2):e0117818. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117818.
eCollection 2015.

mRNA profiling reveals determinants of trastuzumab efficiency in HER2-positive
breast cancer.

von der Heyde S(1), Wagner S(2), Czerny A(3), Nietert M(3), Ludewig F(4),
Salinas-Riester G(4), Arlt D(2), Beißbarth T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Statistical Bioinformatics, Department of Medical Statistics, University
Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany; IndivuTest GmbH, Hamburg, Germany. 
(2)Division of Stem Cells and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, 
Germany; Division of Molecular Genome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Statistical Bioinformatics, Department of Medical
Statistics, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. (4)DNA
Microarray and Deep-Sequencing Facility Göttingen, Department of Developmental
Biochemistry, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

Intrinsic and acquired resistance to the monoclonal antibody drug trastuzumab is 
a major problem in the treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer. A deeper
understanding of the underlying mechanisms could help to develop new agents. Our 
intention was to detect genes and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
affecting trastuzumab efficiency in cell culture. Three HER2-positive breast
cancer cell lines with different resistance phenotypes were analyzed. We chose
BT474 as model of trastuzumab sensitivity, HCC1954 as model of intrinsic
resistance, and BTR50, derived from BT474, as model of acquired resistance. Based
on RNA-Seq data, we performed differential expression analyses on these cell
lines with and without trastuzumab treatment. Differentially expressed genes
between the resistant cell lines and BT474 are expected to contribute to
resistance. Differentially expressed genes between untreated and trastuzumab
treated BT474 are expected to contribute to drug efficacy. To exclude false
positives from the candidate gene set, we removed genes that were also
differentially expressed between untreated and trastuzumab treated BTR50. We
further searched for SNPs in the untreated cell lines which could contribute to
trastuzumab resistance. The analysis resulted in 54 differentially expressed
candidate genes that might be connected to trastuzumab efficiency. 90% of 40
selected candidates were validated by RT-qPCR. ALPP, CALCOCO1, CAV1, CYP1A2 and
IGFBP3 were significantly higher expressed in the trastuzumab treated than in the
untreated BT474 cell line. GDF15, IL8, LCN2, PTGS2 and 20 other genes were
significantly higher expressed in HCC1954 than in BT474, while NCAM2, COLEC12,
AFF3, TFF3, NRCAM, GREB1 and TFF1 were significantly lower expressed.
Additionally, we inferred SNPs in HCC1954 for CAV1, PTGS2, IL8 and IGFBP3. The
latter also had a variation in BTR50. 20% of the validated subset have already
been mentioned in literature. For half of them we called and analyzed SNPs. These
results contribute to a better understanding of trastuzumab action and resistance
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4339844
PMID: 25710561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2014 Nov-Dec;22(6):893-901. doi:
10.1590/0104-1169.3600.2492. Epub 2015 Jan 9.

Evaluation of perineal muscle strength in the first trimester of pregnancy.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Caroci Ade S(1), Riesco ML(2), Rocha BM(3), Ventura Lde J(4), Oliveira SG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Escola de Artes, Ciências e Humanidades, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo,
SP, Brazil. (2)Escola de Enfermagem, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil. (3)aff3. (4)Hospital Geral de São Mateus Dr. Manoel Bifulco, São Mateus, 
SP, Brazil. (5)Pronto Socorro e Maternidade Municipal Zoraide Eva das Dores,
Itapecerica da Serra, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: to analyze the Pelvic Floor Muscle Strength (PFMS) of pregnant women 
with one or more vaginal or cesarean deliveries; to compare the PFMS of these
with pregnant women with the PFMS of primiparous women.
METHODS: cross-sectional study with women up to 12 weeks pregnant, performed in
Itapecerica da Serra, São Paulo state, from December 2012 to May 2013. The sample
consisted of 110 pregnant women with one or more vaginal deliveries or cesarean
sections and 110 primigravidae. The PFMS was evaluated by perineometry
(Peritron(tm)) and vaginal digital palpation (modified Oxford scale).
RESULTS: the average PFMS in pregnant women with a history of vaginal delivery or
cesarean section was 33.4 (SD=21.2) cmH2O. From the Oxford scale, 75.4% of the
pregnant women with previous vaginal or cesarean deliveries presented grade = 2, 
and 5.5% grade = 4; among the primiparae, 39.9% presented grade = 2, and 50.9%
grade = 4, with a statistically significant difference (p<0.001). From the
perineometry, there was no statistically significant difference between the PFMS 
and age, type of delivery, parity, body mass index, and genitourinary tract
symptoms, however, there was a statistically significant difference between the
pregnant women with and without a history of episiotomy (p=0.04). In the
palpation, none of the variables showed a statistically significant difference.
CONCLUSION: pregnancy and childbirth can reduce the PFMS.

PMCID: PMC4309222
PMID: 25591083  [PubMed - in process]


16. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2015 Jan 9;0:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Evaluation of perineal muscle strength in the first trimester of pregnancy.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Caroci AS(1), Riesco ML(2), Rocha BM(3), Ventura LJ(4), Oliveira SG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Escola de Artes, Ciências e Humanidades, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo,
SP, Brazil. (2)Escola de Enfermagem, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil. (3)aff3. (4)Hospital Geral de São Mateus Dr. Manoel Bifulco, São Mateus, 
SP, Brazil. (5)Pronto Socorro e Maternidade Municipal Zoraide Eva das Dores,
Itapecerica da Serra, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: to analyze the Pelvic Floor Muscle Strength (PFMS) of pregnant women 
with one or more vaginal or cesarean deliveries; to compare the PFMS of these
with pregnant women with the PFMS of primiparous women.
METHODS: cross-sectional study with women up to 12 weeks pregnant, performed in
Itapecerica da Serra, São Paulo state, from December 2012 to May 2013. The sample
consisted of 110 pregnant women with one or more vaginal deliveries or cesarean
sections and 110 primigravidae. The PFMS was evaluated by perineometry
(Peritron(tm)) and vaginal digital palpation (modified Oxford scale).
RESULTS: the average PFMS in pregnant women with a history of vaginal delivery or
cesarean section was 33.4 (SD=21.2) cmH2O. From the Oxford scale, 75.4% of the
pregnant women with previous vaginal or cesarean deliveries presented grade = 2, 
and 5.5% grade = 4; among the primiparae, 39.9% presented grade = 2, and 50.9%
grade = 4, with a statistically significant difference (p<0.001). From the
perineometry, there was no statistically significant difference between the PFMS 
and age, type of delivery, parity, body mass index, and genitourinary tract
symptoms, however, there was a statistically significant difference between the
pregnant women with and without a history of episiotomy (p=0.04). In the
palpation, none of the variables showed a statistically significant difference.
CONCLUSION: pregnancy and childbirth can reduce the PFMS.

PMID: 25591007  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 27;9(8):e105933. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105933.
eCollection 2014.

Laf4/Aff3, a gene involved in intellectual disability, is required for cellular
migration in the mouse cerebral cortex.

Moore JM(1), Oliver PL(1), Finelli MJ(1), Lee S(2), Lickiss T(2), Molnár Z(2),
Davies KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Functional Genomics Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.

Members of the AFF (AF4/FMR2) family of putative transcription factors are
involved in infant acute leukaemia and intellectual disability (ID), although
very little is known about their transcriptional targets. For example, deletion
of human lymphoid nuclear protein related to AF4/AFF member 3 (LAF4/AFF3) is
known to cause severe neurodevelopmental defects, and silencing of the gene is
also associated with ID at the folate-sensitive fragile site (FSFS) FRA2A; yet
the normal function of this gene in the nervous system is unclear. The aim of
this study was to further investigate the function of Laf4 in the brain by
focusing on its role in the cortex. By manipulating expression levels in
organotypic slices, we demonstrate here that Laf4 is required for normal cellular
migration in the developing cortex and have subsequently identified Mdga2, an
important structural protein in neurodevelopment, as a target of Laf4
transcriptional activity. Furthermore, we show that the migration deficit caused 
by loss of Laf4 can be partially rescued by Mdga2 over-expression, revealing an
important functional relationship between these genes. Our study demonstrates the
key transcriptional role of Laf4 during early brain development and reveals a
novel function for the gene in the process of cortical cell migration relevant to
the haploinsufficiency and silencing observed in human neurodevelopmental
disorders.

PMCID: PMC4146563
PMID: 25162227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Molecules. 2014 Aug 19;19(8):12660-75. doi: 10.3390/molecules190812660.

Prebiotic potential of Agave angustifolia Haw fructans with different degrees of 
polymerization.

Velázquez-Martínez JR(1), González-Cervantes RM(2), Hernández-Gallegos MA(3),
Mendiola RC(4), Aparicio AR(5), Ocampo ML(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Desarrollo de Productos Bióticos, Instituto Politécnico Nacional,
P.O. Box 24, Yautepec 62730, Morelos, Mexico. jrodolfovelazquez@gmail.com.
(2)Departamento de Sistemas Biológicos, Universidad Autónoma
Metropolitana-Xochimilco, Calzada del Hueso 1100, Col. Villa Quietud, Delegación 
Coyoacán 04960, D.F., Mexico. gcrm4280@correo.xoc.uam.mx. (3)Escuela Nacional de 
Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Prolongación de Carpio y
Plan de Ayala s/n, Col. Santo Tomas, Delegación Miguel Hidalgo 11340, D.F.,
Mexico. mineaurora@gmail.com. (4)Centro de Desarrollo de Productos Bióticos,
Instituto Politécnico Nacional, P.O. Box 24, Yautepec 62730, Morelos, Mexico.
rcamposm@ipn.mx. (5)Centro de Desarrollo de Productos Bióticos, Instituto
Politécnico Nacional, P.O. Box 24, Yautepec 62730, Morelos, Mexico.
aaparici@ipn.mx. (6)Centro de Desarrollo de Productos Bióticos, Instituto
Politécnico Nacional, P.O. Box 24, Yautepec 62730, Morelos, Mexico.
mlarenas@ipn.mx.

Inulin-type fructans are the most studied prebiotic compounds because of their
broad range of health benefits. In particular, plants of the Agave genus are rich
in fructans. Agave-derived fructans have a branched structure with both ß-(2<U+2192>1)
and ß-(2<U+2192>6) linked fructosyl chains attached to the sucrose start unit with a
degree of polymerization (DP) of up to 80 fructose units. The objective of this
work was to assess the prebiotic potential of three Agave angustifolia Haw
fructan fractions (AFF) with different degrees of polymerization. The three
fructan fractions were extracted from the agave stem by lixiviation and then
purified by ultrafiltration and ion exchange chromatography: AFF1, AFF2 and AFF3 
with high (3-60 fructose units), medium (2-40) and low (2-22) DP, respectively.
The fructan profile was determined with high-performance anion exchange
chromatography with pulsed amperometric detection (HPAEC-PAD), which confirmed a 
branched fructan structure. Structural elucidation was performed by Fourier
Transform Infra-Red Spectroscopy. The AFF spectrum shows characteristic fructan
bands. The prebiotic effect of these fractions was assessed in vitro through
fermentation by Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus strains. Four growth patterns
were observed. Some bacteria did not grow with any of the AFF, while other
strains grew with only AFF3. Some bacteria grew according to the molecular weight
of the AFF and some grew indistinctly with the three fructan fractions.

PMID: 25153877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Rev Col Bras Cir. 2014 May-Jun;41(3):155-60.

Impact of bariatric surgery on depression and anxiety symptons, bulimic behaviors
and quality of life.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Tae B(1), Pelaggi ER(1), Moreira JG(1), Waisberg J(2), de Matos LL(3), D'Elia
G(4).

Author information: 
(1)aff1. (2)aff2. (3)aff3. (4)Facudade de Medicina do ABC, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To assess psychiatric symptoms, substance use, quality of life and
eating behavior of patients undergoing bariatric surgery before and after the
procedure.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective longitudinal study of 32 women undergoing
bariatric surgery. To obtain data, the patients answered specific,
self-administered questionnaires.
RESULTS: We observed a reduction in depressive and anxious symptoms and also in
bulimic behavior, as well as an improved quality of life in the physical,
psychological and environmental domains. There was also a decrease in use of
antidepressants and appetite suppressants, but the surgery was not a cessation
factor in smoking and / or alcoholism.
CONCLUSION: a decrease in psychiatric symptoms was observed after bariatric
surgery, as well as the reduction in the use of psychoactive substances. In
addition, there was an improvement in quality of life after surgical treatment of
obesity.

PMID: 25140645  [PubMed - in process]


20. Hist Cienc Saude Manguinhos. 2015 Dec;22 Suppl:1551-71. doi:
10.1590/S0104-59702014005000015. Epub 2014 Aug 13.

[Regulating the internet: a comparative analysis of Brazil, Chile, Spain, the US,
and France].

[Article in Portuguese]

Segurado R(1), Lima CS(2), Ameni CS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Fundação Escola de Sociologia e Política, São Paulo, SP, Brasil. (2)aff3,
Brasil. (3)aff4, Brasil.

Global governance is of key concern in the current debate over the workings of
the world's computer network, and Brazil has played a notable role in this
process, especially after approval of the Marco Civil da Internet (law 12.965,
april 23, 2014), which defines Brazil's regulatory framework for the internet.
Dubbed the internet bill of rights, this law sets out the principles, guarantees,
rights, and duties of internet users and providers in Brazil. Based on the
fundamental categories of net neutrality, internet users' right to privacy, and
copyright discussions from the perspective of intellectual property, the article 
offers a comparative analysis of regulations in five countries: Brazil, Chile,
Spain, the US, and France.

PMID: 25119248  [PubMed - in process]


21. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2014 May-Jun;22(3):448-53.

How do primary health care professionals deal with pregnant women who are victims
of domestic violence?

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Salcedo-Barrientos DM(1), Miura PO(2), Macedo VD(3), Egry EY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Escola de Artes, Ciências e Humanidades, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo,
SP, Brazil. (2)Instituto de Psicologia, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil. (3)aff3. (4)Escola de Enfermagem, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo,
SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: to determine how Family Health Strategy professionals recognize and
deal with domestic violence in pregnant women.
METHOD: qualitative study based on the Theory of Praxis Intervention in
Collective Health Nursing (TIPESC). Fourteen professionals at a Basic Health Unit
in the east side of Sao Paulo/Brazil were interviewed. Empirical data were
categorized and discussed in thematic groups. For data analysis was used the
technique of Discourse Analysis.
RESULTS: we identified low number of reported cases of domestic violence; lack of
education and training of health care professionals; failure in the
identification and intervention process due to bias on their personal problems,
moral attitudes and prejudice against these women. In addition, the study showed 
that their labor process was based entirely on the biological aspects of the
women and to overcome this, they need of proper rapport between health care
professionals and pregnant women to deal with of domestic violence.
CONCLUSION: professionals should develop skills to intervene in violence against 
pregnant women and also modify labor processes considering women in their
totality and part of society.

PMCID: PMC4292616
PMID: 25029056  [PubMed - in process]


22. Rev Lat Am Enfermagem. 2014 May-Jun;22(3):401-7.

Factors related to failure to attend the consultation to receive the results of
the Pap smear test.

[Article in English, Portuguese, Spanish]

Vasconcelos CT(1), Cunha Dde F(1), Coelho CF(2), Pinheiro AK(1), Sawada NO(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Enfermagem, Faculdade de Farmácia, Odontologia e Enfermagem,
Universidade Federal do Ceará, Fortaleza, CE, Brazil. (2)aff3. (3)Centre for
Nursing Research Development, Escola de Enfermagem de Ribeirão Preto,
Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: to identify the factors related to the failure of women to attend the 
follow-up consultation to receive the results of the Pap smear test.
METHOD: a cross-sectional study, carried out with 775 patients who underwent the 
Pap smear test in the Centro de Saúde da Família of Fortaleza, between September 
2010 and February 2011.
RESULTS: the majority of the women studied were young (=35 years), had low levels
of education (=7 years of study), and commenced sexual activity early (=20
years), with 17.0% of them failing to return to receive the test results.
Statistically significant results for the failure to return were related to:
young women (p=0.001); early onset of sexual activity (p=0.047); and inadequate
knowledge about the Pap smear test (p=0.029).
CONCLUSION: the fact that the women failed to return for the result is a problem 
for the control of cervical cancer, and must be addressed through educational
strategies that reinforce the importance of the return for the early detection of
this cancer.

PMCID: PMC4292637
PMID: 25029050  [PubMed - in process]


23. PLoS Genet. 2014 Apr 24;10(4):e1004242. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004242.
eCollection 2014.

FRA2A is a CGG repeat expansion associated with silencing of AFF3.

Metsu S(1), Rooms L(1), Rainger J(2), Taylor MS(2), Bengani H(2), Wilson DI(3),
Chilamakuri CS(4), Morrison H(2), Vandeweyer G(1), Reyniers E(1), Douglas E(5),
Thompson G(6), Haan E(7), Gecz J(8), Fitzpatrick DR(2), Kooy RF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Medical and Developmental Genetics Section, MRC Human Genetics Unit, IGMM,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. (3)University of Southampton,
Centre for Human Development, Stem Cells and Regeneration, Human Genetics,
Southampton, United Kingdom. (4)Department of Tumor Biology, Institute for Cancer
Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (5)Genetics and Molecular
Pathology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (6)Department of
Paediatrics, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia;
Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Flinders University, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia. (7)Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; South Australian Clinical Genetic Service, 
SA Pathology (at Women's and Children's Hospital), Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia. (8)Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia; Department of Paediatrics, The University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Folate-sensitive fragile sites (FSFS) are a rare cytogenetically visible subset
of dynamic mutations. Of the eight molecularly characterized FSFS, four are
associated with intellectual disability (ID). Cytogenetic expression results from
CGG tri-nucleotide-repeat expansion mutation associated with local CpG
hypermethylation and transcriptional silencing. The best studied is the FRAXA
site in the FMR1 gene, where large expansions cause fragile X syndrome, the most 
common inherited ID syndrome. Here we studied three families with FRA2A
expression at 2q11 associated with a wide spectrum of neurodevelopmental
phenotypes. We identified a polymorphic CGG repeat in a conserved, brain-active
alternative promoter of the AFF3 gene, an autosomal homolog of the X-linked
AFF2/FMR2 gene: Expansion of the AFF2 CGG repeat causes FRAXE ID. We found that
FRA2A-expressing individuals have mosaic expansions of the AFF3 CGG repeat in the
range of several hundred repeat units. Moreover, bisulfite sequencing and
pyrosequencing both suggest AFF3 promoter hypermethylation. cSNP-analysis
demonstrates monoallelic expression of the AFF3 gene in FRA2A carriers thus
predicting that FRA2A expression results in functional haploinsufficiency for
AFF3 at least in a subset of tissues. By whole-mount in situ hybridization the
mouse AFF3 ortholog shows strong regional expression in the developing brain,
somites and limb buds in 9.5-12.5dpc mouse embryos. Our data suggest that there
may be an association between FRA2A and a delay in the acquisition of motor and
language skills in the families studied here. However, additional cases are
required to firmly establish a causal relationship.

PMCID: PMC3998887
PMID: 24763282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(11):1788-97. doi: 10.4161/cc.28756. Epub 2014 Apr 11.

Crystal structure of HIV-1 Tat complexed with human P-TEFb and AFF4.

Gu J(1), Babayeva ND(1), Suwa Y(1), Baranovskiy AG(1), Price DH(2), Tahirov
TH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases; University of
Nebraska Medical Center; Omaha, NE USA. (2)Biochemistry Department; University of
Iowa; Iowa City, IA USA.

Developing anti-viral therapies targeting HIV-1 transcription has been hampered
by the limited structural knowledge of the proteins involved. HIV-1 hijacks the
cellular machinery that controls RNA polymerase II elongation through an
interaction of HIV-1 Tat with the positive transcription elongation factor
P-TEFb, which interacts with an AF4 family member (AFF1/2/3/4) in the super
elongation complex (SEC). Because inclusion of TatP-TEFb into the SEC is
critical for HIV transcription, we have determined the crystal structure of the
TatAFF4P-TEFb complex containing HIV-1 Tat (residues 1-48), human Cyclin T1
(1-266), human Cdk9 (7-332), and human AFF4 (27-69). Tat binding to AFF4P-TEFb
causes concerted structural changes in AFF4 via a shift of helix H5' of Cyclin T1
and the a-3 10 helix of AFF4. The interaction between Tat and AFF4 provides
structural constraints that explain tolerated Tat mutations. Analysis of the
Tat-binding surface of AFF4 coupled with modeling of all other AF4 family members
suggests that AFF1 and AFF4 would be preferred over AFF2 or AFF3 for interaction 
with TatP-TEFb. The structure establishes that the Tat-TAR recognition motif
(TRM) in Cyclin T1 interacts with both Tat and AFF4, leading to the exposure of
arginine side chains for binding to TAR RNA. Furthermore, modeling of Tat Lys28
acetylation suggests that the acetyl group would be in a favorable position for
H-bond formation with Asn257 of TRM, thereby stabilizing the TRM in Cyclin T1,
and provides a structural basis for the modulation of TAR RNA binding by
acetylation of Tat Lys28.

PMCID: PMC4111725
PMID: 24727379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 10;8(9):e74375. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074375. eCollection
2013.

Lack of association of variants previously associated with anti-TNF medication
response in rheumatoid arthritis patients: results from a homogeneous Greek
population.

Zervou MI(1), Myrthianou E, Flouri I, Plant D, Chlouverakis G, Castro-Giner F,
Rapsomaniki P, Barton A, Boumpas DT, Sidiropoulos P, Goulielmos GN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Human Genetics, Medical School of Crete, 
Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

Treatment strategies blocking tumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF) have proven very
successful in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), showing beneficial effects
in approximately 50-60% of the patients. However, a significant subset of
patients does not respond to anti-TNF agents, for reasons that are still unknown.
The aim of this study was to validate five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
of PTPRC, CD226, AFF3, MyD88 and CHUK gene loci that have previously been
reported to predict anti-TNF outcome. In addition, two markers of RA
susceptibility, namely TRAF1/C5 and STAT4 were assessed, in a cohort of
anti-TNF-treated RA patients, from the homogeneous Greek island of Crete, Greece.
The RA patient cohort consisted of 183 patients treated with either of 3 anti-TNF
biologic agents (infliximab, adalimumab and etanercept) from the Clinic of
Rheumatology of the University Hospital of Crete. The SNPs were genotyped by
TaqMan assays or following the Restriction Fragments Length Polymorphisms (RFLPs)
approach. Disease activity score in 28 joints (DAS28) at baseline and after 6
months were available for all patients and analysis of good versus poor response 
at 6 months was performed for each SNP. None of the 7 genetic markers correlated 
with treatment response. We conclude that the gene polymorphisms under
investigation are not strongly predictive of anti-TNF response in RA patients
from Greece.

PMCID: PMC3769251
PMID: 24040234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Clin Exp Nephrol. 2013 Dec;17(6):866-71. doi: 10.1007/s10157-013-0797-5. Epub
2013 Mar 30.

Replication study for the association of 3 SNP loci identified in a genome-wide
association study for diabetic nephropathy in European type 1 diabetes with
diabetic nephropathy in Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes.

Maeda S(1), Imamura M, Kurashige M, Araki S, Suzuki D, Babazono T, Uzu T, Umezono
T, Toyoda M, Kawai K, Imanishi M, Hanaoka K, Maegawa H, Uchigata Y, Hosoya T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Endocrinology and Metabolism, RIKEN Center for Genomic
Medicine, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan,
smaeda@src.riken.jp.

BACKGROUND: A recent genome-wide association study for diabetic nephropathy in
European type 1 diabetes identified 3 candidate loci for diabetic nephropathy. In
this study, we examined the association of the 3 single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) loci with susceptibility to diabetic nephropathy in Japanese subjects with 
type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: We genotyped 3 SNPs, rs7583877 in AFF3, rs12437854 in the RGMA-MCTP2
locus and rs7588550 in ERBB4, for 2,300 Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes
[initial study, 1,055 nephropathy cases with overt proteinuria or with end-stage 
renal disease (ESRD) and 1,245 control patients with normoalbuminuria]. The
association of these SNPs with diabetic nephropathy was examined by using a
logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: We observed a significant association of rs7588550 in ERBB4 with
diabetic nephropathy in the Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes, although the 
effect direction was not consistent with that in the European study [p = 0.0126, 
odds ratio (OR) = 0.79, 95 % confidence interval (CI): 0.65-0.95]. We further
examined the association of rs7588550 with diabetic nephropathy in an independent
Japanese cohort (596 nephropathy cases and 311 controls) and observed the same
trend of the association with the initial study. We did not observe any
association of the remaining 2 SNP loci with diabetic nephropathy in the present 
Japanese sample.
CONCLUSION: The association of SNP loci derived from GWAS in European type 1
diabetes with diabetic nephropathy was not replicated in the Japanese patients
with type 2 diabetes, although the ERBB4 locus may have some effect also in
Japanese type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 23543049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Arthritis Rheum. 2013 Jul;65(7):1684-93. doi: 10.1002/art.37938.

Association of variants in IL2RA with progression of joint destruction in
rheumatoid arthritis.

Knevel R(1), de Rooy DP, Zhernakova A, Gröndal G, Krabben A, Steinsson K,
Wijmenga C, Cavet G, Toes RE, Huizinga TW, Gregersen PK, van der Helm-van Mil AH.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. r.knevel@lumc.nl

OBJECTIVE: Heritability studies have suggested an important role of genetic
predisposition in the progression of joint destruction in rheumatoid arthritis
(RA); the heritability is estimated at 45-58%. Several single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) have been identified as being associated with RA
susceptibility. Our objective was to study the association of several of these
loci with progression of joint destruction.
METHODS: We studied 1,750 RA patients in 4 independent data sets with 4,732
radiographs scored using the modified Sharp/van der Heijde method. Thirteen
susceptibility SNPs that were not previously associated with joint destruction
were tested in 596 Dutch RA patients. Subsequently, significant SNPs were studied
in data sets of RA patients from North America and Iceland. Data were summarized 
in inverse-weighted variance meta-analyses. Further, the association with
circulating protein levels was studied and the associated region was fine-mapped.
RESULTS: In stage 1, 3 loci (AFF3, IL2RA, and BLK) were significantly associated 
with the rate of joint destruction and were further analyzed in the additional
data sets. In the combined meta-analyses, the minor (C) allele of IL2RA
(rs2104286) was associated with less progression of joint destruction (P = 7.2 × 
10(-4) ). Furthermore, the IL2RA (rs2104286) protective genotype was associated
with lower (0.85-fold [95% confidence interval 0.77-0.93], P = 1.4 × 10(-3) )
circulating levels of soluble interleukin-2 receptor a (sIL-2Ra). Additionally,
lower sIL-2Ra levels were associated with a lower rate of joint destruction (P = 
3.4 × 10(-3) ). The association of IL2RA with the rate of joint destruction was
further localized to a 40-kb region encompassing the IL2RA intron 1 and the 5'
region of IL2RA and RBM17.
CONCLUSION: The present genetic and serologic data suggest that inherited altered
genetic constitution at the IL2RA locus may predispose to a less destructive
course of RA.

Copyright © 2013 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 23529819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2013 Mar 18;11(1):12. doi: 10.1186/1546-0096-11-12.

Independent replication analysis of genetic loci with previous evidence of
association with juvenile idiopathic arthritis.

Ellis JA(1), Chavez RA, Pezic A, Ponsonby AL, Akikusa JD, Allen RC, Munro JE.

Author information: 
(1)Genes, Environment & Complex Disease, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, 50
Flemington Rd, Parkville, Vic, 3052, Australia. justine.ellis@mcri.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Over the last five years, there have been numerous reports of
association of juvenile idiopathic arthritis with single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) at various loci outside the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) region.
However, the majority of these association findings have been generated using a
limited number of international cohorts, and thus there is benefit in further
independent replication. To address this, we examined a total of 56 SNPs in 42
non-MHC gene regions previously reported to be associated with JIA, in the
ChiLdhood Arthritis Risk factor Identification sTudY (CLARITY), a new Australian 
collection of cases and healthy child controls.
FINDINGS: Genotyping was performed on a total of 324 JIA cases (mean age 9.7
years, 67.3% female) and 568 controls (mean age 7.8 years, 40.7% female). We
demonstrated clear evidence for replication of association of JIA with SNPs in or
around c12orf30, c3orf1, PTPN22, STAT4, and TRAF1-C5, confirming the involvement 
of these loci in disease risk. Further, we generated evidence supportive of
replication of association of JIA with loci containing AFF3, CD226, MBL2,
PSTPIP1, and RANTES (CCL5). These results were robust to sensitivity analyses for
ethnicity.
CONCLUSION: We have provided valuable independent data as to the underlying
genetic architecture of this understudied pediatric autoimmune disease, further
confirming five loci outside the MHC, and supporting a role for a further five
loci in determining disease risk.

PMCID: PMC3606368
PMID: 23506417  [PubMed]


29. J Rheumatol. 2013 Feb;40(2):144-56. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.121034. Epub 2012 Dec 15.

Investigation of rheumatoid arthritis genetic susceptibility markers in the early
rheumatoid arthritis study further replicates the TRAF1 association with
radiological damage.

Viatte S(1), Plant D, Lunt M, Fu B, Flynn E, Parker BJ, Galloway J, Solymossy C, 
Worthington J, Symmons DP, Dixey JJ, Young A, Barton A.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Research UK Epidemiology Unit, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

OBJECTIVE: The TRAF1 genetic region conferring susceptibility to rheumatoid
arthritis (RA) has been reported to associate with radiological damage. We aimed 
to test RA genetic susceptibility markers for association with a continuous
measure of radiological damage over time using longitudinal modeling techniques.
METHODS: Sixty-seven RA susceptibility variants were genotyped in 474 patients in
the Early Rheumatoid Arthritis Study (ERAS) using Sequenom MassArray technology. 
Correlation between genetic markers and Larsen score was assessed longitudinally 
using zero-inflated negative binomial regression to include repeat measurements
in the same individual at different timepoints. Genetic markers associated with
radiological damage in ERAS were tested using the same modeling techniques on
previously published data from the Norfolk Arthritis Register (NOAR).
RESULTS: The single marker associated longitudinally with Larsen score in ERAS (p
= 0.02) and in NOAR (p = 0.04) was rs2900180 at the TRAF1 locus. Analysis of
individual timepoints in ERAS showed that rs2900180 displays its effect primarily
on the extent of Larsen score early in the disease course. Combined longitudinal 
analysis of the 2 cohorts suggests further association of several loci with
Larsen score (KIF5A, PTPN22, AFF3, TAGAP) and therefore a significant
accumulation of RA severity markers among RA susceptibility markers (p = 0.016).
CONCLUSION: The marker rs2900180 is associated with the extent of radiological
damage in the ERAS cohort. This represents the second independent study
correlating rs2900180 at the TRAF1 locus with radiological severity in RA.
Replication in a large dataset is required to establish the role of other RA
susceptibility loci in disease severity.

PMID: 23242182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49348. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049348. Epub 2012 Nov 14.

Two adjacent cis-regulatory elements are required for ecdysone response of
ecdysone receptor (EcR) B1 transcription.

Shirai H(1), Kamimura M, Yamaguchi J, Imanishi S, Kojima T, Fujiwara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Biosciences Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan.

Three distinct classes of nuclear receptors, EcR, E75, and HR3, are key
regulators in the ecdysone-inducible gene activation cascade in insects. The
transcription of these genes is induced by ecdysone (20E) differently, although
the detailed mechanisms underlying their responses to 20E are largely unknown. We
identified ecdysone response elements (EcREs) present in the promoters of genes
coding BmEcR-B1, BmE75-A, and BHR3-B isoforms from Bombyx mori employing
luciferase reporter assays in an ecdysteroid-responsive cultured cell line,
NIAS-Bm-aff3 (aff3). The EcRE of BmEcR-B1 at -2800 comprises of two adjacent
elements separated by 5 bp, E1 (15 bp) and E2 (21 bp), both of which are required
for the 20E response. Further analysis using electrophoretic mobility shift
assays showed that E1 binds to the EcR/USP heterodimer and that E2 may bind to
the E-box (CACGTG) binding factor such as bHLH protein. The unique E1+E2-type
EcRE is also detected in the promoter upstream regions of EcR-B1 from seven
lepidopteran species studied. In contrast, both a 20 bp EcRE identified in the
promoter of BmE75-A and a 18 bp EcRE identified in the BHR3-B promoter, contained
only E1-type EcR/USP binding element but the E2 type element was not in the
promoter regions of these genes. The combination of presence of the E2 element or
other cis-regulatory elements in promoter regions explains the different 20E
response of each class of nuclear receptor genes. Furthermore, the E1+E2
structure for EcR-B1 can be involved in a possible cross-talk between ecdysteroid
and other regulatory pathways.

PMCID: PMC3498158
PMID: 23166644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. PLoS Genet. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002989. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002989. Epub 2012 
Sep 20.

GWAS of diabetic nephropathy: is the GENIE out of the bottle?

Böger CA(1), Sedor JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Nephrology, University Medical Center
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. carsten.boeger@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

Comment on
    PLoS Genet. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002921.

PMCID: PMC3447973
PMID: 23028380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. PLoS Genet. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002921. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002921. Epub 2012 
Sep 20.

New susceptibility loci associated with kidney disease in type 1 diabetes.

Sandholm N(1), Salem RM, McKnight AJ, Brennan EP, Forsblom C, Isakova T, McKay
GJ, Williams WW, Sadlier DM, Mäkinen VP, Swan EJ, Palmer C, Boright AP, Ahlqvist 
E, Deshmukh HA, Keller BJ, Huang H, Ahola AJ, Fagerholm E, Gordin D, Harjutsalo
V, He B, Heikkilä O, Hietala K, Kytö J, Lahermo P, Lehto M, Lithovius R,
Osterholm AM, Parkkonen M, Pitkäniemi J, Rosengård-Bärlund M, Saraheimo M, Sarti 
C, Söderlund J, Soro-Paavonen A, Syreeni A, Thorn LM, Tikkanen H, Tolonen N,
Tryggvason K, Tuomilehto J, Wadén J, Gill GV, Prior S, Guiducci C, Mirel DB,
Taylor A, Hosseini SM; DCCT/EDIC Research Group, Parving HH, Rossing P, Tarnow L,
Ladenvall C, Alhenc-Gelas F, Lefebvre P, Rigalleau V, Roussel R, Tregouet DA,
Maestroni A, Maestroni S, Falhammar H, Gu T, Möllsten A, Cimponeriu D, Ioana M,
Mota M, Mota E, Serafinceanu C, Stavarachi M, Hanson RL, Nelson RG, Kretzler M,
Colhoun HM, Panduru NM, Gu HF, Brismar K, Zerbini G, Hadjadj S, Marre M, Groop L,
Lajer M, Bull SB, Waggott D, Paterson AD, Savage DA, Bain SC, Martin F,
Hirschhorn JN, Godson C, Florez JC, Groop PH, Maxwell AP.

Author information: 
(1)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Folkhälsan Research Center, Biomedicum
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002989.

Diabetic kidney disease, or diabetic nephropathy (DN), is a major complication of
diabetes and the leading cause of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) that requires
dialysis treatment or kidney transplantation. In addition to the decrease in the 
quality of life, DN accounts for a large proportion of the excess mortality
associated with type 1 diabetes (T1D). Whereas the degree of glycemia plays a
pivotal role in DN, a subset of individuals with poorly controlled T1D do not
develop DN. Furthermore, strong familial aggregation supports genetic
susceptibility to DN. However, the genes and the molecular mechanisms behind the 
disease remain poorly understood, and current therapeutic strategies rarely
result in reversal of DN. In the GEnetics of Nephropathy: an International Effort
(GENIE) consortium, we have undertaken a meta-analysis of genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) of T1D DN comprising ~2.4 million single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) imputed in 6,691 individuals. After additional genotyping of 41 top ranked
SNPs representing 24 independent signals in 5,873 individuals, combined
meta-analysis revealed association of two SNPs with ESRD: rs7583877 in the AFF3
gene (P = 1.2 × 10(-8)) and an intergenic SNP on chromosome 15q26 between the
genes RGMA and MCTP2, rs12437854 (P = 2.0 × 10(-9)). Functional data suggest that
AFF3 influences renal tubule fibrosis via the transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-ß1) pathway. The strongest association with DN as a primary phenotype was
seen for an intronic SNP in the ERBB4 gene (rs7588550, P = 2.1 × 10(-7)), a gene 
with type 2 diabetes DN differential expression and in the same intron as a
variant with cis-eQTL expression of ERBB4. All these detected associations
represent new signals in the pathogenesis of DN.

PMCID: PMC3447939
PMID: 23028342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Immunogenetics. 2012 Dec;64(12):935-8. doi: 10.1007/s00251-012-0650-0. Epub 2012 
Sep 16.

Association of AFF1 rs340630 and AFF3 rs10865035 polymorphisms with systemic
lupus erythematosus in a Chinese population.

Cen H(1), Leng RX, Wang W, Zhou M, Feng CC, Chen GM, Li R, Pan HF, Li XP, Ye DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Anhui
Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, 230032, People's Republic of
China.

The aim of this study was to evaluate whether two single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), AF4/FMR2 family, member 1 (AFF1) rs340630 and AF4/FMR2 family, member 3
(AFF3) rs10865035, show significant evidence for association with systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE) in a Chinese population. A total of 868 Chinese patients with
SLE and 975 geographically and ethnically matched healthy control subjects were
enrolled in the current study. The genotypes of these two SNPs were determined by
Sequenom MassArray technology. Significant evidence for association of AFF3
rs10865035 with SLE was detected (for A versus G, P = 4.81 × 10(-4), odds ratio
(OR) 1.26, 95% confidence interval (95% CI) 1.11-1.44). However, no association
between AFF1 rs340630 and SLE was found in the Chinese population (for A versus
G, P = 0.79, OR 0.98, 95% CI 0.86-1.12). No significant evidence for association 
of AFF3 rs10865035 polymorphism with any clinical features was detected. By
targeting a variant with convincing evidence for association with rheumatoid
arthritis, significant association of AFF3 rs10865035 with SLE was detected in
the Chinese population, indicating that AFF3 might be a common autoimmunity gene.
Further case-control studies based on larger sample sizes in diverse ethnic
populations are required to clarify the role of AFF1 rs340630 in SLE.

PMID: 22983539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Dec;71(12):1984-90. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-201225.
Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Genetic markers of rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility in anti-citrullinated
peptide antibody negative patients.

Viatte S(1), Plant D, Bowes J, Lunt M, Eyre S, Barton A, Worthington J.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Research UK Epidemiology Unit, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

INTRODUCTION: There are now over 30 confirmed loci predisposing to rheumatoid
arthritis (RA). Studies have been largely undertaken in patients with anticyclic 
citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) positive RA, and some genetic associations
appear stronger in this subgroup than in anti-CCP negative disease, although few 
studies have had adequate power to address the question. The authors therefore
investigated confirmed RA susceptibility loci in a large cohort of anti-CCP
negative RA subjects.
METHODS: RA patients and controls, with serological and genetic data, were
available from UK Caucasian patients (n=4068 anti-CCP positive, 2040 anti-CCP
negative RA) and 13,009 healthy controls. HLA-DRB1 genotypes and 36 single
nucleotide polymorphisms were tested for association between controls and
anti-CCP positive or negative RA.
RESULTS: The shared epitope (SE) showed a strong association with anti-CCP
positive and negative RA, although the effect size was significantly lower in the
latter (effect size ratio=3.18, p<1.0E-96). A non-intronic marker at TNFAIP3,
GIN1/C5orf30, STAT4, ANKRD55/IL6ST, BLK and PTPN22 showed association with RA
susceptibility, irrespective of the serological status, the latter three markers 
remaining significantly associated with anti-CCP negative RA, after correction
for multiple testing. No significant association with anti-CCP negative RA was
detected for other markers (eg, AFF3, CD28, intronic marker at TNFAIP3), though
the study power for those markers was over 80%.
DISCUSSION: In the largest sample size studied to date, the authors have shown
that the strength of association, the effect size and the number of known RA
susceptibility loci associated with disease is different in the two disease
serotypes, confirming the hypothesis that they might be two genetically different
subsets.

PMCID: PMC3595982
PMID: 22661644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Curr Genomics. 2011 Dec;12(8):542-63. doi: 10.2174/138920211798120772.

The genetic basis of graves' disease.

Ploski R(1), Szymanski K, Bednarczuk T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Centre for Biostructure, Medical University of
Warsaw, Poland.

The presented comprehensive review of current knowledge about genetic factors
predisposing to Graves' disease (GD) put emphasis on functional significance of
observed associations. In particular, we discuss recent efforts aimed at refining
diseases associations found within the HLA complex and implicating HLA class I as
well as HLA-DPB1 loci. We summarize data regarding non-HLA genes such as PTPN22, 
CTLA4, CD40, TSHR and TG which have been extensively studied in respect to their 
role in GD. We review recent findings implicating variants of FCRL3 (gene for FC 
receptor-like-3 protein), SCGB3A2 (gene for secretory uteroglobin-related protein
1- UGRP1) as well as other unverified possible candidate genes for GD selected
through their documented association with type 1 diabetes mellitus:
Tenr-IL2-IL21, CAPSL (encoding calcyphosine-like protein), IFIH1(gene for
interferon-induced helicase C domain 1), AFF3, CD226 and PTPN2. We also review
reports on association of skewed X chromosome inactivation and fetal
microchimerism with GD. Finally we discuss issues of genotype-phenotype
correlations in GD.

PMCID: PMC3271308
PMID: 22654555  [PubMed]


36. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jul;32(13):2608-17. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00182-12. Epub 2012 Apr 
30.

The super elongation complex family of RNA polymerase II elongation factors: gene
target specificity and transcriptional output.

Luo Z(1), Lin C, Guest E, Garrett AS, Mohaghegh N, Swanson S, Marshall S, Florens
L, Washburn MP, Shilatifard A.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, USA.

The elongation stage of transcription is highly regulated in metazoans. We
previously purified the AFF1- and AFF4-containing super elongation complex (SEC) 
as a major regulator of development and cancer pathogenesis. Here, we report the 
biochemical isolation of SEC-like 2 (SEC-L2) and SEC-like 3 (SEC-L3) containing
AFF2 and AFF3 in association with P-TEFb, ENL/MLLT1, and AF9/MLLT3. The SEC
family members demonstrate high levels of polymerase II (Pol II) C-terminal
domain kinase activity; however, only SEC is required for the proper induction of
the HSP70 gene upon stress. Genome-wide mRNA-Seq analyses demonstrated that
SEC-L2 and SEC-L3 control the expression of different subsets of genes, while
AFF4/SEC plays a more dominant role in rapid transcriptional induction in cells. 
MYC is one of the direct targets of AFF4/SEC, and SEC recruitment to the MYC gene
regulates its expression in different cancer cells, including those in acute
myeloid or lymphoid leukemia. These findings suggest that AFF4/SEC could be a
potential therapeutic target for the treatment of leukemia or other cancers
associated with MYC overexpression.

PMCID: PMC3434493
PMID: 22547686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jun 15;21(12):2815-24. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds098. Epub 2012 Mar
8.

Statistical colocalization of monocyte gene expression and genetic risk variants 
for type 1 diabetes.

Wallace C(1), Rotival M, Cooper JD, Rice CM, Yang JH, McNeill M, Smyth DJ,
Niblett D, Cambien F; Cardiogenics Consortium, Tiret L, Todd JA, Clayton DG,
Blankenberg S.

Author information: 
(1)Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflammation
Laboratory, Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge,
Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, UK. chris.wallace@cimr.cam.ac.uk

One mechanism by which disease-associated DNA variation can alter disease risk is
altering gene expression. However, linkage disequilibrium (LD) between variants, 
mostly single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), means it is not sufficient to show
that a particular variant associates with both disease and expression, as there
could be two distinct causal variants in LD. Here, we describe a formal
statistical test of colocalization and apply it to type 1 diabetes
(T1D)-associated regions identified mostly through genome-wide association
studies and expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) discovered in a recently
determined large monocyte expression data set from the Gutenberg Health Study
(1370 individuals), with confirmation sought in an additional data set from the
Cardiogenics Transcriptome Study (558 individuals). We excluded 39 out of 60
overlapping eQTLs in 49 T1D regions from possible colocalization and identified
21 coincident eQTLs, representing 21 genes in 14 distinct T1D regions. Our
results reflect the importance of monocyte (and their derivatives, macrophage and
dendritic cell) gene expression in human T1D and support the candidacy of several
genes as causal factors in autoimmune pancreatic beta-cell destruction, including
AFF3, CD226, CLECL1, DEXI, FKRP, PRKD2, RNLS, SMARCE1 and SUOX, in addition to
the recently described GPR183 (EBI2) gene.

PMCID: PMC3363338
PMID: 22403184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31584. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031584. Epub 2012 Feb 15.

Caucasian and Asian specific rheumatoid arthritis risk loci reveal limited
replication and apparent allelic heterogeneity in north Indians.

Prasad P(1), Kumar A, Gupta R, Juyal RC, Thelma BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Delhi, South Campus, New Delhi, India.

Genome-wide association studies and meta-analysis indicate that several
genes/loci are consistently associated with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in European
and Asian populations. To evaluate the transferability status of these findings
to an ethnically diverse north Indian population, we performed a replication
analysis. We investigated the association of 47 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) at 43 of these genes/loci with RA in a north Indian cohort comprising 983 
RA cases and 1007 age and gender matched controls. Genotyping was done using
Infinium human 660w-quad. Association analysis by chi-square test implemented in 
plink was carried out in two steps. Firstly, association of the index or
surrogate SNP (r2>0.8, calculated from reference GIH Hap-Map population) was
tested. In the second step, evidence for allelic/locus heterogeneity at
aforementioned genes/loci was assessed for by testing additional flanking SNPs in
linkage equilibrium with index/surrogate marker.Of the 44 European specific index
SNPs, neither index nor surrogate SNPs were present for nine SNPs in the
genotyping array. Of the remaining 35, associations were replicated at seven
genes namely PTPN22 (rs1217407, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>3×10(-3)); IL2-21 (rs13119723, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.008);
HLA-DRB1 (rs660895, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.56×10(-5); rs6457617, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.6×10(-09); rs13192471,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.7×10(-16)); TNFA1P3 (rs9321637, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03); CCL21 (rs13293020, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01);
IL2RA (rs2104286, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.9×10(-4)) and ZEB1 (rs2793108, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.006). Of the three
Asian specific loci tested, rs2977227 in PADI4 showed modest association
(p<0.02). Further, of the 140 SNPs (in LE with index/surrogate variant) tested,
association was observed at 11 additional genes: PTPRC, AFF3, CD28, CTLA4, PXK,
ANKRD55, TAGAP, CCR6, BLK, CD40 and IL2RB. This study indicates limited
replication of European and Asian index SNPs and apparent allelic heterogeneity
in RA etiology among north Indians warranting independent GWAS in this
population. However, replicated associations of HLA-DRB1, PTPN22 (which confer
~50% of the heritable risk to RA) and IL2RA suggest that cross-ethnicity fine
mapping of such loci is apposite for identification of causal variants.

PMCID: PMC3280307
PMID: 22355377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Aug;71(8):1350-4. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-200802. Epub 
2012 Feb 10.

Comprehensive assessment of rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility loci in a large
psoriatic arthritis cohort.

Bowes J(1), Ho P, Flynn E, Ali F, Marzo-Ortega H, Coates LC, Warren RB, McManus
R, Ryan AW, Kane D, Korendowych E, McHugh N, FitzGerald O, Packham J, Morgan AW, 
Bruce IN, Barton A.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Research UK Epidemiology Unit, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK.

OBJECTIVE: A number of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) susceptibility genes have been
identified in recent years. Given the overlap in phenotypic expression of
synovial joint inflammation between RA and psoriatic arthritis (PsA), the authors
explored whether RA susceptibility genes are also associated with PsA.
METHODS: 56 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) mapping to 41 genes previously
reported as RA susceptibility loci were selected for investigation. PsA was
defined as an inflammatory arthritis associated with psoriasis and subjects were 
recruited from the UK and Ireland. Genotyping was performed using the Sequenom
MassArray platform and frequencies compared with data derived from large UK
control collections.
RESULTS: Significant evidence for association with susceptibility to PsA was
found toa SNP mapping to the REL (rs13017599, p(trend)=5.2×10(4)) gene, while
nominal evidence for association (p(trend)<0.05) was found to seven other loci
including PLCL2 (rs4535211, p=1.7×10(-3)); STAT4 (rs10181656, p=3.0×10(-3)) and
the AFF3, CD28, CCL21, IL2 and KIF5A loci. Interestingly, three SNPs demonstrated
opposite effects to those reported for RA.
CONCLUSIONS: The REL gene, a key modulator of the NF<U+03BA>B pathway, is associated
with PsA but the allele conferring risk to RA is protective in PsA suggesting
that there are fundamental differences in the aetiological mechanisms underlying 
these two types of inflammatory arthritis.

PMCID: PMC3396450
PMID: 22328738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Apr;63(4):884-93. doi: 10.1002/art.30235.

Genome-wide association study of rheumatoid arthritis in Koreans:
population-specific loci as well as overlap with European susceptibility loci.

Freudenberg J(1), Lee HS, Han BG, Shin HD, Kang YM, Sung YK, Shim SC, Choi CB,
Lee AT, Gregersen PK, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Feinstein Institute for Medical Research and North Shore-Long Island Jewish
Health System, Manhasset, New York, NY, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To perform a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in Koreans in order 
to identify susceptibility loci for rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: We generated high-quality genotypes for 441,398 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 801 RA cases and 757 controls. We then tested 79 markers 
from 46 loci for replication in an independent sample of 718 RA cases and 719
controls.
RESULTS: Genome-wide significance (P < 5 × 10(-08) ) was attained by markers from
the major histocompatibility complex region and from the PADI4 gene. The
replication data showed nominal association signals (P < 5 × 10(-02) ) for
markers from 11 of the 46 replicated loci, greatly exceeding random expectation. 
Genes that were most significant in the replication stage and in the combined
analysis include the known European RA loci BLK, AFF3, and CCL21. Thus, in
addition to the previously associated STAT4 alleles, variants at these three loci
may contribute to RA not only among Europeans, but also among Asians. In
addition, we observed replication signals near the genes PTPN2, FLI1, ARHGEF3,
LCP2, GPR137B, TRHDE, and CGA1. Based on the excess of small P values in the
replication stage study, we estimate that more than half of these loci are
genuine RA susceptibility genes. Finally, we systematically analyzed the presence
of association signals in Koreans at established European RA loci, which showed a
significant enrichment of European RA loci among the Korean RA loci.
CONCLUSION: Genetic risk for RA involves both population-specific loci as well as
many shared genetic susceptibility loci in comparisons of Asian and European
populations.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 21452313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Insect Mol Biol. 2011 Jun;20(3):279-89. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2583.2010.01056.x.
Epub 2011 Feb 23.

Differentially expressed genes in silkworm cell cultures in response to infection
by Wolbachia and Cardinium endosymbionts.

Nakamura Y(1), Gotoh T, Imanishi S, Mita K, Kurtti TJ, Noda H.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, Owashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,
Japan.

Wolbachia and Cardinium are bacterial endosymbionts that are widely distributed
amongst arthropods. Both cause reproductive alterations, such as cytoplasmic
incompatibility, parthenogenesis and feminization. Here we studied differentially
expressed genes in Wolbachia- and Cardinium-infected Bm-aff3 silkworm cells using
a silkworm microarray. Wolbachia infection did not alter gene expression or
induce or suppress immune responses. In contrast, Cardinium infection induced
many immune-related genes, including antimicrobial peptides, pattern recognition 
receptors and a serine protease. Host immune responses differed, possibly because
of the different cell wall structures of Wolbachia and Cardinium because the
former lacks genes encoding lipopolysaccharide components and two racemases for
peptidoglycan formation. A few possibly non-immune-related genes were
differentially expressed, but their involvement in host reproductive alteration
was unclear.

© 2011 The Authors. Insect Molecular Biology © 2011 The Royal Entomological
Society.

PMID: 21349119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 May 15;20(10):1873-85. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr069. Epub 2011 Feb
17.

Functional characterization of the AFF (AF4/FMR2) family of RNA-binding proteins:
insights into the molecular pathology of FRAXE intellectual disability.

Melko M(1), Douguet D, Bensaid M, Zongaro S, Verheggen C, Gecz J, Bardoni B.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 6097, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of
Nice-Sophia Antipolis, 06560 Valbonne, France.

The AFF (AF4/FMR2) family of genes includes four members: AFF1/AF4, AFF2/FMR2,
AFF3/LAF4 and AFF4/AF5q31. AFF2/FMR2 is silenced in FRAXE intellectual
disability, while the other three members have been reported to form fusion genes
as a consequence of chromosome translocations with the myeloid/lymphoid or mixed 
lineage leukemia (MLL) gene in acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALLs). All AFF
proteins are localized in the nucleus and their role as transcriptional
activators with a positive action on RNA elongation was primarily studied. We
have recently shown that AFF2/FMR2 localizes to nuclear speckles, subnuclear
structures considered as storage/modification sites of pre-mRNA splicing factors,
and modulates alternative splicing via the interaction with the G-quadruplex
RNA-forming structure. We show here that similarly to AFF2/FMR2, AFF3/LAF4 and
AFF4/AF5q31 localize to nuclear speckles and are able to bind RNA, having a high 
apparent affinity for the G-quadruplex structure. Interestingly, AFF3/LAF4 and
AFF4/AF5q31, like AFF2/FMR2, modulate, in vivo, the splicing efficiency of a
mini-gene containing a G-quadruplex structure in one alternatively spliced exon. 
Furthermore, we observed that the overexpression of AFF2/3/4 interferes with the 
organization and/or biogenesis of nuclear speckles. These findings fit well with 
our observation that enlarged nuclear speckles are present in FRAXE fibroblasts. 
Furthermore, our findings suggest functional redundancy among the AFF family
members in the regulation of splicing and transcription. It is possible that
other members of the AFF family compensate for the loss of AFF2/FMR2 activity and
as such explain the relatively mild to borderline phenotype observed in FRAXE
patients.

PMID: 21330300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Leukemia. 2011 Jan;25(1):89-100. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.233. Epub 2010 Oct 14.

Chemoproteomics-based kinome profiling and target deconvolution of clinical
multi-kinase inhibitors in primary chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells.

Kruse U(1), Pallasch CP, Bantscheff M, Eberhard D, Frenzel L, Ghidelli S, Maier
SK, Werner T, Wendtner CM, Drewes G.

Author information: 
(1)Cellzome AG, Heidelberg, Germany.

The pharmacological induction of apoptosis in neoplastic B cells presents a
promising therapeutic avenue for the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL). We profiled a panel of clinical multi-kinase inhibitors for their ability 
to induce apoptosis in primary CLL cells. Whereas inhibitors targeting a large
number of receptor and intracellular tyrosine kinases including c-KIT, FLT3, BTK 
and SYK were comparatively inactive, the CDK inhibitors BMS-387032 and
flavopiridol showed marked efficacy similar to staurosporine. Using the kinobeads
proteomics method, kinase expression profiles and binding profiles of the
inhibitors to target protein complexes were quantitatively monitored in CLL
cells. The targets most potently affected were CDK9, cyclin T1, AFF3/4 and MLLT1,
which may represent four subunits of a deregulated positive transcriptional
elongation factor (p-TEFb) complex. Albeit with lower potency, both drugs also
bound the basal transcription factor BTF2/TFIIH containing CDK7. Staurosporine
and geldanamycin do not affect these targets and thus seem to exhibit a different
mechanism of action. The data support a critical role of p-TEFb inhibitors in CLL
that supports their future clinical development.

PMID: 20944678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Aug;69(8):1548-53. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.121020. Epub 2010
May 24.

Investigation of potential non-HLA rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility loci in a 
European cohort increases the evidence for nine markers.

Plant D(1), Flynn E, Mbarek H, Dieudé P, Cornelis F, Arlestig L, Dahlqvist SR,
Goulielmos G, Boumpas DT, Sidiropoulos P, Johansen JS, Ørnbjerg LM, Hetland ML,
Klareskog L, Filer A, Buckley CD, Raza K, Witte T, Schmidt RE, Worthington J.

Author information: 
(1)arc-Epidemiology Unit, Stopford Building, The University of Manchester,
Manchester M13 9PT, UK. darren.plant@manchester.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Genetic factors have a substantial role in determining development of
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and are likely to account for 50-60% of disease
susceptibility. Genome-wide association studies have identified non-human
leucocyte antigen RA susceptibility loci which associate with RA with
low-to-moderate risk.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate recently identified RA susceptibility markers using
cohorts from six European countries, and perform a meta-analysis including
previously published results.
METHODS: 3311 DNA samples were collected from patients from six countries (UK,
Germany, France, Greece, Sweden and Denmark). Genotype data or DNA samples for
3709 controls were collected from four countries (not Sweden or Denmark).
Eighteen single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped using Sequenom
MassArray technology. Samples with a >95% success rate and only those SNPs with a
genotype success rate of >95% were included in the analysis. Scandinavian patient
data were pooled and previously published Swedish control data were accessed as a
comparison group. Meta-analysis was used to combine results from this study with 
all previously published data.
RESULTS: After quality control, 3209 patients and 3692 controls were included in 
the study. Eight markers (ie, rs1160542 (AFF3), rs1678542 (KIF5A), rs2476601
(PTPN22), rs3087243 (CTLA4), rs4810485 (CD40), rs5029937 (6q23), rs10760130
(TRAF1/C5) and rs7574865 (STAT4)) were significantly associated with RA by
meta-analysis. All 18 markers were associated with RA when previously published
studies were incorporated in the analysis. Data from this study increased the
significance for association with RA and nine markers.
CONCLUSIONS: In a large European RA cohort further evidence for the association
of 18 markers with RA development has been obtained.

PMCID: PMC2938898
PMID: 20498205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nat Genet. 2010 Jun;42(6):508-14. doi: 10.1038/ng.582. Epub 2010 May 9.

Genome-wide association study meta-analysis identifies seven new rheumatoid
arthritis risk loci.

Stahl EA(1), Raychaudhuri S, Remmers EF, Xie G, Eyre S, Thomson BP, Li Y,
Kurreeman FA, Zhernakova A, Hinks A, Guiducci C, Chen R, Alfredsson L, Amos CI,
Ardlie KG; BIRAC Consortium, Barton A, Bowes J, Brouwer E, Burtt NP, Catanese JJ,
Coblyn J, Coenen MJ, Costenbader KH, Criswell LA, Crusius JB, Cui J, de Bakker
PI, De Jager PL, Ding B, Emery P, Flynn E, Harrison P, Hocking LJ, Huizinga TW,
Kastner DL, Ke X, Lee AT, Liu X, Martin P, Morgan AW, Padyukov L, Posthumus MD,
Radstake TR, Reid DM, Seielstad M, Seldin MF, Shadick NA, Steer S, Tak PP,
Thomson W, van der Helm-van Mil AH, van der Horst-Bruinsma IE, van der Schoot CE,
van Riel PL, Weinblatt ME, Wilson AG, Wolbink GJ, Wordsworth BP; YEAR Consortium,
Wijmenga C, Karlson EW, Toes RE, de Vries N, Begovich AB, Worthington J,
Siminovitch KA, Gregersen PK, Klareskog L, Plenge RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

To identify new genetic risk factors for rheumatoid arthritis, we conducted a
genome-wide association study meta-analysis of 5,539 autoantibody-positive
individuals with rheumatoid arthritis (cases) and 20,169 controls of European
descent, followed by replication in an independent set of 6,768 rheumatoid
arthritis cases and 8,806 controls. Of 34 SNPs selected for replication, 7 new
rheumatoid arthritis risk alleles were identified at genome-wide significance (P 
< 5 x 10(-8)) in an analysis of all 41,282 samples. The associated SNPs are near 
genes of known immune function, including IL6ST, SPRED2, RBPJ, CCR6, IRF5 and
PXK. We also refined associations at two established rheumatoid arthritis risk
loci (IL2RA and CCL21) and confirmed the association at AFF3. These new
associations bring the total number of confirmed rheumatoid arthritis risk loci
to 31 among individuals of European ancestry. An additional 11 SNPs replicated at
P < 0.05, many of which are validated autoimmune risk alleles, suggesting that
most represent genuine rheumatoid arthritis risk alleles.

PMCID: PMC4243840
PMID: 20453842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Jun;69(6):1029-35. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.118406. Epub 2010
May 5.

Investigation of rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility genes identifies association
of AFF3 and CD226 variants with response to anti-tumour necrosis factor
treatment.

Tan RJ(1), Gibbons LJ, Potter C, Hyrich KL, Morgan AW, Wilson AG, Isaacs JD;
BRAGGSS, Barton A.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Research Campaign Epidemiology Unit, Stopford Building, Oxford Road,
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

Erratum in
    Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Aug;70(8):1519.

BACKGROUND: Anti-tumour necrosis factor (anti-TNF) therapy has proved to be
highly successful in treating rheumatoid arthritis (RA), although 30-40% of
patients have little or no response. The authors hypothesise that this may be
genetically determined. In other complex diseases, susceptibility genes have been
shown to influence treatment response. The aim of the current study was to
investigate the association of markers within confirmed RA susceptibility loci
with the response to anti-TNF treatment.
METHODS: Eighteen single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) mapping to 11 genetic
loci were genotyped in 1012 patients with RA receiving treatment with etanercept,
infliximab or adalimumab. Multivariate linear regression analyses were performed 
using the absolute change in 28 joint count disease activity score (DAS28)
between baseline and 6-month follow-up as the outcome variable, adjusting for
confounders. p Values <0.05 were considered statistically significant and
associated markers were genotyped in an additional 322 samples. Analysis was
performed in the combined cohort of 1334 subjects with RA treated with anti-TNF.
RESULTS: In the combined analysis, SNPs mapping to AFF3 and CD226 had a
statistically significant association with the response to anti-TNF treatment
under an additive model. The G allele at rs10865035, mapping to AFF3, was
associated with an improved response to anti-TNF treatment (coefficient -0.14
(95% CI -0.25 to -0.03), p=0.015). At the CD226 SNP rs763361, the C allele
conferred reduced response to treatment (coefficient 0.11 (95% CI 0.00 to 0.22), 
p=0.048).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that AFF3 and CD226, two confirmed RA
susceptibility genes, have an additional role in influencing the response to
anti-TNF treatment.

PMCID: PMC2930850
PMID: 20444755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Einstein (Sao Paulo). 2010 Mar;8(1):18-23. doi: 10.1590/S1679-45082010AO1440.

Modification of the gasless fetoscopy technique for the treatment of large
myelomeningocele: a study in sheep.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Pedreira DA(1), Acácio GL(2), Abou-Jamra RC(3), Oliveira Rde C(1), Caldini EG(1),
Saldiva PH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology of Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo - 
USP, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (2)Department of Obstetrics of Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade de Taubaté - UNITAU, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (3)aff3, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To change the gasless fetoscopy technique in order to reduce the
diameter of entry orifices in the myometrium.
METHODS: Seven pregnant ewes were submitted to fetoscopy for repairing a large
skin defect measuring 4.0 × 3.0 cm, created in the fetal lumbar region at the
gestational age of 100 days. The defect was repaired through continuous suture of
the skin with approximation of borders. Gasless fetoscopy was used for performing
the suture with three orifices to allow entry of the trocar into the myometrium. 
A 5.0-mm optical trocar, and 3.5-mm grasping, dissecting and suturing forceps
were used. After surgery, pregnancy was maintained until the animals were
euthanized on the 133rd day of gestation, and the fetuses were evaluated.
RESULTS: Seven pregnant ewes underwent surgery; the first two cases were
characterized as the Pilot Group, in which the endoscopic technique was modified 
and caliber reduction was possible in two out of three entry orifices in the
myometrium. In the five remaining cases (Study Group), the repair was
successfully carried out in all the fetuses, and the mean duration of fetoscopy
was 98 minutes. There was a case of maternal death attributed to intrauterine
infection. Mean intrauterine permanence after surgery was 12 days.
CONCLUSIONS: The technique was successfully modified, allowing reduction of the
uterine orifices necessary to perform the repair of a skin defect in the fetal
lumbar region through a new fetoscopy technique. The impact of this modification 
in repair of myelomeningocele in human fetuses should be studied.

PMID: 26761747  [PubMed]


48. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2010 Mar;22(2):152-6. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32833669d2.

Genetic susceptibility factors for psoriatic arthritis.

Castelino M(1), Barton A.

Author information: 
(1)arc Epidemiology Unit, Manchester Academy of Health Sciences, The University
of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) has a large genetic component to its
heritability, yet investigation into the genetic basis of the disease has lagged 
behind other rheumatic diseases mainly because of the difficulty in defining
classification criteria that would accurately differentiate it from other forms
of inflammatory arthritis. However, using a variety of approaches, some confirmed
associations have now been identified with PsA susceptibility, making a review of
these recent developments timely.
RECENT FINDINGS: Family studies continue to suggest a large genetic contribution 
to PsA. Using a candidate gene approach, genes robustly confirmed to be
associated with psoriasis vulgaris (PsV) have also been found to be associated
with PsA (HLA-Cw*0602, IL23R, IL12B). There is less overlap reported with
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) than PsV susceptibility loci but one report suggests
that the AFF3 locus may be associated with both RA and PsA.
SUMMARY: Large, well powered genome-wide association studies are currently
underway and should provide further insights into the cause of this common
arthritic disease over the next few months. The bulk of evidence so far suggests 
that the genetic factors underlying PsV are also associated with PsA suggesting
that future studies of PsV could include patients with PsA.

PMID: 20084005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol. 2010 Mar;73(3):148-62. doi: 10.1002/arch.20347.

Expression profiling of novel bacteria-induced genes from the silkworm, Bombyx
mori.

Tanaka H(1), Suzuki N, Nakajima Y, Sato M, Sagisaka A, Fujita K, Ishibashi J,
Imanishi S, Mita K, Yamakawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Innate Immunity Research Unit, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, 
1-2 Owashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. htanaka1@nias.affrc.go.jp

In this study, we have newly identified three bacteria-induced genes from the
silkworm Bombyx mori by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction. One of these, eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-1 (eIF4E-1), is assumed
to encode an eIF4E family, which plays a role in the initiation of translation as
a mRNA cap-binding protein. The second gene is BmFOXG1, belonging to a family of 
forkhead transcription factors, FOXG1. The third gene is MBF2-related (MBF2-R)
whose product has high homology to a co-activator protein MBF2 from B. mori.
Although BmFOXG1 was up-regulated in the fat body in response to three kinds of
bacteria, Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, and Bacillus subtilis, eIF4E-1
and MBF2-R were up-regulated by E. coli and B. subtilis, but not S. aureus,
suggesting that bacteria possessing meso-diaminopimelic acid-containing
peptidoglycan but not lysine-containing peptidoglycan activate eIF4E-1 and
MBF2-R, probably through a conserved immune deficiency pathway. We further
profiled the expression of three genes in different tissues and a silkworm cell
line, NIAS-Bm-aff3, in response to bacteria, and at different times after
bacterial challenge in the fat body.

(c) 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 20077574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Genes Immun. 2010 Mar;11(2):194-8. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.105. Epub 2010 Jan 14.

Association of the AFF3 gene and IL2/IL21 gene region with juvenile idiopathic
arthritis.

Hinks A(1), Eyre S, Ke X, Barton A, Martin P, Flynn E, Packham J, Worthington J; 
Childhood Arthritis Prospective Study; UKRAG Consortium; BSPAR Study Group,
Thomson W.

Collaborators: Hyrich K, Lay M, Lal S, Gilbert P, Ward P, Baildam E, Lydon C,
Brown L, Davidson J, Gardner-Medwin J, Price V, Sim J, Todd M, Wedderburn L,
Meijer A, Jones J, Foster H, Friswell M, Eltringham M, Chieng A, Buckley J,
Southwood T, Eyre S, Hinks A, Gibbons LJ, Bowes J, Flynn E, Martin P, Ke X, Donn 
R, Thomson W, Barton A, Worthington J, Martin S, Robinson JI, Morgan AW, Emery P,
Wilson AG, Steer S, Hocking L, Reid DM, Harrison P, Wordsworth P, Abinum M,
Becker M, Bell A, Craft A, Crawley E, David J, Foster H, Gardener-Medwin J,
Griffin J, Hall A, Hall M, Herrick A, Hollingworth P, Holt L, Jones S, Pountain
G, Ryder C, Southwood T, Stewart I, Venning H, Wedderburn L, Woo P, Wyatt S.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Research Campaign-Epidemiology Unit (arc-EU), University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK. Anne.Hinks@manchester.ac.uk

Recent genetic studies have led to identification of numerous loci that are
associated with susceptibility to autoimmune diseases. The strategy of using
information from these studies has facilitated the identification of novel
juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) susceptibility loci, specifically, PTPN22 and
IL2RA. Several novel autoimmune susceptibility loci have recently been
identified, and we hypothesise that single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within
these genes may also be JIA susceptibility loci. Five SNPs within the genes AFF3,
IL2/IL21, IL7R, CTLA4 and CD226, previously associated with multiple autoimmune
diseases were genotyped, in a large data set of Caucasian JIA patients and
controls, and tested for association with JIA. We identified two susceptibility
loci for JIA, AFF3 and the IL2/IL21 region and additional weak evidence
supporting an association with the CTLA4 and IL7R genes, which warrant further
investigation. All results require validation in independent JIA data sets.
Further characterisation of the specific causal variants will be required before 
functional studies can be performed.

PMCID: PMC2845517
PMID: 20072139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2009 Dec;73(12):2665-70. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

Functional characterization of a cactus homolog from the silkworm Bombyx mori.

Furukawa S(1), Tanaka H, Ishibashi J, Imanishi S, Yamakawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Innate Immunity Research Unit, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

A cDNA encoding an IkappaB family protein was identified and the full nucleotide 
sequence was determined in the silkworm Bombyx mori. The IkappaB gene, designated
BmCactus, was constitutively expressed mainly in the fat body and hemocytes.
Transfection experiments on a B. mori cell line, NIAS-Bm-aff3, with expression
vectors containing BmCactus, BmRelA, BmRelB, or the active portion of BmRelish1
showed that activation of the CecB1 gene promoter by either BmRelA or BmRelB, but
not the active portion of BmRelish1, was strongly inhibited by BmCactus. In
addition, activation of CecB1 gene by autoclaved E. coli in the cultured cells
was observed regardless of the presence or absence of BmCactus. A glutathione
S-transferase pull-down assay and analysis using a yeast two-hybrid system
demonstrated that BmCactus interacted with the BmRel Rel homology domain, but not
with the BmRelish Rel homology domain. These results suggest that BmCactus is
involved in the Toll signal transduction pathway in B. mori.

PMID: 19966488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jul 1;18(13):2518-22. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp177. Epub 2009 Apr 
9.

Identification of AF4/FMR2 family, member 3 (AFF3) as a novel rheumatoid
arthritis susceptibility locus and confirmation of two further pan-autoimmune
susceptibility genes.

Barton A(1), Eyre S, Ke X, Hinks A, Bowes J, Flynn E, Martin P; YEAR Consortium; 
BIRAC Consortium, Wilson AG, Morgan AW, Emery P, Steer S, Hocking LJ, Reid DM,
Harrison P, Wordsworth P, Thomson W, Worthington J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. anne.barton@manchester.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Nov 15;19(22):4543.

The concept of susceptibility genes common to different autoimmune diseases is
now firmly established with previous studies demonstrating overlap of loci
conferring susceptibility to type 1 diabetes (T1D) with both Coeliac disease and 
multiple sclerosis. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an archetypal autoimmune disease
and we, therefore, targeted putative T1D susceptibility loci for genotyping in UK
RA cases and unrelated controls. A novel RA susceptibility locus at AFF3 was
identified with convincing evidence for association in a combined sample cohort
of 6819 RA cases and 12 650 controls [OR 1.12 95% confidence intervals (CI)
1.07-1.17, P = 2.8 x 10(-7)]. Association of two previously described loci
(CTLA-4 and 4q27) with RA was also replicated (OR 0.87, 95% CI 0.82-0.94, P = 1.1
x 10(-4) and OR 0.86, 95% CI 0.79-0.94, P = 5.4 x 10(-4), respectively). These
findings take the number of established RA susceptibility loci to 13, only one of
which has not been associated with other autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC2694689
PMID: 19359276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Gastroenterol. 2009;44(4):305-12. doi: 10.1007/s00535-009-0027-9. Epub 2009 Mar
10.

Genome-wide analysis of histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation by ChIP-chip in
gastric cancer patients.

Zhang L(1), Zhong K, Dai Y, Zhou H.

Author information: 
(1)The Second Clinical Medical College, Jinan University, Guangdong, China.
zhanglichangde@163.com

BACKGROUND: Trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) is a
posttranslational modification that is highly correlated with genomic silencing. 
In gastric cancer (GC), global and gene-specific DNA methylation changes have
been demonstrated to occur. However, to date, our understanding of the
alterations in H3K27me3 in GC is incomplete. This study aimed to investigate the 
variations in H3K27me3 in CpG island regions between gastric cancerous and
matched non-cancerous tissues.
METHODS: H3K27me3 variations were analyzed in eight pairs of GC and adjacent
normal tissues, from eight GC patients, using a chromatin immunoprecipitation
linked to the microarray (ChIP-chip) approach. ChIP-real time PCR was used to
validate the microrray results. In addition, DNA methylation status also was
further analyzed by methyl-DNA immunoprecipitation quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: One hundred twenty-eight (119 increased and 9 decreased H3K27me3) genes 
displaying significant H3K27me3 differences were found between GC and adjacent
normal tissues. The results of ChIP-real time PCR coincided well with those of
microarray. Aberrant DNA methylation can also be found on selected randomly
positive genes (MMP15, UNC5B, SHH, AFF3, and RB1).
CONCLUSION: Our study indicates that there are significant alterations of
H3K27me3 in gastric cancerous tissues, which may help clarify the molecular
mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of GC. Such novel findings show the
significance of H3K27me3 as a potential biomarker or promising target for
epigenetic-based GC therapies.

PMID: 19267258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Insect Mol Biol. 2009 Feb;18(1):71-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2583.2009.00851.x.

Lipopolysaccharide elicits expression of immune-related genes in the silkworm,
Bombyx mori.

Tanaka H(1), Sagisaka A, Fujita K, Kaneko Y, Imanishi S, Yamakawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Innate Immunity Research Unit, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, 
Ibaraki, Japan.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a major cell wall component of gram-negative bacteria, 
was found to be unable to activate immune-related genes in Drosophila
melanogaster. In contrast, highly purified LPS elicited immune-related gene
expression in the fat body of Bombyx mori. However, the level of activation by
highly purified LPS was lower than crude LPS and peptidoglycan. Furthermore,
synthetic lipid A also activated these genes, suggesting that B. mori possesses
unknown signal pathways to activate immune-related genes by LPS. Up-regulation of
antimicrobial peptide genes by highly purified LPS was not confirmed in the
immune-responsive cell line, NIAS-Bm-aff3, suggesting that some factors necessary
for signal transduction activated by LPS are deficient in this cell line.

PMID: 19196348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Oncogene. 2008 Oct 16;27(47):6187-90. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.214. Epub 2008 Jul
14.

A novel fusion 5'AFF3/3'BCL2 originated from a t(2;18)(q11.2;q21.33)
translocation in follicular lymphoma.

Impera L(1), Albano F, Lo Cunsolo C, Funes S, Iuzzolino P, Laveder F,
Panagopoulos I, Rocchi M, Storlazzi CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.

Follicular lymphoma is the second most frequent type of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in
adults. The basic molecular defect consists of the t(14;18)(q32;q21)
translocation, juxtaposing the B-cell lymphoma protein 2 gene BCL2 to the
immunoglobulin heavy chain locus IGH@, and leading to the antiapoptotic BCL2
protein overproduction. Variations in the t(14;18) are rare and can be classified
into two categories: (i) simple variants, involving chromosomes 18 and 2, or 22, 
in which the fusion partner of BCL2 is the light-chain IGK@ or IGL@; (ii) complex
variant translocations occurring among chromosomes 14, 18 and other chromosomes. 
We report a follicular lymphoma case showing BCL2 overexpression, detected by
immunohistochemistry and real-time quantitative PCR, consequently to the
formation of a novel fusion gene between the 5' of the lymphoid nuclear
transcriptional activator gene AFF3 at 2q11.2, and the 3' of BCL2. This case
shows evidence, for the first time, of BCL2 overexpression consequently to the
fusion of BCL2 to a non-IG partner locus.

PMID: 18622426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Clin Genet. 2008 Dec;74(6):560-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2008.01050.x. Epub
2008 Jun 23.

Triangular tibia with fibular aplasia associated with a microdeletion on 2q11.2
encompassing LAF4.

Steichen-Gersdorf E(1), Gassner I, Superti-Furga A, Ullmann R, Stricker S,
Klopocki E, Mundlos S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
elisabeth.steichen@i-med.ac.at

Nievergelt syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant mesomelic dysplasia
characterized by specific deformities of the radius, ulna, fibula and a rhomboid 
shape of the tibia. Phenotypically overlapping conditions such as mesomelic
dysplasia, Savarirayan-type (MIM 605274), have been described, but their
pathogenesis also remains unknown. We report on a girl with fibular agenesis,
severely abnormal, triangular tibiae, urogenital tract malformations, failure to 
thrive, convulsions and recurrent apnoeas leading to respiratory arrest at the
age of 4 months. Her skeletal findings correspond to those of the mesomelic
dysplasia, Savarirayan-type recently described in two patients. In addition to
the skeletal findings, our patient had central nervous system manifestations and 
developmental anomalies of the urogenital tract. In the patient described in this
study, array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) analysis revealed a de novo 
interstitial microdeletion of 500 kb on chromosome 2q11.1 containing the
LAF4/AFF3 (lymphoid-nuclear-protein-related AF4) gene. In situ hybridization
analysis of Laf4 in mouse embryos revealed expression in the developing brain, in
the limb buds and in the zeugopod corresponding to the limb phenotype.
Haploinsufficiency for LAF4/AFF3 is associated with limb, brain and urogenital
malformations and specific changes of the tibia that are part of the NS spectrum.

PMID: 18616733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Bioinformatics. 2008 Jul 1;24(13):1554-5. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn238.
Epub 2008 May 22.

A Bayesian estimator of protein-protein association probabilities.

Gilmore JM(1), Auberry DL, Sharp JL, White AM, Anderson KK, Daly DS.

Author information: 
(1)Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Battelle Boulevard, Richland, WA 99352,
USA.

The Bayesian Estimator of Protein-Protein Association Probabilities (BEPro aff3) 
is a software tool for estimating probabilities of protein-protein association
between bait and prey protein pairs using data from multiple-bait,
multiple-replicate, protein liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry
LC-MS/MS affinity isolation experiments.AVAILABILITY: BEPro (3) is public domain 
software, has been tested on WIndows XP, Linux and Mac OS, and is freely
available from http://www.pnl.gov/statistics/BEPro3.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: A user guide, example dataset with analysis and
additional documentation are included with the BEPro (3) download.

PMID: 18499697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Oncogene. 2008 Apr 3;27(15):2249-56. Epub 2007 Oct 29.

Identification of the novel AML1 fusion partner gene, LAF4, a fusion partner of
MLL, in childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia with t(2;21)(q11;q22) by
bubble PCR method for cDNA.

Chinen Y(1), Taki T, Nishida K, Shimizu D, Okuda T, Yoshida N, Kobayashi C, Koike
K, Tsuchida M, Hayashi Y, Taniwaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Laboratory Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine Graduate School of Medical Science, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

The AML1 gene is frequently rearranged by chromosomal translocations in acute
leukemia. We identified that the LAF4 gene on 2q11.2-12 was fused to the AML1
gene on 21q22 in a pediatric patient having T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL) with t(2;21)(q11;q22) using the bubble PCR method for cDNA. The genomic
break points were within intron 7 of AML1 and of LAF4, resulting in the in-frame 
fusion of exon 7 of AML1 and exon 8 of LAF4. The LAF4 gene is a member of the
AF4/FMR2 family and was previously identified as a fusion partner of MLL in
B-precursor ALL with t(2;11)(q11;q23), although AML1-LAF4 was in T-ALL. LAF4 is
the first gene fused with both AML1 and MLL in acute leukemia. Almost all AML1
translocations except for TEL-AML1 are associated with myeloid leukemia; however,
AML1-LAF4 was associated with T-ALL as well as AML1-FGA7 in t(4;21)(q28;q22).
These findings provide new insight into the common mechanism of AML1 and MLL
fusion proteins in the pathogenesis of ALL. Furthermore, we successfully applied 
bubble PCR to clone the novel AML1-LAF4 fusion transcript. Bubble PCR is a
powerful tool for detecting unknown fusion transcripts as well as genomic fusion 
points.

PMID: 17968322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Int J Cancer. 2005 Jul 1;115(4):568-74.

LAF-4 is aberrantly expressed in human breast cancer.

To MD(1), Faseruk SA, Gokgoz N, Pinnaduwage D, Done SJ, Andrulis IL.

Author information: 
(1)Fred A. Litwin Centre for Cancer Genetics, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

LAF-4, which encodes a nuclear protein with transactivation potential, is fused
to the MLL gene in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). We identified LAF-4 as a
gene that is transcriptionally deregulated in breast tumors and thus may have a
pathological role in mammary tumorigenesis. In line with the previous finding
that LAF-4 expression is tissue specific, we did not detect any LAF-4 mRNA in
normal mammary epithelial cell lines. However, 2 of 5 breast cancer cell lines
were found to express LAF-4 at both the RNA and protein levels. In 2 of 9 primary
tumor-normal pairs, the expression of LAF-4 was clearly elevated in the tumor
tissue. Using RNA in situ hybridization, we demonstrated that LAF-4 is expressed 
in mammary tumor cells but not in normal acini. In a group of 64 primary human
breast tumors, we found that LAF-4 was overexpressed in approximately 20% of the 
cases. Although epigenetic changes may be involved in altered expression of some 
genes, differences in LAF-4 expression were not associated with DNA methylation
of the predicted promoter region. Our results suggest that LAF-4 may be a
proto-oncogene that is transcriptionally activated in some cases of breast
cancer.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15704140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Oncogene. 2003 May 8;22(18):2851-5.

Fusion of an AF4-related gene, LAF4, to MLL in childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia with t(2;11)(q11;q23).

Hiwatari M(1), Taki T, Taketani T, Taniwaki M, Sugita K, Okuya M, Eguchi M, Ida
K, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

We showed that the LAF4 gene on 2q11.2-12 was fused to the MLL gene on 11q23 in a
pediatric patient with CD10 positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) having
t(2;11)(q11;q23). The LAF4 gene, which encodes a lymphoid nuclear protein of 1227
amino acids with transactivation potential, is thought to have a role in early
lymphoid development. The LAF4 protein was homologous to AF4 and AF5q31 proteins 
that are fused to MLL in infant early pre-B ALL and the breakpoint of LAF4 was
located within the region homologous to the transactivation domain of AF4 and
AF5q31. Expression of the 8.5-kb LAF4 transcript was detected in the adult heart,
brain, and placenta and in the fetal brain. LAF4 expression was found to be
higher in ALL cell lines than in AML and Epstein-Barr virus-transformed
B-lymphocyte cell lines. These findings suggest that LAF4, AF4 and AF5q31 might
define a new family particularly involved in the pathogenesis of 11q23-associated
ALL.

PMID: 12743608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2002 Sep;35(1):92-6.

LAF4, an AF4-related gene, is fused to MLL in infant acute lymphoblastic
leukemia.

von Bergh AR(1), Beverloo HB, Rombout P, van Wering ER, van Weel MH, Beverstock
GC, Kluin PM, Slater RM, Schuuring E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2003 May;37(1):106-9.

Infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with MLL gene rearrangements is
characterized by a proB phenotype and a poor clinical outcome. We analyzed an
infant proB ALL with t(2;11)(p15;p14) and an MLL rearrangement on Southern blot
analysis. Rapid amplification of cDNA ends-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
reverse transcriptase-PCR identified the LAF4 gene mapped on chromosome region
2q11.2-q12 as a fusion partner of the MLL gene. The LAF4 gene was identified
previously by its high sequence homology to the AF4 protein and encodes a protein
of 1,227 amino acids. The t(4;11)(q21;q23), creating the MLL-AF4 chimeric
transcripts, is the predominant 11q23 chromosome translocation in infant ALL and 
is associated with an extremely poor prognosis. Our findings further suggest that
fusion of MLL to one of the AF4 family members (AF4/LAF4/AF5Q31) might determine 
a proB-cell phenotype in infant leukemia.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12203795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Hum Genet. 2001;46(5):251-9.

Fragile XE-associated familial mental retardation protein 2 (FMR2) acts as a
potent transcription activator.

Hillman MA(1), Gecz J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, Department of Cytogenetics and Molecular
Genetics, Women's and Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia.

Expansion of the FRAXE CCG repeat to a full mutation is associated with
methylation and transcriptional silencing of the FMR2 gene, and as a consequence,
mild-to-borderline mental retardation. FMR2 is a member of a family of four
proteins, AF4, LAF4, FMR2, and AF5q31. The proteins associated with this family
localize to the cell nucleus. Various regions of FMR2, and each of the other
members of the protein family, were cloned and analyzed for transcription
activation in yeast and mammalian cells. In both yeast and mammalian cells, FMR2 
showed strong transcription activation. AF4 activation potential was several-fold
lower. Interestingly, isoforms of both FMR2 and LAF4 lacking exon 3 activated
transcription better than the larger isoforms containing exon 3. Compared with
the other members of the family, activation by FMR2 was the strongest. Our
results show that FMR2 is a potent transcription activator and that its function 
is conserved. Elucidation of the function of the FMR2 protein as a transcription 
activator may place FMR2 within the molecular signalling pathways involved in
nonspecific X-linked mental retardation (MRX).

PMID: 11355014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Br J Haematol. 1997 Jul;98(1):157-69.

Exon/intron structure of the human AF-4 gene, a member of the AF-4/LAF-4/FMR-2
gene family coding for a nuclear protein with structural alterations in acute
leukaemia.

Nilson I(1), Reichel M, Ennas MG, Greim R, Knörr C, Siegler G, Greil J, Fey GH,
Marschalek R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

The AF-4 gene on human chromosome 4q21 is involved in reciprocal translocations
to the ALL-1 gene on chromosome 11q23, which are associated with acute
lymphoblastic leukaemias. A set of recombinant phage carrying genomic fragments
for the coding region and flanking sequences of the AF-4 gene were isolated.
Phage inserts were assembled into four contigs with 21 exons, and an intron phase
map was produced enabling the interpretation of translocation-generated fusion
proteins. The gene contains two alternative first exons, 1a and 1b, both
including a translation initiation codon. The translocation breakpoint cluster
region is flanked by exons 3 and 6 and two different polyadenylation signals were
identified. Polyclonal antisera directed against three different portions of the 
AF-4 protein were produced and used to detect a 116 kD protein in cellular
extracts of human B-lymphoblastoid and proB cell lines. In mitogen-stimulated
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells the AF-4 antigen was predominantly
located in the nucleus. The AF-4 gene is a member of the AF-4, LAF-4 and FMR-2
gene family. The members of this family encode serine-proline-rich proteins with 
properties of nuclear transcription factors. Comparison of AF-4 protein coding
sequences with the LAF-4 and FMR-2 sequences revealed five highly conserved
domains of potential functional relevance.

PMID: 9233580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mamm Genome. 1996 Jun;7(6):467-8.

LAF4 maps to mouse chromosome 1 and human chromosome 2q11.2-q12.

Liao X(1), Ma C, Trask B, Massa H, Gilbert DJ, Staudt LM, Jenkins NA, Copeland
NG.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, ABL-Basic Research Program, NCI-Frederick
Cancer Research & Development Center, Maryland 21702, USA.

PMID: 8662235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Blood. 1996 Jan 15;87(2):734-45.

LAF-4 encodes a lymphoid nuclear protein with transactivation potential that is
homologous to AF-4, the gene fused to MLL in t(4;11) leukemias.

Ma C(1), Staudt LM.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

A novel human gene, LAF-4, was isolated from a subtracted cDNA library that
showed strong sequence similarity to AF-4, a gene that is translocated in
t(4;11)(q21;q23) acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALLs). In t(4;11) ALL, the AF-4
gene at 4q21 is translocated into the MLL locus at 11q23, resulting in the
expression of an MLL/AF-4 fusion protein that is the presumptive oncoprotein.
AF-4 and LAF-4 are homologous throughout their coding regions, yet neither
protein is related to previously cloned genes. Human LAF-4 readily hybridized
with genes in mouse and chicken, thus showing that this gene family has been
highly conserved during vertebrate evolution. In mouse tissues, LAF-4 mRNA was
found to be present at highest levels in lymphoid tissues, present at lower
levels in brain and lung, and absent from other tissues. In human and mouse
lymphoid cell lines, LAF-4 expression was highest in pre-B cells, intermediate in
mature B cells, and absent in plasma cells, thus pointing to a potential
regulatory role for LAF-4 in lymphoid development. Antibodies to LAF-4 showed it 
to be a nuclear protein that showed an uneven, granular immunofluorescence
pattern. In vitro-translated LAF-4 was able to bind strongly to double-stranded
DNA cellulose. Furthermore, both LAF-4 and AF-4 had domains that activated
transcription strongly when fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain. Interestingly, 
the AF-4 transactivation domain is retained in the MLL/AF-4 fusion protein; thus,
it may contribute to the transforming potential of the oncoprotein. Therefore,
the cloning of LAF-4 has defined a new family of potential regulatory proteins
that may function in lymphoid development and oncogenesis.

PMID: 8555498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


