
1. Immunity. 2016 Mar 28. pii: S1074-7613(16)30012-7. doi:
10.1016/j.immuni.2016.01.025. [Epub ahead of print]

Dendritic Cells Coordinate the Development and Homeostasis of Organ-Specific
Regulatory T Cells.

Leventhal DS(1), Gilmore DC(1), Berger JM(1), Nishi S(1), Lee V(1), Malchow S(1),
Kline DE(2), Kline J(2), Vander Griend DJ(3), Huang H(4), Socci ND(5), Savage
PA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology-Oncology, University of Chicago,
IL 60637, USA. (3)Department of Surgery, University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Section of Rheumatology, University of Chicago, IL
60637, USA. (5)Bioinformatics Core, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10021, USA. (6)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
IL 60637, USA. Electronic address: psavage@bsd.uchicago.edu.

Although antigen recognition mediated by the T cell receptor (TCR) influences
many facets of Foxp3(+) regulatory T (Treg) cell biology, including development
and function, the cell types that present antigen to Treg cells in vivo remain
largely undefined. By tracking a clonal population of Aire-dependent,
prostate-specific Treg cells in mice, we demonstrated an essential role for
dendritic cells (DCs) in regulating organ-specific Treg cell biology. We have
shown that the thymic development of prostate-specific Treg cells required
antigen presentation by DCs. Moreover, Batf3-dependent CD8a(+) DCs were
dispensable for the development of this clonotype and had negligible impact on
the polyclonal Treg cell repertoire. In the periphery, CCR7-dependent migratory
DCs coordinated the activation of organ-specific Treg cells in the
prostate-draining lymph nodes. Our results demonstrate that the development and
peripheral regulation of organ-specific Treg cells are dependent on antigen
presentation by DCs, implicating DCs as key mediators of organ-specific immune
tolerance.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27037189  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Mol Immunol. 2016 Mar 21;72:92-102. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2016.02.015. [Epub
ahead of print]

TNF superfamily members play distinct roles in shaping the thymic stromal
microenvironment.

Bichele R(1), Kisand K(2), Peterson P(2), Laan M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine,
University of Tartu, Tartu 50411, Estonia. Electronic address:
rudolf.bichele@ut.ee. (2)Molecular Pathology, Institute of Biomedicine and
Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu 50411, Estonia.

The differentiation and proper function of thymic epithelial cells (TECs) depend 
on various tumor necrosis factor superfamily (TNFSF) signals that are needed to
maintain the thymic stromal microenvironment. Nevertheless, the direct
transcriptional effects of these signals on TECs remain unclear. To address this 
issue, we stimulated murine embryonic thymus tissue with selected TNFSF ligands
and performed a gene expression profiling study. We show that Aire expression is 
a direct and specific effect of RANKL stimulation, whereas LTß and TNFa are major
inducers of chemokines in the thymic stroma and we propose differential NF-<U+03BA>B
binding as one possible cause of these gene expression patterns. Our work
provides further insight into the complex molecular pathways that shape the
thymic microenvironment and maintain central tolerance.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27011037  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Clin Invest. 2016 Apr 1;126(4):1239-41. doi: 10.1172/JCI86800. Epub 2016 Mar
21.

Estrogen turns down "the AIRE".

Bakhru P, Su MA.

Genetic alterations are known drivers of autoimmune disease; however, there is a 
much higher incidence of autoimmunity in women, implicating sex-specific factors 
in disease development. The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene contributes to the
maintenance of central tolerance, and complete loss of AIRE function results in
the development of autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1. In this issue
of the JCI, Dragin and colleagues demonstrate that AIRE expression is
downregulated in females as the result of estrogen-mediated alterations at the
AIRE promoter. The association between estrogen and reduction of AIRE may at
least partially account for the elevated incidence of autoimmune disease in women
and has potential implications for sex hormone therapy.

PMID: 26999606  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Clin Invest. 2016 Apr 1;126(4):1525-37. doi: 10.1172/JCI81894. Epub 2016 Mar
21.

Estrogen-mediated downregulation of AIRE influences sexual dimorphism in
autoimmune diseases.

Dragin N, Bismuth J, Cizeron-Clairac G, Biferi MG, Berthault C, Serraf A, Nottin 
R, Klatzmann D, Cumano A, Barkats M, Le Panse R, Berrih-Aknin S.

Autoimmune diseases affect 5% to 8% of the population, and females are more
susceptible to these diseases than males. Here, we analyzed human thymic
transcriptome and revealed sex-associated differences in the expression of
tissue-specific antigens that are controlled by the autoimmune regulator (AIRE), 
a key factor in central tolerance. We hypothesized that the level of AIRE is
linked to sexual dimorphism susceptibility to autoimmune diseases. In human and
mouse thymus, females expressed less AIRE (mRNA and protein) than males after
puberty. These results were confirmed in purified murine thymic epithelial cells 
(TECs). We also demonstrated that AIRE expression is related to sexual hormones, 
as male castration decreased AIRE thymic expression and estrogen receptor
a-deficient mice did not show a sex disparity for AIRE expression. Moreover,
estrogen treatment resulted in downregulation of AIRE expression in cultured
human TECs, human thymic tissue grafted to immunodeficient mice, and murine fetal
thymus organ cultures. AIRE levels in human thymus grafted in immunodeficient
mice depended upon the sex of the recipient. Estrogen also upregulated the number
of methylated CpG sites in the AIRE promoter. Together, our results indicate that
in females, estrogen induces epigenetic changes in the AIRE gene, leading to
reduced AIRE expression under a threshold that increases female susceptibility to
autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 26999605  [PubMed - in process]


5. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2016 Mar;111(3):218-21. doi: 10.1590/0074-02760150401.
Epub 2016 Mar 15.

Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic responses in adult patients with Chagas
disease treated with a new formulation of benznidazole.

Fernández ML(1), Marson ME(2), Ramirez JC(3), Mastrantonio G(2), Schijman AG(3), 
Altcheh J(4), Riarte AR(1), Bournissen FG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Parasitología Dr M Fatala Chabén, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. (2)Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, 
Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La Plata, Argentina. (3)Laboratorio de Biología
Molecular de la Enfermedad de Chagas, Instituto de Investigaciones en Ingeniería 
Genética y Biología Molecular, Buenos Aires, Argentina. (4)Hospital de Niños
Ricardo Gutiérrez, Buenos Aire, Argentina.

Pharmacological treatment of Chagas disease with benznidazole (BNZ) is effective 
in children in all stages, but it is controversial in chronically infected
adults. We report the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in six adult patients
with Chagas disease treated with the new BNZ formulation (ABARAX®) in doses
between 2.5-5.5 mg/Kg/day. All but one patient had plasmatic BNZ concentrations
within the expected range. All patients finalised treatment with nondetectable
Trypanosoma cruziquantitative polymerase chain reaction, which remained
nondetectable at the six month follow-up. Our data suggests parasitological
responses with the new BNZ and supports the hypothesis that treatment protocols
with lower BNZ doses may be effective.

PMCID: PMC4804505
PMID: 26982179  [PubMed - in process]


6. Nat Rev Immunol. 2016 Apr;16(4):247-58. doi: 10.1038/nri.2016.9. Epub 2016 Mar
14.

AIRE expands: new roles in immune tolerance and beyond.

Anderson MS(1), Su MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
California 94143, USA. (2)Departments of Pediatrics and of
Microbiology/Immunology, School of Medicine, and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

More than 15 years ago, mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene were
identified as the cause of autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS1). It is
now clear that this transcription factor has a crucial role in promoting
self-tolerance in the thymus by regulating the expression of a wide array of
self-antigens that have the commonality of being tissue-restricted in their
expression pattern in the periphery. In this Review, we highlight many of the
recent advances in our understanding of the complex biology that is related to
AIRE, with a particular focus on advances in genetics, molecular interactions and
the effect of AIRE on thymic selection of regulatory T cells. Furthermore, we
highlight new areas of biology that are potentially affected by this key
regulator of immune tolerance.

PMID: 26972725  [PubMed - in process]


7. Environ Int. 2016 Mar 9;91:196-200. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2016.02.023. [Epub
ahead of print]

China's soil and groundwater management challenges: Lessons from the UK's
experience and opportunities for China.

Coulon F(1), Jones K(2), Li H(2), Hu Q(3), Gao J(3), Li F(4), Chen M(5), Zhu
YG(6), Liu R(7), Liu M(8), Canning K(9), Harries N(10), Bardos P(11), Nathanail
P(12), Sweeney R(10), Middleton D(13), Charnley M(13), Randall J(14), Richell
M(14), Howard T(15), Martin I(15), Spooner S(16), Weeks J(17), Cave M(18), Yu
F(19), Zhang F(20), Jiang Y(17), Longhurst P(17), Prpich G(17), Bewley R(21),
Abra J(22), Pollard S(17).

Author information: 
(1)Cranfield University, School of Energy, Environment and Agrifood, Cranfield,
MK430AL, UK. Electronic address: f.coulon@cranfield.ac.uk. (2)Lancaster
Environment Centre, Lancaster University, LA1 4YQ, UK. (3)Engineering Innovation 
Centre, South University of Science and Technology of China, 1088 Xue Yuan Da
Dao, Nanshan, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518055, China. (4)Department of Soil Pollution
Control, Chinese Research Academy of Environmental Sciences (CRAES), 8 Dayangfang
BeiYuan Road., Chaoyang District, Beijing 100012, China. (5)Institute of Soil
Science, Chinese Academy of Science (ISSAS), 71 East Beijing Road, Nanjing,
210008, China. (6)The Institute of Urban Environment (IUE), Chinese Academy of
Sciences (CAS), 1799 Jimei Road, Xiamen 361021, China. (7)The Administrative
Centre for China's Agenda21 (ACCA21), 8 Yuyuantan Nanlu, Haidian District,
Beijing 100038, China. (8)Department of Science, Technology & Innovation, British
Consulate-General Guangzhou, 5 Zhujiang Road West, Zhujiang New Town, Guangzhou
510623, China. (9)Arup, Energy and Resources, 6th floor, 3 Piccadilly place,
Manchester M3 1 BN, UK. (10)CL:AIRE, 32 Bloomsbury Street, London WC1B 3QJ, UK.
(11)University of Brighton, Environment and Technology, Moulsecoomb, Brighton BN2
4GJ, UK. (12)School of Geography, The University of Nottingham, University Park, 
Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK & Land Quality Management Ltd, University of Innovation
Park, Sir Colin Campbell Bldg, Nottingham NG7 2TU, UK. (13)Department for
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA, UK), Nobel House, 17 Smith Square,
London, SW1P 3JR, UK. (14)RAW, Randall and Walsh Associated Limited, 339 Yorktown
road, Sandhurst GU47 0PX, UK. (15)Environment Agency (England), Horizon House,
Deanery Road, Bristol, BS1 5AH, UK. (16)Atkins, Water Ground and Environment,
Epsom, KT18 5BW, UK and Nottingham University, Ningbo, 199 Taikang E Rd, Yinzhou,
Ningbo, Zhejiang 315100, China. (17)Cranfield University, School of Energy,
Environment and Agrifood, Cranfield, MK430AL, UK. (18)British Geological Survey, 
Keyworth, Nottingham NG12 5GG, UK. (19)Chinese Academy for Environmental
Planning, 8 Dayangfang BeiYuan Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100012, China.
(20)School of Environment, Tsinghua University, Haidian, Beijing 100084, China.
(21)AECOM, Bridgewater House, Whitworth Street Manchester, M1 6LT, UK. (22)KTN,
Innovation Suite, The Heath, Runcorn, Cheshire WA7 4QX, UK.

There are a number of specific opportunities for UK and China to work together on
contaminated land management issues as China lacks comprehensive and systematic
planning for sustainable risk based land management, encompassing both
contaminated soil and groundwater and recycling and reuse of soil. It also lacks 
comprehensive risk assessment systems, structures to support risk management
decision making, processes for verification of remediation outcome, systems for
record keeping and preservation and integration of contamination issues into land
use planning, along with procedures for ensuring effective health and safety
considerations during remediation projects, and effective evaluation of costs
versus benefits and overall sustainability. A consequence of the absence of these
overarching frameworks has been that remediation takes place on an ad hoc basis. 
At a specific site management level, China lacks capabilities in site
investigation and consequent risk assessment systems, in particular related to
conceptual modelling and risk evaluation. There is also a lack of shared
experience of practical deployment of remediation technologies in China,
analogous to the situation before the establishment of the independent,
non-profit organisation CL:AIRE (Contaminated Land: Applications In Real
Environments) in 1999 in the UK. Many local technology developments are at
lab-scale or pilot-scale stage without being widely put into use. Therefore, a
shared endeavour is needed to promote the development of technically and
scientifically sound land management as well as soil and human health protection 
to improve the sustainability of the rapid urbanisation in China.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26970591  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Nat Commun. 2016 Feb 29;7:10562. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10562.

Increased generation of Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells by manipulating antigen
presentation in the thymus.

Lin J(1,)(2), Yang L(1,)(2), Silva HM(1), Trzeciak A(1), Choi Y(3), Schwab
SR(1,)(4), Dustin ML(1,)(4,)(5), Lafaille JJ(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathogenesis Program, Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine at the 
Skirball Institute, New York University School of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New
York, New York 10016, USA. (2)The Sackler Institute of Graduate Biomedical
Sciences, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA. 
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute for Immunology,
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, New York University School
of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA. (5)Nuffield Department of
Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, Kennedy Institute of
Rheumatology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7FY, UK.

Regulatory T-cell (Treg) selection in the thymus is essential to prevent
autoimmune diseases. Although important rules for Treg selection have been
established, there is controversy regarding the degree of self-reactivity
displayed by T-cell receptors expressed by Treg cells. In this study we have
developed a model of autoimmune skin inflammation, to determine key parameters in
the generation of skin-reactive Treg cells in the thymus (tTreg). tTreg
development is predominantly AIRE dependent, with an AIRE-independent component. 
Without the knowledge of antigen recognized by skin-reactive Treg cells, we are
able to enhance skin-specific tTreg cell generation using three approaches.
First, we increase medullary thymic epithelial cells by using mice lacking
osteoprotegerin or by adding TRANCE (RANKL, Tnfsf11). Second, we inject
intrathymically peripheral dendritic cells from skin-draining sites. Finally, we 
inject skin tissue lysates intrathymically. These findings have implications for 
enhancing the generation of organ-specific Treg cells in autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC4773449
PMID: 26923114  [PubMed - in process]


9. Autoimmunity. 2016 Feb 25:1-8. [Epub ahead of print]

AIRE is not essential for the induction of human tolerogenic dendritic cells.

Crossland KL(1), Abinun M(1,)(2), Arkwright PD(3), Cheetham TD(4), Pearce SH(5), 
Hilkens CM(6), Lilic D(1,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)a Primary Immune Deficiency Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle
University , Newcastle upon Tyne , UK . (2)b Department of Paediatric Immunology 
, Great North Children's Hospital , Newcastle upon Tyne , UK . (3)c Institute of 
Inflammation and Repair, University of Manchester , Manchester , UK . (4)d
Department of Paediatric Endocrinology , Great North Children's Hospital ,
Newcastle upon Tyne , UK . (5)e Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University
, Newcastle upon Tyne , UK . (6)f Musculoskeletal Research Group, Institute of
Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University , Newcastle upon Tyne , UK , and. (7)g
Department of Regional Immunology and Allergy , Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS
Trust , Newcastle upon Tyne , UK.

Loss-of-function mutations of the Autoimmune Regulator (AIRE) gene results in
organ-specific autoimmunity and disease Autoimmune Polyendocrinopathy type 1
(APS1)/Autoimmune Polyendocrinopathy Candidiasis Ectodermal Dystrophy (APECED).
The AIRE protein is crucial in the induction of central tolerance, promoting
ectopic expression of tissue-specific antigens in medullary thymic epithelial
cells and enabling removal of self-reactive T-cells. AIRE expression has recently
been detected in myeloid dendritic cells (DC), suggesting AIRE may have a
significant role in peripheral tolerance. DC stimulation of T-cells is critical
in determining the initiation or lack of an immune response, depending on the
pattern of costimulation and cytokine production by DCs, defining
immunogenic/inflammatory (inflDC) and tolerogenic (tolDC) DC. In AIRE-deficient
patients and healthy controls, we validated the role of AIRE in the generation
and function of monocyte-derived inflDC and tolDCs by determining mRNA and
protein expression of AIRE and comparing activation markers
(HLA-DR/DP/DQ,CD83,CD86,CD274(PDL-1),TLR-2), cytokine production
(IL-12p70,IL-10,IL-6,TNF-a,IFN-<U+03B3>) and T-cell stimulatory capacity (mixed
lymphocyte reaction) of AIRE+ and AIRE- DCs. We show for the first time that: (1)
tolDCs from healthy individuals express AIRE; (2) AIRE expression is not
significantly higher in tolDC compared to inflDC; (3) tolDC can be generated from
APECED patient monocytes and (4) tolDCs lacking AIRE retain the same phenotype
and reduced T-cell stimulatory function. Our findings suggest that AIRE does not 
have a role in the induction and function of monocyte-derived tolerogenic DC in
humans, but these findings do not exclude a role for AIRE in peripheral tolerance
mediated by other cell types.

PMID: 26912174  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 May 5;426:101-12. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2016.02.014. Epub 
2016 Feb 18.

CD26/DPPIV inhibition alters the expression of immune response-related genes in
the thymi of NOD mice.

Julián MT(1), Alonso N(2), Colobran R(3), Sánchez A(4), Miñarro A(5),
Pujol-Autonell I(6), Carrascal J(6), Rodríguez-Fernández S(6), Ampudia RM(6),
Vives-Pi M(7), Puig-Domingo M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Germans Trias i Pujol Health
Sciences Research Institute and Hospital, 08916, Badalona, Spain; Department of
Medicine, Autonomous University of Barcelona, 08193, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Germans Trias i Pujol Health
Sciences Research Institute and Hospital, 08916, Badalona, Spain; Department of
Medicine, Autonomous University of Barcelona, 08193, Barcelona, Spain; CIBER of
Diabetes and Associated Metabolic Diseases (CIBERDEM), Instituto de Salud Carlos 
III (ISCIII), 28029, Madrid, Spain. (3)Immunology Division, Vall d'Hebron
Research Institute (VHIR), Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, 08035, Barcelona,
Spain. (4)Statistics Department, Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona,
08028, Barcelona, Spain; Statistics and Bioinformatics Unit, Vall d'Hebron
Research Institute (VHIR), 08035, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Statistics Department,
Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona, 08028, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Immunology Department, Germans Trias i Pujol Health Sciences Research
Institute, 08916, Badalona, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Immunology Department, Germans Trias i Pujol Health Sciences Research
Institute, 08916, Badalona, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Spain; CIBER of
Diabetes and Associated Metabolic Diseases (CIBERDEM), Instituto de Salud Carlos 
III (ISCIII), 28029, Madrid, Spain. (8)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition,
Germans Trias i Pujol Health Sciences Research Institute and Hospital, 08916,
Badalona, Spain; Department of Medicine, Autonomous University of Barcelona,
08193, Barcelona, Spain; CIBER of Diabetes and Associated Metabolic Diseases
(CIBERDEM), Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), 28029, Madrid, Spain; CIBER
of Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), 28029,
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: mpuigd@igtp.cat.

The transmembrane glycoprotein CD26 or dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPPIV) is a
multifunctional protein. In immune system, CD26 plays a role in T-cell function
and is also involved in thymic maturation and emigration patterns. In preclinical
studies, treatment with DPPIV inhibitors reduces insulitis and delays or even
reverses the new -onset of type 1 diabetes (T1D) in non-obese diabetic (NOD)
mice. However, the specific mechanisms involved in these effects remain unknown. 
The aim of the present study was to investigate how DPPIV inhibition modifies the
expression of genes in the thymus of NOD mice by microarray analysis. Changes in 
the gene expression of ß-cell autoantigens and Aire in thymic epithelial cells
(TECs) were also evaluated by using qRT-PCR. A DPPIV inhibitor, MK626, was orally
administered in the diet for 4 and 6 weeks starting at 6-8 weeks of age. Thymic
glands from treated and control mice were obtained for each study checkpoint.
Thymus transcriptome analysis revealed that 58 genes were significantly
over-expressed in MK626-treated mice after 6 weeks of treatment. Changes in gene 
expression in the thymus were confined mainly to the immune system, including
innate immunity, chemotaxis, antigen presentation and immunoregulation. Most of
the genes are implicated in central tolerance mechanisms through several
pathways. No differences were observed in the expression of Aire and ß-cell
autoantigens in TECs. In the current study, we demonstrate that treatment with
the DPPIV inhibitor MK626 in NOD mice alters the expression of the immune
response-related genes in the thymus, especially those related to immunological
central tolerance, and may contribute to the prevention of T1D.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26911933  [PubMed - in process]


11. Genome Biol Evol. 2016 Feb 23;8(3):765-76. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evw032.

Genome Resequencing Identifies Unique Adaptations of Tibetan Chickens to Hypoxia 
and High-Dose Ultraviolet Radiation in High-Altitude Environments.

Zhang Q(1), Gou W(1), Wang X(2), Zhang Y(1), Ma J(1), Zhang H(1), Zhang Y(1),
Zhang H(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, China Agricultural
University, Beijing, People's Republic of China. (2)School of Agriculture, Ludong
University, Yantai, China. (3)National Engineering Laboratory for Animal
Breeding, China Agricultural University, Beijing, People's Republic of China
zhanghao827@163.com.

Tibetan chicken, unlike their lowland counterparts, exhibit specific adaptations 
to high-altitude conditions. The genetic mechanisms of such adaptations in
highland chickens were determined by resequencing the genomes of four highland
(Tibetan and Lhasa White) and four lowland (White Leghorn, Lindian, and Chahua)
chicken populations. Our results showed an evident genetic admixture in Tibetan
chickens, suggesting a history of introgression from lowland gene pools. Genes
showing positive selection in highland populations were related to cardiovascular
and respiratory system development, DNA repair, response to radiation,
inflammation, and immune responses, indicating a strong adaptation to oxygen
scarcity and high-intensity solar radiation. The distribution of allele
frequencies of nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms between highland and
lowland populations was analyzed using chi-square test, which showed that several
differentially distributed genes with missense mutations were enriched in several
functional categories, especially in blood vessel development and adaptations to 
hypoxia and intense radiation. RNA sequencing revealed that several
differentially expressed genes were enriched in gene ontology terms related to
blood vessel and respiratory system development. Several candidate genes involved
in the development of cardiorespiratory system (FGFR1, CTGF, ADAM9, JPH2, SATB1, 
BMP4, LOX, LPR, ANGPTL4, and HYAL1), inflammation and immune responses (AIRE,
MYO1F, ZAP70, DDX60, CCL19, CD47, JSC, and FAS), DNA repair, and responses to
radiation (VCP, ASH2L, and FANCG) were identified to play key roles in the
adaptation to high-altitude conditions. Our data provide new insights into the
unique adaptations of highland animals to extreme environments.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

PMID: 26907498  [PubMed - in process]


12. J Immunol. 2016 Apr 1;196(7):2955-64. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500301. Epub 2016
Feb 22.

Anticommensal Responses Are Associated with Regulatory T Cell Defect in
Autoimmune Polyendocrinopathy-Candidiasis-Ectodermal Dystrophy Patients.

Hetemäki I(1), Jarva H(2), Kluger N(3), Baldauf HM(4), Laakso S(4), Bratland
E(5), Husebye ES(5), Kisand K(6), Ranki A(3), Peterson P(6), Arstila TP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, University of Helsinki, 00290
Helsinki, Finland; Research Programs Unit, Immunobiology Research Program,
University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland; iivo.hetemaki@helsinki.fi.
(2)Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, University of Helsinki, 00290
Helsinki, Finland; Research Programs Unit, Immunobiology Research Program,
University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland; HUSLAB, Helsinki University
Central Hospital, 00029 Helsinki, Finland; (3)Department of Skin and Allergic
Diseases, Skin and Allergy Hospital, Helsinki University Central Hospital, 00250 
Helsinki, Finland; (4)Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, University of
Helsinki, 00290 Helsinki, Finland; (5)Department of Medicine, Haukeland
University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway; and. (6)Institute of General and
Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu 50411, Estonia. (7)Department of 
Bacteriology and Immunology, University of Helsinki, 00290 Helsinki, Finland;
Research Programs Unit, Immunobiology Research Program, University of Helsinki,
00014 Helsinki, Finland;

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a
monogenic autoimmune disease caused by mutations in the AIRE gene. Although
mainly an endocrine disease, a substantial fraction of patients have
gastrointestinal manifestations. In this study, we have examined the role of
anticommensal responses and their regulation. APECED patients had increased
levels of Abs against Saccharomyces cerevisiae (p < 0.0001) and against several
species of commensal gut bacteria, but not against species predominantly
associated with other locations. The anticommensal Ab levels did not correlate
with gastrointestinal autoantibodies, neutralizing anti-IL-17 or -IL-22 Abs, or
gastrointestinal symptoms, although scarcity of the available clinical data
suggests that further study is required. However, the anti-S. cerevisiae Ab
levels showed a significant inverse correlation with FOXP3 expression levels in
regulatory T cells (Treg), previously shown to be dysfunctional in APECED. The
correlation was strongest in the activated CD45RO(+) population (<U+03C1> = -0.706; p < 
0.01). APECED patients also had decreased numbers of FOXP3(+) cells in gut
biopsies. These results show that APECED patients develop early and sustained
responses to gut microbial Ags in a pattern reminiscent of Crohn's disease. This 
abnormal immune recognition of gut commensals is linked to a systemic Treg
defect, which is also reflected as a local decrease of gut-associated Treg. To
our knowledge, these data are the first to show dysregulated responses to
non-self commensal Ags in APECED and indicate that AIRE contributes to the
regulation of gut homeostasis, at least indirectly. The data also raise the
possibility of persistent microbial stimulation as a contributing factor in the
pathogenesis of APECED.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26903483  [PubMed - in process]


13. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2016 Feb;18(2):147-51.

[Clinical analysis and autoimmune regulator gene mutation of autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy syndrome type I in a family: a report of one case].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun YX(1), He YF, Li XL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou 450052, China. xialianli@hotmail.com.

The clinical data of one patient with autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type
I were collected. PCR-DNA direct bidirectional sequencing was applied for
mutation screening of 14 exons in autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene in the patient
and her parents. A total of 50 unrelated healthy controls were selected and
tested. The bioinformatic methods were used to predict the possible impact of the
mutations on the structure and function of the AIRE protein. The results of
sequencing showed that heterozygous mutation c.622G>T (p.G208W) in exon 5 of the 
AIRE gene was detected in the patient and was a novel mutation, which had not
been reported in the HGMD database and latest articles. This mutation was not
detected in the 50 unrelated normal controls. The novel mutation of c.622G>T
(p.G208W) in AIRE gene might play an important role in the pathogenesis of this
case of autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type I.

PMID: 26903062  [PubMed - in process]


14. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 12;11(2):e0148947. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148947.
eCollection 2016.

Omnivory of an Insular Lizard: Sources of Variation in the Diet of Podarcis
lilfordi (Squamata, Lacertidae).

Pérez-Cembranos A(1), León A(1), Pérez-Mellado V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.

Through 17 years and from a sample of 7,790 faecal pellets and 26,346 prey items,
we studied the diet of the Balearic lizard Podarcis lilfordi in Aire Island
(Menorca, Balearic Islands, Spain). We analysed the diet in terms of prey
frequencies, as well as by their volume and biomass contributions. The diet of
the Balearic lizard was extremely variable through the years, months and areas
under study. The dominance of small clumped prey, particularly ants, was
confirmed. However, the main contribution by volume corresponded to beetles, with
a relevant role for Diplopoda and terrestrial Isopoda during some months and at
particular areas of the island. Several prey items were probably captured at the 
base of shrubs, under stones or inside rock crevices. Therefore, our estimations 
of electivity would only be reliable for epigeal and flying prey. The capacity of
the Balearic lizard to include marine subsidies in its diet, such as coastal
crustaceans, is noteworthy. Also, its consumption of carrion from carcasses of
gulls and rabbits and leftovers from human visitors is remarkable. Juvenile
conspecifics can also be a sporadic food resource, especially during the second
half of summer, whereas the consumption of vegetal matter is constant for each
whole year. The shifts of vegetal exploitation among areas of the island and
months take place according to availability of different plant species at each
area or during a given period. Thus, lizards are able to conduct a thorough
monitoring of plant phenology, exploiting a large variety of plant species.
Omnivory does not imply the indiscriminate inclusion of any edible food in its
diet. Rather, the inclusion of several food items means the adoption of a wide
range of foraging behaviours adapted to the exploitation of each food resource.

PMCID: PMC4752353
PMID: 26871439  [PubMed - in process]


15. EBioMedicine. 2015 Nov 5;2(12):2024-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.11.003.
eCollection 2015.

Modulation of Autoimmune T-Cell Memory by Stem Cell Educator Therapy: Phase 1/2
Clinical Trial.

Delgado E(1), Perez-Basterrechea M(2), Suarez-Alvarez B(3), Zhou H(4), Revuelta
EM(5), Garcia-Gala JM(5), Perez S(2), Alvarez-Viejo M(2), Menendez E(1),
Lopez-Larrea C(6), Tang R(7), Zhu Z(8), Hu W(9), Moss T(10), Guindi E(10), Otero 
J(2), Zhao Y(9).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Section, Department of Medicine, University de Oviedo, Oviedo
33006, Spain; Endocrinology and Nutrition Service, Hospital Universitario Central
de Asturias, Oviedo 33011, Spain. (2)Unit of Transplants, Cell Therapy and
Regenerative Medicine, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo 33011, 
Spain. (3)Cellular Biology of Renal Diseases Laboratory, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid,
Madrid 28049, Spain. (4)Section of Endocrinology, The First Hospital of Hebei
Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050031, PR China. (5)Hematology and Hemotherapy 
Service, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo 33011, Spain.
(6)Department of Immunology, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo
33011, Spain; Fundación Renal "Iñigo Álvarez de Toledo", Madrid 28003, Spain.
(7)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical
University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050031, PR China. (8)Department of Pathology, The
First Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050031, PR China.
(9)Department of Research, Hackensack University Medical Center, Hackensack, NJ
07601, USA. (10)CORD:USE Cord Blood Bank, Orlando, FL 32810, USA.

BACKGROUND: Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a T cell-mediated autoimmune disease that
causes a deficit of pancreatic islet ß cells. The complexities of overcoming
autoimmunity in T1D have contributed to the challenges the research community
faces when devising successful treatments with conventional immune therapies.
Overcoming autoimmune T cell memory represents one of the key hurdles.
METHODS: In this open-label, phase 1/phase 2 study, Caucasian T1D patients
(N = 15) received two treatments with the Stem Cell Educator (SCE) therapy, an
approach that uses human multipotent cord blood-derived multipotent stem cells
(CB-SCs). SCE therapy involves a closed-loop system that briefly treats the
patient's lymphocytes with CB-SCs in vitro and returns the "educated" lymphocytes
(but not the CB-SCs) into the patient's blood circulation. This study is
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01350219.
FINDINGS: Clinical data demonstrated that SCE therapy was well tolerated in all
subjects. The percentage of naïve CD4(+) T cells was significantly increased at
26 weeks and maintained through the final follow-up at 56 weeks. The percentage
of CD4(+) central memory T cells (TCM) was markedly and constantly increased at
18 weeks. Both CD4(+) effector memory T cells (TEM) and CD8(+) TEM cells were
considerably decreased at 18 weeks and 26 weeks respectively. Additional clinical
data demonstrated the modulation of C-C chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7) expressions
on naïve T, TCM, and TEM cells. Following two treatments with SCE therapy, islet 
ß-cell function was improved and maintained in individuals with residual ß-cell
function, but not in those without residual ß-cell function.
INTERPRETATION: Current clinical data demonstrated the safety and efficacy of SCE
therapy in immune modulation. SCE therapy provides lasting reversal of autoimmune
memory that could improve islet ß-cell function in Caucasian subjects.
FUNDING: Obra Social "La Caixa", Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Red de
Investigación Renal, European Union FEDER Funds, Principado de Asturias, FICYT,
and Hackensack University Medical Center Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4703710
PMID: 26844283  [PubMed - in process]


16. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 1;6:20104. doi: 10.1038/srep20104.

Proteome-wide survey of the autoimmune target repertoire in autoimmune
polyendocrine syndrome type 1.

Landegren N(1,)(2), Sharon D(3,)(4), Freyhult E(2,)(5,)(6), Hallgren Å(1,)(2),
Eriksson D(1,)(2), Edqvist PH(7), Bensing S(8), Wahlberg J(9), Nelson LM(10),
Gustafsson J(11), Husebye ES(12), Anderson MS(13), Snyder M(3), Kämpe O(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Solna), Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska
Institutet, Sweden. (2)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical
Sciences, Uppsala University, Sweden. (3)Department of Genetics, Stanford
University, California, USA. (4)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and
Developmental Biology, Yale University, Connecticut, USA. (5)Department of
Medical Sciences, Cancer Pharmacology and Computational Medicine, Uppsala
University, Sweden. (6)Bioinformatics Infrastructure for Life Sciences, Sweden.
(7)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Sweden
and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden. (8)Department of Molecular
Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (9)Department of 
Endocrinology and Department of Medical and Health Sciences and Department of
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(10)Integrative Reproductive Medicine Group, Intramural Research Program on
Reproductive and Adult Endocrinology, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(11)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University, Sweden.
(12)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, and Department of
Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. (13)Diabetes Center,
University of California San Francisco, USA.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS1) is a monogenic disorder that
features multiple autoimmune disease manifestations. It is caused by mutations in
the Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene, which promote thymic display of thousands
of peripheral tissue antigens in a process critical for establishing central
immune tolerance. We here used proteome arrays to perform a comprehensive study
of autoimmune targets in APS1. Interrogation of established autoantigens revealed
highly reliable detection of autoantibodies, and by exploring the full panel of
more than 9000 proteins we further identified MAGEB2 and PDILT as novel major
autoantigens in APS1. Our proteome-wide assessment revealed a marked enrichment
for tissue-specific immune targets, mirroring AIRE's selectiveness for this
category of genes. Our findings also suggest that only a very limited portion of 
the proteome becomes targeted by the immune system in APS1, which contrasts the
broad defect of thymic presentation associated with AIRE-deficiency and raises
novel questions what other factors are needed for break of tolerance.

PMCID: PMC4735587
PMID: 26830021  [PubMed - in process]


17. Mol Carcinog. 2016 Jan 19. doi: 10.1002/mc.22459. [Epub ahead of print]

Transcriptome profiling in oral cavity and esophagus tissues from
(S)-N'-nitrosonornicotine-treated rats reveals candidate genes involved in human 
oral cavity and esophageal carcinogenesis.

Khammanivong A(1), Anandharaj A(2), Qian X(2), Song JM(2), Upadhyaya P(2), Balbo 
S(2,)(3), Bandyopadhyay D(4), Dickerson EB(1,)(2), Hecht SS(2), Kassie F(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, Minnesota. (2)Masonic Cancer Center,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota. (3)Environmental Health Sciences
Division, School of Public Health, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota. (4)Department of Biostatistics, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, Virginia.

Recently, we have shown that (S)-N'-Nitrosonornicotine [(S)-NNN], the major form 
of NNN in tobacco products, is a potent oral cavity and esophageal carcinogen in 
rats. To determine the early molecular alterations induced by (S)-NNN in the oral
and esophageal mucosa, we administered the carcinogen to rats in the drinking
water for 10<U+2009>wk and global gene expression alterations were analyzed by RNA
sequencing. At a false discovery rate P-value<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05 and fold-change =2, we found
alterations in the level of 39 genes in the oral cavity and 69 genes in the
esophagus. Validation of RNA sequencing results by qRT-PCR assays revealed a high
cross-platform concordance. The most significant impact of exposure to (S)-NNN
was alteration of genes involved in immune regulation (Aire, Ctla4, and CD80),
inflammation (Ephx2 and Inpp5d) and cancer (Cdkn2a, Dhh, Fetub B, Inpp5d, Ly6E,
Nr1d1, and Wnt6). Consistent with the findings in rat tissues, most of the genes 
were deregulated, albeit to different degrees, in immortalized oral keratinocytes
treated with (S)-NNN and in non-treated premalignant oral cells and malignant
oral and head and neck squamous cells. Furthermore, interrogation of TCGA data
sets showed that genes deregulated by (S)-NNN in rat tissues (Fetub, Ly6e, Nr1d1,
Cacna1c, Cd80, and Dgkg) are also altered in esophageal and head and neck tumors.
Overall, our findings provide novel insights into early molecular changes induced
by (S)-NNN and, therefore, could contribute to the development of biomarkers for 
the early detection and prevention of (S)-NNN-associated oral and esophageal
cancers. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26785143  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. J Autoimmun. 2016 Apr;68:86-97. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2015.12.004. Epub 2016 Jan 6.

Sonic Hedgehog regulates thymic epithelial cell differentiation.

Saldaña JI(1), Solanki A(1), Lau CI(1), Sahni H(1), Ross S(1), Furmanski AL(1),
Ono M(1), Holländer G(2), Crompton T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Section, UCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street
London WC1N 1EH, UK. (2)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, and
Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, UK. (3)Immunobiology Section,
UCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street London WC1N 1EH, UK. Electronic
address: t.crompton@ucl.ac.uk.

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is expressed in the thymus, where it regulates T cell
development. Here we investigated the influence of Shh on thymic epithelial cell 
(TEC) development. Components of the Hedgehog (Hh) signalling pathway were
expressed by TEC, and use of a Gli Binding Site-green fluorescence protein (GFP) 
transgenic reporter mouse demonstrated active Hh-dependent transcription in TEC
in the foetal and adult thymus. Analysis of Shh-deficient foetal thymus organ
cultures (FTOC) showed that Shh is required for normal TEC differentiation.
Shh-deficient foetal thymus contained fewer TEC than wild type (WT), the
proportion of medullary TEC was reduced relative to cortical TEC, and cell
surface expression of MHC Class II molecules was increased on both cortical and
medullary TEC populations. In contrast, the Gli3-deficient thymus, which shows
increased Hh-dependent transcription in thymic stroma, had increased numbers of
TEC, but decreased cell surface expression of MHC Class II molecules on both
cortical and medullary TEC. Neutralisation of endogenous Hh proteins in WT FTOC
led to a reduction in TEC numbers, and in the proportion of mature
Aire-expressing medullary TEC, but an increase in cell surface expression of MHC 
Class II molecules on medullary TEC. Likewise, conditional deletion of Shh from
TEC in the adult thymus resulted in alterations in TEC differentiation and
consequent changes in T cell development. TEC numbers, and the proportion of
mature Aire-expressing medullary TEC were reduced, and cell surface expression of
MHC Class II molecules on medullary TEC was increased. Differentiation of mature 
CD4 and CD8 single positive thymocytes was increased, demonstrating the
regulatory role of Shh production by TEC on T cell development. Treatment of
human thymus explants with recombinant Shh or neutralising anti-Shh antibody
indicated that the Hedgehog pathway is also involved in regulation of
differentiation from DP to mature SP T cells in the human thymus.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26778835  [PubMed - in process]


19. Trends Microbiol. 2016 Mar;24(3):224-37. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2015.12.003. Epub
2016 Jan 13.

Network-Thinking: Graphs to Analyze Microbial Complexity and Evolution.

Corel E(1), Lopez P(2), Méheust R(2), Bapteste E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Equipe AIRE, UMR 7138, Laboratoire Evolution Paris-Seine, Université Pierre et
Marie Curie, 7 quai St Bernard 75005 Paris, France. Electronic address:
eduardo.corel@upmc.fr. (2)Equipe AIRE, UMR 7138, Laboratoire Evolution
Paris-Seine, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 7 quai St Bernard 75005 Paris,
France.

The tree model and tree-based methods have played a major, fruitful role in
evolutionary studies. However, with the increasing realization of the
quantitative and qualitative importance of reticulate evolutionary processes,
affecting all levels of biological organization, complementary network-based
models and methods are now flourishing, inviting evolutionary biology to
experience a network-thinking era. We show how relatively recent comers in this
field of study, that is, sequence-similarity networks, genome networks, and gene 
families-genomes bipartite graphs, already allow for a significantly enhanced
usage of molecular datasets in comparative studies. Analyses of these networks
provide tools for tackling a multitude of complex phenomena, including the
evolution of gene transfer, composite genes and genomes, evolutionary
transitions, and holobionts.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4766943
PMID: 26774999  [PubMed - in process]


20. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Dec 29;17(1). pii: E38. doi: 10.3390/ijms17010038.

Aire-Overexpressing Dendritic Cells Induce Peripheral CD4<U+207A> T Cell Tolerance.

Li D(1), Li H(2), Fu H(3), Niu K(4), Guo Y(5), Guo C(6), Sun J(7), Li Y(8), Yang 
W(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Norman Bethune College of Medicine, Jilin
University, Changchun 130021, China. lidongbei2008@163.com. (2)Department of
Immunology, Norman Bethune College of Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun
130021, China. 13944883280@163.com. (3)Department of Immunology, Norman Bethune
College of Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun 130021, China. fuhy@jlu.edu.cn. 
(4)Department of Immunology, Norman Bethune College of Medicine, Jilin
University, Changchun 130021, China. niukw123@163.com. (5)Department of
Immunology, Norman Bethune College of Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun
130021, China. gb123450000@163.com. (6)Department of Immunology, Norman Bethune
College of Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun 130021, China.
guochuanxy@163.com. (7)Department of Immunology, Norman Bethune College of
Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun 130021, China. sjitong@163.com.
(8)Department of Immunology, Norman Bethune College of Medicine, Jilin
University, Changchun 130021, China. liyi@jlu.edu.cn. (9)Department of
Immunology, Norman Bethune College of Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun
130021, China. ywei@jlu.edu.cn.

Autoimmune regulator (Aire) can promote the ectopic expression of peripheral
tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs) in thymic medullary epithelial cells (mTECs),
which leads to the deletion of autoreactive T cells and consequently prevents
autoimmune diseases. However, the functions of Aire in the periphery, such as in 
dendritic cells (DCs), remain unclear. This study's aim was to investigate the
effect of Aire-overexpressing DCs (Aire cells) on the functions of CD4<U+207A> T cells
and the treatment of type 1 diabetes (T1D). We demonstrated that Aire cells
upregulated the mRNA levels of the tolerance-related molecules CD73, Lag3, and
FR4 and the apoptosis of CD4<U+207A> T cells in STZ-T1D mouse-derived splenocytes.
Furthermore, following insulin stimulation, Aire cells decreased the number of
CD4<U+207A> IFN-<U+03B3><U+207A> T cells in both STZ-T1D and WT mouse-derived splenocytes and reduced 
the expression levels of TCR signaling molecules (Ca(2+) and p-ERK) in CD4<U+207A> T
cells. We observed that Aire cells-induced CD4<U+207A> T cells could delay the
development of T1D. In summary, Aire-expressing DCs inhibited TCR signaling
pathways and decreased the quantity of CD4<U+207A>IFN-<U+03B3><U+207A> autoreactive T cells. These
data suggest a mechanism for Aire in the maintenance of peripheral immune
tolerance and provide a potential method to control autoimmunity by targeting
Aire.

PMCID: PMC4730283
PMID: 26729097  [PubMed - in process]


21. Przegl Lek. 2015;72(2):87-9.

[Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1-like clinical picture of hereditary
hemochromatosis].

[Article in Polish]

Krysiak R, Okopien B.

The presence of hereditary hemochromatosis, one of the most common genetic
disorders in the Caucasian population, disrupting iron absorption, storage and
utilization, results in tissue iron overload. Its clinical presentation is
usually complex and differs from patient to patient. In this article, the authors
report a case of primary adrenal failure followed by primary hypoparathyroidism
in a young male patient, describing diagnostic and treatment strategies
undertaken in this patient. Our report shows that the presence of hemochromatosis
should always be taken into consideration in the differential diagnosis of
autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1, a rare autosomal recessive disorder
characterized by autoimmune multiorgan disease secondary to mutations in the
autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE), and leading to hypofunction of the adrenal
cortex and parathyroid glands.

PMID: 26727750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Exp Neurol. 2016 Mar;277:76-85. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.12.010. Epub 2015
Dec 18.

Myf5 and Myogenin in the development of thymic myoid cells - Implications for a
murine in vivo model of myasthenia gravis.

Hu B(1), Simon-Keller K(1), Küffer S(2), Ströbel P(2), Braun T(3), Marx A(1),
Porubsky S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Centre Mannheim, University of
Heidelberg, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68167 Mannheim, Germany. (2)Institute of
Pathology, University of Göttingen, Robert-Koch-Str. 40, 37075 Göttingen,
Germany. (3)Cardiac Development and Remodelling, Max Planck Institute for Heart
and Lung Research, Ludwigstrasse 43, 61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany. (4)Institute of 
Pathology, University Medical Centre Mannheim, University of Heidelberg,
Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68167 Mannheim, Germany. Electronic address:
stefan.porubsky@umm.de.

Myasthenia gravis (MG) is caused by autoantibodies against the neuromuscular
junction of striated muscle. Most MG patients have autoreactive T- and B-cells
directed to the acetylcholine receptor (AChR). To achieve immunologic tolerance, 
developing thymocytes are normally eliminated after recognition of
self-antigen-derived peptides. Presentation of muscle-specific antigens is likely
achieved through two pathways: on medullary thymic epithelial cells and on
medullary dendritic cells cross-presenting peptides derived from a unique
population of thymic myoid cells (TMC). Decades ago, it has been hypothesized
that TMC play a key role in the induction of immunological tolerance towards
skeletal muscle antigens. However, an experimental model to address this
postulate has not been available. To generate such a model, we tested the
hypothesis that the development of TMC depends on myogenic regulatory factors. To
this end, we utilized Myf5-deficient mice, which lack the first wave of muscle
cells but form normal skeletal muscles later during development, and
Myogenin-deficient mice, which fail to form differentiated myofibers. We
demonstrate for the first time that Myf5- and Myogenin-deficient mice showed a
partial or complete, respectively, loss of TMC in an otherwise regularly
structured thymus. To overcome early postnatal lethality of muscle-deficient,
Myogenin-knockout mice we transplanted Myogenin-deficient fetal thymuses into
Foxn1(nu/nu) mice that lack their own thymus anlage. We found that the
transplants are functional but lack TMC. In combination with established
immunization strategies (utilizing AChR or Titin), this model should enable us in
the future testing the hypothesis that TMC play an indispensable role in the
development of central tolerance towards striated muscle antigens.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26708556  [PubMed - in process]


23. Genom Data. 2015 Aug 7;6:48-50. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2015.08.004. eCollection
2015.

Genome-wide gene expression profiling of homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2
deficient medullary thymic epithelial cells.

Rattay K(1), Derbinski J(1), Hofmann TG(2), Kyewski B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Immunobiology, Tumor Immunology Program, German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Cellular Senescence 
Group, DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120
Heidelberg, Germany.

The establishment of central tolerance essentially depends on the promiscuous
gene expression (pGE) of a plethora of tissue restricted antigens by the
medullary thymic epithelial cells. The antigens are presented to developing
thymocytes in the thymus to select for non-self reactive T-cell receptors in
order to prevent autoimmune reactions in the periphery. However the molecular
regulation of tissue-restricted antigen expression is still poorly understood.
The only regulator known to play a role in the transcriptional regulation so far 
is the autoimmune regulator (AIRE). AIRE is thought to act in a multi-protein
complex, promoting transcription, elongation and splicing of target genes. Yet
the full composition of this Aire-associated multi-protein complex and its mode
of action remain to be elucidated. Here we describe the experimental details and 
controls of the gene array analysis on the impact of the homeodomain-interacting 
protein kinase 2 (Hipk2) on promiscuous gene expression in medullary thymic
epithelial cells based on the analysis of newly generated TEC-specific Hipk2
conditional knockout mice. The changes in gene expression are presumably mediated
through a regulatory effect of Hipk2 on AIRE as published in the study by Rattay 
and colleagues in the Journal of Immunology [1]. The gene array data reported in 
this paper have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database,
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo (accession no. GSE63432).

PMCID: PMC4664679
PMID: 26697330  [PubMed]


24. Front Immunol. 2015 Dec 14;6:615. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00615. eCollection
2015.

Editorial: The Role of Aire, microRNAs and Cell-Cell Interactions on Thymic
Architecture and Induction of Tolerance.

Passos GA(1), Mendes-da-Cruz DA(2), Oliveira EH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunogenetics Group, Department of Genetics, Ribeirão Preto Medical
School, University of São Paulo , Ribeirão Preto , Brazil ; Disciplines of
Genetics and Molecular Biology, Department of Morphology, Physiology and Basic
Pathology, School of Dentistry of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo ,
Ribeirão Preto , Brazil. (2)Laboratory on Thymus Research, Oswaldo Cruz
Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation , Rio de Janeiro , Brazil. (3)Molecular
Immunogenetics Group, Department of Genetics, Ribeirão Preto Medical School,
University of São Paulo , Ribeirão Preto , Brazil.

PMCID: PMC4677259
PMID: 26697011  [PubMed]


25. Horm Res Paediatr. 2016;85(1):35-42. doi: 10.1159/000441843. Epub 2015 Dec 10.

Primary Adrenocortical Insufficiency Case Series: Genetic Etiologies More Common 
than Expected.

Tsai SL(1), Green J, Metherell LA, Curtis F, Fernandez B, Healey A, Curtis J.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Pediatrics (Division of Endocrinology), Memorial University of
Newfoundland, St. John's, Nfld., Canada.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Primary adrenal insufficiency (AI) is an important cause of
morbidity in children. Our objectives were: (1) to describe the clinical
presentation of children with new-onset primary AI, and (2) to identify monogenic
causes of primary AI in children.
METHODS: Chart review and mutation detection in candidate genes were conducted
for 11 patients with primary AI.
RESULTS: The likely cause of AI was determined in 9 patients. One had a
homozygous MC2R mutation associated with familial glucocorticoid deficiency. Two 
had the same homozygous mutation in the AIRE gene which is associated with type 1
autoimmune polyglandular syndrome. One patient had a heterozygous change in this 
gene of undetermined significance. Five were homozygous for the previously
reported p.R188C STAR mutation causing nonclassic lipoid congenital adrenal
hyperplasia, representing the largest cohort of such patients from a single
geographic area. In the remaining 2 patients, no clear etiology was identified.
CONCLUSIONS: We recommend genetic testing for patients who have negative
anti-adrenal antibodies or suggestive family history. Diagnosing a genetic
etiology can provide information about prognosis and treatment, and is therefore 
beneficial for patients. Our high proportion of patients with nonclassic lipoid
congenital adrenal hyperplasia likely represents a founder effect.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26650942  [PubMed - in process]


26. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Dec;45(12):3237-40. doi: 10.1002/eji.201546098.

Switching on the Aire conditioner.

Matsumoto M(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, Tokushima
University, Tokushima, Japan. (2)Japan Agency for Medical Research and
Development-Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, Tokyo, Japan.

Aire has been cloned as the gene responsible for a hereditary type of
organ-specific autoimmune disease. Aire controls the expression of a wide array
of tissue-restricted Ags by medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs), thereby
leading to clonal deletion and Treg-cell production, and ultimately to the
establishment of self-tolerance. However, relatively little is known about the
mechanism responsible for the control of Aire expression itself. In this issue of
the European Journal of Immunology, Haljasorg et al. [Eur. J. Immunol. 2015. 45: 
3246-3256] have reported the presence of an enhancer element for Aire that binds 
with NF-<U+03BA>B components downstream of the TNF receptor family member, RANK
(receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B). The results suggest that RANK has a dual mode of
action in Aire expression: one involving the promotion of mTEC differentiation
and the other involving activation of the molecular switch for Aire within mature
mTECs.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26643138  [PubMed - in process]


27. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Dec 25;468(4):913-20. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.11.056. Epub 2015 Nov 27.

Extended HSR/CARD domain mediates AIRE binding to DNA.

Maslovskaja J(1), Saare M(2), Liiv I(2), Rebane A(2), Peterson P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine,
University of Tartu, Tartu, 50411, Estonia. Electronic address:
julia.maslovskaja@ut.ee. (2)Molecular Pathology, Institute of Biomedicine and
Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, 50411, Estonia.

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) activates the transcription of many genes in an
unusual promiscuous and stochastic manner. The mechanism by which AIRE binds to
the chromatin and DNA is not fully understood, and the regulatory elements that
AIRE target genes possess are not delineated. In the current study, we
demonstrate that AIRE activates the expression of transiently transfected
luciferase reporters that lack defined promoter regions, as well as intron and
poly(A) signal sequences. Our protein-DNA interaction experiments with mutated
AIRE reveal that the intact homogeneously staining region/caspase recruitment
domain (HSR/CARD) and amino acids R113 and K114 are key elements involved in AIRE
binding to DNA.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26607109  [PubMed - in process]


28. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2015 Nov;1356:80-9. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12960.

Central tolerance to self revealed by the autoimmune regulator.

Chan AY(1,)(2), Anderson MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center. (2)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California.

The autoimmune regulator (Aire) was initially identified as the gene causing
multiorgan system autoimmunity in humans, and deletion of this gene in mice also 
resulted in organ-specific autoimmunity. Aire regulates the expression of
tissue-specific antigens (TSAs) in medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs),
which play a critical role in the negative selection of autoreactive T cells and 
the generation of regulatory T cells. More recently, the role of Aire in the
development of mTECs has helped elucidate its ability to present the spectrum of 
TSAs needed to prevent autoimmunity. Molecular characterization of the functional
domains of Aire has revealed multiple binding partners that assist Aire's
function in altering gene transcription and chromatin remodeling. These recent
advances have further highlighted the importance of Aire in central tolerance.

© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMCID: PMC4654700 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26579596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Seikagaku. 2015 Jun;87(3):362-72.

[Aire gene is a central player in the autoimmune disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamaguchi Y, Shimizu N.

PMID: 26571603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Jan;13(1):565-71. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4530. Epub 2015 Nov 6.

Autoimmune regulator-overexpressing dendritic cells induce T helper 1 and T
helper 17 cells by upregulating cytokine expression.

Li H(1), Li D(1), Sun J(1), Li Y(1), Yang W(1), Li Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Norman Bethune College of Medicine, Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China.

The autoimmune regulator (Aire) protein is a transcriptional activator that is
essential in central immune tolerance, as it regulates the ectopic expression of 
many tissue-restricted antigens in medullary thymic epithelial cells. Aire
expression has also been described in hematopoietic cells, such as
monocytes/macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs), in the peripheral immune system.
However, the role of Aire expression in peripheral immune system cells, including
DCs, remains to be elucidated. In the present study, the effects of secreted
cytokines from Aire-overexpressing DCs on cluster of differentiation (CD)4+
T cell subsets were investigated. The dendritic cell line, DC2.4, which
overexpresses Aire, was co-cultured with CD4+ T cells from splenocytes using
Transwell inserts. The results indicate that Aire-overexpressing cells induce
T helper (Th)1 subsets by increasing interleukin (IL)-12 expression, and induce
Th17 subsets by upregulating IL-6 and transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß
production. In addition, it was observed that increased levels of phosphorylated 
extracellular signal-regulated kinases and p38 upregulated the expression of
cytokines in Aire-overexpressing cells. These data suggest that Aire may have a
role in inducing Th1 and Th17 differentiation by upregulating cytokine expression
in DCs.

PMID: 26548750  [PubMed - in process]


31. Cell. 2015 Nov 5;163(4):975-87. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.10.013.

Fezf2 Orchestrates a Thymic Program of Self-Antigen Expression for Immune
Tolerance.

Takaba H(1), Morishita Y(2), Tomofuji Y(3), Danks L(1), Nitta T(3), Komatsu N(3),
Kodama T(4), Takayanagi H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan; Takayanagi Osteonetwork Project, 
Exploratory Research for Advanced Technology Program, Japan Science and
Technology Agency (JST), Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular
Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. (3)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of
Medicine and Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
(4)Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, Department of Systems
Biology and Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.
(5)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan; Takayanagi Osteonetwork Project, 
Exploratory Research for Advanced Technology Program, Japan Science and
Technology Agency (JST), Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. Electronic address:
takayana@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Comment in
    Cell. 2015 Nov 5;163(4):794-5.

Self-tolerance to immune reactions is established via promiscuous expression of
tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs) in medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs),
leading to the elimination of T cells that respond to self-antigens. The
transcriptional regulator Aire has been thought to be sufficient for the
induction of TRAs, despite some indications that other factors may promote TRA
expression in the thymus. Here, we show that the transcription factor Fezf2
directly regulates various TRA genes in mTECs independently of Aire. Mice lacking
Fezf2 in mTECs displayed severe autoimmune symptoms, including the production of 
autoantibodies and inflammatory cell infiltration targeted to peripheral organs. 
These responses differed from those detected in Aire-deficient mice. Furthermore,
Fezf2 expression and Aire expression are regulated by distinct signaling pathways
and promote the expression of different classes of proteins. Thus, two
independent factors, Fezf2 and Aire, permit the expression of TRAs in the thymus 
to ensure immune tolerance.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26544942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cell. 2015 Nov 5;163(4):794-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.10.057.

Aire Gets Company for Immune Tolerance.

Klein L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, University of Munich, Goethestr. 31, 80336 Munich,
Germany. Electronic address: ludger.klein@med.uni-muenchen.de.

Comment on
    Cell. 2015 Nov 5;163(4):975-87.

A specialized subset of epithelial cells in the thymus "promiscuously"
transcribes thousands of peripheral genes to ensure that developing T cells can
test their antigen receptors for dangerous autoreactivity. New findings by Takaba
et al. indicate that the transcription factor Fezf2 acts independently of Aire in
thymic epithelial cells to generate "genetic noise" for immunological tolerance.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26544932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biomedica. 2015 Aug;35 Spec:167-76. doi: 10.1590/S0120-41572015000500017.

[Respiratory symptoms associated with air pollution in five localities of Bogotá,
2008-2011, a dynamic cohort study].

[Article in Spanish]

Sarmiento R(1), Hernández LJ(2), Medina EK(1), Rodríguez N(1), Reyes J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Línea de Aire, Ruido y Radiación Electromagnética, Observatorio de Salud
Ambiental, Área de Vigilancia en Salud Pública, Secretaría Distrital de Salud de 
Bogotá, Bogotá, D.C, Colombia. (2)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de los Andes,
Bogotá, D.C, Colombia. (3)Línea de Aire, Ruido y Radiación Electromagnética,
Vigilancia Sanitaria y Ambiental, Dirección de Salud Pública, Hospital del Sur,
Bogotá, D.C, Colombia.

INTRODUCTION: High levels of air pollution increase respiratory morbidity in
children under five years of age.
OBJECTIVE: To know the incidence of respiratory symptoms and its associated
factors in five localities of Bogota.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A dynamic cohort study was undertaken with a sample size
of 3,278 children from five localities split into two groups according to the
degree of exposure to particulate matter. Monitoring was conducted at the
outbreak of ten respiratory symptoms through a diary of those symptoms.
Statistical analysis included incidence rate ratio (IRR) calculations and Poisson
regression models for each assessed symptom.
RESULTS: Cough was more frequent in the highly exposed group (lRR=1.23, Cl 95%
1.13-1.34). The most exposed group had higher incidence of expectoration
(lRR=1.64, Cl= 95% 1.47-1.84). Wheezing was associated with high exposure to
particulate matter (RR=2.29, Cl 95% 1.78-3.00), cottage industries (RR=1.29, Cl
95% 1.01-1.68) and age (RR=0.95, Cl 95% 0.94-0.96). Risk attributable to air
pollution exposure fluctuated according to symptoms from 37% for nocturnal
wheezing (Cl 95% 26-47.8) to 10.6 for cough (Cl 95% 6.3-15%).
CONCLUSION: Extradomiciliary air pollution effects are potentiated by
socioeconomic living and working conditions of people in Bogota. A broader
conceptual public health approach and the strengthening of intersector actions
are required to reduce health effects of air pollution.

PMID: 26535752  [PubMed - in process]


34. Biomedica. 2015 Aug;35 Spec:103-9. doi: 10.1590/S0120-41572015000500011.

[Sleep quality in an adult population exposed to the noise of El Dorado Airport, 
Bogotá, 2012].

[Article in Spanish]

Callejas LM(1), Sarmiento R(2), Medina K(2), Sepúlveda H(1), Deluque D(1),
Escobar-Córdoba FE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Línea Aire, Ruido y Radiaciones Electromagnéticas, Hospital Fontibón E.S.E,
Bogotá, D.C, Colombia. (2)Línea Aire, Ruido y Radiaciones Electromagnéticas,
Secretaría Distrital de Salud, Bogotá, D.C, Colombia. (3)Grupo Trastornos del
Sueño y Psiquiatría Forense, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá, D.C,
Colombia.

INTRODUCTION: The airport of Bogotá lies within the city and its expansion could 
produce an increase in adverse effects on the health of the inhabitants of
Fontibón and Engativá districts due to the noise it generates.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of sleep disturbances and associated
factors among residents of Fontibón exposed to this noise.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A cross-sectional study design was used, involving a
sample of 205 people aged 18 to 65, selected by means of stratified random
sampling. Sleep quality was evaluated using the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index
(PSQI) and the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS). Descriptive statistics were
carried out, as well as correlation tests between the different scales.
RESULTS: A total of 60% of the residents reported poor quality sleep (PSQI>5),
with a mean PSQI of 7.19 (SD=3.931), and the following pathological interruptions
were found: subjective sleep quality, 27%; sleep latency, 39%; sleep duration,
33%; habitual sleep efficiency, 37%; sleep alterations, 30%; diurnal dysfunction,
40%, and use of sleeping medication, 5%. According to the Epworth Sleepiness
Scale (ESS>10), 28% of residents reported daytime somnolence. Regarding the
prevalence of poor quality sleep according to the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index,
17% of those who reported not being able to sleep because of noise associated
this with air traffic. A correlation was observed between the index and the scale
( r =0.329, CI 95%: 0.20-0.44).
CONCLUSIONS: Inhabitants of the district reported poor sleep quality due to
exposure to noise, airport operations being one of the main generating sources.
Noise mitigation strategies in the district need to be reviewed and the public
health implications of the El Dorado Airport expansion should be considered.

PMID: 26535746  [PubMed - in process]


35. Nat Commun. 2015 Nov 4;6:8820. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9820.

Intronic regulation of Aire expression by Jmjd6 for self-tolerance induction in
the thymus.

Yanagihara T(1,)(2), Sanematsu F(1,)(3), Sato T(4), Uruno T(1,)(3), Duan
X(1,)(3), Tomino T(1), Harada Y(1), Watanabe M(1), Wang Y(3), Tanaka Y(5),
Nakanishi Y(2), Suyama M(4), Yoshinori F(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunogenetics, Department of Immunobiology and Neuroscience,
Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi,
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (2)Research Institute for Diseases of the
Chest, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi,
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (3)Research Centre for Advanced Immunology, 
Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
(4)Division of Bioinformatics, Multi-scale Research Centre for Medical Science,
Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi,
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (5)Section of Infection Biology, Department 
of Functional Bioscience, Fukuoka Dental College, 2-15-1 Tamura, Sawara-ku,
Fukuoka 814-0175, Japan.

The thymus has spatially distinct microenvironments, the cortex and the medulla, 
where the developing T-cells are selected to mature or die through the
interaction with thymic stromal cells. To establish the immunological self in the
thymus, medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) express diverse sets of
tissue-specific self-antigens (TSAs). This ectopic expression of TSAs largely
depends on the transcriptional regulator Aire, yet the mechanism controlling Aire
expression itself remains unknown. Here, we show that Jmjd6, a dioxygenase that
catalyses lysyl hydroxylation of splicing regulatory proteins, is critical for
Aire expression. Although Jmjd6 deficiency does not affect abundance of Aire
transcript, the intron 2 of Aire gene is not effectively spliced out in the
absence of Jmjd6, resulting in marked reduction of mature Aire protein in mTECs
and spontaneous development of multi-organ autoimmunity in mice. These results
highlight the importance of intronic regulation in controlling Aire protein
expression.

PMCID: PMC4667615
PMID: 26531897  [PubMed - in process]


36. J Exp Med. 2015 Nov 16;212(12):1993-2002. doi: 10.1084/jem.20151069. Epub 2015
Nov 2.

Identification of a novel cis-regulatory element essential for immune tolerance.

LaFlam TN(1), Seumois G(2), Miller CN(1), Lwin W(1), Fasano KJ(1), Waterfield
M(1), Proekt I(3), Vijayanand P(2), Anderson MS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143. (2)La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143. (4)Diabetes Center, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143 manderson@diabetes.ucsf.edu.

Thymic central tolerance is essential to preventing autoimmunity. In medullary
thymic epithelial cells (mTECs), the Autoimmune regulator (Aire) gene plays an
essential role in this process by driving the expression of a diverse set of
tissue-specific antigens (TSAs), which are presented and help tolerize
self-reactive thymocytes. Interestingly, Aire has a highly tissue-restricted
pattern of expression, with only mTECs and peripheral extrathymic Aire-expressing
cells (eTACs) known to express detectable levels in adults. Despite this high
level of tissue specificity, the cis-regulatory elements that control Aire
expression have remained obscure. Here, we identify a highly conserved noncoding 
DNA element that is essential for Aire expression. This element shows enrichment 
of enhancer-associated histone marks in mTECs and also has characteristics of
being an NF-<U+03BA>B-responsive element. Finally, we find that this element is
essential for Aire expression in vivo and necessary to prevent spontaneous
autoimmunity, reflecting the importance of this regulatory DNA element in
promoting immune tolerance.

© 2015 LaFlam et al.

PMCID: PMC4647269 [Available on 2016-05-16]
PMID: 26527800  [PubMed - in process]


37. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 29;10(10):e0141650. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141650.
eCollection 2015.

Hypergravity Provokes a Temporary Reduction in CD4+CD8+ Thymocyte Number and a
Persistent Decrease in Medullary Thymic Epithelial Cell Frequency in Mice.

Tateishi R(1), Akiyama N(1), Miyauchi M(1), Yoshinaga R(1), Sasanuma H(2), Kudo
T(3), Shimbo M(3), Shinohara M(4), Obata K(5), Inoue J(6), Shirakawa M(7), Shiba 
D(7), Asahara H(8), Yoshida N(2), Takahashi S(3), Morita H(5), Akiyama T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology, The Institute of Medical Science, 
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Mouse epigenetics project, ISS/Kibo
experiment, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, JAXA, Tsukuba, Japan. (2)Mouse
epigenetics project, ISS/Kibo experiment, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency,
JAXA, Tsukuba, Japan; Laboratory of Developmental Genetics, Center for
Experimental Medicine and Systems Biology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Mouse epigenetics project, ISS/Kibo experiment, Japan Aerospace Exploration
Agency, JAXA, Tsukuba, Japan; Laboratory Animal Resource Center, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan; Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. (4)Mouse epigenetics
project, ISS/Kibo experiment, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, JAXA, Tsukuba, 
Japan; Department of Systems BioMedicine, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan; JST, PRESTO,
Kawaguchi, Saitama, Japan. (5)Mouse epigenetics project, ISS/Kibo experiment,
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, JAXA, Tsukuba, Japan; Department of
Physiology, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu, Japan. (6)Division
of Cellular and Molecular Biology, The Institute of Medical Science, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Mouse epigenetics project, ISS/Kibo
experiment, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, JAXA, Tsukuba, Japan; JEM
Utilization Center, Human Spaceflight Technology Directorate, JAXA, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, Japan. (8)Mouse epigenetics project, ISS/Kibo experiment, Japan
Aerospace Exploration Agency, JAXA, Tsukuba, Japan; Department of Systems
BioMedicine, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Gravity change affects many immunological systems. We investigated the effects of
hypergravity (2G) on murine thymic cells. Exposure of mice to 2G for three days
reduced the frequency of CD4+CD8+ thymocytes (DP) and mature medullary thymic
epithelial cells (mTECs), accompanied by an increment of keratin-5 and keratin-8 
double-positive (K5+K8+) TECs that reportedly contain TEC progenitors. Whereas
the reduction of DP was recovered by a 14-day exposure to 2G, the reduction of
mature mTECs and the increment of K5+K8+ TEC persisted. Interestingly, a surgical
lesion of the inner ear's vestibular apparatus inhibited these hypergravity
effects. Quantitative PCR analysis revealed that the gene expression of Aire and 
RANK that are critical for mTEC function and development were up-regulated by the
3-day exposure and subsequently down-regulated by the 14-day exposure to 2G.
Unexpectedly, this dynamic change in mTEC gene expression was independent of the 
vestibular apparatus. Overall, data suggest that 2G causes a temporary reduction 
of DP and a persistent reduction of mature mTECs in a vestibular system-dependent
manner, and also dysregulates mTEC gene expression without involving the
vestibular system. These data might provide insight on the impact of gravity
change on thymic functions during spaceflight and living.

PMCID: PMC4626100
PMID: 26513242  [PubMed - in process]


38. Clin Case Rep. 2015 Oct;3(10):809-13. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.354. Epub 2015 Aug 26.

Early-onset hypoparathyroidism and chronic keratitis revealing APECED.

Mezgueldi E(1), Bertholet-Thomas A(1), Milazzo S(2), Morris M(3), Bacchetta J(1),
Fabien N(4), Cochat P(5), Weetman AP(6), Kemp EH(6), Belot A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Nephrology, Rheumatology, Dermatology Unit, Femme Mère Enfant
Hospital, Hospices Civils de Lyon, University Lyon I Lyon, France. (2)Pediatric
Opthalmology Unit, CHU d'Amiens-Picardie Amiens, France. (3)Synlab Lausanne,
Switzerland. (4)Department of Immunology, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Hospices
Civils de Lyon, Claude Bernard University Lyon I Lyon, France. (5)Pediatric
Nephrology, Rheumatology, Dermatology Unit, Femme Mère Enfant Hospital, Hospices 
Civils de Lyon, University Lyon I Lyon, France ; IBCP-FRE 3310, CNRS Lyon,
France. (6)Department of Human Metabolism, University of Sheffield Sheffield, UK.
(7)Pediatric Nephrology, Rheumatology, Dermatology Unit, Femme Mère Enfant
Hospital, Hospices Civils de Lyon, University Lyon I Lyon, France ; INSERM U1111 
Lyon, France.

Early diagnosis of potentially life-threatening autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is crucial, but is
often delayed due to the clinical heterogeneity of the disorder. Even in the
absence of the classic disease triad of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis,
hypoparathyroidism, and adrenocortical insufficiency, a diagnosis of APECED
should be considered in children who have hypoparathyroidism and chronic
keratitis, with a past medical history showing a mild and transient Candida
infection.

PMCID: PMC4614645
PMID: 26509012  [PubMed]


39. J Immunol. 2015 Dec 1;195(11):5149-58. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501000. Epub 2015
Oct 26.

Aire Expression Is Inherent to Most Medullary Thymic Epithelial Cells during
Their Differentiation Program.

Kawano H(1), Nishijima H(2), Morimoto J(2), Hirota F(3), Morita R(3), Mouri Y(2),
Nishioka Y(4), Matsumoto M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, Tokushima
University, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan; Department of Respiratory Medicine and
Rheumatology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Tokushima Graduate 
School, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan; and. (2)Division of Molecular Immunology,
Institute for Enzyme Research, Tokushima University, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan;
(3)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, Tokushima
University, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan; Japan Agency for Medical Research and
Development-Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, Tokyo 100-0004,
Japan. (4)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Rheumatology, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima 770-8503,
Japan; and. (5)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research,
Tokushima University, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan; Japan Agency for Medical
Research and Development-Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology,
Tokyo 100-0004, Japan mitsuru@tokushima-u.ac.jp.

Aire in medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) plays an important role in the 
establishment of self-tolerance. Because Aire(+) mTECs appear to be a limited
subset, they may constitute a unique lineage(s) among mTECs. An alternative
possibility is that all mTECs are committed to express Aire in principle, but
Aire expression by individual mTECs is conditional. To investigate this issue, we
established a novel Aire reporter strain in which endogenous Aire is replaced by 
the human AIRE-GFP-Flag tag (Aire/hAGF-knockin) fusion gene. The hAGF reporter
protein was produced and retained very efficiently within mTECs as authentic Aire
nuclear dot protein. Remarkably, snapshot analysis revealed that mTECs expressing
hAGF accounted for >95% of mature mTECs, suggesting that Aire expression does not
represent a particular mTEC lineage(s). We confirmed this by generating
Aire/diphtheria toxin receptor-knockin mice in which long-term ablation of
Aire(+) mTECs by diphtheria toxin treatment resulted in the loss of most mature
mTECs beyond the proportion of those apparently expressing Aire. These results
suggest that Aire expression is inherent to all mTECs but may occur at particular
stage(s) and/or cellular states during their differentiation, thus accounting for
the broad impact of Aire on the promiscuous gene expression of mTECs.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26503950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Autoimmun. 2016 Feb;67:65-75. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2015.10.001. Epub 2015 Oct
23.

Evolutionary conserved gene co-expression drives generation of self-antigen
diversity in medullary thymic epithelial cells.

Rattay K(1), Meyer HV(2), Herrmann C(3), Brors B(4), Kyewski B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Immunology, Tumor Immunology Program, German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ), 69120, Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Division of Applied
Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 581,
Heidelberg, 69120, Germany. (3)Institute of Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology,
Bioquant Center, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 267, Heidelberg,
69120, Germany; Division Theoretical Bioinformatics, DKFZ, 69120, Heidelberg,
Germany. (4)Division of Applied Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, Heidelberg, 69120, Germany; National Center for 
Tumor Diseases (NCT), 69120, Heidelberg, Germany; German Consortium for
Translational Cancer Research (DKTK), 69120, Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Division of 
Developmental Immunology, Tumor Immunology Program, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), 69120, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
b.kyewski@dkfz-heidelberg.de.

Promiscuous expression of a plethora of tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs) in
medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) is essential for central tolerance.
This promiscuous gene expression (pGE) is characterized by inclusion of a broad
range of TRAs and by its mosaic expression patterns, i.e. each antigen is only
expressed in 1-3% of mTECs. It is currently unclear to which extent random and/or
deterministic mechanisms are involved in the regulation of pGE. In order to
address this issue, we deconstructed the transcriptional heterogeneity in mTEC to
minor subsets expressing a particular TRA. We identified six delineable
co-expression groups in mouse mTECs. These co-expression groups displayed a
variable degree of mutual overlap and mapped to different stages of mTEC
development. Co-expressed genes showed chromosomal preference and clustered
within delimited genomic regions. Moreover, co-expression groups in mice and
humans selected by a pair of orthologous genes preferentially co-expressed sets
of orthologous genes attesting to the species conservation of pGE between mouse
and human. Furthermore, co-expressed genes were enriched for specific
transcription factor binding motifs concomitant with up-regulation of the
corresponding transcription factors, implicating additional factors in the
regulation of pGE besides the Autoimmune Regulator (Aire). Thus promiscuous
transcription of self-antigens in mTECs entails a highly coordinated process,
which is evolutionary strictly conserved between species.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26481130  [PubMed - in process]


41. Autoimmune Dis. 2015;2015:503087. doi: 10.1155/2015/503087. Epub 2015 Sep 17.

The Attenuated Live Yellow Fever Virus 17D Infects the Thymus and Induces Thymic 
Transcriptional Modifications of Immunomodulatory Genes in C57BL/6 and BALB/C
Mice.

Melo-Lima BL(1), Espósito DL(2), da Fonseca BA(2), Figueiredo LT(2), Moreau P(3),
Donadi EA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Medicine, Ribeirão Preto
Medical School, University of São Paulo, Avenida Bandeirantes 3900, 14049-900
Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil ; Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique et aux Energies
Alternatives, Institut des Maladies Emergentes et des Thérapies Innovantes,
Service de Recherches en Hémato-Immunologie, Hôpital Saint-Louis, 1 avenue Claude
Vellefaux, Bâtiment Lailler, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France ; Université
Paris-Diderot, Sorbonne Paris-Cité, UMR E5, Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie,
Hôpital Saint-Louis, 1 avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France.
(2)Virology Research Center, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São
Paulo, Avenida Bandeirantes 3900, 14049-900 Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.
(3)Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives, Institut des
Maladies Emergentes et des Thérapies Innovantes, Service de Recherches en
Hémato-Immunologie, Hôpital Saint-Louis, 1 avenue Claude Vellefaux, Bâtiment
Lailler, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France ; Université Paris-Diderot, Sorbonne
Paris-Cité, UMR E5, Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Hôpital Saint-Louis, 1 
avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France. (4)Division of Clinical
Immunology, Department of Medicine, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of 
São Paulo, Avenida Bandeirantes 3900, 14049-900 Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

Thymus is involved in induction of self-tolerance in T lymphocytes, particularly 
due to Aire activity. In peripheral tissues, Treg cells and immunomodulatory
molecules, like the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class Ib molecules,
are essential for maintenance of autotolerance during immune responses. Viral
infections can trigger autoimmunity and modify thymic function, and YFV17D
immunization has been associated with the onset of autoimmunity, being
contraindicated in patients with thymic disorders. Aiming to study the influence 
of YFV17D immunization on the transcriptional profiles of immunomodulatory genes 
in thymus, we evaluated the gene expression of AIRE, FOXP3, H2-Q7 (Qa-2/HLA-G),
H2-T23 (Qa-1/HLA-E), H2-Q10, and H2-K1 following immunization with 10,000 LD50 of
YFV17D in C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice. The YFV17D virus replicated in thymus and
induced the expression of H2-Q7 (Qa-2/HLA-G) and H2-T23 (Qa-1/HLA-E) transcripts 
and repressed the expression of AIRE and FOXP3. Transcriptional expression varied
according to tissue and mouse strain analyzed. Expression of H2-T23 (Qa-1/HLA-E) 
and FOXP3 was induced in thymus and liver of C57BL/6 mice, which exhibited
defective control of viral load, suggesting a higher susceptibility to YFV17D
infection. Since the immunization with YFV17D modulated thymus gene expression in
genetically predisposed individuals, the vaccine may be related to the onset of
autoimmunity disorders.

PMCID: PMC4589579
PMID: 26457200  [PubMed]


42. J Immunol. 2015 Nov 15;195(10):4641-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501026. Epub 2015
Oct 9.

Ectopic Aire Expression in the Thymic Cortex Reveals Inherent Properties of Aire 
as a Tolerogenic Factor within the Medulla.

Nishijima H(1), Kitano S(2), Miyachi H(2), Morimoto J(1), Kawano H(1), Hirota
F(3), Morita R(3), Mouri Y(1), Masuda K(4), Imoto I(4), Ikuta K(5), Matsumoto
M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, Tokushima
University, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan; (2)Reproductive Engineering Team,
Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan;
(3)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, Tokushima
University, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan; Japan Agency for Medical Research and
Development-Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, Tokyo 100-0004,
Japan; (4)Department of Human Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
Tokushima University Graduate School, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan; and.
(5)Laboratory of Biological Protection, Department of Biological Responses,
Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
(6)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, Tokushima
University, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan; Japan Agency for Medical Research and
Development-Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, Tokyo 100-0004,
Japan; mitsuru@tokushima-u.ac.jp.

Cortical thymic epithelial cells (cTECs) and medullary thymic epithelial cells
(mTECs) play essential roles in the positive and negative selection of developing
thymocytes, respectively. Aire in mTECs plays an essential role in the latter
process through expression of broad arrays of tissue-restricted Ags. To determine
whether the location of Aire within the medulla is absolutely essential or
whether Aire could also function within the cortex for establishment of
self-tolerance, we used bacterial artificial chromosome technology to establish a
semiknockin strain of NOD-background (ß5t/Aire-transgenic) mice expressing Aire
under control of the promoter of ß5t, a thymoproteasome expressed exclusively in 
the cortex. Although Aire was expressed in cTECs as typical nuclear dot protein
in ß5t/Aire-Tg mice, cTECs expressing Aire ectopically did not confer
transcriptional expression of either Aire-dependent or Aire-independent
tissue-restricted Ag genes. We then crossed ß5t/Aire-Tg mice with Aire-deficient 
NOD mice, generating a strain in which Aire expression was confined to cTECs.
Despite the presence of Aire(+) cTECs, these mice succumbed to autoimmunity, as
did Aire-deficient NOD mice. The thymic microenvironment harboring Aire(+) cTECs,
within which many Aire-activated genes were present, also showed no obvious
alteration of positive selection, suggesting that Aire's unique property of
generating a self-tolerant T cell repertoire is functional only in mTECs.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26453754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Eur J Immunol. 2016 Jan;46(1):22-33. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545792. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

AIRE: From promiscuous molecular partnerships to promiscuous gene expression.

Abramson J(1), Goldfarb Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is a unique transcriptional regulator that induces
promiscuous expression of thousands of tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs) in
medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs), a step critical for the induction of
immunological self-tolerance. The past 15 years have seen dramatic progress in
our understanding of how AIRE induces immunological self-tolerance on a molecular
level. This major advancement can be greatly attributed to the identification of 
a large variety of proteins that physically associate with AIRE, supporting and
regulating its transcription-transactivation capacity. These diverse molecular
partnerships have been shown to play roles in shuttling AIRE to the nucleus,
securing AIRE's interaction with nuclear matrix and chromatin, releasing RNA
polymerase-II from its stalled state and potentiating AIRE-mediated gene
expression, among others. In this review we discuss the relationship of AIRE with
its vast and rather diverse repertoire of partners and highlight how such
"promiscuous partnerships" contribute to the phenomenon of "promiscuous gene
expression" in the thymus.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26450177  [PubMed - in process]


44. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 8;5:14871. doi: 10.1038/srep14871.

FSP1(+) fibroblast subpopulation is essential for the maintenance and
regeneration of medullary thymic epithelial cells.

Sun L(1), Sun C(1), Liang Z(1), Li H(1), Chen L(2), Luo H(1), Zhang H(1), Ding
P(1), Sun X(1), Qin Z(2), Zhao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. (2)Key Laboratory of
Protein and Peptide Pharmaceuticals, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, China.

Thymic epithelial cells (TECs) form a 3-dimentional network supporting thymocyte 
development and maturation. Besides epithelium and thymocytes, heterogeneous
fibroblasts are essential components in maintaining thymic microenvironments.
However, thymic fibroblast characteristics, development and function remain to be
determined. We herein found that thymic non-hematopoietic CD45(-)FSP1(+) cells
represent a unique Fibroblast specific protein 1 (FSP1)(-)fibroblast-derived cell
subset. Deletion of these cells in FSP1-TK transgenic mice caused thymus atrophy 
due to the loss of TECs, especially mature medullary TECs (MHCII(high), CD80(+)
and Aire(+)). In a cyclophosphamide-induced thymus injury and regeneration model,
lack of non-hematopoietic CD45(-)FSP1(+) fibroblast subpopulation significantly
delayed thymus regeneration. In fact, thymic FSP1(+) fibroblasts released more
IL-6, FGF7 and FSP1 in the culture medium than their FSP1(-) counterparts.
Further experiments showed that the FSP1 protein could directly enhance the
proliferation and maturation of TECs in the in vitro culture systems. FSP1
knockout mice had significantly smaller thymus size and less TECs than their
control. Collectively, our studies reveal that thymic CD45(-)FSP1(+) cells are a 
subpopulation of fibroblasts, which is crucial for the maintenance and
regeneration of TECs especially medullary TECs through providing IL-6, FGF7 and
FSP1.

PMCID: PMC4597222
PMID: 26445893  [PubMed - in process]


45. Spermatogenesis. 2014 Oct 30;4(3):e959392.

Spermiogenesis in birds.

Aire TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy; Physiology and Pharmacology; School of Veterinary
Medicine; St. George's University ; St. George, Grenada.

Current knowledge on avian spermiogenesis, including strengths and weaknesses,
has been reviewed. Information on avian spermiogenesis considerably lags behind
that in mammals because of the paucity of reports in birds. Spermiogenesis in
passerine birds has received even much less attention than in non-passerine
birds. Mechanisms underlying morphogenesis of the acrosome and nucleus, and roles
of microtubular assemblies are poorly understood. The proximal centriole found in
non-passerine birds, but hitherto considered to be absent in passerine birds, has
recently been described in spermatids and mature spermatozoa of 2 passeridan
species, including the Masked weaver for which new and detailed spermiogenetic
information is provided in this review. A great deal more studies on
spermiogenesis, and spermatogenesis generally, in various avian species are
required to considerably enhance knowledge of this phenomenon, contribute to
comparative spermatology, provide a basis for appropriate applied studies, and
contribute to understanding of phylogeny in this vast order of vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC4581053
PMID: 26413401  [PubMed]


46. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Dec;45(12):3246-56. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545928. Epub 2015 Oct
26.

A highly conserved NF-<U+03BA>B-responsive enhancer is critical for thymic expression of
Aire in mice.

Haljasorg U(1), Bichele R(1), Saare M(1), Guha M(1), Maslovskaja J(1), Kõnd K(1),
Remm A(1), Pihlap M(1), Tomson L(1), Kisand K(1), Laan M(1), Peterson P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.

Autoimmune regulator (Aire) has a unique expression pattern in thymic medullary
epithelial cells (mTECs), in which it plays a critical role in the activation of 
tissue-specific antigens. The expression of Aire in mTECs is activated by
receptor activator of nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (RANK) signaling; however, the molecular 
mechanism behind this activation is unknown. Here, we characterize a conserved
noncoding sequence 1 (CNS1) containing two NF-<U+03BA>B binding sites upstream of the
Aire coding region. We show that CNS1-deficient mice lack thymic expression of
Aire and share several features of Aire-knockout mice, including downregulation
of Aire-dependent genes, impaired terminal differentiation of the mTEC
population, and reduced production of thymic Treg cells. In addition, we show
that CNS1 is indispensable for RANK-induced Aire expression and that CNS1 is
activated by NF-<U+03BA>B pathway complexes containing RelA. Together, our results
indicate that CNS1 is a critical link between RANK signaling, NF-<U+03BA>B activation,
and thymic expression of Aire.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26364592  [PubMed - in process]


47. Med Sci (Paris). 2015 Aug-Sep;31(8-9):742-7. doi: 10.1051/medsci/20153108012.
Epub 2015 Sep 4.

[Induction of central tolerance by the factor Aire: molecular and epigenetic
regulation].

[Article in French]

Lopes N(1), Ferrier P(1), Irla M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Aix Marseille Université UM2,
Inserm, U1104, CNRS UMR7280, 13288 Marseille, France.

The establishment of thymic central tolerance is a critical process to prevent
the development of autoimmune diseases. Medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTEC) 
are essential to this process through the expression of the transcription factor 
Aire, which controls the transcription of many genes encoding tissue-restricted
antigens. Mutations in the Aire gene are responsible for a rare autoimmune
disorder called APECED (autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal
dystrophy). This review summarizes our current knowledge on the mode of action of
Aire at the molecular and epigenetic levels in controlling the expression of
tissue-restricted antigens. We also discuss recently described additional roles
of this transcription factor in the induction of central T-cell tolerance.

© 2015 médecine/sciences  Inserm.

PMID: 26340833  [PubMed - in process]


48. Autoimmunity. 2015 Dec;48(8):532-41. doi: 10.3109/08916934.2015.1077230. Epub
2015 Aug 27.

Serological proteome analysis reveals new specific biases in the IgM and IgG
autoantibody repertoires in autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1.

Dubucquoi S(1,)(2,)(3), Proust-Lemoine E(2,)(3,)(4), Kemp EH(5), Ryndak
A(2,)(3,)(4), Lefèvre-Dutoit V(1,)(2,)(3), Bellart M(1,)(2,)(3), Saugier-Véber
P(6), Duban-Deweer S(3,)(7), Wémeau JL(2,)(3,)(4), Prin L(1,)(2,)(3), Lefranc
D(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a CHRU Lille, Institut d'Immunologie - Centre de Biologie Pathologie et
Génétique , Lille , France . (2)b UDSL, EA 2686, UFR Médecine , Lille , France . 
(3)c Univ Lille Nord de France , Lille , France . (4)d CHRU Lille Service
d'Endocrinologie , Lille , France . (5)e Department of Human Metabolism ,
University of Sheffield , Sheffield , UK . (6)f Laboratoire de génétique
moléculaire , Rouen , France , and. (7)g UArtois, LBHE , EA 2465 , Lens , France.

OBJECTIVE: Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS 1) is caused by
mutations in the AIRE gene that induce intrathymic T-cell tolerance breakdown,
which results in tissue-specific autoimmune diseases.
DESIGN: To evaluate the effect of a well-defined T-cell repertoire impairment on 
humoral self-reactive fingerprints, comparative serum self-IgG and self-IgM
reactivities were analyzed using both one- and two-dimensional western blotting
approaches against a broad spectrum of peripheral tissue antigens.
METHODS: Autoantibody patterns of APS 1 patients were compared with those of
subjects affected by other autoimmune endocrinopathies (OAE) and healthy
controls.
RESULTS: Using a Chi-square test, significant changes in the Ab repertoire were
found when intergroup patterns were compared. A singular distortion of both serum
self-IgG and self-IgM repertoires was noted in APS 1 patients. The molecular
characterization of these antigenic targets was conducted using a proteomic
approach. In this context, autoantibodies recognized more significantly either
tissue-specific antigens, such as pancreatic amylase, pancreatic triacylglycerol 
lipase and pancreatic regenerating protein 1a, or widely distributed antigens,
such as peroxiredoxin-2, heat shock cognate 71-kDa protein and aldose reductase. 
As expected, a well-defined self-reactive T-cell repertoire impairment, as
described in APS 1 patients, affected the tissue-specific self-IgG repertoire.
Interestingly, discriminant IgM reactivities targeting both tissue-specific and
more widely expressed antigens were also specifically observed in APS 1 patients.
Using recombinant targets, we observed that post translational modifications of
these specific antigens impacted upon their recognition.
CONCLUSIONS: The data suggest that T-cell-dependent but also T-cell-independent
mechanisms are involved in the dynamic evolution of autoimmunity in APS 1.

PMID: 26312540  [PubMed - in process]


49. J Vis Exp. 2015 Jul 30;(101):e52614. doi: 10.3791/52614.

3D Organotypic Co-culture Model Supporting Medullary Thymic Epithelial Cell
Proliferation, Differentiation and Promiscuous Gene Expression.

Pinto S(1), Stark HJ(2), Martin I(3), Boukamp P(3), Kyewski B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Immunology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ);
s.pinto@dkfz.de. (2)Genetics of Skin Carcinogenesis, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ); hj.stark@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (3)Genetics of Skin Carcinogenesis,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ). (4)Division of Developmental Immunology,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ).

Intra-thymic T cell development requires an intricate three-dimensional meshwork 
composed of various stromal cells, i.e., non-T cells. Thymocytes traverse this
scaffold in a highly coordinated temporal and spatial order while sequentially
passing obligatory check points, i.e., T cell lineage commitment, followed by T
cell receptor repertoire generation and selection prior to their export into the 
periphery. The two major resident cell types forming this scaffold are cortical
(cTECs) and medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs). A key feature of mTECs is 
the so-called promiscuous expression of numerous tissue-restricted antigens.
These tissue-restricted antigens are presented to immature thymocytes directly or
indirectly by mTECs or thymic dendritic cells, respectively resulting in
self-tolerance. Suitable in vitro models emulating the developmental pathways and
functions of cTECs and mTECs are currently lacking. This lack of adequate
experimental models has for instance hampered the analysis of promiscuous gene
expression, which is still poorly understood at the cellular and molecular level.
We adapted a 3D organotypic co-culture model to culture ex vivo isolated mTECs.
This model was originally devised to cultivate keratinocytes in such a way as to 
generate a skin equivalent in vitro. The 3D model preserved key functional
features of mTEC biology: (i) proliferation and terminal differentiation of
CD80(lo), Aire-negative into CD80(hi), Aire-positive mTECs, (ii) responsiveness
to RANKL, and (iii) sustained expression of FoxN1, Aire and tissue-restricted
genes in CD80(hi) mTECs.

PMID: 26275017  [PubMed - in process]


50. Front Immunol. 2015 Jul 22;6:376. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00376. eCollection
2015.

Thymic B Cells and Central T Cell Tolerance.

Yamano T(1), Steinert M(1), Klein L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich , Munich ,
Germany.

Central T cell tolerance is believed to be mainly induced by thymic dendritic
cells and medullary thymic epithelial cells. The thymus also harbors substantial 
numbers of B cells. These may arise though intrathymic B lymphopoiesis or
immigration from the bloodstream. Importantly, and in contrast to resting
"mainstream" B cells in the periphery, thymic B cells display elevated levels of 
MHC class II and constitutively express CD80. Arguably, their most unexpected
feature is the expression of autoimmune regulator. These unique features of
thymic B cells result from a licensing process that involves cross-talk with CD4 
single-positive T cells and CD40 signaling. Together, these recent findings
suggest that B cells play a more prominent role as thymic APCs than previously
appreciated.

PMCID: PMC4510420
PMID: 26257742  [PubMed]


51. J Immunol. 2015 Sep 15;195(6):2675-82. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501226. Epub 2015
Aug 7.

Osteoprotegerin-Mediated Homeostasis of Rank+ Thymic Epithelial Cells Does Not
Limit Foxp3+ Regulatory T Cell Development.

McCarthy NI(1), Cowan JE(1), Nakamura K(1), Bacon A(1), Baik S(1), White AJ(1),
Parnell SM(1), Jenkinson EJ(1), Jenkinson WE(1), Anderson G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Immune Regulation, Institute for
Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United
Kingdom. (2)Medical Research Council Centre for Immune Regulation, Institute for 
Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom
g.anderson@bham.ac.uk.

In the thymus, medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTEC) regulate T cell tolerance
via negative selection and Foxp3(+) regulatory T cell (Treg) development, and
alterations in the mTEC compartment can lead to tolerance breakdown and
autoimmunity. Both the receptor activator for NF-<U+03BA>B (RANK)/RANK ligand
(RANKL)/osteoprotegerin (OPG) axis and expression of the transcriptional
regulator Aire are involved in the regulation of thymus medullary
microenvironments. However, their impact on the mechanisms controlling mTEC
homeostasis is poorly understood, as are the processes that enable the thymus
medulla to support the balanced production of mTEC-dependent Foxp3(+) Treg. In
this study, we have investigated the control of mTEC homeostasis and examined how
this process impacts the efficacy of Foxp3(+) Treg development. Using newly
generated RANK Venus reporter mice, we identify distinct RANK(+) subsets that
reside within both the mTEC(hi) and mTEC(lo) compartments and that represent
direct targets of OPG-mediated control. Moreover, by mapping OPG expression to a 
subset of Aire(+) mTEC, our data show how cis- and trans-acting mechanisms are
able to control the thymus medulla by operating on multiple mTEC targets.
Finally, we show that whereas the increase in mTEC availability in OPG-deficient 
(Tnfrsf11b(-/-)) mice impacts the intrathymic Foxp3(+) Treg pool by enhancing
peripheral Treg recirculation back to the thymus, it does not alter the number of
de novo Rag2pGFP(+)Foxp3(+) Treg that are generated. Collectively, our study
defines patterns of RANK expression within the thymus medulla, and it shows that 
mTEC homeostasis is not a rate-limiting step in intrathymic Foxp3(+) Treg
production.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4560491
PMID: 26254339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Curr Mol Med. 2015;15(6):550-7.

Mouse Models of Experimental Autoimmune Uveitis: Comparative Analysis of
Adjuvant-Induced vs Spontaneous Models of Uveitis.

Chen J(1), Qian H, Horai R, Chan CC, Caspi RR.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510060, China. chenjun35@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Mouse models of experimental autoimmune uveitis (EAU) mimic unique features of
human uveitis, and serve as a template for preclinical study. The "classical" EAU
model is induced by active immunization of mice with the retinal protein IRBP in 
adjuvant, and has proved to be a useful tool to study basic mechanisms and novel 
therapy in human uveitis. Several spontaneous models of uveitis induced by
autoreactive T cells targeting on IRBP have been recently developed in IRBP
specific TCR transgenic mice (R161H) and in AIRE(-/-) mice. The "classical"
immunization-induced EAU exhibits acute ocular inflammation with two distinct
patterns: (i) severe monophasic form with extensive destruction of the retina and
rapid loss of visual function, and (ii) lower grade form with an acute onset
followed by a prolonged chronic phase of disease. The spontaneous models of
uveitis in R161H and AIRE(-/-) mice have a gradual onset and develop chronic
ocular inflammation that ultimately leads to retinal degeneration, along with a
progressive decline of visual signal. The adjuvant-dependent model and
adjuvant-free spontaneous models represent distinct aspects and/or various forms 
of human uveitis. This review will discuss and compare clinical manifestations,
pathology as well as visual function of the retina in the different models of
uveitis, as measured by fundus imaging and histology, optical coherence
tomography (OCT) and electroretinography (ERG).

PMID: 26238369  [PubMed - in process]


53. Nat Immunol. 2015 Sep;16(9):942-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.3247. Epub 2015 Aug 3.

Aire controls gene expression in the thymic epithelium with ordered
stochasticity.

Meredith M(1), Zemmour D(1), Mathis D(1), Benoist C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard 
Medical School, and Evergrande Center for Immunologic Diseases, Harvard Medical
School and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The transcription factor Aire controls immunological tolerance by inducing the
ectopic thymic expression of many tissue-specific genes, acting broadly by
removing stops on the transcriptional machinery. To better understand Aire's
specificity, we performed single-cell RNA-seq and DNA-methylation analysis of
Aire-sufficient and Aire-deficient medullary epithelial cells (mTECs). Each of
Aire's target genes was induced in only a minority of mTECs, independently of
DNA-methylation patterns, as small inter-chromosomal gene clusters activated in
concert in a proportion of mTECs. These microclusters differed between individual
mice. Thus, our results suggest an organization of the DNA or of the epigenome
that results from stochastic determinism but is 'bookmarked' and stable through
mTEC divisions, which ensures more effective presentation of self antigens and
favors diversity of self-tolerance between individuals.

PMCID: PMC4632529
PMID: 26237550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Front Immunol. 2015 Jul 14;6:352. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00352. eCollection
2015.

The Thymic Orchestration Involving Aire, miRNAs, and Cell-Cell Interactions
during the Induction of Central Tolerance.

Passos GA(1), Mendes-da-Cruz DA(2), Oliveira EH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunogenetics Group, Department of Genetics, Ribeirão Preto Medical
School, University of São Paulo , Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo , Brazil ;
Disciplines of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Department of Morphology,
Physiology and Basic Pathology, School of Dentistry of Ribeirão Preto, University
of São Paulo , Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo , Brazil. (2)Laboratory on Thymus
Research, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation , Rio de Janeiro, Rio
de Janeiro , Brazil. (3)Molecular Immunogenetics Group, Department of Genetics,
Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo , Ribeirão Preto, São
Paulo , Brazil.

Developing thymocytes interact sequentially with two distinct structures within
the thymus: the cortex and medulla. Surviving single-positive and double-positive
thymocytes from the cortex migrate into the medulla, where they interact with
medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs). These cells ectopically express a vast
set of peripheral tissue antigens (PTAs), a property termed promiscuous gene
expression that is associated with the presentation of PTAs by mTECs to
thymocytes. Thymocyte clones that have a high affinity for PTAs are eliminated by
apoptosis in a process termed negative selection, which is essential for
tolerance induction. The Aire gene is an important factor that controls the
expression of a large set of PTAs. In addition to PTAs, Aire also controls the
expression of miRNAs in mTECs. These miRNAs are important in the organization of 
the thymic architecture and act as posttranscriptional controllers of PTAs.
Herein, we discuss recent discoveries and highlight open questions regarding the 
migration and interaction of developing thymocytes with thymic stroma, the
ectopic expression of PTAs by mTECs, the association between Aire and miRNAs and 
its effects on central tolerance.

PMCID: PMC4500981
PMID: 26236310  [PubMed]


55. Rev Chil Pediatr. 2015 Mar-Apr;86(2):80-5. doi: 10.1016/j.rchipe.2015.04.017.

[Breath tests in children with suspected lactose intolerance].

[Article in Spanish]

Parra PÁ(1), Furió CS(1), Arancibia AG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Estudiantes de Pregrado, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad Católica
de Chile. (2)Gastroenterólogo Infantil, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile.
Electronic address: sarancib@med.puc.cl.

INTRODUCTION: Up to 70% of the world population is lactose intolerance. However, 
there are no epidemiological studies among Chilean pediatric population affected 
by this condition.
OBJECTIVES: Clinical characterization of a series of children who underwent the
lactose intolerance breath test for lactose intolerance study, establishing
intolerance and malabsorption frequencies, the most frequent symptoms, and test
performance depending on the origin.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients under 18 years old who took the lactose
intolerance breath test in the Gastroenterology Laboratory of the Catholic
University of Chile, and who were admitted due to clinically suspected lactose
intolerance. Malabsorption was considered when there was as an increase of =20ppm
above the baseline (H2) or =34ppm of H2 and methane (CH4) combined. Intolerance
was considered when the above was associated with a symptom intensity score =7
during registration.
RESULTS: The analysis included194 patients aged 1 to17 years of age. Of these,
102 (53%) presented with malabsorption, and 53 (27%) were intolerant. The
frequency of lactose intolerance varied from 7.1 to 45.4%, and it occurred more
frequently at older ages. The most common reported symptoms were abdominal pain, 
bloating and rumbling.
DISCUSSION: Lactose malabsorption and intolerance can be investigated from the
first years of life using the lactose breath test plus a symptom questionnaire.
An increase in the frequency of intolerance with age, and a greater number of
positive tests, if they were requested by a gastroenterologist, were observed.

Copyright © 2015 Sociedad Chilena de Pediatría. Publicado por Elsevier España,
S.L.U. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26235686  [PubMed - in process]


56. Acta Clin Belg. 2015 Dec;70(6):457-60. doi: 10.1179/2295333715Y.0000000056. Epub 
2015 Jul 31.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome and thrombocytosis.

Atquet V(1), Lienart F, Vaes M.

Author information: 
(1)The Université libre de Bruxelles , Belgium.

We describe a woman aged 37<U+200A> years, affected with Hashimoto's thyroiditis,
detected since the age of 17, with gonadic insufficiency with anti-ovarian
antibodies since the age of 22 <U+200A>years and Addison's disease since 24 <U+200A>years old. 
At that moment, the diagnosis of autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome (APS) was
made. Concomitant to this diagnosis, thrombocytosis was detected and aetiological
assessment revealed an atrophy of the spleen. Differential diagnoses of APS and
hyposplenism will be discussed. We will look at a possible association between
these two pathologies. Indeed, asplenism is found in approximately 20% of adults 
affected by type 1 APS, also called auto-immune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis
ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) syndrome. The most likely aetiology for this
atrophy of the spleen is a destruction of auto-immunological origin. However, in 
our patient, the search for a mutation of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene
proved negative. This mutation is commonly, but not systematically, present in
type 1 APS. A type 2 APS should then be considered.

PMID: 26229032  [PubMed - in process]


57. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Aug 11;112(32):E4448-57. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1512081112. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

Brd4 bridges the transcriptional regulators, Aire and P-TEFb, to promote
elongation of peripheral-tissue antigen transcripts in thymic stromal cells.

Yoshida H(1), Bansal K(1), Schaefer U(2), Chapman T(3), Rioja I(3), Proekt I(4), 
Anderson MS(5), Prinjha RK(3), Tarakhovsky A(2), Benoist C(6), Mathis D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; (2)Laboratory of Immune Cell Epigenetics and
Signaling, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065; (3)Epinova Discovery
Performance Unit, Immuno-Inflammation Therapy Area, Medicines Research Centre,
GlaxoSmithKline, Stevenage SG1 2NY, United Kingdom; (4)Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143; (5)Diabetes
Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143; (6)Division of
Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115; Evergrande Center for Immunologic Diseases, Harvard Medical
School and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115 cbdm@hms.harvard.edu.

Aire controls immunologic tolerance by inducing a battery of thymic transcripts
encoding proteins characteristic of peripheral tissues. Its unusually broad
effect is achieved by releasing RNA polymerase II paused just downstream of
transcriptional start sites. We explored Aire's collaboration with the
bromodomain-containing protein, Brd4, uncovering an astonishing correspondence
between those genes induced by Aire and those inhibited by a small-molecule
bromodomain blocker. Aire:Brd4 binding depended on an orchestrated series of
posttranslational modifications within Aire's caspase activation and recruitment 
domain. This interaction attracted P-TEFb, thereby mobilizing downstream
transcriptional elongation and splicing machineries. Aire:Brd4 association was
critical for tolerance induction, and its disruption could account for certain
point mutations that provoke human autoimmune disease. Our findings evoke the
possibility of unanticipated immunologic mechanisms subtending the potent
antitumor effects of bromodomain blockers.

PMCID: PMC4538633
PMID: 26216992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2015;38(3):142-9. doi: 10.2177/jsci.38.142.

[Difference in target antigens between central tolerance and peripheral tolerance
deficiencies].

[Article in Japanese]

Chida N(1), Kobayashi I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry for Children and Disabled Persons, Hokkaido University
Graduate School of Dental Medicine.

Failure of the immunotolerance mechanisms causes multiple organ-specific
autoimmune disorders. Mutations of autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene result in
central immunotolerance deficiency named autoimmune polyendocrinopathy,
candidiasis, ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). Mutations of FOXP3 genes cause
regulatory T cell (Treg) deficiency named immune dysregulation,
polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked (IPEX) syndrome. Because T cell
tolerance influences B cell tolerance, autoantibodies seem to reflect the
presence of autoreactive T cells with the same antigen specificity. To date many 
differences in both clinical features and autoantibody profiles have been
described between APECED and IPEX syndrome. In addition to the differences in
target organs, we have found differences in the target antigens in the same
organ, small intestine, between both disorders; anti-autoimmune
enteropathy-related 75 kDa antigen (AIE-75) antibodies are specific to IPEX
syndrome, whereas anti-tryptophan hydroxylase-1 (TPH-1) antibodies are specific
to APECED. These facts suggest that immunotolerance to AIE-75 depends on the
Treg, whereas the tolerance to TPH-1 depends on the central mechanisms.
Furthermore, given the earlier onset and more serious clinical features of IPEX
syndrome than APECED, physiological roles of Aire on the selection of Treg may
be, if present, limited.

PMID: 26213192  [PubMed - in process]


59. Hipertens Riesgo Vasc. 2015 Jul-Sep;32(3):100-4. doi:
10.1016/j.hipert.2014.09.004. Epub 2014 Nov 14.

[Perception of cardiovascular risk in an outpatient population of the Madrid
Community].

[Article in Spanish]

Pérez-Manchón D(1), Álvarez-García GM(2), González-López E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Consultorio de Brunete, Centro de Salud Universitario Villanueva de la Cañada,
Dirección asistencial noroeste del Servicio Madrileño de Salud (SERMAS), Madrid, 
España. Electronic address: dperezman@gmail.com. (2)Centro de Salud Universitario
Cerro del Aire, Dirección asistencial noroeste del Servicio Madrileño de Salud
(SERMAS), Majadahonda, Madrid, España. (3)Centro de Salud Universitario
Villanueva de la Cañada, Dirección asistencial noroeste del Servicio Madrileño de
Salud (SERMAS), Facultad de Medicina de la Universidad Autónoma de Madrid,
Villanueva de la Cañada, Madrid, España.

INTRODUCTION: Cardiovascular diseases are responsible for the largest burden of
global mortality. The study of the degree of knowledge of their population risk
factors and cardiovascular risk is a priority preventive strategy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A cross-sectional study with 369 people was performed. The 
sociodemographic variables were cardiovascular risk and perception as well as
physical and anthropometric factors. The risk was stratified with the SCORE
table.
RESULTS: A total of 49.6% were men and 50.4% were women. The proportion of
diagnosis was 23.8% in HTA, 39% in hypercholesterolemia, 31.4% in smoking, 26.3% 
in obesity and 4.6% in diabetes. Concordance between perceived and real
cardiovascular risk was very weak.
DISCUSSION: The population has good knowledge about diabetes and acceptable
knowledge about hypertension, and hypercholesterolemia but knowledge in
prediabetic states and perception of the associated cardiovascular risk is low.

Copyright © 2014 SEHLELHA. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26180033  [PubMed - in process]


60. Nat Genet. 2015 Aug;47(8):933-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.3355. Epub 2015 Jul 13.

Keratin-dependent regulation of Aire and gene expression in skin tumor
keratinocytes.

Hobbs RP(1), DePianto DJ(1), Jacob JT(1), Han MC(1), Chung BM(1), Batazzi AS(1), 
Poll BG(1), Guo Y(1), Han J(1), Ong S(2), Zheng W(1), Taube JM(3), Ciháková D(4),
Wan F(5), Coulombe PA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (2)Department of
Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (3)1] Department of Pathology,
School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [2]
Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (4)1] Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [2] Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (5)1] Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [2] Department of Oncology, School of
Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [3] Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. 
(6)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [2] Department
of Dermatology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA. [3] Department of Oncology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [4] Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. [5] Department of
Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

Expression of the intermediate filament protein keratin 17 (K17) is robustly
upregulated in inflammatory skin diseases and in many tumors originating in
stratified and pseudostratified epithelia. We report that autoimmune regulator
(Aire), a transcriptional regulator, is inducibly expressed in human and mouse
tumor keratinocytes in a K17-dependent manner and is required for timely onset of
Gli2-induced skin tumorigenesis in mice. The induction of Aire mRNA in
keratinocytes depends on a functional interaction between K17 and the
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein hnRNP K. Further, K17 colocalizes with
Aire protein in the nucleus of tumor-prone keratinocytes, and each factor is
bound to a specific promoter region featuring an NF-<U+03BA>B consensus sequence in a
relevant subset of K17- and Aire-dependent proinflammatory genes. These findings 
provide radically new insight into keratin intermediate filament and Aire
function, along with a molecular basis for the K17-dependent amplification of
inflammatory and immune responses in diseased epithelia.

PMCID: PMC4520766
PMID: 26168014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Autoimmun. 2015 Sep;63:13-22. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2015.06.008. Epub 2015 Jul 3.

Natural Th17 cells are critically regulated by functional medullary thymic
microenvironments.

Jenkinson WE(1), McCarthy NI(2), Dutton EE(2), Cowan JE(2), Parnell SM(2), White 
AJ(2), Anderson G(2).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Immune Regulation, Institute for Biomedical Research, Medical
School, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK. Electronic address:
w.e.jenkinson@bham.ac.uk. (2)MRC Centre for Immune Regulation, Institute for
Biomedical Research, Medical School, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15
2TT, UK.

The thymic medulla is critical for the enforcement of central tolerance. In
addition to deletion of auto-reactive T-cells, the thymic medulla supports the
maturation of heterogeneous natural aßT-cells linked to tolerance mechanisms.
Natural IL-17-secreting CD4(+)aßT-cells (nTh17) represent recently described
natural aßT-cells that mature and undergo functional priming intrathymically.
Despite a proposed potential to impact upon either protective or pathological
inflammatory responses, the intrathymic mechanisms regulating the balance of
nTh17 development are unclear. Here we compare the development of distinct
natural aßT-cells in the thymus. We reveal that thymic stromal MHC class II
expression and RelB-dependent medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTEC), including
Aire(+) mTEC, are an essential requirement for nTh17 development. nTh17
demonstrate a partial, non-redundant requirement for both ICOS-ligand and CD80/86
costimulation, with a dispensable role for CD80/86 expression by thymic
epithelial cells. Although mTEC constitutively expressed inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS), a critical negative regulator of conventional Th17
differentiation, iNOS was not essential to constrain thymic nTh17. These findings
highlight the critical role of the thymic medulla in the differential regulation 
of novel natural aßT-cell subsets, and reveal additional layers of thymic
medullary regulation of T-cell driven autoimmunity and inflammation.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4570931
PMID: 26143957  [PubMed - in process]


62. J Clin Immunol. 2015 Jul;35(5):463-78. doi: 10.1007/s10875-015-0176-y. Epub 2015 
Jul 5.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy.

Kisand K(1), Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, 19
Ravila Str., Tartu, EE50411, Estonia, kai.kisand@ut.ee.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is an
autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator
(AIRE) gene. This review focuses on the clinical and immunological features of
APECED, summarizes the current knowledge on the function of AIRE and discusses
the importance of autoantibodies in disease diagnosis and prognosis.
Additionally, we review the outcome of recent immunomodulatory treatments in
APECED patients.

PMID: 26141571  [PubMed - in process]


63. EBioMedicine. 2014 Dec 2;2(2):172-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2014.12.001.
eCollection 2015.

Biomarkers Can Identify Pulmonary Tuberculosis in HIV-infected Drug Users Months 
Prior to Clinical Diagnosis.

Sloot R(1), Schim van der Loeff MF(2), van Zwet EW(3), Haks MC(4), Keizer ST(5), 
Scholing M(6), Ottenhoff TH(4), Borgdorff MW(7), Joosten SA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics,
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands ;
Center for Infections and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Center for Infections and
Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands ; Department of Infectious Diseases, Public Health
Service, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Medical Statistics and
Bioinformatics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands. (5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Public Health Service,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Public Health
Service, Amsterdam, The Netherlands ; Department of Medical Microbiology, Onze
Lieve Vrouwe Gasthuis, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (7)Department of Clinical
Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands ; Center for Infections and
Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands ; Department of Infectious Diseases, Public Health
Service, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Current diagnostic tests cannot identify which infected individuals
are at risk for progression to tuberculosis (TB). Our aim was to identify
biomarkers which can predict the development of TB prior to clinical diagnosis.
METHOD: In a retrospective case-control study, RNA of 14 HIV-infected drug users 
obtained before TB diagnosis (cases) and of 15 who did not develop TB (controls) 
was analyzed for the expression of 141 genes by dcRT-MLPA followed by Lasso
regression analysis.
FINDINGS: A combined analysis of IL13 and AIRE had the highest discriminatory
power to identify cases up to 8 months prior to clinical diagnosis. Cases
expressing IL13 had a gene expression pattern strongly enriched for type I IFN
related signaling genes, suggesting that these genes represent processes that
contribute to TB pathogenesis.
INTERPRETATION: We here demonstrated that biomarkers, such as IL13-AIRE, can
identify individuals that progress to TB within a high risk population, months
prior to clinical diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC4484511
PMID: 26137541  [PubMed]


64. Cornea. 2015 Sep;34(9):1086-91. doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000000513.

Keratopathy in Autoimmune Polyendocrinopathy Syndrome Type 1.

Couturier A(1), Saugier-Veber P, Carel JC, Bertherat J, Brézin AP.

Author information: 
(1)*APHP, Hôpital Lariboisière, Service d'Ophtalmologie, Paris, France;
Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France; APHP, Hôpital
Cochin, Service d'Ophtalmologie, Paris, France; §Université Paris Descartes,
Faculté de Médecine, Paris, France; ¶Institute for Biomedical Research, Faculty
of Medecine, University of Rouen, France; <U+2016>Department of Genetics, Rouen
University Hospital, Rouen, France; **AP-HP, Hôpital Robert Debré, Service
d'Endocrinologie Diabétologie Pédiatrique et Centre de Référence des Maladies
Endocriniennes Rares de la Croissance, and Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale, Paris, France; and APHP, Hôpital Cochin, Service
d'Endocrinologie, Paris, France.

PURPOSE: To report the spectrum of phenotypes in patients with autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 (APS1)-related keratopathy.
METHODS: In this retrospective observational case series, 6 patients followed for
APS1 were included. Data collected included family history, age at presentation, 
and systemic and ophthalmic manifestations. The 14 coding exons of the autoimmune
regulator (AIRE) gene were sequenced.
RESULTS: The age at the onset of keratopathy ranged from 4 to 20 years. The
ocular symptoms varied from mild photophobia to severe pain, and visual acuity
was from light perception to 20/20 Snellen equivalent. Heterogeneous corneal
involvement was observed, ranging from minimal superficial punctate staining to
severe stromal scarring with deep corneal neovascularization. The severity of
ophthalmic findings was uncorrelated to that of systemic manifestations. The
genetic analyses identified 2 novel mutations (c.173C>A in exon 2 and c.892G>T in
exon 8) and 4 known mutations (c.62C>T in exon 1, c.415C>T in exon 3, c.1096-1G>A
in intron 9, and c.1193delC in exon 10) in the AIRE gene. In patients with
identical AIRE mutations, including within a sib-pair, heterogeneous phenotypes
were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Keratopathy can be an early and severe manifestation of APS1, which 
contributes to the global prognosis of the disease. Its mechanisms remain to be
elucidated.

PMID: 26114819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Immunol Lett. 2015 Sep;167(1):17-22. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2015.06.010. Epub 2015 
Jun 22.

Lymphopenia-induced proliferation in the absence of functional Autoimmune
regulator (Aire) induces colitis in mice.

Kekäläinen E(1), Lehto MK(2), Smeds E(2), Pöntynen N(3), Pekkarinen PT(2),
Ulmanen I(4), Miettinen A(5), Arstila TP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Haartman Institute, Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, Immunobiology
Research Program, University of Helsinki, PB 21, Helsinki 00014, Finland.
Electronic address: eliisa.kekalainen@helsinki.fi. (2)Haartman Institute,
Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, Immunobiology Research Program,
University of Helsinki, PB 21, Helsinki 00014, Finland. (3)National Institute for
Health and Welfare, Department of Molecular Medicine, Biomedicum, Helsinki,
Finland; Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland. (4)National Institute for Health and Welfare, Department of Molecular
Medicine, Biomedicum, Helsinki, Finland. (5)HUSLAB Helsinki Central Hospital
Laboratory, Division of Clinical Microbiology, Haartmaninkatu 3, 00290 Helsinki, 
Finland.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is caused
by mutations in Autoimmune regulator (Aire), a transcriptional regulator of
negative selection in thymus. However, Aire is also expressed in periphery, but
the full range of Aire's peripheral function is unknown. Here, we transferred
lymphocytes from wildtype donors into lymphopenic recipients with or without
functional Aire. Following cell proliferation thus took place in Aire-sufficient 
or deficient environment. The wildtype lymphocytes hyperproliferated and induced 
disease in lymphopenic Aire(-/-) but not in Aire(+/+) recipients. The disease was
characterized by diarrhea, inflammation, and colitis, and in some recipients
pancreatitis, gastritis, and hepatitis was also found. Our results identify Aire 
as an important regulator of peripheral T cell homeostasis in gastrointestinal
tissues. Given a suitable trigger the absence of peripheral Aire leads to
dysregulated T cell proliferation and disease.

Copyright © 2015 European Federation of Immunological Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26112418  [PubMed - in process]


66. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 Nov;29(1):143-7. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.06.005.
Epub 2015 Jun 20.

Cholinergic chemosensory cells of the thymic medulla express the bitter receptor 
Tas2r131.

Soultanova A(1), Voigt A(2), Chubanov V(3), Gudermann T(3), Meyerhof W(2), Boehm 
U(4), Kummer W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen,
German Center for Lung Research, Giessen, Germany. Electronic address:
aichurek.soultanova@anatomie.med.uni-giessen.de. (2)Department of Molecular
Genetics, German Institute of Human Nutrition, Potsdam Rehbruecke, Nuthetal,
Germany. (3)Walter-Straub-Institute for Pharmacology and Toxicology,
Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich, Germany. (4)Department of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, University of Saarland School of Medicine, Homburg, Germany.
(5)Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen,
German Center for Lung Research, Giessen, Germany.

The thymus is the site of T cell maturation which includes positive selection in 
the cortex and negative selection in the medulla. Acetylcholine is locally
produced in the thymus and cholinergic signaling influences the T cell
development. We recently described a distinct subset of medullary epithelial
cells in the murine thymus which express the acetylcholine-synthesizing enzyme
choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) and components of the canonical taste
transduction cascade, i.e. transient receptor potential melastatin-like subtype 5
channel (TRPM5), phospholipase Cß(2), and Ga-gustducin. Such a chemical phenotype
is characteristic for chemosensory cells of mucosal surfaces which utilize bitter
receptors for detection of potentially hazardous compounds and cholinergic
signaling to initiate avoidance reflexes. We here demonstrate mRNA expression of 
bitter receptors Tas2r105, Tas2r108, and Tas2r131 in the murine thymus. Using a
Tas2r131-tauGFP reporter mouse we localized the expression of this receptor to
cholinergic cells expressing the downstream elements of the taste transduction
pathway. These cells are distinct from the medullary thymic epithelial cells
which promiscuously express tissue-restricted self-antigens during the process of
negative selection, since double-labeling immunofluorescence showed no
colocalization of autoimmune regulator (AIRE), the key mediator of negative
selection, and TRPM5. These data demonstrate the presence of bitter taste-sensing
signaling in cholinergic epithelial cells in the thymic medulla and opens a
discussion as to what is the physiological role of this pathway.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26102274  [PubMed - in process]


67. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 10;6(16):13978-93.

ß-catenin activation drives thymoma initiation and progression in mice.

Liang CC(1), Lu TL(1), Yu YR(1), You LR(2,)(3), Chen CM(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)VYM Genome Research
Center, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Taiwan Mouse
Clinic-National Phenotyping Center, Taipei, Taiwan.

Thymoma is the most commonly identified cancer in the anterior mediastinum. To
date, the causal mechanism that drives thymoma progression is not clear. Here, we
generated K5-â<U+0088><U+0086>N64Ctnnb1/ERT2 transgenic mice, which express an N-terminal
deletion mutant of ß-catenin fused to a mutated ligand-binding domain of estrogen
receptor (ERT2) under the control of the bovine cytokeratin 5 (K5) promoter. The 
transgenic mouse lines named Tg1 and Tg4 were characterized. Forced expression of
â<U+0088><U+0086>N64Ctnnb1/ERT2 in the Tg1 and Tg4 mice developed small thymoma lesions in
response to tamoxifen treatment. In the absence of tamoxifen, the Tg1 mice
exhibited leaky activation of ß-catenin, which activated the TOP-Gal transgene
and Wnt/ß-catenin-targeted genes. As the Tg1 mice aged in the absence of
tamoxifen, manifest thymomas were found at 10-12 months. Interestingly, we
detected loss of AIRE and increase of p63 in the thymomas of Tg1 mice, similar to
that observed in human thymomas. Moreover, the ß5t protease subunit, which was
reported as a differential marker for human type B3 thymoma, was expressed in the
Tg1 thymomas. Thus, the Tg1 mice generated in this study accurately mimic the
characteristics of human thymomas and may serve as a model for understanding
thymoma pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4546445
PMID: 26101855  [PubMed - in process]


68. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2015;15 Suppl 1:S51-8. doi: 10.1517/14712598.2015.1044895.
Epub 2015 Jun 22.

Thymosin a1: burying secrets in the thymus.

Moretti S(1), Oikonomou V, Garaci E, Romani L.

Author information: 
(1)University of Perugia, Department of Experimental Medicine , Perugia , Italy
+039 075 5858311 ; +039 075 5858311 ; luigina.romani@unipg.it.

Thymosin a1 (Ta1), an epithelial cell (EC)-derived cytokine, has the strong
ability to modulate signals delivered through innate immune receptors on
dendritic cells (DCs), thus instructing the initiation of appropriate immune
responses to T cells. In its ability to activate indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase
1-dependent tolerogenic programs in DCs, Ta1 pivotally contributes to the
maintenance of self-tolerance by regulating the function of regulatory T (Treg)
cells. How Ta1 may contribute to the Treg cell ontogeny is not known. The
transcriptional regulator autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is known to control central
and peripheral tolerance. AIRE is highly expressed in thymic medullary ECs where 
it controls the ectopic expression of tissue restricted antigens for negative
selection. The absence of AIRE-induced tissue-specific antigens in the thymus can
lead to autoimmunity in the antigen-expressing target organ. Recently, AIRE
protein has been detected in peripheral lymphoid organs, suggesting that
peripheral AIRE may play a complementary role. We have addressed the possible
relationship between AIRE and Ta1 and discovered an intricate crosstalk, whereby 
AIRE may promote prothymosin cleavage to Ta1, and Ta1 in turn transcriptionally
regulates AIRE expression. Thus, similar to other members of thymic stromal
poietins, Ta1 expressed within the thymus and peripheral tissues regulates the
EC/DC crosstalk required for salutary immune homeostasis.

PMID: 26098878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Nat Immunol. 2015 Jul;16(7):680-1. doi: 10.1038/ni.3195.

Sirt-ainly Aire.

Peterson P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Research Group, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational
Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2015 Jul;16(7):737-45.

PMID: 26086133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Sci Transl Med. 2015 Jun 17;7(292):292ra101. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa9186.

Transglutaminase 4 as a prostate autoantigen in male subfertility.

Landegren N(1), Sharon D(2), Shum AK(3), Khan IS(4), Fasano KJ(4), Hallgren Å(5),
Kampf C(6), Freyhult E(7), Ardesjö-Lundgren B(8), Alimohammadi M(9), Rathsman
S(10), Ludvigsson JF(11), Lundh D(12), Motrich R(13), Rivero V(13), Fong L(14),
Giwercman A(15), Gustafsson J(16), Perheentupa J(17), Husebye ES(18), Anderson
MS(4), Snyder M(19), Kämpe O(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Solna), Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm SE 171 76, Sweden. Department of Medical Sciences, Science 
for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala SE 751 85, Sweden.
nils.landegren@ki.se. (2)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford
94305, CA, USA. Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology,
Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA. (3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical 
Care, Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (4)Diabetes Center, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (5)Department of Medicine (Solna),
Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm SE 171 76,
Sweden. Department of Medical Sciences, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala
University, Uppsala SE 751 85, Sweden. (6)Department of Immunology, Genetics, and
Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala SE 751 85, Sweden. (7)Cancer Pharmacology 
and Computational Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Bioinformatics
Infrastructure for Life Sciences, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala
University, Uppsala SE 751 85, Sweden. (8)Department of Animal Breeding and
Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala SE 750 07, Sweden.
(9)Department of Medicine (Solna), Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm SE 171 76, Sweden. Department of Medical Sciences, Science 
for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala SE 751 85, Sweden. Department of
Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala SE 751 85, Sweden. (10)Department
of Laboratory Medicine/Microbiology, Örebro University Hospital, Örebro SE 701
85, Sweden. (11)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm SE 171 76, Sweden. (12)School of Bioscience, University of 
Skövde, Skövde SE 541 28, Sweden. (13)Centro de Investigaciones en Bioquímica
Clínica e Inmunología, Departamento de Bioquímica Clínica, Facultad de Ciencias
Químicas, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba 5000, Argentina.
(14)University of California San Francisco Helen Diller Family Comprehensive
Cancer Center, San Francisco, CA 94115, USA. (15)Molecular Reproduction Research,
Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund University, Malmö SE 205 02, Sweden. 
(16)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University, Uppsala SE
751 85, Sweden. (17)The Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki 00029, Finland. (18)Department of Clinical Science, University
of Bergen, and Department of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen
5020, Norway. (19)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford 94305,
CA, USA.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS1), a monogenic disorder caused by
AIRE gene mutations, features multiple autoimmune disease components. Infertility
is common in both males and females with APS1. Although female infertility can be
explained by autoimmune ovarian failure, the mechanisms underlying male
infertility have remained poorly understood. We performed a proteome-wide
autoantibody screen in APS1 patient sera to assess the autoimmune response
against the male reproductive organs. By screening human protein arrays with male
and female patient sera and by selecting for gender-imbalanced autoantibody
signals, we identified transglutaminase 4 (TGM4) as a male-specific autoantigen. 
Notably, TGM4 is a prostatic secretory molecule with critical role in male
reproduction. TGM4 autoantibodies were detected in most of the adult male APS1
patients but were absent in all the young males. Consecutive serum samples
further revealed that TGM4 autoantibodies first presented during pubertal age and
subsequent to prostate maturation. We assessed the animal model for APS1, the
Aire-deficient mouse, and found spontaneous development of TGM4 autoantibodies
specifically in males. Aire-deficient mice failed to present TGM4 in the thymus, 
consistent with a defect in central tolerance for TGM4. In the mouse, we further 
link TGM4 immunity with a destructive prostatitis and compromised secretion of
TGM4. Collectively, our findings in APS1 patients and Aire-deficient mice reveal 
prostate autoimmunity as a major manifestation of APS1 with potential role in
male subfertility.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26084804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Immunity. 2015 Jun 16;42(6):1185-96. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.04.021.

Dominant Mutations in the Autoimmune Regulator AIRE Are Associated with Common
Organ-Specific Autoimmune Diseases.

Oftedal BE(1), Hellesen A(2), Erichsen MM(3), Bratland E(1), Vardi A(4),
Perheentupa J(5), Kemp EH(6), Fiskerstrand T(7), Viken MK(8), Weetman AP(6),
Fleishman SJ(9), Banka S(10), Newman WG(10), Sewell WA(11), Sozaeva LS(12),
Zayats T(13), Haugarvoll K(14), Orlova EM(12), Haavik J(13), Johansson S(7),
Knappskog PM(7), Løvås K(2), Wolff AS(1), Abramson J(4), Husebye ES(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen, Norway.
(2)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen, Norway;
Department of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway.
(4)Department of Immunology, The Weizmann Institute of Science, 76100 Rehovot,
Israel. (5)Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Helsinki, 00100
Helsinki, Finland. (6)Department of Human Metabolism, The Medical School,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2RX, UK. (7)Department of Clinical
Science, University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen, Norway; Center for Medical Genetics
and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway.
(8)Department of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo,
0316 Oslo, Norway. (9)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Weizmann Institute 
of Science, 76100 Rehovot, Israel. (10)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine,
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9WL, UK; Manchester Centre for Genomic
Medicine, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre,
Manchester M13 9WL, UK. (11)Path Links Immunology, Scunthorpe General Hospital,
Scunthorpe DN15 7BH, UK. (12)Endocrinological Research Center, Institute of
Pediatric Endocrinology, Moscow 117036, Russian Federation. (13)K.G. Jebsen
Centre for Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Department of Biomedicine, University of
Bergen, 5021 Bergen, Norway. (14)Department of Neurology, Haukeland University
Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway. (15)Department of Clinical Science, University of 
Bergen, 5021 Bergen, Norway; Department of Medicine, Haukeland University
Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway. Electronic address: eystein.husebye@k2.uib.no.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2015 Jun 16;42(6):986-8.

The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene is crucial for establishing central
immunological tolerance and preventing autoimmunity. Mutations in AIRE cause a
rare autosomal-recessive disease, autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1
(APS-1), distinguished by multi-organ autoimmunity. We have identified multiple
cases and families with mono-allelic mutations in the first plant homeodomain
(PHD1) zinc finger of AIRE that followed dominant inheritance, typically
characterized by later onset, milder phenotypes, and reduced penetrance compared 
to classical APS-1. These missense PHD1 mutations suppressed gene expression
driven by wild-type AIRE in a dominant-negative manner, unlike CARD or truncated 
AIRE mutants that lacked such dominant capacity. Exome array analysis revealed
that the PHD1 dominant mutants were found with relatively high frequency
(>0.0008) in mixed populations. Our results provide insight into the molecular
action of AIRE and demonstrate that disease-causing mutations in the AIRE locus
are more common than previously appreciated and cause more variable autoimmune
phenotypes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26084028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Immunity. 2015 Jun 16;42(6):986-8. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.06.004.

More than Meets the Eye: Monogenic Autoimmunity Strikes Again.

Anderson MS(1), Casanova JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA. Electronic address: mark.anderson@ucsf.edu. (2)St. Giles Laboratory
of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller
University, New York, NY 10065, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York,
NY 10065, USA; Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker
Branch, Inserm U980, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, 75015 Paris, France;
Paris Descartes University, Imagine Institute, 75015 Paris, France; Pediatric
Hematology & Immunology Unit, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, 75015 Paris,
France. Electronic address: jean-laurent.casanova@rockefeller.edu.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2015 Jun 16;42(6):1185-96.

Autoimmunity is often familial, suggesting that inborn genetic variations might
underlie its development. Curiously, autoimmunity has long been thought to be
typically polygenic. Contrary to this prediction and consistent with growing
discoveries of monogenic autoimmunity, Oftedal et al. discovered heterozygous
dominant-negative AIRE mutations in patients with certain forms of autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26084018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Int J Health Serv. 2015;45(3):530-44. doi: 10.1177/0020731415584559.

Who Is Afraid of Volume 1181 of the New York Academy of Sciences? Under Threat,
the Nuclear Establishment Plays Dirty.

Katz AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)15 Chemin du Passeur, Aire 1219, Switzerland katz.alison@gmail.com.

Following decades of an internationally coordinated cover-up, critical
information about the health consequences of the Chernobyl accident, worldwide
but particularly in Western and Eastern Europe, was made available through Volume
1181 of the Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. The book also contains
unique, valuable data from the 3 most affected counties, and it suggests that
consequences of the Chernobyl accident are far more serious than has been
acknowledged. Many health problems are worsening, including those resulting from 
irreversible genetic damage. Given the threat that such information represents to
the nuclear establishment, it was predictable that Volume 1181, of far higher
scientific quality than the United Nations' flagship report The Chernobyl Forum, 
would meet with violent criticism. Since its publication in 2009, it has been
misrepresented and discredited by the nuclear establishment and international
health establishment - to the extent of making the absurd and false claim that
the New York Academy of Sciences has in some way disowned its own publication.
The New York Academy of Sciences defends publication of Volume 1181 on the
grounds of its commitment to open discussion of scientific material and
publication of material of scientific value.

© SAGE Publications 2015.

PMID: 26077859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Immunity. 2015 Jun 16;42(6):1048-61. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.05.013. Epub 2015
Jun 9.

Thymic B Cells Are Licensed to Present Self Antigens for Central T Cell Tolerance
Induction.

Yamano T(1), Nedjic J(1), Hinterberger M(1), Steinert M(1), Koser S(2), Pinto
S(3), Gerdes N(4), Lutgens E(5), Ishimaru N(6), Busslinger M(7), Brors B(2),
Kyewski B(3), Klein L(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Goethestrasse 
31, 80336 Munich, Germany. (2)Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany. (3)Division of Developmental Immunology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Institute for
Cardiovascular Prevention, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich,
Pettenkoferstrasse 9, 80336 Munich, Germany. (5)Institute for Cardiovascular
Prevention, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Pettenkoferstrasse 9, 80336
Munich, Germany; Department of Medical Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Oral Molecular Pathology, Institute of Health Biosciences, The
University of Tokushima Graduate School, 3-18-15 Kuramoto, Tokushima 770-8504,
Japan. (7)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.
Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna, Austria. (8)Institute for Immunology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Goethestrasse 31, 80336 Munich, Germany.
Electronic address: ludger.klein@med.lmu.de.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2015 Jul;15(7):404.

Thymic antigen-presenting cells (APCs) such as dendritic cells and medullary
thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) use distinct strategies of self-antigen
expression and presentation to mediate central tolerance. The thymus also harbors
B cells; whether they also display unique tolerogenic features and how they
genealogically relate to peripheral B cells is unclear. Here, we found that Aire 
is expressed in thymic but not peripheral B cells. Aire expression in thymic B
cells coincided with major histocompatibility class II (MHCII) and CD80
upregulation and immunoglobulin class-switching. These features were
recapitulated upon immigration of naive peripheral B cells into the thymus,
whereby this intrathymic licensing required CD40 signaling in the context of
cognate interactions with autoreactive CD4(+) thymocytes. Moreover, a
licensing-dependent neo-antigen selectively upregulated in immigrating B cells
mediated negative selection through direct presentation. Thus, autoreactivity
within the nascent T cell repertoire fuels a feed forward loop that endows thymic
B cells with tolerogenic features.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26070482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Immunol. 2015 Jul 15;195(2):498-506. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500558. Epub 2015
Jun 1.

Differential Features of AIRE-Induced and AIRE-Independent Promiscuous Gene
Expression in Thymic Epithelial Cells.

St-Pierre C(1), Trofimov A(2), Brochu S(1), Lemieux S(3), Perreault C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada; Department of Medicine, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada; and. (2)Institute for Research in Immunology
and Cancer, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada; Department 
of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada; and
Department of Computer Science and Operations Research, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada. (3)Institute for Research in Immunology and
Cancer, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada; Department of
Computer Science and Operations Research, University of Montreal, Montreal,
Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada. (4)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer,
University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada; Department of Medicine,
University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada; and
claude.perreault@umontreal.ca.

Establishment of self-tolerance in the thymus depends on promiscuous expression
of tissue-restricted Ags (TRA) by thymic epithelial cells (TEC). This promiscuous
gene expression (pGE) is regulated in part by the autoimmune regulator (AIRE). To
evaluate the commonalities and discrepancies between AIRE-dependent and
-independent pGE, we analyzed the transcriptome of the three main TEC subsets in 
wild-type and Aire knockout mice. We found that the impact of AIRE-dependent pGE 
is not limited to generation of TRA. AIRE decreases, via non-cell autonomous
mechanisms, the expression of genes coding for positive regulators of cell
proliferation, and it thereby reduces the number of cortical TEC. In mature
medullary TEC, AIRE-driven pGE upregulates non-TRA coding genes that enhance
cell-cell interactions (e.g., claudins, integrins, and selectins) and are
probably of prime relevance to tolerance induction. We also found that
AIRE-dependent and -independent TRA present several distinctive features. In
particular, relative to AIRE-induced TRA, AIRE-independent TRA are more numerous 
and show greater splicing complexity. Furthermore, we report that AIRE-dependent 
versus -independent TRA project nonredundant representations of peripheral
tissues in the thymus.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26034170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Transl Med. 2015 Jun 2;13:173. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0525-x.

Novel and rare functional genomic variants in multiple autoimmune syndrome and
Sjögren's syndrome.

Johar AS(1), Mastronardi C(2), Rojas-Villarraga A(3), Patel HR(4), Chuah A(5),
Peng K(6), Higgins A(7), Milburn P(8), Palmer S(9), Silva-Lara MF(10), Velez
JI(11), Andrews D(12), Field M(13), Huttley G(14), Goodnow C(15), Anaya JM(16),
Arcos-Burgos M(17).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Predictive Medicine, Genome Biology Department, John Curtin
School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia. u4842377@anu.edu.au.
(2)Genomics and Predictive Medicine, Genome Biology Department, John Curtin
School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
claudio.mastronardi@anu.edu.au. (3)Center for Autoimmune Diseases Research
(CREA), School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogota, 
Colombia. adrirojas@gmail.com. (4)Genome Discovery Unit, Genome Biology
Department, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine,
Biology and Environment, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT,
Australia. Hardip.Patel@anu.edu.au. (5)Genome Discovery Unit, Genome Biology
Department, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine,
Biology and Environment, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT,
Australia. Aaron.Chuah@anu.edu.au. (6)Biomolecular Resource Facility, John Curtin
School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia. kaiman.peng@anu.edu.au.
(7)Biomolecular Resource Facility, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU
College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The Australian National University,
Canberra, ACT, Australia. angela.higgins@anu.edu.au. (8)Biomolecular Resource
Facility, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine,
Biology and Environment, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT,
Australia. peter.milburn@anu.edu.au. (9)Biomolecular Resource Facility, John
Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine, Biology and
Environment, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
stephanie.palmer@anu.edu.au. (10)Genomics and Predictive Medicine, Genome Biology
Department, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine,
Biology and Environment, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT,
Australia. maria.silva@anu.edu.au. (11)Genomics and Predictive Medicine, Genome
Biology Department, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU College of
Medicine, Biology and Environment, The Australian National University, Canberra, 
ACT, Australia. jorge.velez@anu.edu.au. (12)Immunogenomics and Bioinformatics
Group, Immunology Department, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU College
of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The Australian National University,
Canberra, ACT, Australia. dan.andrews@anu.edu.au. (13)Immunogenomics and
Bioinformatics Group, Immunology Department, John Curtin School of Medical
Research, ANU College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The Australian
National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia. matthew.field@anu.edu.au.
(14)Biomolecular Resource Facility, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU
College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The Australian National University,
Canberra, ACT, Australia. gavin.huttley@anu.edu.au. (15)Immunogenomics and
Bioinformatics Group, Immunology Department, John Curtin School of Medical
Research, ANU College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The Australian
National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia. chris.goodnow@anu.edu.au.
(16)Center for Autoimmune Diseases Research (CREA), School of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogota, Colombia. anayajm@gmail.com.
(17)Genomics and Predictive Medicine, Genome Biology Department, John Curtin
School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
mauricio.arcos-burgos@anu.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Multiple autoimmune syndrome (MAS), an extreme phenotype of
autoimmune disorders, is a very well suited trait to tackle genomic variants of
these conditions. Whole exome sequencing (WES) is a widely used strategy for
detection of protein coding and splicing variants associated with inherited
diseases.
METHODS: The DNA of eight patients affected by MAS [all of whom presenting with
Sjögren's syndrome (SS)], four patients affected by SS alone and 38 unaffected
individuals, were subject to WES. Filters to identify novel and rare functional
(pathogenic-deleterious) homozygous and/or compound heterozygous variants in
these patients and controls were applied. Bioinformatics tools such as the Human 
gene connectome as well as pathway and network analysis were applied to test
overrepresentation of genes harbouring these variants in critical pathways and
networks involved in autoimmunity.
RESULTS: Eleven novel and rare functional variants were identified in cases but
not in controls, harboured in: MACF1, KIAA0754, DUSP12, ICA1, CELA1, LRP1/STAT6, 
GRIN3B, ANKLE1, TMEM161A, and FKRP. These were subsequently subject to network
analysis and their functional relatedness to genes already associated with
autoimmunity was evaluated. Notably, the LRP1/STAT6 novel mutation was homozygous
in one MAS affected patient and heterozygous in another. LRP1/STAT6 disclosed the
strongest plausibility for autoimmunity. LRP1/STAT6 are involved in extracellular
and intracellular anti-inflammatory pathways that play key roles in maintaining
the homeostasis of the immune system. Further; networks, pathways, and
interaction analyses showed that LRP1 is functionally related to the HLA-B and
IL10 genes and it has a substantial impact within immunological pathways and/or
reaction to bacterial and other foreign proteins (phagocytosis, regulation of
phospholipase A2 activity, negative regulation of apoptosis and response to
lipopolysaccharides). Further, ICA1 and STAT6 were also closely related to AIRE
and IRF5, two very well known autoimmunity genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Novel and rare exonic mutations that may account for autoimmunity
were identified. Among those, the LRP1/STAT6 novel mutation has the strongest
case for being categorised as potentially causative of MAS given the presence of 
intriguing patterns of functional interaction with other major genes shaping
autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC4450850
PMID: 26031516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2015 Sep 1;53(10):e279-82. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2014-0898.

Analytical and clinical evaluation of a new immunoassay for therapeutic drug
monitoring of etanercept.

Llinares-Tello F, Rosas-Gómez de Salazar J, Senabre-Gallego JM, Santos-Soler G,
Santos-Ramírez C, Salas-Heredia E, Molina-García J; AIRE-MB Group.

Collaborators: de Salazar JR, Gallego JM, Soler GS, Heredia ES, Pérez CC, Bas AP,
Betoret ML, Tello FL, García JM, Ramírez CS, Vallés XB, Barrioluego MS,
García-Carrasco M.

PMID: 26021413  [PubMed - in process]


78. Gastroenterology. 2015 Jul;149(1):22-5. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.05.027. Epub
2015 May 26.

A Breath of Fresh AIRE Surrounds Paneth Cells and Defensins.

Yusung SA(1), Martín MG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition,
Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California; Los Angeles Biomedical Research
Institute, Torrance, California. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Mattel Children's Hospital, Los Angeles,
California; David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California. Electronic address: mgmartin@mednet.ucla.edu.

Comment on
    Gastroenterology. 2015 Jul;149(1):139-50.

PMID: 26021231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Nat Immunol. 2015 Jul;16(7):737-45. doi: 10.1038/ni.3194. Epub 2015 May 25.

The deacetylase Sirt1 is an essential regulator of Aire-mediated induction of
central immunological tolerance.

Chuprin A(1), Avin A(1), Goldfarb Y(1), Herzig Y(1), Levi B(1), Jacob A(1), Sela 
A(1), Katz S(1), Grossman M(2), Guyon C(3), Rathaus M(4), Cohen HY(4), Sagi I(2),
Giraud M(3), McBurney MW(5), Husebye ES(6), Abramson J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.
(2)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel. (3)Department of Immunology, Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016, Université
Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France. (4)The Mina and Everard
Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(5)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Canada. (6)Department of Clinical 
Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2015 Jul;16(7):680-1.

Aire is a transcriptional regulator that induces the promiscuous expression of
thousands of tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs) in medullary thymic epithelial
cells (mTECs), a step critical for the induction of immunological self-tolerance.
Studies have offered molecular insights into how Aire operates, but more
comprehensive understanding of this process still remains elusive. Here we found 
abundant expression of the protein deacetylase Sirtuin-1 (Sirt1) in mature
Aire(+) mTECs, wherein it was required for the expression of Aire-dependent
TRA-encoding genes and the subsequent induction of immunological self-tolerance. 
Our study elucidates a previously unknown molecular mechanism for Aire-mediated
transcriptional regulation and identifies a unique function for Sirt1 in
preventing organ-specific autoimmunity.

PMID: 26006015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2015 May 21;10(5):e0127052. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127052.
eCollection 2015.

The Complex Interaction between Home Environment, Socioeconomic Status, Maternal 
IQ and Early Child Neurocognitive Development: A Multivariate Analysis of Data
Collected in a Newborn Cohort Study.

Ronfani L(1), Vecchi Brumatti L(2), Mariuz M(3), Tognin V(1), Bin M(1), Ferluga
V(1), Knowles A(1), Montico M(1), Barbone F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Epidemiology and Public Health Research Unit, Institute for Maternal 
and Child Health-IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo," Trieste, Italy. (2)Scientific Direction,
Institute for Maternal and Child Health-IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo," Trieste, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical and Biological Sciences, University of Udine, Udine,
Italy. (4)Department of Medical and Biological Sciences, University of Udine,
Udine, Italy; Department of Medical Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste,
Italy; Institute of Hygiene and Clinical Epidemiology, University Hospital of
Udine, Udine, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The relative role of socioeconomic status (SES), home environment and
maternal intelligence, as factors affecting child cognitive development in early 
childhood is still unclear. The aim of this study is to analyze the association
of SES, home environment and maternal IQ with child neurodevelopment at 18
months.
METHODS: The data were collected prospectively in the PHIME study, a newborn
cohort study carried out in Italy between 2007 and 2010. Maternal nonverbal
abilities (IQ) were evaluated using the Standard Progressive Matrices, a version 
of the Raven's Progressive Matrices; a direct evaluation of the home environment 
was carried out with the AIRE instrument, designed using the HOME (Home
Observation for Measurement of the Environment) model; the socioeconomic
characteristics were evaluated using the SES index which takes into account
parents occupation, type of employment, educational level, homeownership. The
study outcome was child neurodevelopment evaluated at 18 months, with the Bayley 
Scales of Infant and Toddler Development Third Edition (BSID III). Linear
regression analyses and mediation analyses were carried out to evaluate the
association between the three exposures, and the scaled scores of the three main 
scales of BSID III (cognitive, language and motor scale), with adjustment for a
wide range of potential explanatory variables.
RESULTS: Data from 502 mother-child pairs were analyzed. Mediation analysis
showed a relationship between SES and maternal IQ, with a complete mediation
effect of home environment in affecting cognitive and language domains. A direct 
significant effect of maternal IQ on the BSID III motor development scale and the
mediation effect of home environment were found.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that home environment was the variable with greater
influence on neurodevelopment at 18 months. The observation of how parents and
children interact in the home context is crucial to adequately evaluate early
child development.

PMCID: PMC4440732
PMID: 25996934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Gastroenterology. 2015 Jul;149(1):139-50. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.05.009. Epub
2015 May 15.

Gastrointestinal Autoimmunity Associated With Loss of Central Tolerance to
Enteric a-Defensins.

Dobe J(1), Neuwirth A(1), Dobeová M(1), Voboril M(1), Balounová J(1), Ballek
O(1), Lebl J(2), Meloni A(3), Krohn K(4), Kluger N(5), Ranki A(5), Filipp D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the AS CR,
Prague, Czech Republic. (2)Department of Pediatrics, 2(nd) Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech
Republic. (3)Pediatric Clinic II, Ospedale Microcitemico and Department of
Biomedical and Biotechnological Science, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(4)Clinical Research Institute HUCH, Helsinki, Finland; Department of Dermatology
and Allergology, Department of Medicine, Helsinki University Central Hospital,
Helsinki, Finland. (5)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Department of
Medicine, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. (6)Laboratory 
of Immunobiology, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the AS CR, Prague, Czech
Republic. Electronic address: dominik.filipp@img.cas.cz.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2015 Jul;149(1):22-5.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED) is an autoimmune disorder characterized by chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, and adrenal insufficiency, but patients also
develop intestinal disorders. APECED is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by
mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE, which regulates immune tolerance)
that allow self-reactive T cells to enter the periphery. Enteric a-defensins are 
antimicrobial peptides secreted by Paneth cells. Patients with APECED frequently 
have gastrointestinal symptoms and seroreactivity against secretory granules of
Paneth cells. We investigated whether enteric a-defensins are autoantigens in
humans and mice with AIRE deficiency.
METHODS: We analyzed clinical data, along with serum and stool samples and
available duodenal biopsies from 50 patients with APECED collected from multiple 
centers in Europe. Samples were assessed for expression of defensins and other
molecules by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and
flow cytometry; levels of antibodies and other proteins were measured by
immunohistochemical and immunoblot analyses. Histologic analyses were performed
on biopsy samples. We used Aire(-/-) mice as a model of APECED, and studied the
effects of transferring immune cells from these mice to athymic mice.
RESULTS: Enteric defensins were detected in extraintestinal tissues of patients
with APECED, especially in medullary thymic epithelial cells. Some patients with 
APECED lacked Paneth cells and were seropositive for defensin-specific
autoantibodies; the presence of autoantibodies correlated with frequent diarrhea.
Aire(-/-) mice developed defensin-specific T cells. Adoptive transfer of these T 
cells to athymic mice resulted in T-cell infiltration of the gut, loss of Paneth 
cells, microbial dysbiosis, and the induction of T-helper 17 cell-mediated
autoimmune responses resembling those observed in patients with APECED.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with APECED, loss of AIRE appears to cause an autoimmune
response against enteric defensins and loss of Paneth cells. Aire(-/-) mice
developed defensin-specific T cells that cause intestinal defects similar to
those observed in patients with APECED. These findings provide a mechanism by
which loss of AIRE-mediated immune tolerance leads to intestinal disorders in
patients with APECED.

Copyright © 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25982289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. PLoS One. 2015 May 15;10(5):e0127476. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127476.
eCollection 2015.

The AIRE -230Y Polymorphism Affects AIRE Transcriptional Activity: Potential
Influence on AIRE Function in the Thymus.

Lovewell TR(1), McDonagh AJ(2), Messenger AG(2), Azzouz M(3), Tazi-Ahnini R(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, United Kingdom. (2)Dermatology Department, Royal Hallamshire Hospital,
Sheffield, United Kingdom. (3)Department of Neuroscience, School of Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is expressed in the thymus,
particularly in thymic medullary epithelial cells (mTECs), and is required for
the ectopic expression of a diverse range of peripheral tissue antigens by mTECs,
facilitating their ability to perform negative selection of auto-reactive
immature T-cells. The expression profile of peripheral tissue antigens is
affected not only by AIRE deficiency but also with variation of AIRE activity in 
the thymus.
METHOD AND RESULTS: Therefore we screened 591bp upstream of the AIRE
transcription start site including AIRE minimal promoter for single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNPs) and identified two SNPs -655R (rs117557896) and -230Y
(rs751032) respectively. To study the effect of these variations on AIRE promoter
activity we generated a Flp-In host cell line which was stably transfected with a
single copy of the reporter vector. Relative promoter activity was estimated by
comparing the luciferase specific activity for lysates of the different reporter 
AIRE promoter-reporter gene constructs including AIRE-655G AIRE-230C, AIRE-655G
AIRE-230T and AIRE-655A AIRE-230C. The analysis showed that the commonest
haplotype AIRE-655G AIRE-230C has the highest luciferase specific activity
(p<0.001). Whereas AIRE-655G AIRE-230T has a luciferase specific activity value
that approaches null. Both AIRE promoter polymorphic sites have one allele that
forms a CpG methylation site which we determined can be methylated in methylation
assays using the M.SssI CpG methyltransferase.
CONCLUSION: AIRE-230Y is in a conserved region of the promoter and is adjacent to
a predicted WT1 transcription factor binding site, suggesting that AIRE-230Y
affects AIRE expression by influencing the binding of biochemical factors to this
region. Our findings show that AIRE-655GAIRE-230T haplotype could dramatically
alter AIRE transcription and so have an effect on the process of negative
selection and affect susceptibility to autoimmune conditions.

PMCID: PMC4433237
PMID: 25978041  [PubMed - in process]


83. J Immunol. 2015 Jun 15;194(12):5825-37. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500082. Epub 2015 
May 8.

Thymic involution perturbs negative selection leading to autoreactive T cells
that induce chronic inflammation.

Coder BD(1), Wang H(1), Ruan L(1), Su DM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, University of North Texas Health
Science Center at Fort Worth, Fort Worth, TX 76107. (2)Department of Cell Biology
and Immunology, University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth,
Fort Worth, TX 76107 dong-ming.su@unthsc.edu.

Thymic involution and the subsequent amplified release of autoreactive T cells
increase the susceptibility toward developing autoimmunity, but whether they
induce chronic inflammation with advanced age remains unclear. The presence of
chronic low-level proinflammatory factors in elderly individuals (termed
inflammaging) is a significant risk factor for morbidity and mortality in
virtually every chronic age-related disease. To determine how thymic involution
leads to the persistent release and activation of autoreactive T cells capable of
inducing inflammaging, we used a Foxn1 conditional knockout mouse model that
induces accelerated thymic involution while maintaining a young periphery. We
found that thymic involution leads to T cell activation shortly after thymic
egress, which is accompanied by a chronic inflammatory phenotype consisting of
cellular infiltration into non-lymphoid tissues, increased TNF-a production, and 
elevated serum IL-6. Autoreactive T cell clones were detected in the periphery of
Foxn1 conditional knockout mice. A failure of negative selection, facilitated by 
decreased expression of Aire rather than impaired regulatory T cell generation,
led to autoreactive T cell generation. Furthermore, the young environment can
reverse age-related regulatory T cell accumulation in naturally aged mice, but
not inflammatory infiltration. Taken together, these findings identify thymic
involution and the persistent activation of autoreactive T cells as a
contributing source of chronic inflammation (inflammaging).

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4458423 [Available on 2016-06-15]
PMID: 25957168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2015 May;25 Suppl 1:76.

PROGNOSTIC SIGNIFICANCE OF TUMOR SIZE IN SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA OF THE VULVA:
IGCS-0107 Vulvar and Vaginal Cancer.

Soderini A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gyecologic Oncology, Hospital Oncologico de Buenos Aires "Marie Curie", Ciudad
Autónoma de Buenos Aire, Argentina.

PMID: 25955951  [PubMed]


85. Science. 2015 May 1;348(6234):506-7. doi: 10.1126/science.aab2998. Epub 2015 Apr 
30.

Immunology. Early life Aire.

Tanaka A(1), Sakaguchi S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Immunology, Immunology Frontier Research Center,
Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (2)Department of Experimental
Immunology, Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Osaka
565-0871, Japan. shimon@ifrec.osaka-u.ac.jp.

Comment on
    Science. 2015 May 1;348(6234):589-94.

PMID: 25931543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Br J Ophthalmol. 2015 Nov;99(11):1536-42. doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2014-305897. 
Epub 2015 Apr 29.

Retinal degeneration in autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1: a case series.

Bourgault S(1), Baril C(1), Vincent A(2), Héon E(2), Ali A(2), MacDonald I(3),
Lueder GT(4), Colleaux KM(5), Laliberté I(6).

Author information: 
(1)Département d'ophtalmologie et ORL-Chirurgie cervico-faciale, Faculté de
médecine, Université Laval, Québec, Quebec, Canada Centre universitaire
d'ophtalmologie, Hôpital du Saint-Sacrement, CHU de Québec, Québec, Quebec,
Canada. (2)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Department of Ophthalmology and Vision
Sciences, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Department
of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(4)Departments of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences and Pediatrics, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, USA. (5)Department of
Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
Saskatchewan, Canada Saskatoon Retina Consultants, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,
Canada. (6)Département d'ophtalmologie et ORL-Chirurgie cervico-faciale, Faculté 
de médecine, Université Laval, Québec, Quebec, Canada Centre mére-enfant Soleil, 
CHUL, CHU de Québec, Québec, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS1) is a rare autosomal
recessive disorder due to mutations in the AIRE gene.
AIM: To report the ocular features and characterise the retinal phenotype in
molecularly confirmed APS1.
METHOD: This retrospective case series reviewed five molecularly confirmed cases 
with APS1 known to have ocular involvement (age range: 19 months-44 years; mean
follow-up of 8 years). The medical history, ocular history and evaluation, visual
field testing, full-field electroretinogram (ERG) and antiretinal antibody
results were reviewed.
RESULTS: All but one case had decreased vision at first presentation. All cases
had peripheral pigmentary retinal changes; macular atrophy was noted in 80% of
cases. The most common feature on spectral-domain optical coherence tomography
was a disruption of the external limiting membrane and inner segment ellipsoid
band (n=3). Fundus autofluorescence imaging demonstrated a parafoveal ring of
hyper-autofluorescence (n=1) or a stippled and patchy autofluorescence pattern in
the macula (n=1). The visual fields were constricted in all tested patients
(n=3). The rod ERG was abnormal in all cases; the relative involvement of rods
and cones differed. Four patients who were tested for antiretinal antibodies were
found positive by immunohistochemistry (n=3) and/or western blot (n=2).
CONCLUSIONS: Photoreceptor degeneration is part of APS1 phenotype and the
presence of antiretinal antibodies strongly supports an aetiology similar to that
of non-paraneoplastic autoimmune retinopathy. Periodic retinal evaluation and
imaging, visual field testing and ERG would assist in monitoring the retinopathy 
in APS1-related disease.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 25926518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Diabetes. 2015 Aug;64(8):3028-36. doi: 10.2337/db14-0742. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

A Mendelian Randomization Study of Circulating Uric Acid and Type 2 Diabetes.

Sluijs I(1), Holmes MV(2), van der Schouw YT(3), Beulens JW(3), Asselbergs FW(4),
Huerta JM(5), Palmer TM(6), Arriola L(7), Balkau B(8), Barricarte A(9), Boeing
H(10), Clavel-Chapelon F(8), Fagherazzi G(8), Franks PW(11), Gavrila D(5), Kaaks 
R(12), Khaw KT(13), Kühn T(12), Molina-Montes E(14), Mortensen LM(15), Nilsson
PM(16), Overvad K(17), Palli D(18), Panico S(19), Quirós JR(20), Rolandsson
O(21), Sacerdote C(22), Sala N(23), Schmidt JA(24), Scott RA(25), Sieri S(26),
Slimani N(27), Spijkerman AM(28), Tjonneland A(29), Travis RC(24), Tumino R(30), 
van der A DL(28), Sharp SJ(25), Forouhi NG(25), Langenberg C(25), Riboli E(31),
Wareham NJ(25); InterAct Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands i.sluijs-2@umcutrecht.nl. (2)Clinical Trial
Service Unit and Epidemiological Studies Unit (CTSU), Nuffield Department of
Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K. Division of Transplantation
and Center for Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. (3)Julius Center for
Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the
Netherlands. (4)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands Department of Cardiology, Heart 
Long Institute, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands
Durrer Center for Cardiogenetic Research, ICIN-Netherlands Heart Institute,
Utrecht, the Netherlands. (5)Department of Epidemiology, Murcia Regional Health
Council, Murcia, Spain CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Spain.
(6)Division of Health Sciences, Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick,
Coventry, U.K. (7)CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Spain Public
Health Division of Gipuzkoa, San Sebastian, Spain Instituto BIO-Donostia, Basque 
Government, San Sebastian, Spain. (8)Inserm, Center for Research in Epidemiology 
and Population Health (CESP), U1018, Villejuif, France Université Paris-Sud, UMRS
1018, Villejuif, France. (9)CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Spain
Navarre Public Health Institute (ISPN), Pamplona, Spain. (10)German Institute of 
Human Nutrition Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Nuthetal, Germany. (11)Lund University,
Malmö, Sweden Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden. (12)German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (13)University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K.
(14)CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Spain Andalusian School of
Public Health, Granada, Spain. (15)Department of Cardiology, Aalborg University
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark Section for Epidemiology, Department of Public Health,
Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark. (16)Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
(17)Section for Epidemiology, Department of Public Health, Aarhus University,
Aarhus, Denmark Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark. (18)Cancer
Research and Prevention Institute (ISPO), Florence, Italy. (19)Dipartimento di
Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Federico II University, Naples, Italy. (20)Public
Health Directorate, Asturias, Spain. (21)Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden. (22)Unit 
of Cancer Epidemiology, Citta' della Salute e della Scienza Hospital, University 
of Turin and Center for Cancer Prevention (CPO), Turin, Italy Human Genetics
Foundation (HuGeF), Turin, Italy. (23)Unit of Nutrition, Environment and Cancer, 
Cancer Epidemiology Research Program, and Translational Research Laboratory,
Catalan Institute of Oncology (IDIBELL), Barcelona, Spain. (24)Cancer
Epidemiology Unit, Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of
Oxford, Oxford, U.K. (25)MRC Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, U.K. (26)Epidemiology and Prevention Unit, Milan, Italy.
(27)International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. (28)National
Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, the
Netherlands. (29)Danish Cancer Society Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(30)ASP Ragusa, Ragusa, Italy AIRE ONLUS, Ragusa, Italy. (31)School of Public
Health, Imperial College London, U.K.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2015 Aug;64(8):2720-2.

We aimed to investigate the causal effect of circulating uric acid concentrations
on type 2 diabetes risk. A Mendelian randomization study was performed using a
genetic score with 24 uric acid-associated loci. We used data of the European
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-InterAct case-cohort
study, comprising 24,265 individuals of European ancestry from eight European
countries. During a mean (SD) follow-up of 10 (4) years, 10,576 verified incident
case subjects with type 2 diabetes were ascertained. Higher uric acid was
associated with a higher diabetes risk after adjustment for confounders, with a
hazard ratio (HR) of 1.20 (95% CI 1.11, 1.30) per 59.48 µmol/L (1 mg/dL) uric
acid. The genetic score raised uric acid by 17 µmol/L (95% CI 15, 18) per SD
increase and explained 4% of uric acid variation. By using the genetic score to
estimate the unconfounded effect, we found that a 59.48 µmol/L higher uric acid
concentration did not have a causal effect on diabetes (HR 1.01 [95% CI 0.87,
1.16]). Including data from the Diabetes Genetics Replication And Meta-analysis
(DIAGRAM) consortium, increasing our dataset to 41,508 case subjects with
diabetes, the summary odds ratio estimate was 0.99 (95% CI 0.92, 1.06). In
conclusion, our study does not support a causal effect of circulating uric acid
on diabetes risk. Uric acid-lowering therapies may therefore not be beneficial in
reducing diabetes risk.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 25918230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Autoimmun. 2015 Jun;60:12-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2015.03.004. Epub 2015 Apr 21.

Central T cell tolerance: Identification of tissue-restricted autoantigens in the
thymus HLA-DR peptidome.

Alvarez I(1), Collado JA(1), Colobran R(2), Carrascal M(3), Ciudad MT(1), Canals 
F(4), James EA(5), Kwok WW(5), Gärtner M(6), Kyewski B(6), Pujol-Borrell R(2),
Jaraquemada D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, Institut de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma
de Barcelona, 08193 Cerdanyola del Vallès, Barcelona, Spain; Dept of Cell
Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193
Cerdanyola del Vallès, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Dept of Cell Biology, Physiology and 
Immunology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Cerdanyola del Vallès,
Barcelona, Spain; Immunology Division, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron
(HUVH), Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca (VHIR), Passeig Vall d'Hebron 119-129, 
08023 Barcelona, Spain. (3)CSIC/UAB Proteomics Laboratory, IIBB-CSIC, IDIBAPS,
Facultat de Medicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Cerdanyola del
Vallès, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Proteomics Laboratory, Medical Oncology Research
Program, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Benaroya
Research Institute at Virginia Mason, Seattle, WA, USA. (6)Division of
Developmental Immunology, Tumor Immunology Program, German Cancer Research
Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (7)Immunology Unit, Institut de Biotecnologia 
i Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Cerdanyola del Vallès,
Barcelona, Spain; Dept of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Cerdanyola del Vallès, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic 
address: dolores.jaraquemada@uab.es.

Promiscuous gene expression (pGE) of tissue-restricted self-antigens (TRA) in
medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) is in part driven by the Autoimmune
Regulator gene (AIRE) and essential for self-tolerance. The link between AIRE
functional mutations and multi-organ autoimmunity in human and mouse supports the
role of pGE. Deep sequencing of the transcriptome revealed that mouse mTECs
potentially transcribe an unprecedented range of >90% of all genes. Yet, it
remains unclear to which extent these low-level transcripts are actually
translated into proteins, processed and presented by thymic APCs to induce
tolerance. To address this, we analyzed the HLA-DR-associated thymus peptidome.
Within a large panel of peptides from abundant proteins, two TRA peptides were
identified: prostate-specific semenogelin-1 (an autoantigen in autoimmune chronic
prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome) and central nervous system-specific
contactin-2 (an autoantigen in multiple sclerosis). Thymus expression of both
genes was restricted to mTECs. SEMG1 expression was confined to mature HLA-DR(hi)
mTECs of male and female donors and was AIRE-dependent, whereas CNTN2 was
apparently AIRE-independent and was expressed by both populations of mTECs. Our
findings establish a link between pGE, MHC-II peptide presentation and
autoimmunity for bona fide human TRAs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25911201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Aten Primaria. 2015 Dec;47(10):675-6. doi: 10.1016/j.aprim.2015.01.013. Epub 2015
Apr 20.

[Detecting patients at risk of malnutrition. Can we improve?].

[Article in Spanish]

Piñera M(1), de Llama B(2), Jubete MT(3), Arrieta Blanco F(4).

Author information: 
(1)CS Benita Ávila, Madrid, España; En representación del grupo de Nutrición de
SoMaMFyC. Electronic address: marbellaptames1@yahoo.com. (2)CS Entrevías, Madrid,
España; En representación del grupo de Nutrición de SoMaMFyC. (3)CS Cerro del
Aire, Majadahonda, Madrid, España; En representación del grupo de Nutrición de
SoMaMFyC. (4)Endocrinología y Nutrición, Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, España; 
En representación del grupo de Nutrición de SoMaMFyC.

PMID: 25908305  [PubMed - in process]


90. Blood. 2015 Apr 23;125(17):2593-5. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-03-630871.

GVHD clears the Aire in thymic selection.

Hassan MN(1), Waller EK(1).

Author information: 
(1)WINSHIP CANCER INSTITUTE EMORY UNIVERSITY.

Comment on
    Blood. 2015 Apr 23;125(17):2720-3.

In this issue of Blood, Dertschnig et al describe the development of autoreactive
T cells from the thymus in mice that had previously developed acute
graft-versus-host-disease (aGVHD).

PMID: 25907903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Hypocalcemia: Diagnosis and Treatment.

Schafer AL, Shoback DM.
In: De Groot LJ, Beck-Peccoz P, Chrousos G, Dungan K, Grossman A, Hershman JM,
Koch C, McLachlan R, New M, Rebar R, Singer F, Vinik A, Weickert MO, editors.
Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000-.
2016 Jan 3.

Hypocalcemia is an electrolyte derangement commonly encountered on surgical and
medical services. This derangement can result from a vast spectrum of disorders. 
The condition may be transient, reversing with addressing the underlying cause
expeditiously, or chronic and even lifelong, when due to a genetic disorder or
the result of irreversible damage to the parathyroid glands after surgery or
secondary to autoimmune destruction. Adult and pediatric endocrinologists must
carefully assess patients with hypocalcemia, factoring into that assessment
clinical presentation and symptomatology, concomitant laboratory abnormalities,
past medical and family histories, recent medications, and even genetic
sequencing analysis on the patient or affected family members. Critical initial
laboratory testing involves measuring serum phosphate, magnesium, intact
parathyroid hormone (PTH), 25-hydroxyvitamin D, and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D
levels. Further evaluation is directed by the clinical and laboratory profiles
that emerge. Significant fundamental insights into the molecular pathogenesis of 
several disorders that cause hypocalcemia have been made. These insights involve 
the molecular etiologies for PTH resistance (i.e., the different subtypes of
pseudohypoparathyroidism); the role of the AIRE (autoimmune regulator) protein in
autoimmune hypoparathyroidism and in mediating central tolerance to
self-antigens; and the molecular bases for different genetic forms of magnesium
wasting (that in turn causes hypocalcemia) and hypoparathyroidism. Genetic
etiologies for hypoparathyroidism involve mutations in the calcium-sensing
receptor, the G protein subunit alpha 11 that couples the receptor to downstream 
signaling molecules in parathyroid cells, transcription factors essential for
parathyroid gland development, and the PTH molecule itself. Treatment of
hypocalcemia depends on severity and chronicity. A calcium infusion is indicated 
for severe acute and or symptomatic hypocalcemia, while the standard mainstays of
oral therapy are calcium supplements and activated vitamin D metabolites.
Finally, and importantly, despite the rarity of chronic hypoparathyroidism, there
have been several clinical trials supporting the use of recombinant human PTH
(1-84) in the management of patients not well controlled on standard treatment.
These trials have led to the approval of PTH (1-84) by the US Food and Drug
Administration for adults with this disorder not well regulated on the usual
therapy. Future research is being directed toward designing ideal treatment
regimens with PTH (1-84) as well as developing a better understanding of the
risks for post-surgical hypoparathyroidism, the most common etiology of
hypoparathyroidism in adult patients. For complete coverage of this and all
related ares of Endocrinology, please see our FREE web-book www.endotext.org.

PMID: 25905251  [PubMed]


92. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 17;10(4):e0122695. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122695.
eCollection 2015.

Quality indicators for safe medication preparation and administration: a
systematic review.

Smeulers M(1), Verweij L(1), Maaskant JM(2), de Boer M(3), Krediet CT(4), Nieveen
van Dijkum EJ(5), Vermeulen H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Quality Assurance and Process Innovation, Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (2)Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Clinical Epidemiology,
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Medical Faculty, Academic Medical Center and
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (3)Department of Hospital
Pharmacy, Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center, the Netherlands. (4)Department of
Internal Medicine, Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Surgery, Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Quality Assurance and Process Innovation, Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Surgery, Amsterdam, Academic
Medical Center, the Netherlands; Department of Nursing, the Amsterdam School of
Health Professions, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: One-third of all medication errors causing harm to hospitalized
patients occur in the medication preparation and administration phase, which is
predominantly a nursing activity. To monitor, evaluate and improve the quality
and safety of this process, evidence-based quality indicators can be used.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of study was to identify evidence-based quality indicators
(structure, process and outcome) for safe in-hospital medication preparation and 
administration.
METHODS: MEDLINE, EMBASE and CINAHL were searched for relevant studies published 
up to January 2015. Additionally, nine databases were searched to identify
relevant grey literature. Two reviewers independently selected studies if (1) the
method for quality indicator development combined a literature search with expert
panel opinion, (2) the study contained quality indicators on medication safety,
and (3) any of the quality indicators were applicable to hospital medication
preparation and administration. A multidisciplinary team appraised the studies
independently using the AIRE instrument, which contains four domains and 20
items. Quality indicators applicable to in-hospital medication preparation and
administration were extracted using a structured form.
RESULTS: The search identified 1683 studies, of which 64 were reviewed in detail 
and five met the inclusion criteria. Overall, according to the AIRE domains, all 
studies were clear on purpose; most of them applied stakeholder involvement and
used evidence reasonably; usage of the indicator in practice was scarcely
described. A total of 21 quality indicators were identified: 5 structure
indicators (e.g. safety management and high alert medication), 11 process
indicators (e.g. verification and protocols) and 5 outcome indicators (e.g. harm 
and death). These quality indicators partially cover the 7 rights.
CONCLUSION: Despite the relatively small number of included studies, the
identified quality indicators can serve as an excellent starting point for
further development of nursing specific quality indicators for medication safety.
Especially on the right patient, right route, right time and right documentation 
there is room future development of quality indicators.

PMCID: PMC4401721
PMID: 25884623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cell Immunol. 2015 Jun;295(2):99-104. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2015.03.005. Epub
2015 Mar 23.

A normal T cell receptor beta CDR3 length distribution in patients with APECED.

Niemi HJ(1), Laakso S(1), Salminen JT(2), Arstila TP(1), Tuulasvaara A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Haartman Institute, Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, and Research
Programs Unit, Immunobiology, University of Helsinki, PB 21, FIN-00014 University
of Helsinki, Finland. (2)Department of Surgery, Hospital for Children and
Adolescents, Helsinki University Hospital, PB 281, FIN-00029 HUS, Finland.
(3)Haartman Institute, Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, and Research
Programs Unit, Immunobiology, University of Helsinki, PB 21, FIN-00014 University
of Helsinki, Finland. Electronic address: anni.tuulasvaara@helsinki.fi.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is caused
by mutations in the AIRE gene. Murine studies suggest that AIRE controls thymic
expression of tissue-restricted antigens, its absence allowing nonselected
autoreactive cells to escape. We tested this in humans using the TCRß CDR3 length
repertoire as a surrogate of thymic selection, as it shortens during the process.
Analysis of healthy thymuses showed an altogether 1.9 base pair shortening,
starting at the CD4(+)CD8(+)CD3(low) stage and continuing until the CD4(+)
subset, likely encompassing both the positive and negative selection. Comparison 
of five APECED patients with eight healthy controls showed a skewed repertoire
with oligoclonal expansions in the patients' CD4(+) and CD8(+) populations. The
average CDR3 length, however, was normal and unaffected by the skewing. This was 
also true of the hypothesized autoreactive CD8(+)CD45RA(+) population. We failed 
to detect a subset with an abnormally long CDR3 repertoire, as would be predicted
by a failure in selection.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25880100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Jun;135(6):1578-88.e5. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2015.01.040. Epub 2015 Apr 2.

PRKDC mutations associated with immunodeficiency, granuloma, and autoimmune
regulator-dependent autoimmunity.

Mathieu AL(1), Verronese E(2), Rice GI(3), Fouyssac F(4), Bertrand Y(5), Picard
C(6), Chansel M(7), Walter JE(8), Notarangelo LD(9), Butte MJ(10), Nadeau KC(10),
Csomos K(8), Chen DJ(11), Chen K(12), Delgado A(2), Rigal C(2), Bardin C(2),
Schuetz C(13), Moshous D(7), Reumaux H(14), Plenat F(15), Phan A(16), Zabot
MT(17), Balme B(18), Viel S(19), Bienvenu J(19), Cochat P(16), van der Burg
M(20), Caux C(2), Kemp EH(21), Rouvet I(17), Malcus C(22), Méritet JF(23), Lim
A(24), Crow YJ(3), Fabien N(25), Ménétrier-Caux C(2), De Villartay JP(7), Walzer 
T(1), Belot A(26).

Author information: 
(1)CIRI, International Center for Infectiology Research, Université de Lyon,
Lyon, France; Inserm U1111, Lyon, France; Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon,
France; CNRS, UMR5308, Lyon, France. (2)Université de Lyon, INSERM U1052, Centre 
de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, Plateforme d'Innovation en
Immuno-monitoring et Immunothérapie, Centre Léon Bérard, and in the framework of 
the LABEX DevWeCan (ANR-10-LABX-0061) of University de Lyon, within the program
"Investissements d'Avenir" (ANR-11-IDEX-0007) operated by the French National
Research Agency (ANR), Lyon, France. (3)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine,
Institute of Human Development, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, Manchester
Academic Health Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom. (4)Pediatric Haematology and 
Oncology Department, Children Hospital-CHU NANCY Vandoeuvre les Nancy, Nancy,
France. (5)Institut d'Hématologie et d'Oncologie Pédiatrique (Hospices Civils de 
Lyon), Université Claude Bernard Lyon I, Lyon, France. (6)Study Center for
Primary Immunodeficiencies, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Necker
Hospital, Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch,
INSERM U1163, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris Descartes University, Imagine Institute,
Paris Descartes University, Paris, France. (7)INSERM UMR 1163, Laboratoire
Dynamique du Génome et Système Immunitaire Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne
Paris Cité, Imagine Institute, Paris, France. (8)Pediatric Allergy & Immunology
and the Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass. (9)Division of Immunology, Boston
Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass. (10)Department of
Pediatrics, Division of Immunology, Allergy and Rheumatology, Stanford
University, Stanford, Calif. (11)Division of Molecular Radiation Biology
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Tex. (12)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy,
Immunology & Rheumatology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City,
Utah. (13)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical
Center Ulm, Ulm, Germany. (14)Pediatric Rheumatology and Emergency Unit, Jeanne
de Flandre Hospital, Lille, France. (15)Pathology Department, Hémato-Oncologie
Pédiatrique, CHU Nancy, Nancy, France. (16)Pediatric Rheumatology, Nephrology and
Dermatology Department and EPICIME Hospices Civils de Lyon and Université
Claude-Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France. (17)Biotechnology Department, Hospices
Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France. (18)Pathology Department, Centre Hospitalier Lyon
Sud, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France. (19)CIRI, International Center for
Infectiology Research, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France; Inserm U1111, Lyon,
France; Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon, France; CNRS, UMR5308, Lyon,
France; Immunobiology Department, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Centre Hospitalier
Lyon Sud, Lyon, France. (20)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University
Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (21)Department of Human
Metabolism, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom. (22)Cell
Immunology Department, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon,
France. (23)Virology Unit, Hopital Cochin, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
Paris, France. (24)Immunoscope Group, Immunology Department, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, France. (25)Immunobiology Department, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Centre
Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Lyon, France. (26)CIRI, International Center for
Infectiology Research, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France; Inserm U1111, Lyon,
France; Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon, France; CNRS, UMR5308, Lyon,
France; Pediatric Rheumatology, Nephrology and Dermatology Department and EPICIME
Hospices Civils de Lyon and Université Claude-Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France.
Electronic address: alexandre.belot@chu-lyon.fr.

BACKGROUND: PRKDC encodes for DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit
(DNA-PKcs), a kinase that forms part of a complex (DNA-dependent protein kinase
[DNA-PK]) crucial for DNA double-strand break repair and V(D)J recombination. In 
mice DNA-PK also interacts with the transcription factor autoimmune regulator
(AIRE) to promote central T-cell tolerance.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to understand the causes of an inflammatory disease with
granuloma and autoimmunity associated with decreasing T- and B-cell counts over
time that had been diagnosed in 2 unrelated patients.
METHODS: Genetic, molecular, and functional analyses were performed to
characterize an inflammatory disease evocative of a combined immunodeficiency.
RESULTS: We identified PRKDC mutations in both patients. These patients exhibited
a defect in DNA double-strand break repair and V(D)J recombination. Whole-blood
mRNA analysis revealed a strong interferon signature. On activation, memory
T cells displayed a skewed cytokine response typical of TH2 and TH1 but not TH17.
Moreover, mutated DNA-PKcs did not promote AIRE-dependent transcription of
peripheral tissue antigens in vitro. The latter defect correlated in vivo with
production of anti-calcium-sensing receptor autoantibodies, which are typically
found in AIRE-deficient patients. In addition, 9 months after bone marrow
transplantation, patient 1 had Hashimoto thyroiditis, suggesting that
organ-specific autoimmunity might be linked to nonhematopoietic cells, such as
AIRE-expressing thymic epithelial cells.
CONCLUSION: Deficiency of DNA-PKcs, a key AIRE partner, can present as an
inflammatory disease with organ-specific autoimmunity, suggesting a role for
DNA-PKcs in regulating autoimmune responses and maintaining AIRE-dependent
tolerance in human subjects.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4487867
PMID: 25842288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2015 Aug 1;16(8):668-73. doi: 10.1016/j.jamda.2015.03.004.
Epub 2015 Apr 2.

Impact of Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring on Control of Untreated,
Undertreated, and Resistant Hypertension in Older People in Spain.

Gijón-Conde T(1), Graciani A(2), López-García E(2), Guallar-Castillón P(2),
Rodríguez-Artalejo F(2), Banegas JR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, School of Medicine,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid/IdiPAZ - CIBER in Epidemiology and Public Health
(CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain; Centro de Salud Universitario Cerro del Aire,
Majadahonda, Madrid, España. (2)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public
Health, School of Medicine, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid/IdiPAZ - CIBER in
Epidemiology and Public Health (CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain. (3)Department of
Preventive Medicine and Public Health, School of Medicine, Universidad Autónoma
de Madrid/IdiPAZ - CIBER in Epidemiology and Public Health (CIBERESP), Madrid,
Spain. Electronic address: joseramon.banegas@uam.es.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The impact of ambulatory blood pressure monitoring
(ABPM) on hypertension control has not been fully assessed across the treatment
spectrum in older community-living individuals and could have important
implications; specifically, the number of untreated, undertreated, and
treatment-resistant uncontrolled hypertensives in need of or with unnecessary
drug treatment could vary with respect to studies based on conventional blood
pressure (BP) measured in clinical settings.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Cross-sectional study conducted in 2012 among 
1118 community-living individuals aged =60 years in Spain.
MEASUREMENTS: Three conventional BP measurements at participants' homes and
24-hour ABPM were performed under standardized conditions. Uncontrolled
hypertension (mean of the last 2 conventional BP readings =140/90 mm Hg) was
considered undertreated if on 1 or 2 antihypertensive drugs, and apparently
treatment-resistant if on =3 drugs. White-coat effect was defined as conventional
BP = 140/90 mm Hg and 24-hour BP <130/80 mm Hg.
RESULTS: Of 720 hypertensive patients (mean age, 72.3 ± 6.3 years; 51.3%, males),
64.4% had conventional BP = 140/90 mm Hg, and from these 39.9% were untreated,
49.5% undertreated, and 10.6% apparently treatment-resistant. Among uncontrolled 
hypertensive patients, the white-coat effect was present in 52.4% of those
untreated, in 53.5% of undertreated, and in 49% of apparent treatment-resistant. 
These white-coat results were similar or even higher across alternative BP
thresholds.
CONCLUSIONS: One-half of older uncontrolled hypertensive patients studied at home
were actually controlled according to ABPM, regardless of treatment status. This 
suggests reconsideration of treatment needs in these numerous white-coat
hypertensive patients, who probably do not need drug treatment initiation or
intensification.

Copyright © 2015 AMDA  The Society for Post-Acute and Long-Term Care Medicine.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25841324  [PubMed - in process]


96. J Immunol. 2015 May 1;194(9):4207-14. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402775. Epub 2015
Mar 30.

Programmed cell death 1 and Helios distinguish TCR-aß+ double-negative (CD4-CD8-)
T cells that derive from self-reactive CD8 T cells.

Rodríguez-Rodríguez N(1), Apostolidis SA(2), Penaloza-MacMaster P(3), Martín
Villa JM(4), Barouch DH(5), Tsokos GC(6), Crispín JC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215; Departamento de
Inmunología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid,
28040, Spain; (2)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215; (3)Center 
for Virology and Vaccine Research, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215; and. (4)Departamento de Inmunología, Facultad
de Medicina, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, 28040, Spain; (5)Center
for Virology and Vaccine Research, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215; and Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA 02139. (6)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215;
carlos.crispina@incmnsz.mx gtsokos@bidmc.harvard.edu.

TCR-aß(+) double-negative (DN; CD4(-)CD8(-)) T cells represent a poorly
understood cellular subset suggested to contribute to the pathogenesis of the
autoimmune disease systemic lupus erythematosus. DN T cells have been proposed to
derive from CD8(+) cells. However, the conditions that govern the loss of CD8
expression after Ag encounter are unknown. In this study, we tracked the fate of 
CD8 T cells from transgenic TCR mice exposed to their cognate Ags as self or in
the context of infection. We demonstrate that CD8 T cells lose CD8 expression and
become DN only when cognate Ag is sensed as self. This process is restricted to
tissues where the Ag is present. We also show that DN T cells derived from
self-reactive CD8 cells express the inhibitory molecules PD-1 and Helios. These
molecules identify a subset of DN T cells in normal mice. A similar population
expands when CD8 T cells from repertoires enriched in self-reactive cells
(Aire-deficient) are transferred into cognate hosts. Collectively, our data
suggest that a subset of DN T cells, identified by the expression of PD-1 and
Helios, represent self-reactive cells. Our results provide an explanation for the
origin of DN T cells and introduce CD8 loss as a process associated with self-Ag 
encounter.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4503929 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25825451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Science. 2015 May 1;348(6234):589-94. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa7017. Epub 2015 Mar
19.

Immune tolerance. Regulatory T cells generated early in life play a distinct role
in maintaining self-tolerance.

Yang S(1), Fujikado N(2), Kolodin D(2), Benoist C(3), Mathis D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Aging Intervention Research Center, Korea 
Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), 125 Gwahak-ro,
Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-806, South Korea. (2)Division of Immunology, Department 
of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Evergrande Center for Immunologic
Diseases, Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston MA
02115, USA. cbdm@hms.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2015 May;15(5):269.
    Science. 2015 May 1;348(6234):506-7.

Aire is an important regulator of immunological tolerance, operating in a minute 
subset of thymic stromal cells to induce transcripts encoding peptides that guide
T cell selection. Expression of Aire during a perinatal age window is necessary
and sufficient to prevent the multiorgan autoimmunity characteristic of
Aire-deficient mice. We report that Aire promotes the perinatal generation of a
distinct compartment of Foxp3(+)CD4(+) regulatory T (Treg) cells, which stably
persists in adult mice. This population has a role in maintaining self-tolerance,
a transcriptome and an activation profile distinguishable from those of Tregs
produced in adults. Underlying the distinct Treg populations are age-dependent,
Aire-independent differences in the processing and presentation of thymic
stromal-cell peptides, resulting in different T cell receptor repertoires. Our
findings expand the notion of a developmentally layered immune system.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4710357
PMID: 25791085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Front Immunol. 2015 Mar 3;6:93. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00093. eCollection 2015.

Promiscuous Gene Expression in the Thymus: A Matter of Epigenetics, miRNA, and
More?

Ucar O(1), Rattay K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Immunology, German Cancer Research Center ,
Heidelberg , Germany.

The induction of central tolerance in the course of T cell development crucially 
depends on promiscuous gene expression (pGE) in medullary thymic epithelial cells
(mTECs). mTECs express a genome-wide variety of tissue-restricted antigens
(TRAs), preventing the escape of autoreactive T cells to the periphery, and the
development of severe autoimmunity. Most of our knowledge of how pGE is
controlled comes from studies on the autoimmune regulator (Aire). Aire activates 
the expression of a large subset of TRAs by interacting with the general
transcriptional machinery and promoting transcript elongation. However, further
factors regulating Aire-independent TRAs must be at play. Recent studies
demonstrated that pGE in general and the function of Aire in particular are
controlled by epigenetic and post-transcriptional mechanisms. This mini-review
summarizes current knowledge of the regulation of pGE by miRNA and epigenetic
regulatory mechanisms such as DNA methylation, histone modifications, and
chromosomal topology.

PMCID: PMC4347492
PMID: 25784915  [PubMed]


99. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2015 Mar-Apr;81(2):166-9. doi:
10.4103/0378-6323.152285.

Psoriasis in autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I: a possible complication or
a non-endocrine minor component?

Poojary SA(1), Lodha N, Gupta N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, K.J. Somaiya Medical College, Mumbai, Maharashtra, 
India.

INTRODUCTION: Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I (APS I) is an autosomal
recessive systemic autoimmune disorder, affecting primarily endocrine glands, in 
which chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis is an early and prominent manifestation. 
We describe the rare occurrence of unstable psoriasis (with onset of pustular
lesions) in a case of APS I without mucocutaneous candidiasis. A patient
presenting with unstable psoriasis (with onset of pustular lesions) was detected 
to have persistent hypocalcemia which led to the diagnosis of hypoparathyroidism.
Subsequently he was found to have hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism, primary
adrenal insufficiency (compensated), and coeliac disease, thus confirming the
diagnosis of APS I. Psoriasis is very rarely reported in APS I, possibly due to
the protective effect of antibodies to Th17 cytokines, which are responsible for 
the occurrence of candidiasis in this syndrome. However, psoriasis could occur in
APS I patients without mucocutaneous candidiasis, who lack these antibodies. In
our patient, possible factors aggravating psoriasis include hypocalcemia due to
hypoparathyroidism as well as coeliac disease via anti-tissue transglutaminase
antibodies. However, defining psoriasis as a possible minor component of APS I
would require further studies of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene functions.

PMID: 25751334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Eur J Clin Invest. 2015 May;45(5):529-39. doi: 10.1111/eci.12430.

The contribution of NF-<U+03BA>B signalling to immune regulation and tolerance.

van Delft MA(1), Huitema LF, Tas SW.

Author information: 
(1)Amsterdam Rheumatology & immunology Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Experimental Immunology, Academic
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Immune regulation is necessary to control inflammatory responses and 
to prevent autoimmune diseases. Therefore, mechanisms of central and peripheral
tolerance have evolved to ensure that T cells recognize antigens as self- or
non-self-antigens. The thymus is crucially important for central tolerance
induction to self-antigens via negative selection of T cells. However, if T cells
escape negative selection in the thymus and enter the periphery, peripheral
mechanisms are active to warrant immune tolerance. Secondary lymphoid organs, as 
well as tolerogenic dendritic cells and regulatory T cells, play an important
role in peripheral tolerance. In chronic inflammatory diseases, tertiary lymphoid
organs are sometimes formed that may also be involved in the induction of
peripheral tolerance. This review discusses the main processes that are involved 
in immune regulation and tolerance, and focuses on the contribution of NF-<U+03BA>B
signalling to these processes.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This narrative review is based on peer-reviewed
publications listed on PubMed up to December 2014. The focus of our literature
search was on studies investigating the role of (non)canonical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling
in central and peripheral mechanisms of tolerance. Only studies published in
English language were considered.
RESULTS: This review discusses the immune phenotype of mutant mice with defective
(non)canonical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling, corroborated with human data, and emphasizes the
contribution of the noncanonical NF-<U+03BA>B pathway to immune regulation and tolerance
induction.
CONCLUSIONS: Noncanonical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling has an important immunoregulatory role
in the immune system and contributes to both central and peripheral mechanisms of
tolerance.

© 2015 Stichting European Society for Clinical Investigation Journal Foundation.

PMID: 25735405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Exp Neurol. 2015 Aug;270:55-65. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.02.010. Epub 2015
Feb 18.

Thymoma related myasthenia gravis in humans and potential animal models.

Marx A(1), Porubsky S(2), Belharazem D(2), Saruhan-Direskeneli G(3), Schalke
B(4), Ströbel P(5), Weis CA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Centre Mannheim, University of
Heidelberg, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 13, D-68167 Mannheim, Germany. Electronic
address: alexander.marx@umm.de. (2)Institute of Pathology, University Medical
Centre Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 13, D-68167
Mannheim, Germany. (3)Department of Physiology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine,
Istanbul University, Capa 34093, Istanbul, Turkey. Electronic address:
gsaruhan@istanbul.edu.tr. (4)Department of Neurology, Bezirkskrankenhaus,
University of Regensburg, D-93042 Regensburg, Germany. Electronic address:
schalke@medbo.de. (5)Institute of Pathology, University of Göttingen,
Robert-Koch-Str. 40, D-37075 Göttingen, Germany. Electronic address:
philipp.stroebel@med.uni-goettingen.de. (6)Institute of Pathology, University
Medical Centre Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 13,
D-68167 Mannheim, Germany. Electronic address:
cleo-aron.weis@medma.uni-heidelberg.de.

Thymoma-associated Myasthenia gravis (TAMG) is one of the anti-acetylcholine
receptor MG (AChR-MG) subtypes. The clinico-pathological features of TAMG and its
pathogenesis are described here in comparison with pathogenetic models suggested 
for the more common non-thymoma AChR-MG subtypes, early onset MG and late onset
MG. Emphasis is put on the role of abnormal intratumorous T cell selection and
activation, lack of intratumorous myoid cells and regulatory T cells as well as
deficient expression of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) by neoplastic thymic
epithelial cells. We review spontaneous and genetically engineered thymoma models
in a spectrum of animals and the extensive clinical and immunological overlap
between canine, feline and human TAMG. Finally, limitations and perspectives of
the transplantation of human and murine thymoma tissue into nude mice, as
potential models for TAMG, are addressed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25700911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Scand J Immunol. 2015 May;81(5):298-304. doi: 10.1111/sji.12280.

Autoimmunity, Not a Developmental Defect, is the Cause for Subfertility of
Autoimmune Regulator (Aire) Deficient Mice.

Kekäläinen E(1), Pöntynen N, Meri S, Arstila TP, Jarva H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology and Immunology and Immunobiology Research Program, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Autoimmune regulator's (AIRE) best characterized role is in the generation
immunological tolerance, but it is also involved in many other processes such as 
spermatogenesis. Loss-of-function mutations in AIRE cause a disease called
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy, candidiasis and ectodermal dystrophy (APECED; also
called autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1, APS-1) that is dominated by
various autoimmune manifestations, mainly endocrinopathies. Both patients with
APECED and Aire(-/-) mice suffer from varying levels of infertility, but it is
not clear if it is a result of an autoimmune tissue damage or more of a
developmental defect. In this study, we wanted to resolve whether or not the
reduced fertility of Aire(-/-) mice is dependent on the adaptive immune system
and therefore a manifestation of autoimmunity in these mice. We generated
lymphopenic mice without Aire expression that were devoid of the autoimmune
manifestations previously reported in immunocompetent Aire(-/-) mice. These
Aire(-/-) Rag1(-/-) mice regained full fertility. This confirms that the
development of infertility in Aire(-/-) mice requires a functional adaptive
immune system. We also show that only the male Aire(-/-) mice are subfertile,
whereas Aire(-/-) females produce litters normally. Moreover, the male
subfertility can be adoptively transferred with lymphocytes from Aire(-/-) donor 
mice to previously fertile lymphopenic Aire(-/-) recipients. Our data show that
subfertility in Aire(-/-) mice is dependent on a functional adaptive immune
system thus confirming its autoimmune aetiology.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25689230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Acad Emerg Med. 2015 Feb;22(2):127-41. doi: 10.1111/acem.12591. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Quality indicators for musculoskeletal injury management in the emergency
department: a systematic review.

Strudwick K(1), Nelson M, Martin-Khan M, Bourke M, Bell A, Russell T.

Author information: 
(1)The Physiotherapy Department, QEII Jubilee Hospital, Metro South Health,
Queensland, Australia; The Emergency Department, QEII Jubilee Hospital, Metro
South Health, Queensland, Australia; The Division of Physiotherapy, School of
Health and Rehabilitation Sciences The University of Queensland, Queensland,
Australia.

OBJECTIVES: There is increasing importance placed on quality of health care for
musculoskeletal injuries in emergency departments (EDs). This systematic review
aimed to identify existing musculoskeletal quality indicators (QIs) developed for
ED use and to critically evaluate their methodological quality.
METHODS: MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, and the gray literature, including relevant
organizational websites, were searched in 2013. English-language articles were
included that described the development of at least one QI related to the ED care
of musculoskeletal injuries. Data extraction of each included article was
conducted. A quality assessment was then performed by rating each relevant QI
against the Appraisal of Indicators through Research and Evaluation (AIRE)
Instrument. QIs with similar definitions were grouped together and categorized
according to the health care quality frameworks of Donabedian and the Institute
of Medicine.
RESULTS: The search revealed 1,805 potentially relevant articles, of which 15
were finally included in the review. The number of relevant QIs per article
ranged from one to 11, resulting in a total of 71 QIs overall. Pain (n = 17) and 
fracture management (n = 13) QIs were predominant. Ten QIs scored at least 50%
across all AIRE Instrument domains, and these related to pain management and
appropriate imaging of the spine.
CONCLUSIONS: Methodological quality of the development of most QIs is poor.
Recommendations for a core set of QIs that address the complete spectrum of
musculoskeletal injury management in emergency medicine is not possible, and more
work is needed. Currently, QIs with highest methodological quality are in the
areas of pain management and medical imaging.

© 2015 by the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine.

PMID: 25676528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Hum Immunol. 2015 Apr;76(4):281-5. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2015.01.026. Epub 2015
Jan 29.

Association of rs2075876 polymorphism of AIRE gene with rheumatoid arthritis
risk.

Feng ZJ(1), Zhang SL(2), Wen HF(3), Liang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medcine, The Third Hospital of Hebei Medical
University, Shijiazhuang 050051, China. Electronic address: fzjdoc@163.com.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medcine, Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine of 
Shijiazhuang City, Shijiazhuang 050051, China. (3)Department of Laboratory
Medcine, The Third Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050051,
China. (4)Department of Laboratory Medcine, The First Hospital of Shijiazhuang
City, Shijiazhuang 050011, China.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune regulator (AIRE), a protein encoded by AIRE gene, is a
transcriptional factor primarily expressed in medullary thymic epithelial cells
(mTECs). It has pivotal role in regulation of human immunology. The mutations of 
AIRE gene or protein level changes would alter the status of body immunity and
therefore onset of diseases. Therefore we aimed at investigating the association 
of AIRE gene with the risk of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: We genotyped 9 SNPs of AIRE gene of recruited 691 patients of rheumatoid
arthritis and 800 healthy people in Chinese Han population.
RESULTS: Our results indicated that a variant rs2075876 with minor allele A
increased the risk of rheumatoid arthritis (pa=0.008, OR=1.991, 95%CI
1.214-2.919). Other two SNPs rs933150 and rs760426 were borderline-associated
with rheumatoid arthritis risk (pa=0.055; pa=0.074, respectively). Furthermore,
in correlation analysis of SNPs in AIRE gene with clinical characteristics of
rheumatoid arthritis, we found the SNP rs2075876 had significant correlation with
CRP concentration (pa=0.020).
CONCLUSION: We might provide a new inside look into the AIRE gene variants in
development and progression of rheumatoid arthritis.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25637666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl Ed). 2015 Aug;68(8):672-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rec.2014.08.015. 
Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Leptin Reference Values and Cutoffs for Identifying Cardiometabolic Abnormalities
in the Spanish Population.

Gijón-Conde T(1), Graciani A(2), Guallar-Castillón P(2), Aguilera MT(3),
Rodríguez-Artalejo F(2), Banegas JR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Salud Universitario Cerro del Aire, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain;
Departamento de Medicina Preventiva y Salud Pública, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid/Idi Paz, CIBER de Epidemiología y Salud Pública CIBERESP, Madrid, Spain.
Electronic address: gijonmt@gmail.com. (2)Departamento de Medicina Preventiva y
Salud Pública, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid/Idi Paz, CIBER de Epidemiología y
Salud Pública CIBERESP, Madrid, Spain. (3)Departamento Médico, Sanofi-Aventis,
Barcelona, Spain.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: Estimate leptin reference values and calculate
leptinemia cutoff values for identifying cardiometabolic abnormalities in Spain.
METHODS: Cross-sectional study carried out between 2008 and 2010 in 11 540
individuals representing the Spanish population aged = 18 years. Data were
obtained by standardized physical examination and analyses were performed at a
central laboratory. Leptinemia was measured using ELISA. Cardiometabolic
abnormality was defined as the presence of at least two of the following: high
blood pressure, high triglycerides, reduced high density lipoprotein cholesterol,
high insulin resistance values, and elevated C-reactive protein and glucose.
RESULTS: Leptin values were higher in women than men (geometric mean, 21.9 and
6.6 ng/mL; P<.001). The median [interquartile range] was 24.5 [14.1-37.0] ng/mL
in women, and 7.2 [3.3-14.3] ng/mL in men. In the multivariate analysis, leptin
was significantly associated with anthropometric measures, insulin, and
C-reactive protein, and inversely associated with age, smoking, and physical
activity in women (r(2)=0.53; P<.001) and in men (r(2)=0.61; P<.001). The leptin 
values that identified cardiometabolic abnormality were 23.75 ng/mL in women
(area under the curve, 0.722; sensitivity, 72.3%; specificity, 58.7%) and 6.45
ng/mL in men (area under the curve, 0.716; sensitivity, 71.4%; specificity,
60.2%).
CONCLUSIONS: These results facilitate the interpretation of leptin values in
clinical and population studies. Leptin has moderate sensitivity and specificity 
for identifying cardiometabolic abnormalities.

Copyright © 2014 Sociedad Española de Cardiología. Published by Elsevier España, 
S.L.U. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25618563  [PubMed - in process]


106. Endokrynol Pol. 2014;65(6):514-8. doi: 10.5603/EP.2014.0070.

Uncommon constellation of multiglandular deficiency with 2 mutations in AIRE gene
in an 18-year-old girl - 12 years of observation.

Barg E(1), Skarzynska M, Pollak A, Slezak R, Glab E, Petriczko E, Józwa A,
Sasiadek MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Wroclaw Medical University, Poland.
ebarg@dilnet.wroc.pl.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndromes (APS) consist of a variety of endocrine and
non-endocrine disorders. The syndromes are complex and their occurrence in life
does not follow any pattern. Early detection of such disorders may prevent many
serious clinical consequences which are usually a result of delayed diagnosis. We
present the case of a female patient whose clinical symptoms very strongly
suggested APS, however neither autoimmune background except elevated anti-thyroid
peroxidase and anti-thyroglobulin antibodies of multiglandular deficiency, nor
critical mutations in the AIRE gene have been confirmed or detected, yet we
identified five polymorphisms and two mutations in exon1 of gene AIRE during 12
years of observation and treatment.

PMID: 25554620  [PubMed - in process]


107. J Immunol. 2015 Feb 1;194(3):921-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402694. Epub 2014 Dec 
31.

Homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2, a novel autoimmune regulator
interaction partner, modulates promiscuous gene expression in medullary thymic
epithelial cells.

Rattay K(1), Claude J(1), Rezavandy E(1), Matt S(2), Hofmann TG(3), Kyewski B(4),
Derbinski J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Immunobiology, Tumor Immunology Program, German
Cancer Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; and. (2)Zelluläre
Seneszenz-Gruppe, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum-Zentrum für Molekulare
Biologie Allianz, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Zelluläre Seneszenz-Gruppe, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum-Zentrum für
Molekulare Biologie Allianz, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, 69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany b.kyewski@dkfz-heidelberg.de t.hofmann@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (4)Division of
Developmental Immunobiology, Tumor Immunology Program, German Cancer Research
Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; and b.kyewski@dkfz-heidelberg.de
t.hofmann@dkfz-heidelberg.de.

Promiscuous expression of a plethora of tissue-restricted Ags (TRAs) by medullary
thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) plays an essential role in T cell tolerance.
Although the cellular mechanisms by which promiscuous gene expression (pGE)
imposes T cell tolerance have been well characterized, the underlying molecular
mechanisms remain poorly understood. The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is to date
the only validated molecule known to regulate pGE. AIRE is part of higher-order
multiprotein complexes, which promote transcription, elongation, and splicing of 
a wide range of target genes. How AIRE and its partners mediate these various
effects at the molecular level is still largely unclear. Using a yeast two-hybrid
screen, we searched for novel AIRE-interacting proteins and identified the
homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 2 (HIPK2) as a novel partner. HIPK2
partially colocalized with AIRE in nuclear bodies upon cotransfection and in
human mTECs in situ. Moreover, HIPK2 phosphorylated AIRE in vitro and suppressed 
the coactivator activity of AIRE in a kinase-dependent manner. To evaluate the
role of Hipk2 in modulating the function of AIRE in vivo, we compared
whole-genome gene signatures of purified mTEC subsets from TEC-specific Hipk2
knockout mice with control mice and identified a small set of differentially
expressed genes. Unexpectedly, most differentially expressed genes were confined 
to the CD80(lo) mTEC subset and preferentially included AIRE-independent TRAs.
Thus, although it modulates gene expression in mTECs and in addition affects the 
size of the medullary compartment, TEC-specific HIPK2 deletion only mildly
affects AIRE-directed pGE in vivo.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25552543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Organogenesis. 2014;10(3):323-31. doi: 10.1080/15476278.2014.995509. Epub 2015
Jan 7.

Maturation of embryonic tissues in a lymph node: a new approach for
bioengineering complex organs.

Francipane MG(1), Lagasse E.

Author information: 
(1)a McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine; Department of Pathology ;
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine ; Pittsburgh , PA USA.

Given our recent finding that the lymph node (LN) can serve as an in vivo factory
to generate complex structures like liver, pancreas, and thymus, we investigated 
whether LN could also support early development and maturation from several
mid-embryonic (E14.5/15.5) mouse tissues including brain, thymus, lung, stomach, 
and intestine. Here we observed brain maturation in LN by showing the emergence
of astrocytes with well-developed branching processes. Thymus maturation in LN
was monitored by changes in host immune cells. Finally, newly terminally
differentiated mucus-producing cells were identified in ectopic tissues generated
by transplantation of lung, stomach and intestine in LN. Thus, we speculate the
LN offers a unique approach to study the intrinsic and extrinsic differentiation 
potential of cells and tissues during early development, and provides a new site 
for bioengineering complex body parts.

PMCID: PMC4750546
PMID: 25531035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Anim Cogn. 2015 May;18(3):629-37. doi: 10.1007/s10071-014-0831-3. Epub 2014 Dec
21.

Local enhancement and social foraging in a non-social insular lizard.

Pérez-Cembranos A(1), Pérez-Mellado V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, Universidad de Salamanca, Campus Miguel de
Unamuno, s/n., 37007, Salamanca, Spain, anapercem@usal.es.

Even in solitary foragers, conspecifics can provide reliable information about
food location. The insular lizard Podarcis lilfordi is a solitary species with
high population densities that sometimes aggregate around rich food patches. Its 
diet includes novel and unpredictable resources, such as carcasses or plants,
whose exploitation quickly became widespread among the population. We tested the 
use of social information by lizards through some field experiments in which they
had to choose one of the two pieces of fruit. Probably due to local enhancement, 
lizards preferred to feed on the piece of fruit where conspecifics or
lizard-shaped models were already present. Conspecifics' behaviour, but also
their mere presence, seems to be a valuable source of information to decide where
to feed. Lizards also showed a strong attraction to conspecifics, even in the
absence of food. Maybe the presence of a group is interpreted as an indirect cue 
for the presence of food. The group size was not important to females, but males 
had a significantly higher attraction towards groups with three conspecifics. We 
discuss some characteristics of P. lilfordi at Aire Island that can explain the
development of the observed social foraging, as well as their possible
consequences.

PMID: 25528349  [PubMed - in process]


110. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2014;10(11):3313-21. doi: 10.4161/21645515.2014.973314.

To affinity and beyond: harnessing the T cell receptor for cancer immunotherapy.

Thaxton JE(1), Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Microbiology and Immunology; Hollings Cancer Center ; Medical 
University of South Carolina ; Charleston , SC USA.

T cell adoptive therapies for immune-mediated regression of cancers have
attracted a great deal of recent attention. Clinical results are glamorous, yet
much remains to be uncovered behind the basic science that allows us to engineer 
T cells and T cell receptors (TCRs) for clinical use. We discuss the development 
of TCRs for therapeutic use in the context of thymic selection toward central
tolerance and we review therapies based on tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs),
endogenous antigen specific TCRs, and engineered TCRs. Further we discuss the
development of low and high affinity TCRs and the extent to which each challenges
central tolerance. Current results suggest that adaptation of TCR engineering of 
moderate affinity TCRs coupled with co-regulatory and stimulatory molecules may
be the safest and most efficacious road for TCR development aimed at tumor
abolition.

PMCID: PMC4514023
PMID: 25483644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Hepatology. 2015 Apr;61(4):1295-305. doi: 10.1002/hep.27639. Epub 2015 Feb 24.

Autoimmune hepatitis in a murine autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 model
is directed against multiple autoantigens.

Hardtke-Wolenski M(1), Taubert R, Noyan F, Sievers M, Dywicki J, Schlue J, Falk
CS, Ardesjö Lundgren B, Scott HS, Pich A, Anderson MS, Manns MP, Jaeckel E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1) is caused by mutations of the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. Mouse studies have shown that this results in
defective negative selection of T cells and defective early seeding of peripheral
organs with regulatory T cells (Tregs). Aire deficiency in humans and mice
manifests as spontaneous autoimmunity against multiple organs, and 20% of
patients develop an autoimmune hepatitis (AIH). To study AIH in APS-1, we
generated a murine model of human AIH on a BALB/c mouse background, in which Aire
is truncated at exon 2. A subgroup of 24% of mice is affected by AIH,
characterized by lymphoplasmacytic and periportal hepatic infiltrates,
autoantibodies, elevated aminotransferases, and a chronic and progressive course 
of disease. Disease manifestation was dependent on specific Aire mutations and
the genetic background of the mice. Though intrahepatic Treg numbers were
increased and hyperproliferative, the intrahepatic CD4/CD8 ratio was decreased.
The targets of the adaptive autoimmune response were polyspecific and not
focussed on essential autoantigens, as described for other APS-1-related
autoimmune diseases. The AIH could be treated with prednisolone or adoptive
transfer of polyspecific Tregs.CONCLUSION: Development of AIH in APS-1 is
dependent on specific Aire mutations and genetic background genes. Autoimmune
response is polyspecific and can be controlled by steroids or transfer with
Tregs. This might enable new treatment options for patients with AIH.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 25475693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Autoimmun. 2015 Jan;56:87-97. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.10.006. Epub 2014 Nov
14.

Retention and tolerance of autoreactive CD4(+) recent thymic emigrants in the
liver.

Xu X(1), Zhang S(1), Jin R(1), Wang K(1), Li P(1), Lin L(1), Dong J(1), Hao J(1),
Zhang Y(1), Sun X(1), Pang X(1), Qian X(1), Zhang J(1), Wu H(2), Zhang Y(3), Ge
Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology, Ministry of Health, Department of
Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science
Center, 38 Xue Yuan Road, Beijing 100191, PR China. (2)Peking University Medical 
and Health Analytical Center, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing,
PR China. Electronic address: wuhounan@bjmu.edu.cn. (3)Key Laboratory of Medical 
Immunology, Ministry of Health, Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, 38 Xue Yuan Road, Beijing
100191, PR China. Electronic address: zhangyu007@bjmu.edu.cn. (4)Key Laboratory
of Medical Immunology, Ministry of Health, Department of Immunology, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, 38 Xue Yuan
Road, Beijing 100191, PR China. Electronic address: qingge@bjmu.edu.cn.

Mechanisms of peripheral tolerance play a critical role in preventing T cells
that escape from negative selection in the thymus from initiating autoimmune
reactions. To investigate the site of peripheral tolerance induction, we examined
migration and activation of recent thymic emigrants (RTEs) in liver, spleen,
lymph node and peripheral blood. We show that a fraction of RTE precursors were
retained in the liver independent of the secondary lymphoid organs. Compared to
RTEs from the lymph nodes, RTEs from the liver proliferated more and many
exhibited an activated phenotype with the capability of producing IL-10 upon
activation. Liver RTEs also responded poorly to interleukin (IL)-7 and were more 
prone to apoptosis. Following transfer into RAG(-/-) recipients, liver RTEs
induced more severe inflammation and T cell infiltration in the lung and colon.
The extrathymic expression of MHC and Aire is required for the acquisition of
tolerogenic phenotype of newly generated thymic emigrants in the liver. These
results suggest that the liver is the first checkpoint in the periphery to
filter, retain, and enforce tolerance to autoreactive CD4(+) thymic emigrants
that escape from negative selection.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25468259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol. 2015 Apr;90(4):198-201. doi: 10.1016/j.oftal.2014.02.019. 
Epub 2014 Nov 15.

[Management of corneal hydrops using air and micro-punctures].

[Article in Spanish]

Campos Polo R(1), Chacón Iglesias J(2), Gamazo Carrasco M(2), Mencía Bartolomé
JM(2), Solana Fajardo J(2), García Guisado D(2), Fernández Miranda C(2), Bueno
Álvarez-Arenas J(2), Sánchez Trancón Á(3), García Ardoy E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Oftalmología, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Badajoz,
Badajoz, España; Clínica Vista Sánchez Trancón, Badajoz, España. Electronic
address: rafacampospolo@hotmail.com. (2)Servicio de Oftalmología, Complejo
Hospitalario Universitario de Badajoz, Badajoz, España. (3)Clínica Vista Sánchez 
Trancón, Badajoz, España.

CASE REPORT: A 22-year- old woman with an acute hydrops and Descemet membrane
detachment was managed by intracameral air injection combined with multiple
corneal stromal venting incisions for the drainage of intrastromal fluid. No
intraoperative complications were encountered, and the intrastromal fluid was
resolved over 2 weeks.
DISCUSSION: Acute corneal hydrops is a significant complication of keratoconus.
If not treated, resolution usually occurs over a period of 2-4 months. The
persistent oedema can cause complications, such as corneal neovascularisation,
infection and corneal perforation.

Copyright © 2013 Sociedad Española de Oftalmología. Published by Elsevier España,
S.L.U. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25443186  [PubMed - in process]


114. Bioinformatics. 2015 Apr 1;31(7):986-90. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu785. Epub
2014 Nov 25.

Promiscuous mRNA splicing under the control of AIRE in medullary thymic
epithelial cells.

Keane P(1), Ceredig R(1), Seoighe C(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Mathematics, Statistics and Applied Mathematics and Regenerative
Medicine Institute, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.

MOTIVATION: The expression of tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs) in the thymus is 
required to ensure efficient negative selection of potentially auto-reactive T
lymphocytes and avoid autoimmune disease. This promiscuous expression is under
the control of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE), a transcription factor expressed 
in medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs). Tissue-specific alternative
splicing may also produce TRAs but the extent to which splice isoforms that are
restricted to specific tissues are expressed in mTECs is yet to be investigated.
RESULTS: We reanalyzed microarray and RNA-Seq datasets from mouse mTECs and other
epithelial and non-epithelial cell types and found that the diversity of splice
isoforms in mTECs was greater than in any of the other cell types or tissues
studied. We identified tissue-specific isoforms from a panel of mouse tissues and
found several examples of such isoforms that are expressed in mTECs. The number
of isoforms with restricted expression found in mTECs was significantly higher
than for comparable cell types. Furthermore, we found evidence that AIRE
influences the increased splicing diversity observed in mTECs as the genes for
which tissue restricted isoforms are produced in mTECs were significantly more
likely than other genes to be differentially spliced between AIRE knock-out and
wild-type samples. Our results suggest that developing T lymphocytes are exposed 
to diverse tissue-restricted splice isoforms in the thymus and that AIRE has a
direct or indirect role in this process, representing a novel aspect of its role 
in the maintenance of immune self-tolerance.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25429061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Hormones (Athens). 2015 Apr-Jun;14(2):312-6. doi: 10.14310/horm.2002.1513.

Precocious presentation of autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 2 associated
with an AIRE mutation.

Resende E(1), G<U+03CC>mez GN(2), Nascimento M(3), Loidi L(4), Saborido Fiaño R(5),
Cabanas Rodr<U+03AF>guez P(6), Castro-Feijoo L(6), Barreiro Conde J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Servio de Endocrinologia, Hospital Central do Funchal, Portugal. (2)Servicio
de Pediatr<U+03AF>a, Hospital Cl<U+03AF>nico de Ourense, Spain. (3)Servio de Pediatria,
Hospital Pedro Hispano, Matosinhos, Portugal. (4)Fundaci<U+03CC>n Pública Galega de
Medicina Xen<U+03CC>mica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. (5)Departamento de Pediatr<U+03AF>a,
Hospital Cl<U+03AF>nico Universitario de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela,
Spain. (6)Unidad de Endocrinolog<U+03AF>a Pediátrica y Crecimiento, Departamento de
Pediatr<U+03AF>a, Hospital Cl<U+03AF>nico Universitario de Santiago de Compostela, Universidad 
de Santiago de Compostela; Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 2 (type 2 APS), or Schmidt's syndrome, is 
defined by the presence of Addison's disease in combination with type 1 diabetes 
and/or autoimmune thyroid disease. The estimated prevalence of this syndrome is
1.4-4.5 per 100,000 inhabitants and it is more frequent in middle-aged females,
whilst it is quite rare in children. Type 2 APS, which shows a pattern of
autosomal dominant inheritance with low penetrance, has been associated with HLA 
specific DR3/DQ2 and DR4/DQ8 haplotypes. However, it has been hypothesized that
genetic variability in the AIRE gene, which causing type 1 APS, may play a role
in more common organ-specific autoimmune conditions like type 1 diabetes,
Hashimoto's disease and type 2 APS, among others. Here we present the case of an 
8-year-old girl, with a past medical history of type 1 diabetes diagnosed at the 
age of 3. She was taken to the Emergency Department because she complained of
abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, and her blood analysis revealed a severe
hyponatremia. She also had seizures as a consequence of the hyponatremia and
frequent hypoglycemia. She was ultimately found to be suffering from autoimmune
primary adrenal insufficiency. The combination of both mentioned conditions, type
1 diabetes and Addison's disease, in the absence of chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis, made a diagnosis of type 2 APS plausible in this girl. The genetic
study showed two heterozygous variants: NM_000383.2:C.1411C>T (p. Arg471Cys) in
exon 12 and IVS9+6G>A in intron 9 of the AIRE gene. The description of an
uncommon case of type 2 APS with precocious presentation associated with an AIRE 
mutation in a very young girl could help to clarify the role of AIRE in the
development of autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 25402387  [PubMed - in process]


116. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2014 Oct;105 Suppl 1:34-40. doi:
10.1016/S0001-7310(14)70016-X.

IL-17 and infections.

Ling Y(1), Puel A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM
1163, Paris, France; Imagine Institute, University Paris Descartes, Paris,
France. (2)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch,
INSERM 1163, Paris, France; Imagine Institute, University Paris Descartes, Paris,
France; St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases,
Rockefeller Branch, the Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA. Electronic
address: anne.puel@inserm.fr.

IL-17 immunity has been shown to be essential for mucocutaneous protection
against Candida albicans in mice and humans. However, mice with defective IL-17
immunity display broader susceptibility, as they are also prone to infections
with diverse infectious agents at various sites. Humans with genetic defects
affecting their IL-17 immunity usually suffer from chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis (CMC): recurrent or persistent infections of the skin, nails, and
mucosae with C. albicans, with or without other clinical signs. Most patients
with autosomal dominant (AD) hyper-IgE syndrome (HIES) due to STAT3 deficiency or
AD STAT1 gain-of-function display impaired IL-17-producing T-cell development,
and CMC is one of their principal clinical manifestations. Similarly, patients
with autosomal recessive (AR) autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1)
caused by AIRE deficiency have high levels of neutralizing autoantibodies against
IL-17A, IL-17F and/or IL-22 and present CMC as their only infectious disease.
Finally, CMC is the main clinical phenotype observed in patients with inborn
errors specifically affecting IL-17 immunity. Indeed, patients with AD IL-17F
deficiency or AR IL-17RA or ACT1 deficiency display CMC and, to a lesser extent, 
superficial staphylococcal diseases. Candida infection was recently reported in
psoriasis patients treated with anti-IL-17A antibodies. Careful monitoring for
CMC is thus important during anti-IL-17 treatment.

PMID: 25398490  [PubMed - in process]


117. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 Sep;9(9 Suppl 2):S137-42. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000299.

Alterations of the immune system in thymic malignancies.

Weksler B(1), Lu B.

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Thoracic Surgery, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 
Memphis, TN; and Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA.

Normal thymic architecture is essential for the proper development of
T-lymphocytes. Immature T-cell progenitors enter the thymus where through
interactions with cortical and medullary thymic epithelial cells (TECs) they
undergo positive and negative selection and become competent cells that do not
react with self-antigens. This process requires normal thymic architecture,
expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II, and normal
expression of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. Thymomas are rare neoplasms
of the TECs that often generate lymphocytes that mature into CD4+ and CD8+
T-lymphocytes. However, several abnormalities have been described in thymomas
that may affect normal T-cell development: the tumor architecture is distorted,
neoplastics expresses less MHC class II, most thymomas do not express AIRE, and
production of T-regulator cells is decreased. Thymomas are associated with a
variety of autoimmune disorders often linked to T-cell-mediated autoimmunity.
Myasthenia gravis, the most common autoimmune disorder associated with thymoma
patients, is present in 30% of patients with thymoma. Several theories attempt to
explain the association of immune disorders with thymomas. These different
theories are based on failure of positive and negative selection of T-lymphocytes
and on autoimmunizing mechanisms in an AIRE-poor environment in the thymus. The
finding that immunosurveillance against cancer may be impaired before the
diagnosis of thymoma may challenge current theories and suggest a more complex
defect in T-lymphocyte maturation. It is likely that a combination of mechanisms 
is responsible for immune disorders in patients with thymoma. More investigation 
is needed to clarify the basic mechanisms responsible for immune disorders in
patients with thymoma.

PMID: 25396311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Exp Med. 2014 Nov 17;211(12):2425-38. doi: 10.1084/jem.20141207. Epub 2014 Nov 
10.

Limitation of immune tolerance-inducing thymic epithelial cell development by
Spi-B-mediated negative feedback regulation.

Akiyama N(1), Shinzawa M(1), Miyauchi M(1), Yanai H(1), Tateishi R(1), Shimo
Y(1), Ohshima D(1), Matsuo K(2), Sasaki I(3), Hoshino K(4), Wu G(5), Yagi S(5),
Inoue J(1), Kaisho T(6), Akiyama T(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Medical Science, The 
University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Cell and 
Tissue Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Keio University, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 
160-8582, Japan. (3)Laboratory for Immune Regulation, World Premier International
Research Center Initiative, Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (4)Laboratory for Immune Regulation,
World Premier International Research Center Initiative, Immunology Frontier
Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan Laboratory for
Inflammatory Regulation, Research Center for Allergy and Immunology, RIKEN Center
for Integrative Medical Sciences, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan 
Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa University, Kita-gun,
Kagawa 761-0793, Japan. (5)Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Department of
Animal Resource Sciences, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The 
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan. (6)Laboratory for Immune
Regulation, World Premier International Research Center Initiative, Immunology
Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan
Laboratory for Inflammatory Regulation, Research Center for Allergy and
Immunology, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, 
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan taishin@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp tkaisho@wakayama-med.ac.jp.
(7)Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Medical Science, The 
University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan taishin@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp
tkaisho@wakayama-med.ac.jp.

Medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) expressing the autoimmune regulator
AIRE and various tissue-specific antigens (TSAs) are critical for preventing the 
onset of autoimmunity and may attenuate tumor immunity. However, molecular
mechanisms controlling mTEC development remain elusive. Here, we describe the
roles of the transcription factor Spi-B in mTEC development. Spi-B is rapidly
up-regulated by receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL) cytokine signaling,
which triggers mTEC differentiation, and in turn up-regulates CD80, CD86, some
TSAs, and the natural inhibitor of RANKL signaling, osteoprotegerin (OPG).
Spi-B-mediated OPG expression limits mTEC development in neonates but not in
embryos, suggesting developmental stage-specific negative feedback regulation.
OPG-mediated negative regulation attenuates cellularity of thymic regulatory T
cells and tumor development in vivo. Hence, these data suggest that this negative
RANKL-Spi-B-OPG feedback mechanism finely tunes mTEC development and function and
may optimize the trade-off between prevention of autoimmunity and induction of
antitumor immunity.

© 2014 Akiyama et al.

PMCID: PMC4235644
PMID: 25385757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Eur J Pediatr. 2014 Dec;173(12):1731-4. doi: 10.1007/s00431-014-2448-6. Epub 2014
Nov 4.

Hypoparathyroidism and central diabetes insipidus: in search of the link.

Eyal O(1), Oren A, Jüppner H, Somech R, De Bellis A, Mannstadt M, Szalat A,
Bleiberg M, Weisman Y, Weintrob N.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes Unit, Dana-Dwek Children Hospital, Tel
Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, 6 Weizmann St., 6423906, Tel Aviv, Israel,
ori.eyal27@gmail.com.

Two siblings (a 15-year-old boy and an 11-year-old girl) who presented with
hypocalcemic seizure at the age of 2 years and 2 months (boy) and 2 years and 4
months (girl) were diagnosed with hypoparathyroidism. At the age of 3 years, the 
girl developed central diabetes insipidus with good response to desmopressin
acetate treatment. The family history was unremarkable, and there was no
consanguinity between the parents. The father is of Iraqi/Egyptian Jewish origin 
and the mother is of Iranian/Romanian Jewish origin. Sequence analysis of the
candidate genes for isolated hypoparathyroidism encoding calcium-sensing
receptor, parathyroid hormone, and glial cells missing homolog B did not reveal
any mutations. Whole-exome sequencing identified a homozygous mutation in the
autoimmune regulatory gene (AIRE), c.374A>G;p.Y85C, characteristic for Jewish
Iranians with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS1), which was
confirmed by the Sanger sequencing. Antibodies against the adrenal, pancreatic
islet cell, ovary, thyroid, pituitary, celiac, and parietal cell were negative in
both siblings, while anti-diuretic hormone antibodies were positive only in the
girl. No other symptoms or signs of APS1 developed during all the years of
follow-up.CONCLUSION: APS1 should be part of the differential diagnosis in
children presenting with isolated hypoparathyroidism or hypoparathyroidism with
central diabetes insipidus (CDI). These cases show that the AIRE mutation
characteristic of Iranian Jews can also be found in non-Iranian Jews.

PMID: 25367057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. BMC Pediatr. 2014 Nov 1;14:272. doi: 10.1186/1471-2431-14-272.

Cutaneous vasculitis in patients with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1:
report of a case and brief review of the literature.

Improda N, Capalbo D, Cirillo E, Cerbone M, Esposito A, Pignata C, Salerno M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Traslational Medical Sciences, 
"Federico II" University of Naples, Naples, Italy. salerno@unina.it.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1, also known as autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal-dystrophy, is a rare autosomal
recessive disease due to pathogenic variants in the AIRE gene. Classic features
of the syndrome are mucocutaneous candidiasis, chronic idiopathic
hypoparathyroidism and Addison disease. However, other endocrine and
non-endocrine components, may occur with a different prevalence. In addition to
ectodermal features, which are quite common features of the disease, APS 1
patients may experience other types of skin alterations, such as vasculitic skin 
rash. An early diagnosis of APS 1 can be very challenging, due to the high
clinical heterogeneity, and a considerable delay may occur between the appearance
of symptoms and the diagnosis.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report on a girl affected by APS 1 who presented with
cutaneous vasculitis when she was seven-months old, some years before the onset
of the common components of the disease.
CONCLUSION: Clinical picture of APS 1 may be characterized by isolated rare or
atypical autoimmune or immune-mediated manifestations, even years before the
onset of the classic components of the disease. Among these uncommon features,
skin rashes of variable form and duration may occur, most of them being
associated with histopathological features of vasculitis. Our case suggests that 
cutaneous vasculitis may represent a first sign of APS 1. The clinical
significance of cutaneous vasculitis in the context of APS 1 is still debated. It
may represent a rare, unusual, early component of the disease or a clinical
manifestation secondarily related to the typical APS 1 components (i.e.
autoimmune thyroid disease), which are frequently associated with
rheumatologic-like signs and symptoms. Alternatively, it may be the expression of
an independent disease co-occuring with APS 1. In conclusion, our case suggests
that children presenting with unexplained vasculitic skin rash should be
followed-up in order to early identify APS 1.

PMCID: PMC4286916
PMID: 25361846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. N Engl J Med. 2014 Nov 27;371(22):2092-100. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1411680. Epub 2014
Oct 29.

Clinical illness and outcomes in patients with Ebola in Sierra Leone.

Schieffelin JS(1), Shaffer JG, Goba A, Gbakie M, Gire SK, Colubri A, Sealfon RS, 
Kanneh L, Moigboi A, Momoh M, Fullah M, Moses LM, Brown BL, Andersen KG, Winnicki
S, Schaffner SF, Park DJ, Yozwiak NL, Jiang PP, Kargbo D, Jalloh S, Fonnie M,
Sinnah V, French I, Kovoma A, Kamara FK, Tucker V, Konuwa E, Sellu J, Mustapha I,
Foday M, Yillah M, Kanneh F, Saffa S, Massally JL, Boisen ML, Branco LM, Vandi
MA, Grant DS, Happi C, Gevao SM, Fletcher TE, Fowler RA, Bausch DG, Sabeti PC,
Khan SH, Garry RF; KGH Lassa Fever Program; Viral Hemorrhagic Fever Consortium;
WHO Clinical Response Team.

Collaborators: Adachi T, Bhadelia N, Bausch D, Brett-Major D, Crozier I, Donovan 
S, Ferri M, Fletcher T, Fowler R, Houlihan C, Hurley K, Jacob S, O'Dempsey SM,
Porembka D, Risi G, Rubinson L, Schieffelin J, Abu J, Allieu A, Bangura J,
Dukullay B, Fomgbeh M, Kamara B, Kamara F, Kainesie G, Kallon M, Kallon T, Kargbo
K, Karbgo O, Koninga J, Konneh V, Koroma V, Lungay V, Massaquoi E, Moseray J,
Musa J, Robert W, Samai S, Sannoh P, Sesay J, Shaw S, Sow M, Wilson RB, Kulakosky
PC, Simpson K, Charbonnet M, Butts M, Burchfield L, Gladden A, Hlastava A,
Hueklom S, Karlsson E, Phelan E, Tariyal R, Matranga C, Shlyakhter I, Tareila A, 
Tewhey R, Vitti J, Simpson D, Simpson D, Saphire EO, Hastie K, Oldstone MB, de la
Torre JC, Sullivan B, Hutto S, Gaither C, Tubre' S, Gale TV, Hoffmann A, Melnik
LI, Yenni RB, Haislip AM, Li S, Geisbert TW, Geisbert J, Cross R, Mire CE, Fish
W, Folarin O, Adomeh D, Adun O, Agbukor J, Airende M, Akpede GO, Aire C, Akhaine 
I, Asogun D, Ayepada J, Ekaete T, Ehikhametalor S, Eromon PE, Ifeh V, Ighenegbale
G, Ighodalo YO, Muoebonam E, Odia I, Okokhere PO, Olokor T, Omomoh E, Omoniwa O, 
Oyakhilome J, Uyigue E.

BACKGROUND: Limited clinical and laboratory data are available on patients with
Ebola virus disease (EVD). The Kenema Government Hospital in Sierra Leone, which 
had an existing infrastructure for research regarding viral hemorrhagic fever,
has received and cared for patients with EVD since the beginning of the outbreak 
in Sierra Leone in May 2014.
METHODS: We reviewed available epidemiologic, clinical, and laboratory records of
patients in whom EVD was diagnosed between May 25 and June 18, 2014. We used
quantitative reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain-reaction assays to assess the
load of Ebola virus (EBOV, Zaire species) in a subgroup of patients.
RESULTS: Of 106 patients in whom EVD was diagnosed, 87 had a known outcome, and
44 had detailed clinical information available. The incubation period was
estimated to be 6 to 12 days, and the case fatality rate was 74%. Common findings
at presentation included fever (in 89% of the patients), headache (in 80%),
weakness (in 66%), dizziness (in 60%), diarrhea (in 51%), abdominal pain (in
40%), and vomiting (in 34%). Clinical and laboratory factors at presentation that
were associated with a fatal outcome included fever, weakness, dizziness,
diarrhea, and elevated levels of blood urea nitrogen, aspartate aminotransferase,
and creatinine. Exploratory analyses indicated that patients under the age of 21 
years had a lower case fatality rate than those over the age of 45 years (57% vs.
94%, P=0.03), and patients presenting with fewer than 100,000 EBOV copies per
milliliter had a lower case fatality rate than those with 10 million EBOV copies 
per milliliter or more (33% vs. 94%, P=0.003). Bleeding occurred in only 1
patient.
CONCLUSIONS: The incubation period and case fatality rate among patients with EVD
in Sierra Leone are similar to those observed elsewhere in the 2014 outbreak and 
in previous outbreaks. Although bleeding was an infrequent finding, diarrhea and 
other gastrointestinal manifestations were common. (Funded by the National
Institutes of Health and others.).

PMCID: PMC4318555
PMID: 25353969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Diabetes Care. 2014 Dec;37(12):3164-71. doi: 10.2337/dc14-1020. Epub 2014 Oct 21.

Smoking and long-term risk of type 2 diabetes: the EPIC-InterAct study in
European populations.

InterAct Consortium, Spijkerman AM(1), van der A DL(2), Nilsson PM(3), Ardanaz
E(4), Gavrila D(5), Agudo A(6), Arriola L(7), Balkau B(8), Beulens JW(9), Boeing 
H(10), de Lauzon-Guillain B(8), Fagherazzi G(8), Feskens EJ(11), Franks PW(12),
Grioni S(13), Huerta JM(14), Kaaks R(15), Key TJ(16), Overvad K(17), Palli D(18),
Panico S(19), Redondo ML(20), Rolandsson O(21), Roswall N(22), Sacerdote C(23),
Sánchez MJ(24), Schulze MB(10), Slimani N(25), Teucher B(15), Tjonneland A(26),
Tumino R(27), van der Schouw YT(9), Langenberg C(28), Sharp SJ(28), Forouhi
NG(28), Riboli E(29), Wareham NJ(28).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven,
the Netherlands annemieke.spijkerman@rivm.nl. (2)National Institute for Public
Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, the Netherlands. (3)Lund
University, Malmö, Sweden. (4)Navarre Public Health Institute (ISPN), Pamplona,
Spain CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Murcia Regional Health Council, Murcia, Spain.
(6)Catalan Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain. (7)CIBER Epidemiología y
Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain Public Health Division of Gipuzkoa,
San Sebastian, Spain Instituto BIO-Donostia, Basque Government, Donostia, Spain. 
(8)INSERM, CESP, U1018, Villejuif, France UMRS 1018, University Paris Sud 11,
Villejuif, France. (9)University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the
Netherlands. (10)German Institute of Human Nutrition, Potsdam-Rehbruecke,
Nuthetal, Germany. (11)University of Wageningen, Wageningen, the Netherlands.
(12)Lund University, Malmö, Sweden Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(13)Epidemiology and Prevention Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei
Tumori, Milan, Italy. (14)CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP),
Barcelona, Spain Department of Epidemiology, Murcia Regional Health Council,
Murcia, Spain. (15)German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(16)University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K. (17)Department of Public Health, Aarhus
University, Aarhus, Denmark Aalborg Hospital, Aalborg University, Aalborg,
Denmark. (18)Cancer Research and Prevention Institute (ISPO), Florence, Italy.
(19)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Federico II University,
Naples, Italy. (20)Public Health Directorate, Asturias, Spain. (21)Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden. (22)Department of Diet, Genes and Environment, Danish
Cancer Society Research Center, Danish Cancer Society, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(23)Center for Cancer Prevention, Torino, Italy Human Genetics Foundation
(HuGeF), Torino, Italy. (24)CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP),
Barcelona, Spain Andalusian School of Public Health, Granada, Spain.
(25)International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. (26)Danish Cancer 
Society Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark. (27)Cancer Registry and
Histopathology Unit, ASP 7, Ragusa, Italy AIRE-ONLUS - Ragusa, Ragusa, Italy.
(28)MRC Epidemiology Unit, Cambridge, U.K. (29)Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London, U.K.

OBJECTIVE: The aims of this study were to investigate the association between
smoking and incident type 2 diabetes, accounting for a large number of potential 
confounding factors, and to explore potential effect modifiers and intermediate
factors.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The European Prospective Investigation into Cancer
and Nutrition (EPIC)-InterAct is a prospective case-cohort study within eight
European countries, including 12,403 cases of incident type 2 diabetes and a
random subcohort of 16,835 individuals. After exclusion of individuals with
missing data, the analyses included 10,327 cases and 13,863 subcohort
individuals. Smoking status was used (never, former, current), with never smokers
as the reference. Country-specific Prentice-weighted Cox regression models and
random-effects meta-analysis were used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) for type 2
diabetes.
RESULTS: In men, the HRs (95% CI) of type 2 diabetes were 1.40 (1.26, 1.55) for
former smokers and 1.43 (1.27, 1.61) for current smokers, independent of age,
education, center, physical activity, and alcohol, coffee, and meat consumption. 
In women, associations were weaker, with HRs (95% CI) of 1.18 (1.07, 1.30) and
1.13 (1.03, 1.25) for former and current smokers, respectively. There was some
evidence of effect modification by BMI. The association tended to be slightly
stronger in normal weight men compared with those with overall adiposity.
CONCLUSIONS: Former and current smoking was associated with a higher risk of
incident type 2 diabetes compared with never smoking in men and women,
independent of educational level, physical activity, alcohol consumption, and
diet. Smoking may be regarded as a modifiable risk factor for type 2 diabetes,
and smoking cessation should be encouraged for diabetes prevention.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 25336749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 21;9(10):e109995. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109995.
eCollection 2014.

Three distinct subsets of thymic epithelial cells in rats and mice defined by
novel antibodies.

Sawanobori Y(1), Ueta H(1), Dijkstra CD(2), Park CG(3), Satou M(4), Kitazawa
Y(1), Matsuno K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy (Macro), Dokkyo Medical University, Tochigi, Japan.
(2)Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology, VU University Medical Center Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, Netherlands. (3)Laboratory of Immunology, Severance Biomedical Science
Institute, Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Biochemistry,
Dokkyo Medical University, Tochigi, Japan.

AIM: Thymic epithelial cells (TECs) are thought to play an essential role in T
cell development and have been detected mainly in mice using lectin binding and
antibodies to keratins. Our aim in the present study was to create a precise map 
of rat TECs using antibodies to putative markers and novel monoclonal antibodies 
(i.e., ED 18/19/21 and anti-CD205 antibodies) and compare it with a map from
mouse counterparts and that of rat thymic dendritic cells.
RESULTS: Rat TECs were subdivided on the basis of phenotype into three subsets;
ED18+ED19+/-keratin 5 (K5)+K8+CD205+ class II MHC (MHCII)+ cortical TECs (cTECs),
ED18+ED21-K5-K8+Ulex europaeus lectin 1 (UEA-1)+CD205- medullary TECs (mTEC1s),
and ED18+ED21+K5+K8dullUEA-1-CD205- medullary TECs (mTEC2s). Thymic nurse cells
were defined in cytosmears as an ED18+ED19+/-K5+K8+ subset of cTECs. mTEC1s
preferentially expressed MHCII, claudin-3, claudin-4, and autoimmune regulator
(AIRE). Use of ED18 and ED21 antibodies revealed three subsets of TECs in mice as
well. We also detected two distinct TEC-free areas in the subcapsular cortex and 
in the medulla. Rat dendritic cells in the cortex were MHCII+CD103+ but negative 
for TEC markers, including CD205. Those in the medulla were MHCII+CD103+ and
CD205+ cells were found only in the TEC-free area.
CONCLUSION: Both rats and mice have three TEC subsets with similar phenotypes
that can be identified using known markers and new monoclonal antibodies. These
findings will facilitate further analysis of TEC subsets and DCs and help to
define their roles in thymic selection and in pathological states such as
autoimmune disorders.

PMCID: PMC4204869
PMID: 25334032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cell Mol Immunol. 2014 Nov;11(6):510-21. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2014.97. Epub 2014 Oct 
20.

Ovarian autoimmune disease: clinical concepts and animal models.

Warren BD(1), Kinsey WK(1), McGinnis LK(2), Christenson LK(2), Jasti S(1),
Stevens AM(3), Petroff BK(4), Petroff MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, KS, USA. (2)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology,
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA. (3)Research Center for
Immunity and Immunotherapies, Children's Hospital and Regional Medical Center,
and Division of Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA. (4)1] Department of Internal Medicine, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA [2] Present address: Department of
Pathobiology and Diagnostic Investigation, Michigan State University College of
Veterinary Medicine, East Lansing, MI, USA.

The ovary is not an immunologically privileged organ, but a breakdown in
tolerogenic mechanisms for ovary-specific antigens has disastrous consequences on
fertility in women, and this is replicated in murine models of autoimmune
disease. Isolated ovarian autoimmune disease is rare in women, likely due to the 
severity of the disease and the inability to transmit genetic information
conferring the ovarian disease across generations. Nonetheless, autoimmune
oophoritis is often observed in association with other autoimmune diseases,
particularly autoimmune adrenal disease, and takes a toll on both society and
individual health. Studies in mice have revealed at least two mechanisms that
protect the ovary from autoimmune attack. These mechanisms include control of
autoreactive T cells by thymus-derived regulatory T cells, as well as a role for 
the autoimmune regulator (AIRE), a transcriptional regulator that induces
expression of tissue-restricted antigens in medullary thymic epithelial cells
during development of T cells. Although the latter mechanism is incompletely
defined, it is well established that failure of either results in
autoimmune-mediated targeting and depletion of ovarian follicles. In this review,
we will address the clinical features and consequences of autoimmune-mediated
ovarian infertility in women, as well as the possible mechanisms of disease as
revealed by animal models.

PMCID: PMC4220844
PMID: 25327908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2014 Nov-Dec;32(6):942-8. Epub 2014 Oct 20.

Clinical relevance of monitoring serum levels of adalimumab in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis in daily practice.

Rosas J(1), Llinares-Tello F, de la Torre I, Santos-Ramírez C, Senabre-Gallego
JM, Valor L, Barber-Vallés X, Hernández-Flórez D, Santos-Soler G, Salas-Heredia
E, Carreño L; AIRE-MB Group.

Collaborators: Gómez de Salazar JR, Senabre Gallego JM, Soler GS, Heredia ES,
Pérez CC, Pons Bas A, Lorente Betoret M, Llinares Tello F, Molina García J,
Ramírez CS, Ortega Castro R, Barber Vallés X, Sånchez Barrioluego M,
García-Carrasco M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Marina Baixa Hospital, Villajoyosa, Alicante,
Spain. j.rosas.gs@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this paper is to assess the usefulness of measuring serum 
levels of adalimumab (ADL) and anti-ADL antibodies in 57 patients with rheumatoid
arthritis (RA) treated with ADL for at least 3 months in daily practice.
METHODS: All patients received concomitant disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug 
(DMARD). Receiver-operator characteristics (ROC) analysis was used to obtain the 
cut-off value of ADL for low disease activity (DAS28-ESR =3.2).
RESULTS: Anti-ADL antibodies were detected in 4 (7%) patients with a mean (SD)
DAS28 score of 4.6 (0.9). Patients with positive anti-ADL antibodies had
significantly lower levels of ADL and higher DAS28 scores than those with
negative antibodies. Patients with DAS28 =3.2 as compared with patients with
DAS28 >3.2 showed significantly better SDAI score, higher serum concentrations of
ADL and none of them showed anti-ADL antibodies. The cut-off of serum level of
ADL for DAS28 <3.2 was 4.3 mg/L. According to serum levels of ADL, patients were 
grouped into group 1 (low level) <5.5 mg/L, group 2 (medium level) 5.5-11.3 mg/L 
and group 3 (high level) >11.3 mg/L. Patients in the medium group were closed to 
clinical remission (median DAS28 2.7) and patients in the high group were on
clinical remission (DAS28 2.1).
CONCLUSIONS: Serum levels of ADL should be maintained >4.3 mg/L. In patients with
ADL levels >11.3 mg/L, a decrease of the dose of ADL or an increase in the
interval between doses may be planned. The presence of anti-ADL antibodies was
associated with a loss of clinical efficacy of ADL.

PMID: 25327159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Biol Open. 2014 Oct 17;3(11):1071-82. doi: 10.1242/bio.201410173.

In vitro co-culture systems for studying molecular basis of cellular interaction 
between Aire-expressing medullary thymic epithelial cells and fresh thymocytes.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Kudoh J(2), Yoshida T(3), Shimizu N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Research Center for Genome Super Power, Keio University, 2 Okubo,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-2611, Japan. (2)Advanced Research Center for Genome Super
Power, Keio University, 2 Okubo, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-2611, Japan Laboratory of
Gene Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, 
Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. (3)Institute for Advanced Sciences, Toagosei Company
Limited, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-2611, Japan. (4)Advanced Research Center for Genome
Super Power, Keio University, 2 Okubo, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-2611, Japan
smzgsp@dmb.med.keio.ac.jp.

We previously established three mouse cell lines (Aire(+)TEC1, Aire(+)TEC2 and
Aire(+)DC) from the medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) and dendritic cells
(mDCs). These cells constitutively expressed "autoimmune regulator (Aire) gene"
and they exhibited various features of self antigen-presenting cells (self-APCs) 
present in the thymic medullary region. Here, we confirmed our previous
observation that Aire(+) thymic epithelial cells adhere to fresh thymocytes and
kill them by inducing apoptosis, thus potentially reproducing in vitro some
aspects of the negative selection of T cells in vivo. In this system, a single
Aire(+) cell appeared able to kill ~30 thymocytes within 24 hrs. Moreover, we
observed that ectopic expression of peripheral tissue-specific antigens (TSAs),
and expression of several surface markers involved in mTEC development, increased
as Aire(+) cell density increases toward confluency. Thus, these Aire(+) cells
appear to behave like differentiating mTECs as if they pass through the
developmental stages from intermediate state toward mature state. Surprisingly,
an in vitro co-culture system consisting of Aire(+) cells and fractionated
sub-populations of fresh thymocytes implied the possible existence of two
distinct subtypes of thymocytes (named as CD4(+) killer and CD4(-) rescuer) that 
may determine the fate (dead or alive) of the differentiating Aire(+)mTECs. Thus,
our in vitro co-culture system appears to mimic a part of "in vivo thymic
crosstalk".

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4232765
PMID: 25326516  [PubMed]


127. Immunity. 2014 Sep 18;41(3):343-5. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.08.013.

Love is in the Aire: mTECs share their assets.

Kyewski B(1), Feuerer M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Immunology, German Cancer Research Center, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: b.kyewski@dkfz.de. (2)Helmholtz Young
Investigator Group Immune Tolerance, Tumor Immunology Program, German Cancer
Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2014 Sep 18;41(3):414-26.

Self-tolerance imposition requires the presentation of self-antigens by a variety
of thymic antigen-presenting cells. In this issue of Immunity, Perry et al.
(2014) reveal unidirectional self-antigen transfer from medullary thymic
epithelial cells to dendritic cells as an essential aspect.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25238088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Immunol. 2014 Oct 15;193(8):3880-90. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401068. Epub 2014
Sep 17.

Clinical and serologic parallels to APS-I in patients with thymomas and
autoantigen transcripts in their tumors.

Wolff AS(1), Kärner J(2), Owe JF(3), Oftedal BE(4), Gilhus NE(3), Erichsen MM(5),
Kämpe O(6), Meager A(7), Peterson P(2), Kisand K(2), Willcox N(8), Husebye ES(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen, Norway;
Anette.boe@k2.uib.no. (2)Molecular Pathology Group, Institute of Biomedicine and 
Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, 50090 Tartu, Estonia; (3)Department 
of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen, Norway; Department of
Neurology, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway; (4)Department of
Clinical Science, University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen, Norway; (5)Department of
Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway; (6)Department of
Medicine, Solna, Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76
Stockholm, Sweden; (7)Biotherapeutics Group, The National Institute for
Biological Standards and Control, South Mimms, Potters Bar, Hertfordshire EN6
3QG, United Kingdom; and. (8)Department of Clinical Neurology, Weatherall
Institute for Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, United
Kingdom. (9)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen,
Norway; Department of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen,
Norway;

Patients with the autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I (APS-I), caused by
mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene, and myasthenia gravis (MG)
with thymoma, show intriguing but unexplained parallels. They include uncommon
manifestations like autoimmune adrenal insufficiency (AI), hypoparathyroidism,
and chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis plus autoantibodies neutralizing IL-17,
IL-22, and type I IFNs. Thymopoiesis in the absence of AIRE is implicated in both
syndromes. To test whether these parallels extend further, we screened 247
patients with MG, thymoma, or both for clinical features and organ-specific
autoantibodies characteristic of APS-I patients, and we assayed 26 thymoma
samples for transcripts for AIRE and 16 peripheral tissue-specific autoantigens
(TSAgs) by quantitative PCR. We found APS-I-typical autoantibodies and clinical
manifestations, including chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, AI, and asplenia,
respectively, in 49 of 121 (40%) and 10 of 121 (8%) thymoma patients, but
clinical features seldom occurred together with the corresponding autoantibodies.
Both were rare in other MG subgroups (n = 126). In 38 patients with APS-I, by
contrast, we observed neither autoantibodies against muscle Ags nor any
neuromuscular disorders. Whereas relative transcript levels for AIRE and 7 of 16 
TSAgs showed the expected underexpression in thymomas, levels were increased for 
four of the five TSAgs most frequently targeted by these patients'
autoantibodies. Therefore, the clinical and serologic parallels to APS-I in
patients with thymomas are not explained purely by deficient TSAg transcription
in these aberrant AIRE-deficient tumors. We therefore propose additional
explanations for the unusual autoimmune biases they provoke. Thymoma patients
should be monitored for potentially life-threatening APS-I manifestations such as
AI and hypoparathyroidism.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4190667
PMID: 25230752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Genome Res. 2014 Dec;24(12):1918-31. doi: 10.1101/gr.171645.113. Epub 2014 Sep
15.

Population and single-cell genomics reveal the Aire dependency, relief from
Polycomb silencing, and distribution of self-antigen expression in thymic
epithelia.

Sansom SN(1), Shikama-Dorn N(2), Zhanybekova S(2), Nusspaumer G(2), Macaulay
IC(3), Deadman ME(4), Heger A(5), Ponting CP(6), Holländer GA(7).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Computational Genomics Analysis and Training Programme, MRC Functional
Genomics Unit, Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of
Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3PT, United Kingdom; stephen.sansom@kennedy.ox.ac.uk
stephen.sansom@cantab.net Georg.Hollander@paediatrics.ox.ac.uk
Georg-A.Hollaender@unibas.ch. (2)Paediatric Immunology, Department of
Biomedicine, University of Basel, and The Basel University Children's Hospital,
Basel, 4058, Switzerland; (3)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute-EBI Single Cell
Genomics Centre, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SA,
United Kingdom; (4)Developmental Immunology, Department of Paediatrics, and the
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS,
United Kingdom. (5)MRC Computational Genomics Analysis and Training Programme,
MRC Functional Genomics Unit, Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics,
University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3PT, United Kingdom; (6)MRC Computational
Genomics Analysis and Training Programme, MRC Functional Genomics Unit,
Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1
3PT, United Kingdom; Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute-EBI Single Cell Genomics
Centre, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SA, United
Kingdom; (7)Paediatric Immunology, Department of Biomedicine, University of
Basel, and The Basel University Children's Hospital, Basel, 4058, Switzerland;
Developmental Immunology, Department of Paediatrics, and the Weatherall Institute
of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, United Kingdom.

Promiscuous gene expression (PGE) by thymic epithelial cells (TEC) is essential
for generating a diverse T cell antigen receptor repertoire tolerant to
self-antigens, and thus for avoiding autoimmunity. Nevertheless, the extent and
nature of this unusual expression program within TEC populations and single cells
are unknown. Using deep transcriptome sequencing of carefully identified mouse
TEC subpopulations, we discovered a program of PGE that is common between
medullary (m) and cortical TEC, further elaborated in mTEC, and completed in
mature mTEC expressing the autoimmune regulator gene (Aire). TEC populations are 
capable of expressing up to 19,293 protein-coding genes, the highest number of
genes known to be expressed in any cell type. Remarkably, in mouse mTEC, Aire
expression alone positively regulates 3980 tissue-restricted genes. Notably, the 
tissue specificities of these genes include known targets of autoimmunity in
human AIRE deficiency. Led by the observation that genes induced by Aire
expression are generally characterized by a repressive chromatin state in somatic
tissues, we found these genes to be strongly associated with H3K27me3 marks in
mTEC. Our findings are consistent with AIRE targeting and inducing the
promiscuous expression of genes previously epigenetically silenced by Polycomb
group proteins. Comparison of the transcriptomes of 174 single mTEC indicates
that genes induced by Aire expression are transcribed stochastically at low cell 
frequency. Furthermore, when present, Aire expression-dependent transcript levels
were 16-fold higher, on average, in individual TEC than in the mTEC population.

© 2014 Sansom et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4248310
PMID: 25224068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Immunobiology. 2015 Jan;220(1):93-102. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2014.08.015. Epub
2014 Aug 27.

Aire-dependent peripheral tissue antigen mRNAs in mTEC cells feature networking
refractoriness to microRNA interaction.

Macedo C(1), Oliveira EH(1), Almeida RS(1), Donate PB(1), Fornari TA(1), Pezzi
N(1), Sakamoto-Hojo ET(2), Donadi EA(3), Passos GA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunogenetics Group, Department of Genetics, School of Medicine of 
Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo (USP), Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Philosophy, Sciences and Letters, USP,
Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil. (3)Department of Clinical Medicine, School of
Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, USP, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil. (4)Molecular
Immunogenetics Group, Department of Genetics, School of Medicine of Ribeirão
Preto, University of São Paulo (USP), Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil; Department of
Morphology, Physiology and Basic Pathology, Disciplines of Genetics and Molecular
Biology, School of Dentistry of Ribeirão Preto, USP, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil. 
Electronic address: passos@usp.br.

The downregulation of PTA genes in mTECs is associated with the loss of
self-tolerance, and the role of miRNAs in this process is not fully understood.
Therefore, we studied the expression of mRNAs and miRNAs in mTECs from autoimmune
NOD mice during the period when loss of self-tolerance occurs in parallel with
non-autoimmune BALB/c mice. Although the expression of the transcriptional
regulator Aire was unchanged, we observed downregulation of a set of PTA mRNAs. A
set of miRNAs was also differentially expressed in these mice. The reconstruction
of miRNA-mRNA interaction networks identified the controller miRNAs and predicted
the PTA mRNA targets. Interestingly, the known Aire-dependent PTAs exhibited
pronounced refractoriness in the networking interaction with miRNAs. This study
reveals the existence of a new mechanism in mTECs, and this mechanism may have
importance in the control of self-tolerance.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25220732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Immunity. 2014 Sep 18;41(3):414-26. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.08.007. Epub 2014 
Sep 11.

Distinct contributions of Aire and antigen-presenting-cell subsets to the
generation of self-tolerance in the thymus.

Perry JS(1), Lio CW(1), Kau AL(2), Nutsch K(1), Yang Z(1), Gordon JI(2), Murphy
KM(3), Hsieh CS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Center for Genome
Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO 63108, USA. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of
Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110, USA. (4)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic
address: chsieh@wustl.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2014 Nov;14(11):714-5.
    Immunity. 2014 Sep 18;41(3):343-5.

The contribution of thymic antigen-presenting-cell (APC) subsets in selecting a
self-tolerant T cell population remains unclear. We show that bone marrow (BM)
APCs and medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) played nonoverlapping roles in
shaping the T cell receptor (TCR) repertoire by deletion and regulatory T (Treg) 
cell selection of distinct TCRs. Aire, which induces tissue-specific antigen
expression in mTECs, affected the TCR repertoire in a manner distinct from mTEC
presentation. Approximately half of Aire-dependent deletion or Treg cell
selection utilized a pathway dependent on antigen presentation by BM APCs.
Batf3-dependent CD8a<U+207A> dendritic cells (DCs) were the crucial BM APCs for Treg
cell selection via this pathway, showing enhanced ability to present antigens
from stromal cells. These results demonstrate the division of function between
thymic APCs in shaping the self-tolerant TCR repertoire and reveal an
unappreciated cooperation between mTECs and CD8a<U+207A> DCs for presentation of
Aire-induced self-antigens to developing thymocytes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4175925
PMID: 25220213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Immunol. 2014 Oct 15;193(8):3872-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400223. Epub 2014
Sep 12.

Autoimmune predisposition in Down syndrome may result from a partial central
tolerance failure due to insufficient intrathymic expression of AIRE and
peripheral antigens.

Giménez-Barcons M(1), Casteràs A(2), Armengol Mdel P(3), Porta E(3), Correa
PA(3), Marín A(1), Pujol-Borrell R(4), Colobran R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Divisió d'Immunologia, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Vall d'Hebron
Institut de Recerca, Barcelona 08035, Spain; (2)Divisió d'Endocrinologia,
Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca, Barcelona
08035, Spain; (3)Institut d'Investigació en Ciències de la Salut Germans Trias i 
Pujol, Badalona 08916, Spain; and. (4)Divisió d'Immunologia, Hospital
Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca, Barcelona 08035,
Spain; Departament de Biologia Cellular, de Fisiologia i d'Immunologia,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra 08193, Spain rpujol@vhebron.net.
(5)Divisió d'Immunologia, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Vall d'Hebron
Institut de Recerca, Barcelona 08035, Spain; Departament de Biologia Cellular, de
Fisiologia i d'Immunologia, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra 08193, 
Spain.

Down syndrome (DS), or trisomy of chromosome 21, is the most common genetic
disorder associated with autoimmune diseases. Autoimmune regulator protein
(AIRE), a transcription factor located on chromosome 21, plays a crucial role in 
autoimmunity by regulating promiscuous gene expression (pGE). To investigate if
autoimmunity in DS is promoted by the reduction of pGE owing to dysregulation of 
AIRE, we assessed the expression of AIRE and of several peripheral
tissue-restricted Ag genes by quantitative PCR in thymus samples from 19 DS
subjects and 21 euploid controls. Strikingly, despite the 21 trisomy, AIRE
expression was significantly reduced by 2-fold in DS thymuses compared with
controls, which was also confirmed by fluorescent microscopy. Allele-specific
quantification of intrathymic AIRE showed that despite its lower expression, the 
three copies are expressed. More importantly, decreased expression of AIRE was
accompanied by a reduction of pGE because expression of tissue-restricted Ags,
CHRNA1, GAD1, PLP1, KLK3, SAG, TG, and TSHR, was reduced. Of interest, thyroid
dysfunction (10 cases of hypothyroidism and 1 of Graves disease) developed in 11 
of 19 (57.9%) of the DS individuals and in none of the 21 controls. The thymuses 
of these DS individuals contained significantly lower levels of AIRE and
thyroglobulin, to which tolerance is typically lost in autoimmune thyroiditis
leading to hypothyroidism. Our findings provide strong evidence for the
fundamental role of AIRE and pGE, namely, central tolerance, in the
predisposition to autoimmunity of DS individuals.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25217160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Biomed Sci. 2014 Aug 27;21:85. doi: 10.1186/s12929-014-0085-z.

AIRE acetylation and deacetylation: effect on protein stability and
transactivation activity.

Incani F, Serra M, Meloni A, Cossu C, Saba L, Cabras T, Messana I, Rosatelli MC.

BACKGROUND: The AIRE protein plays a remarkable role as a regulator of central
tolerance by controlling the promiscuous expression of tissue-specific antigens
in thymic medullary epithelial cells. Defects in AIRE gene cause the autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy- candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy, a rare disease frequent in 
Iranian Jews, Finns, and Sardinian population.
RESULTS: In this study, we have precisely mapped, by mass spectrometry
experiments, the sites of protein acetylation and, by mutagenesis assays, we have
described a set of acetylated lysines as being crucial in influencing the
subcellular localization of AIRE. Furthermore, we have also determined that the
de-acetyltransferase enzymes HDAC1-2 are involved in the lysine de-acetylation of
AIRE.
CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of our results and those reported in literature, we
propose a model in which lysines acetylation increases the stability of AIRE in
the nucleus. In addition, we observed that the interaction of AIRE with
deacetylases complexes inhibits its transcriptional activity and is probably
responsible for the instability of AIRE, which becomes more susceptible to
degradation in the proteasome.

PMCID: PMC4256887
PMID: 25158603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 26;9(8):e105904. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105904.
eCollection 2014.

Commensal bacteria regulate thymic Aire expression.

Nakajima A(1), Negishi N(1), Tsurui H(2), Kadowaki-Ohtsuji N(2), Maeda K(3),
Nanno M(4), Yamaguchi Y(5), Shimizu N(5), Yagita H(1), Okumura K(6), Habu S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Pathology, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University 
School of Medicine, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Yakult Central Institute for
Microbiological Research, Kunitachi, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Advanced Research Center
for Genome Super Power, Keio University, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. (6)Department
of Immunology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan;
Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Commensal bacteria in gastrointestinal tracts are reported to function as an
environmental factor to regulate intestinal inflammation and immune responses.
However, it remains largely unknown whether such bacterial function exerts any
effect on other immune organs distant from the intestine. In this study, the
influence of commensal bacteria in the thymus, where T cell lineages develop into
mature type to form proper repertoires, was investigated using germ-free (GF)
mice and Nod1-deficient mice lacking an intracellular recognition receptor for
certain bacterial components, in which a commensal bacterial effect is predicted 
to be less. In both mice, there was no significant difference in the numbers and 
subset ratios of thymocytes. Interestingly, however, autoimmune regulator (Aire) 
expression in thymic epithelial cells (TECs), main components of the thymic
microenvironment, was decreased in comparison to specific pathogen-free (SPF)
mice and Nod1 wild-type (WT) mice, respectively. In vitro analysis using a fetal 
thymus organ culture (FTOC) system showed that Aire expression in TECs was
increased in the presence of a bacterial component or a bacterial product. These 
results suggest that through their products, commensal bacteria have the
potential to have some effect on epithelial cells of the thymus in tissues
distant from the intestine where they are originally harbored.

PMCID: PMC4144919
PMID: 25157574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Nov;99(11):E2421-8. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2174. Epub
2014 Aug 19.

Comprehensive next-generation sequencing analyses of hypoparathyroidism:
identification of novel GCM2 mutations.

Mitsui T(1), Narumi S, Inokuchi M, Nagasaki K, Nakazawa M, Sasaki G, Hasegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (T.M., S.N., M.I., T.H.), Keio University School of
Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; Division of Pediatrics (K.N.), Department of
Homeostatic Regulation and Development, Niigata University Graduate School of
Medicine and Dental Sciences, Niigata 951-8510, Japan; Department of Pediatrics
(M.N.), Tokyo Metropolitan Ohtsuka Hospital, Tokyo 170-8476, Japan; and
Department of Pediatrics (G.S.), Tokyo Dental College Ichikawa General Hospital, 
Chiba 272-8513, Japan.

CONTEXT: In most patients with hypoparathyroidism (HP), the etiology is not
defined clinically. Eight genes (AIRE, CASR, CLDN16, GATA3, GCM2, PTH, TBCE, and 
TRPM6) are known to be responsible genes associated with HP; however, no previous
study has screened the eight responsible genes comprehensively in HP patients.
OBJECTIVES: This study was conducted to determine the genetic defect in HP
patients. We also described clinical and molecular findings of two HP patients
with novel GCM2 mutations.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We enrolled 20 nonconsanguineous Japanese patients with
child-onset permanent HP without 22q11 deletion. Mutations and genomic
rearrangements involving the eight genes were screened by targeted
next-generation sequencing (NGS). We also screened genetic rearrangements by
array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) in the mutation-negative patients.
A putative deletion, which was suspected by NGS, was additionally analyzed by
droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) and junction PCR. Identified novel nucleotide-level
GCM2 mutants were characterized in vitro.
RESULTS: We identified seven patients with a single gene disorder, including a
CASR mutation, GATA3 mutations, and novel GCM2 mutations (R367Tfs*15, T370M, and 
the deletion encompassing exon 1). This submicroscopic deletion, which had been
suspected by NGS, could not be detected by aCGH and was confirmed by ddPCR and
junction PCR. Functional studies of R367Tfs*- and T370M-GCM2 demonstrated a
reduction of target gene transactivation in both.
CONCLUSIONS: Using comprehensive NGS analyses, we identified the genetic defect
in 35% of HP patients in our cohort and discovered novel GCM2 mutations including
submicroscopic deletion that was undetectable by aCGH.

PMID: 25137426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cell Rep. 2014 Aug 21;8(4):1198-209. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.07.029. Epub 2014
Aug 14.

Multilineage potential and self-renewal define an epithelial progenitor cell
population in the adult thymus.

Wong K(1), Lister NL(1), Barsanti M(1), Lim JM(1), Hammett MV(1), Khong DM(2),
Siatskas C(1), Gray DH(3), Boyd RL(1), Chidgey AP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cells and Immune Regeneration Laboratory, Department of Anatomy and
Developmental Biology, Monash University, Wellington Road, Clayton, VIC 3800,
Australia. (2)Stem Cells and Immune Regeneration Laboratory, Department of
Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash University, Wellington Road, Clayton,
VIC 3800, Australia; Harvard Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard Stem
Cell Institute, Boston, MA 02138, USA. (3)Molecular Genetics of Cancer Division
and Immunology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Parkville, VIC
3052, Australia. (4)Stem Cells and Immune Regeneration Laboratory, Department of 
Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash University, Wellington Road, Clayton,
VIC 3800, Australia. Electronic address: ann.chidgey@monash.edu.

Thymic epithelial cells (TECs) are critical for T cell development and
self-tolerance but are gradually lost with age. The existence of thymic
epithelial progenitors (TEPCs) in the postnatal thymus has been inferred, but
their identity has remained enigmatic. Here, we assessed the entire adult TEC
compartment in order to reveal progenitor capacity is retained exclusively within
a subset of immature thymic epithelium displaying several hallmark features of
stem/progenitor function. These adult TEPCs generate mature cortical and
medullary lineages in a stepwise fashion, including Aire+ TEC, within fetal
thymus reaggregate grafts. Although relatively quiescent in vivo, adult TEPCs
demonstrate significant in vitro colony formation and self-renewal. Importantly, 
3D-cultured TEPCs retain their capacity to differentiate into cortical and
medullary TEC lineages when returned to an in vivo thymic microenvironment. No
other postnatal TEC subset exhibits this combination of properties. The
characterization of adult TEPC will enable progress in understanding TEC biology 
in aging and regeneration.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25131206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Semergen. 2014 Oct;40(7):374-80. doi: 10.1016/j.semerg.2014.07.007. Epub 2014 Aug
11.

[Familial combined hyperlipidemia: consensus document].

[Article in Spanish]

Mata P(1), Alonso R(2), Ruíz-Garcia A(3), Díaz-Díaz JL(4), González N(5),
Gijón-Conde T(6), Martínez-Faedo C(7), Morón I(8), Arranz E(9), Aguado R(10),
Argueso R(11), Perez de Isla L(12).

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Hipercolesterolemia Familiar, Madrid, España. Electronic address:
pmata@colesterolfamiliar.org. (2)Clínica de Lípidos, Medicina Interna,
IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, España. (3)Atención Primaria, Unidad de
Lípidos y Prevención Cardiovascular, Centro de Salud, Pinto, Madrid, España.
(4)Clínica de Lípidos, Medicina Interna, Hospital Abente y Lago, A Coruña,
España. (5)Departamento de Endocrinología y Nutrición, Hospital Universitario La 
Paz, Madrid, España. (6)Centro de Salud Cerro del Aire, Majadahonda, Universidad 
Autónoma, Majadahonda, Madrid, España. (7)Departamento de Endocrinología,
Hospital Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Asturias, España. (8)Centro de Salud de
Goya, Madrid, España. (9)Centro de Salud San Blas, Parla, Madrid, España.
(10)Departamento de Endocrinología, Hospital Universitario de León, León, España.
(11)Departamento de Endocrinología, Hospital de Lugo, Lugo, España. (12)Unidad de
Imagen Cardiovascular, Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital Clínico San Carlos,
Madrid, España.

Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCH) is a frequent disorder associated with
premature coronary artery disease. It is transmitted in an autosomal dominant
manner, although there is not a unique gene involved. The diagnosis is performed 
using clinical criteria, and variability in lipid phenotype and family history of
hyperlipidemia are necessaries. Frequently, the disorder is associated with type2
diabetes mellitus, arterial hypertension and central obesity. Patients with FCH
are considered as high cardiovascular risk and the lipid target is an
LDL-cholesterol <100mg/dL, and <70mg/dL if cardiovascular disease or type 2
diabetes are present. Patients with FCH require lipid lowering treatment using
potent statins and sometimes, combined lipid-lowering treatment. Identification
and management of other cardiovascular risk factors as type 2 diabetes and
hypertension are fundamental to reduce cardiovascular disease burden. This
document gives recommendations for the diagnosis and global treatment of patients
with FCH directed to specialists and general practitioners.

Copyright © 2014 Sociedad Española de Médicos de Atención Primaria (SEMERGEN).
Publicado por Elsevier España. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25131181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2014 Oct;2(10):810-8. doi:
10.1016/S2213-8587(14)70146-9. Epub 2014 Aug 5.

Differences in the prospective association between individual plasma phospholipid
saturated fatty acids and incident type 2 diabetes: the EPIC-InterAct case-cohort
study.

Forouhi NG(1), Koulman A(2), Sharp SJ(3), Imamura F(3), Kröger J(4), Schulze
MB(4), Crowe FL(5), Huerta JM(6), Guevara M(7), Beulens JW(8), van Woudenbergh
GJ(9), Wang L(2), Summerhill K(2), Griffin JL(2), Feskens EJ(9), Amiano P(10),
Boeing H(4), Clavel-Chapelon F(11), Dartois L(11), Fagherazzi G(11), Franks
PW(12), Gonzalez C(13), Jakobsen MU(14), Kaaks R(15), Key TJ(5), Khaw KT(16),
Kühn T(15), Mattiello A(17), Nilsson PM(18), Overvad K(19), Pala V(20), Palli
D(21), Quirós JR(22), Rolandsson O(23), Roswall N(24), Sacerdote C(25), Sánchez
MJ(26), Slimani N(27), Spijkerman AM(28), Tjonneland A(29), Tormo MJ(30), Tumino 
R(31), van der A DL(28), van der Schouw YT(8), Langenberg C(3), Riboli E(32),
Wareham NJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Electronic
address: nita.forouhi@mrc-epid.cam.ac.uk. (2)MRC Human Nutrition Research,
Cambridge, UK. (3)MRC Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 
(4)German Institute of Human Nutrition Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Potsdam, Germany.
(5)Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Murcia Regional Health Council, Murcia, Spain;
CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Murcia, Spain. (7)CIBER
Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Murcia, Spain; Navarre Public Health
Institute (ISPN), Pamplona, Spain. (8)University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
Netherlands. (9)Wageningen University, Wageningen, Netherlands. (10)CIBER
Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Murcia, Spain; Public Health Division
of Gipuzkoa, San Sebastian, Spain; Instituto BIO-Donostia, Basque Government, San
Sebastian, Spain. (11)Inserm, CESP, U1018, Villejuif, France; Univ Paris-Sud,
UMRS 1018, Villejuif, France; Gustave Roussy Institute, F-94800 Villejuif,
France. (12)Lund University, Malmö, Sweden; Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(13)Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO), Barcelona, Spain. (14)Department of
Public Health, Section for Epidemiology, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(15)German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (16)Department of 
Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(17)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Federico II University, Naples,
Italy. (18)Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. (19)Department of Public Health,
Section for Epidemiology, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark; Aalborg University 
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark. (20)Epidemiology and Prevention Unit, Fondazione
IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy. (21)Cancer Research and
Prevention Institute (ISPO), Florence, Italy. (22)Public Health Directorate,
Asturias, Spain. (23)Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden. (24)Danish Cancer Society,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (25)Unit of Cancer Epidemiology, Citta' della Salute e della
Scienza Hospital-University of Turin and Centre for Cancer Prevention (CPO),
Turin, Italy; Human Genetics Foundation (HuGeF), Turin, Italy. (26)CIBER
Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Murcia, Spain; Andalusian School of
Public Health, Granada, Spain; Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria de Granada
(Granada.ibs), Granada, Spain. (27)International Agency for Research on Cancer,
Lyon, France. (28)National Institute for Public Health and the Environment
(RIVM), Bilthoven, Netherlands. (29)Danish Cancer Society Research Center,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (30)Department of Epidemiology, Murcia Regional Health
Council, Murcia, Spain; CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Murcia,
Spain; Department of Health and Social Sciences, Universidad de Murcia, Spain.
(31)Associazione Italiana Registri Tumori, Dipartimento di Prevenzione Medica,
Azienda Sanitaria Provinciale, Ragusa, Italy; Aire Onlus, Ragusa, Italy.
(32)School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014 Nov;10(11):639.
    Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2014 Oct;2(10):770-2.

BACKGROUND: Conflicting evidence exists regarding the association between
saturated fatty acids (SFAs) and type 2 diabetes. In this longitudinal
case-cohort study, we aimed to investigate the prospective associations between
objectively measured individual plasma phospholipid SFAs and incident type 2
diabetes in EPIC-InterAct participants.
METHODS: The EPIC-InterAct case-cohort study includes 12,403 people with incident
type 2 diabetes and a representative subcohort of 16,154 individuals who were
selected from a cohort of 340.234 European participants with 3·99 million
person-years of follow-up (the EPIC study). Incident type 2 diabetes was
ascertained until Dec 31, 2007, by a review of several sources of evidence. Gas
chromatography was used to measure the distribution of fatty acids in plasma
phospholipids (mol%); samples from people with type 2 diabetes and subcohort
participants were processed in a random order by centre, and laboratory staff
were masked to participant characteristics. We estimated country-specific hazard 
ratios (HRs) for associations per SD of each SFA with incident type 2 diabetes
using Prentice-weighted Cox regression, which is weighted for case-cohort
sampling, and pooled our findings using random-effects meta-analysis.
FINDINGS: SFAs accounted for 46% of total plasma phospholipid fatty acids. In
adjusted analyses, different individual SFAs were associated with incident type 2
diabetes in opposing directions. Even-chain SFAs that were measured (14:0
[myristic acid], 16:0 [palmitic acid], and 18:0 [stearic acid]) were positively
associated with incident type 2 diabetes (HR [95% CI] per SD difference: myristic
acid 1·15 [95% CI 1·09-1·22], palmitic acid 1·26 [1·15-1·37], and stearic acid
1·06 [1·00-1·13]). By contrast, measured odd-chain SFAs (15:0 [pentadecanoic
acid] and 17:0 [heptadecanoic acid]) were inversely associated with incident type
2 diabetes (HR [95% CI] per 1 SD difference: 0·79 [0·73-0·85] for pentadecanoic
acid and 0·67 [0·63-0·71] for heptadecanoic acid), as were measured longer-chain 
SFAs (20:0 [arachidic acid], 22:0 [behenic acid], 23:0 [tricosanoic acid], and
24:0 [lignoceric acid]), with HRs ranging from 0·72 to 0·81 (95% CIs ranging
between 0·61 and 0·92). Our findings were robust to a range of sensitivity
analyses.
INTERPRETATION: Different individual plasma phospholipid SFAs were associated
with incident type 2 diabetes in opposite directions, which suggests that SFAs
are not homogeneous in their effects. Our findings emphasise the importance of
the recognition of subtypes of these fatty acids. An improved understanding of
differences in sources of individual SFAs from dietary intake versus endogenous
metabolism is needed.
FUNDING: EU FP6 programme, Medical Research Council Epidemiology Unit, Medical
Research Council Human Nutrition Research, and Cambridge Lipidomics Biomarker
Research Initiative.

Copyright © 2014 Forouhi et al. Open Access article distributed under the terms
of CC BY. Published by .. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4196248
PMID: 25107467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Ethnopharmacol. 2014 Sep 29;155(3):1500-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.07.039. Epub
2014 Aug 1.

Assessment of in vitro pharmacological effect of Neotropical Piperaceae in
GABAergic bioassays in relation to plants traditionally used for folk illness by 
the Yanesha (Peru).

Picard G(1), Valadeau C(2), Albán-Castillo J(3), Rojas R(4), Starr JR(5),
Callejas-Posada R(6), Bennett SA(7), Arnason JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1N 6N5.
(2)Centre EREA, UMR 7186, CNRS-Bat. D, Haudricourt, 7 rue Guy Moquet, 94801
Villejuif cedex, France. (3)Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad Nacional Mayor
de San Marcos, Av. Arenales 1256, Jesús María, Lima, Perú (4)Laboratorio de
Investigación y Desarrollo, Facultad de Ciencias y Filosofía, Universidad Peruana
Cayetano Heredia, Av. Honorio Delgado, San Martin de Porres, Lima, Perú
(5)Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1N 6N5;
Canadian Museum of Nature, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1N 6P4. (6)Facultad de Ciencias
Exactas y Naturales, Instituto de Biología, Universidad de Antioquia, Apartado
postal 1226, Medellín, Colombia. (7)Neural Regeneration Laboratory and Ottawa
Institute of Systems Biology, Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and
Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1H 8M5.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: A previous pilot ethnobotanical and
ethnopharmacological study with the Q'echi<U+05F3> Maya identified the family
Piperaceae, as an important taxonomic group traditionally used for the treatment 
of epileptic and culture-bound anxiety disorders and possessing activity in the
GABA system. Following that lead, a botanical survey was conducted in Peru, where
47 species of Piperaceae were collected including 21 plants traditionally used
for folk illnesses by the Yanesha of Peru, an indigenous Amazonian group.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two high throughput bioassays were used to quantify the in
vitro activity of botanical extracts on the GABA system.
RESULTS: Plant extracts demonstrated moderate to high affinity to the
<U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid benzodiazepine (GABA-BZD) receptor. In addition, extracts
demonstrated low to moderate activity in the inhibition of the GABA-transaminase,
with select plants exhibiting significant activity. Plants indicated by the
Yanesha showed comparable activity to the other Piperaceae plants collected.
Piper cremii was the most active plant in the GABA-BZD receptor assay, and
Drymaria cordata (Caryophyllaceae) in the GABA-T assay.
CONCLUSION: The study provides evidence that there is a pharmacological basis
behind the use of plants in the treatment of susto and mal aire in both Central
and South America, and we propose that the possible mechanism of action includes 
an interaction with the GABA-T enzyme and/or the GABAA-BZD receptor.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25091465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Autoimmun. 2014 Sep;53:10-25. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.07.001. Epub 2014 Aug 1.

Compromised central tolerance of ICA69 induces multiple organ autoimmunity.

Fan Y(1), Gualtierotti G(1), Tajima A(1), Grupillo M(1), Coppola A(1), He J(1),
Bertera S(1), Owens G(1), Pietropaolo M(2), Rudert WA(1), Trucco M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunogenetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (3)Division of Immunogenetics,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Electronic address: MTrucco1@wpahs.org.

For reasons not fully understood, patients with an organ-specific autoimmune
disease have increased risks of developing autoimmune responses against other
organs/tissues. We identified ICA69, a known ß-cell autoantigen in Type 1
diabetes, as a potential common target in multi-organ autoimmunity. NOD mice
immunized with ICA69 polypeptides exhibited exacerbated inflammation not only in 
the islets, but also in the salivary glands. To further investigate ICA69
autoimmunity, two genetically modified mouse lines were generated to modulate
thymic ICA69 expression: the heterozygous ICA69(del/wt) line and the thymic
medullary epithelial cell-specific deletion Aire-<U+0394>ICA69 line. Suboptimal central 
negative selection of ICA69-reactive T-cells was observed in both lines.
Aire-<U+0394>ICA69 mice spontaneously developed coincident autoimmune responses to the
pancreas, the salivary glands, the thyroid, and the stomach. Our findings
establish a direct link between compromised thymic ICA69 expression and
autoimmunity against multiple ICA69-expressing organs, and identify a potential
novel mechanism for the development of multi-organ autoimmune diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4704797
PMID: 25088457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Oct;44(10):2918-24. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444585. Epub 2014 Sep
5.

Intermediate expression of CCRL1 reveals novel subpopulations of medullary thymic
epithelial cells that emerge in the postnatal thymus.

Ribeiro AR(1), Meireles C, Rodrigues PM, Alves NL.

Author information: 
(1)Thymus Development and Function Laboratory, Institute for Molecular and
Cellular Biology, Porto, Portugal; Institute for Biomedical Sciences Abel
Salazar, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.

Erratum in
    Eur J Immunol. 2014 Dec;44(12):3768.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2014 Oct;44(10):2872-5.

Cortical and medullary thymic epithelial cells (cTECs and mTECs, respectively)
provide inductive microenvironments for T-cell development and selection. The
differentiation pathway of cTEC/mTEC lineages downstream of common bipotent
progenitors at discrete stages of development remains unresolved. Using
IL-7/CCRL1 dual reporter mice that identify specialized TEC subsets, we show that
the stepwise acquisition of chemokine (C-C motif) receptor-like 1 (CCRL1) is a
late determinant of cTEC differentiation. Although cTECs expressing high CCRL1
levels (CCRL1(hi) ) develop normally in immunocompetent and Rag2(-/-) thymi,
their differentiation is partially blocked in Rag2(-/-) Il2rg(-/-) counterparts. 
These results unravel a novel checkpoint in cTEC maturation that is regulated by 
the cross-talk between TECs and immature thymocytes. Additionally, we identify
new Ulex europaeus agglutinin 1 (UEA)(+) mTEC subtypes expressing intermediate
CCRL1 levels (CCRL1(int) ) that conspicuously emerge in the postnatal thymus and 
differentially express Tnfrsf11a, Ccl21, and Aire. While rare in fetal and in
Rag2(-/-) thymi, CCRL1(int) mTECs are restored in Rag2(-/-) Marilyn TCR-Tg mice, 
indicating that the appearance of postnatal-restricted mTECs is closely linked
with T-cell selection. Our findings suggest that alternative temporally
restricted routes of new mTEC differentiation contribute to the establishment of 
the medullary niche in the postnatal thymus.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25070355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Gene. 2014 Oct 10;549(2):286-94. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.07.064. Epub 2014 Jul
25.

The possible implication of the S250C variant of the autoimmune regulator protein
in a patient with autoimmunity and immunodeficiency: in silico analysis suggests 
a molecular pathogenic mechanism for the variant.

Bellacchio E(1), Palma A(2), Corrente S(3), Di Girolamo F(4), Helen Kemp E(5), Di
Matteo G(6), Comelli L(7), Carsetti R(2), Cascioli S(2), Cancrini C(3),
Fierabracci A(8).

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratories, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital IRCCS, Piazza S.
Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, Italy. (2)Immunology and Pharmacotherapy Area, Bambino
Gesù Children's Hospital IRCCS, Piazza S. Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, Italy.
(3)University Department of Paediatrics, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital IRCCS, 
Piazza S. Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, Italy. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital IRCCS, Piazza S. Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Human Metabolism, The Medical School, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield S10 2RX, United Kingdom. (6)Department of Systems Medicine, Tor Vergata
University of Rome, Viale Oxford 81, 00133 Rome, Italy. (7)Proteomics Laboratory 
Istituto di Fisiologia Clinica, CNR Via Moruzzi, 1, 56124 Pisa, Italy.
(8)Immunology and Pharmacotherapy Area, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital IRCCS,
Piazza S. Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
alessandra.fierabracci@opbg.net.

Autoimmunity can develop from an often undetermined interplay of genetic and
environmental factors. Rare forms of autoimmune conditions may also result from
single gene mutations as for autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal
dystrophy, an autosomal recessive disease associated with mutated forms of the
autoimmune regulator gene. It was proposed that genetic variability in the
autoimmune regulator locus, in particular heterozygous loss-of-function
mutations, might favor the development of organ-specific autoimmunity by
affecting the presentation of self-antigens in the thymus. Indeed, heterozygous
mutations of the autoimmune regulator gene were reported in patients with
organ-specific autoimmunity. Also, in primary immunodeficiencies, a breakdown in 
central/peripheral tolerance frequently produces association with autoimmunity.
The causative link may involve a common genetic background and several gene
defects have been identified as putative culprits. We report a unique patient, a 
14 year old male from Lazio region, affected by common variable immunodeficiency 
associated with autoimmune manifestations (alopecia, onychodystrophy) and
heterozygote for the S250C variant located in the SAND domain of the autoimmune
regulator gene protein. To our knowledge this is the first report of the S250C
variant in a patient bearing this unusual combination of autoimmunity and
immunodeficiency. To obtain insights into the possible molecular effects of the
S250C variant, we have carried out an in silico analysis of the SAND domain
structure of the autoimmune regulator protein. In particular, homology modeling
has allowed us to observe that the cysteine introduced by the S250C variant is
surrounded by cationic residues, and by means of molecular dynamics simulations
together with pKa calculations, we have shown that these residues remain stably
proximal to cysteine-250 lowering its pKa and thus conferring high chemical
reactivity to the mutated residue. We propose that the enhanced reactivity of
cysteine-250, which is likely to impair the protein function but probably
insufficient to produce alone a phenotype as a heterozygous S250C variant due to 
compensation mechanisms, might become manifest when combined with other
genetic/environmental factors. These results can provide the rationale for the
patient's unusual phenotype, shedding new light into the pathogenesis of the
clinical association of autoimmunity and immunodeficiency.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25068407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Endocrinol Invest. 2014 Oct;37(10):941-8. doi: 10.1007/s40618-014-0120-7. Epub 
2014 Jul 27.

A novel mutation in autoimmune regulator gene causes autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy.

Jin P(1), Zhang Q, Dong CS, Zhao SL, Mo ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endorcrinology, 3nd Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Tongzipo Road, Changsha, 410007, Hunan, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy
syndrome (APECED) is a rare autosomal recessive disease due to mutations in the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene, which encodes a transcription factor that
induces the expression of peripheral tissue-specific antigens in medullary thymic
epithelial cells.
AIM: The purpose of this study was to identify the underlying genetic cause in a 
Chinese family diagnosed with APECED.
METHOD: Peripheral blood samples were collected from family members. All exons of
the AIRE gene and adjacent exon-intron sequences were amplified by PCR and
subsequently sequenced. The functional consequence of the mutations was analyzed 
by cell transfection and in vitro assays.
RESULTS: A novel c.483_484insC mutation in exon 4 was identified, which resulted 
in a frame shift predicted to generate a truncated protein containing the first
163 AIRE amino acids followed by 52 aberrant amino acids. Confocal
immunofluorescence microscopy of COS-7 cells transfected with wild-type and
mutant AIRE constructs showed that wild-type AIRE protein was localized mainly in
the nucleus, while mutant AIRE was localized mainly in the cytoplasm. A
luciferase reporter assay showed that the identified mutation dramatically
inhibited the transactivation activity of AIRE in vitro.
CONCLUSION: We identified a novel AIRE mutation which alters the intracellular
location and transcription activity of AIRE, and has implications in the
pathogenesis of APECED.

PMID: 25064028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Enferm Clin. 2014 Nov-Dec;24(6):351-5. doi: 10.1016/j.enfcli.2014.06.004. Epub
2014 Jul 22.

[Motivation to change unhealthy life styles and cardiovascular risk].

[Article in Spanish]

Pérez-Manchón D(1), Alvarez-García GM(2), González-López E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Salud Universitario Villanueva de la Cañada, Consultorio de Brunete,
Dirección Asistencial Noroeste del Servicio Madrileño de Salud (SERMAS), Madrid, 
España. Electronic address: dperezman@gmail.com. (2)Centro de Salud Universitario
Cerro del Aire, Majadahonda. Dirección asistencial noroeste del Servicio
Madrileño de Salud (SERMAS), Madrid, España. (3)Centro de salud universitario
Villanueva de la Cañada, Madrid, Dirección asistencial Noroeste del Servicio
Madrileño de Salud (SERMAS), Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Madrid, España.

Comment in
    Enferm Clin. 2015 Jul-Aug;25(4):217-8.

OBJECTIVE: Study the relationship between motivation to change unhealthy life
styles and cardiovascular risk.
METHOD: Cross sectional study, random, stratified by age, carried out in the
field of primary care with a sample of 369 people. It was felt that with smoking 
or smoking cessation active consumption less than a year, the physical habit was 
valued at work and leisure, food habits were assessed in adherence to
mediterranean diet and the stages of motivation were categorized precontemplative
phase to maintenance phase. The cardiovascular risk was stratified with the SCORE
table calibrated in Spain.
RESULTS: The 49.6% were men and 50.4% were women, with an average age of 41.2
years. The prevalence of smoking was 31.4% (95% CI 26.56-36,30), 58% in sedentary
lifestyle (95% CI 52.27-62,63) and 68% for bad diet (95% CI 63.97-73,69). The
69.8% of smokers, 77.8% of sedentary and 48.4% of people without proper diet was 
precontemplative to change their lifestyles.
CONCLUSIONS: Precontemplative stages in unhealthy life styles have association
with risk factors and increase the global cardiovascular risk. The
transtheoretical model is a useful tool for the assessment of unhealthy behaviors
in lifestyles.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25059516  [PubMed - in process]


145. Horm Res Paediatr. 2014;82(2):127-32. doi: 10.1159/000363537. Epub 2014 Jul 23.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy: report of seven
additional sicilian patients and overview of the overall series from sicily.

Valenzise M(1), Fierabracci A, Cappa M, Porcelli P, Barcellona R, De Luca F,
Barollo S, Garelli S, Betterle C.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Pediatrics, Department of Pediatric Sciences, University of Messina,
Messina, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED) is a rare recessive inherited disease caused by the mutation of the AIRE
gene on chromosome 21. To date, 8 Sicilian patients have been described and the
R203X AIRE mutation was found to be the most common in this region.
AIMS: (1) To describe 7 additional Sicilian APECED patients and to review all 15 
Sicilian APECED patients who have been investigated by our group in the last
years, and (2) to report a novel AIRE gene mutation.
RESULTS: Among the 3 cardinal features of APECED, hypoparathyroidism has been
already detected in all 15 patients, whereas Addison's disease and chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis have so far been found in 10/15 and 12/15 cases,
respectively. In 2 consanguineous cases, AIRE gene analysis revealed a novel
mutation, named IVS13+2T, in homozygosis. R203X was the most common mutation in
this region (30% of alleles and 46.6% of patients), followed by R257X (20% of
alleles and 40% of patients).
CONCLUSIONS: Sicilian APECED patients are confirmed to have some peculiar
characteristics from a clinical and genetic point of view. No correlations
between genotype and phenotype were identified.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25059117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Immunol. 2014 Sep 1;193(5):2187-95. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400742. Epub 2014
Jul 18.

Altered expression of autoimmune regulator in infant down syndrome thymus, a
possible contributor to an autoimmune phenotype.

Skogberg G(1), Lundberg V(2), Lindgren S(2), Gudmundsdottir J(3), Sandström K(4),
Kämpe O(5), Annerén G(6), Gustafsson J(7), Sunnegårdh J(8), van der Post S(9),
Telemo E(2), Berglund M(2), Ekwall O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Inflammation Research, Institute of Medicine,
University of Gothenburg, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden; xskoga@gu.se. (2)Department 
of Rheumatology and Inflammation Research, Institute of Medicine, University of
Gothenburg, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden; (3)Department of Rheumatology and
Inflammation Research, Institute of Medicine, University of Gothenburg, 405 30
Gothenburg, Sweden; Department of Pediatrics at the Institute of Clinical
Sciences, University of Gothenburg, 416 86 Gothenburg, Sweden; (4)Department of
Pediatric Anesthesia and Intensive Care at the Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, 416 86 Gothenburg, Sweden; (5)Centre of Molecular Medicine,
Department of Medicine (Solna), Karolinska Institutet, 171 76 Stockholm, Sweden; 
Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, 750 03 Uppsala, Sweden;
(6)Department of Immunology, Genetics, and Pathology, Science for Life
Laboratory, Uppsala University, 751 85 Uppsala, Sweden; (7)Department of Women's 
and Children´s Health, Uppsala University, 751 85 Uppsala, Sweden; and.
(8)Department of Pediatrics at the Institute of Clinical Sciences, University of 
Gothenburg, 416 86 Gothenburg, Sweden; (9)Proteomics Core Facility at the
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 413 90 Gothenburg, Sweden.

Down syndrome (DS), caused by trisomy of chromosome 21, is associated with
immunological dysfunctions such as increased frequency of infections and
autoimmune diseases. Patients with DS share clinical features, such as autoimmune
manifestations and specific autoantibodies, with patients affected by autoimmune 
polyendocrine syndrome type 1. Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 is caused
by mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene, located on chromosome 21,
which regulates the expression of tissue-restricted Ags (TRAs) in thymic
epithelial cells. We investigated the expression of AIRE and TRAs in DS and
control thymic tissue using quantitative PCR. AIRE mRNA levels were elevated in
thymic tissue from DS patients, and trends toward increased expression of the
AIRE-controlled genes INSULIN and CHRNA1 were found. Immunohistochemical
stainings showed altered cell composition and architecture of the thymic medulla 
in DS individuals with increased frequencies of AIRE-positive medullary
epithelial cells and CD11c-positive dendritic cells as well as enlarged Hassall's
corpuscles. In addition, we evaluated the proteomic profile of thymic exosomes in
DS individuals and controls. DS exosomes carried a broader protein pool and also 
a larger pool of unique TRAs compared with control exosomes. In conclusion, the
increased AIRE gene dose in DS could contribute to an autoimmune phenotype
through multiple AIRE-mediated effects on homeostasis and function of thymic
epithelial cells that affect thymic selection processes.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4135177
PMID: 25038256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Aten Primaria. 2014 Oct;46(8):440-6. doi: 10.1016/j.aprim.2014.04.013. Epub 2014 
Jul 14.

[Familial combined hyperlipidemia: consensus document].

[Article in Spanish]

Mata P(1), Alonso R(2), Ruíz-Garcia A(3), Díaz-Díaz JL(4), González N(5),
Gijón-Conde T(6), Martínez-Faedo C(7), Morón I(8), Arranz E(9), Aguado R(10),
Argueso R(11), Perez de Isla L(12).

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Hipercolesterolemia Familiar, Madrid, España. Electronic address:
pmata@colesterolfamiliar.org. (2)Clínica de Lípidos, Medicina Interna,
IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, España. (3)Atención Primaria, Unidad de
Lípidos y Prevención Cardiovascular, Centro de Salud, Pinto, Madrid, España.
(4)Clínica de Lípidos, Medicina Interna, Hospital Abente y Lago, A Coruña,
España. (5)Departamento de Endocrinología y Nutrición, Hospital Universitario La 
Paz, Madrid, España. (6)Centro de Salud Cerro del Aire, Majadahonda, Universidad 
Autónoma, Majadahonda, Madrid, España. (7)Departamento de Endocrinología,
Hospital Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Asturias, España. (8)Centro de Salud de
Goya, Madrid, España. (9)Centro de Salud San Blas, Parla, Madrid, España.
(10)Departamento de Endocrinología, Hospital Universitario de León, León, España.
(11)Departamento de Endocrinología, Hospital de Lugo, Lugo, España. (12)Unidad de
Imagen Cardiovascular, Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital Clínico San Carlos,
Madrid, España.

Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCH) is a frequent disorder associated with
premature coronary artery disease. It is transmitted in an autosomal dominant
manner, although there is not a unique gene involved. The diagnosis is performed 
using clinical criteria, and variability in lipid phenotype and family history of
hyperlipidemia are necessaries. Frequently, the disorder is associated with type2
diabetes mellitus, arterial hypertension and central obesity. Patients with FCH
are considered as high cardiovascular risk and the lipid target is an
LDL-cholesterol <100mg/dL, and <70mg/dL if cardiovascular disease or type 2
diabetes are present. Patients with FCH require lipid lowering treatment using
potent statins and sometimes, combined lipid-lowering treatment. Identification
and management of other cardiovascular risk factors as type 2 diabetes and
hypertension are fundamental to reduce cardiovascular disease burden. This
document gives recommendations for the diagnosis and global treatment of patients
with FCH directed to specialists and general practitioners.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25034722  [PubMed - in process]


148. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Jul 17;55(8):5401-9. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-13924.

Topical administration of lacritin is a novel therapy for aqueous-deficient dry
eye disease.

Vijmasi T(1), Chen FY(1), Balasubbu S(1), Gallup M(1), McKown RL(2), Laurie
GW(3), McNamara NA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Francis I. Proctor Foundation, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, United States. (2)Department of Integrated Science and
Technology, James Madison University, Harrisonburg, Virginia, United States.
(3)Departments of Cell Biology and Ophthalmology, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia, United States. (4)Francis I. Proctor Foundation,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States 
Departments of Anatomy and Ophthalmology, University of California San Francisco,
San Francisco, California, United States School of Optometry and Vision Science
Program, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California, United States.

PURPOSE: Lacritin is a tear glycoprotein with prosecretory, prosurvival, and
mitogenic properties. We examined lacritin levels in the tears of Sjögren's
syndrome (SS) patients and explored the therapeutic potential of topical lacritin
for the treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
METHODS: Tears from healthy controls (n = 14) and SS patients (n = 15) were
assayed for lacritin using a C-terminal antibody. In a paired-eye study,
autoimmune regulator (Aire) knockout (KO) mice (n = 7) were treated three times
daily for 21 days with 10 µL of 4 µM lacritin (left eye) or vehicle (PBS) control
(right eye). Tear secretion and ocular surface integrity were assessed at
baseline and after treatment. Immunohistochemical staining of CD4+ T cells,
cytokeratin-10 (K10), and cytokeratin-12 (K12) expression in the cornea and CD4+ 
T cell infiltration in the lacrimal glands were assessed.
RESULTS: Lacritin monomer (421.8 ± 65.3 ng [SS] vs. 655.8 ± 118.9 ng [controls]; 
P = 0.05) and C-terminal fragment protein (125 ± 34.1 ng [SS] vs. 399.5 ± 84.3 ng
[controls]; P = 0.008) per 100 µL of tear eluate were significantly lower in SS
patients. In Aire KO mice treated with lacritin, tear secretion increased by 46% 
(13.0 ± 3.5 mm vs. 8.9 ± 2.9 mm; P = 0.01) and lissamine green staining score
significantly decreased relative to baseline (-0.417 ± 0.06 vs. 0.125 ± 0.07; P =
0.02). Expression of K10 but not K12 in the cornea was significantly decreased in
lacritin-treated eyes. Focal CD4+ T cell infiltration of the lacrimal glands was 
significantly reduced on the lacritin-treated side versus the untreated side.
CONCLUSIONS: Lacritin is significantly reduced in the tears of SS patients.
Topically administered lacritin has therapeutic potential for the treatment of
aqueous-deficient dry eye disease.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4148924
PMID: 25034600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Ethnopharmacol. 2014 Sep 11;155(2):1093-117. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.06.042.
Epub 2014 Jul 1.

Hot and cold: medicinal plant uses in Quechua speaking communities in the high
Andes (Callejón de Huaylas, Ancash, Perú).

de la Cruz MG(1), Malpartida SB(2), Santiago HB(2), Jullian V(3), Bourdy G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Ricardo Palma, Av. Benavides 5440, Santiago de Surco, Lima 33,
Perú (2)Instituto de Etnobiologia, Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad San
Marcos, Av. Arenales 1256, Jesus Maria, Lima 14, Perú (3)Université de Toulouse, 
Université Paul Sabatier, UMR152 Pharma-DEV, Faculté de Pharmacie, 35 Chemin des 
maraîchers, F-31062 Toulouse cedex 9, France; Institut de Recherche pour le
Développement (IRD), UMR 152, Mission IRD, Casilla 18-1209, Lima, Perú
(4)Universidad Ricardo Palma, Av. Benavides 5440, Santiago de Surco, Lima 33,
Perú; Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), UMR 152 Pharma-DEV,
Faculté de Pharmacie, 35 Chemin des maraîchers, F-31062 Toulouse cedex 9, France.
Electronic address: genevieve.bourdy@ird.fr.

ETHNO-PHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: An ethnopharmacological survey has been set up
in high altitude Quechua speaking communities dwelling in Callejón de Huaylas
(Ancash department, Peru) and in medicinal plant markets in order to document the
medicinal plants use of 178 species within the frame of a traditional Andean
medicinal system.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A sound ethnopharmacological survey was performed during
the years 2011, 2012 and 2013 in different places along Callejón de Huaylas
valley in the peruvian Andes, were Quechua speaking communities dwell. Two
different methodologies were used: first, plant uses were recorded during walks
with informants and in medicinal plant markets held on a regular bases in the
area (Huaraz, Carhuaz, Yungay). Secondly, traditional healers (curanderas,
curanderos) were interviewed about their practices and healing sessions were
observed, in order to understand better the traditional medicinal system as a
whole (disease aetiology, diagnosis, treatments, healers).
RESULTS: Altogether, 178 medicinal species were collected. Most of the plants
found on the market were also found in the wild and vice-versa. Medicinal plant
trade is exclusively held by women, selling their merchandise to local people or 
to big retailer. Plants are classified according their hot or cold virtues, this 
in accordance with the local conception of the body physiology and disease
aetiology, based on a hot-cold polarity. Main use notified for medicinal plants
is "(bath) against cold", a prophylactic measure against diseases of cold nature.
Other uses include culture bound illnesses i.e. susto, aire, nervios, or heart
pain, commonly cited in South America. Regarding symptoms, rheumatic/arthritic
pain, musculoskeletal traumas, cough, pulmonary and respiratory problems,
gastritis and stomach ache, were the most frequently cited. Diagnosis and
treatment are intrinsically linked together and mainly based upon divination
techniques using egg and cuy (Cavia porcellus L., Caviidae).
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Medicinal plants use and traditional medicinal
practices are still very vivid in Callejón de Huaylas as highlighted by the
abundance of medicinal plants traded in the markets. In this business, women have
a key position as healers at the family and community level. Medicinal uses of
the majority of the species presented here are reported for the first time.
Because medicinal plants sold on the market are collected from the wild and also 
because high altitude medicinal plants are generally small herbaceous species
pulled out with their roots, there is a serious risk of over exploitation and
extinction of endemic species.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 24995836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Immunol. 2014 Aug 1;193(3):1204-12. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400993. Epub 2014
Jul 2.

Differential requirement for CCR4 and CCR7 during the development of innate and
adaptive aßT cells in the adult thymus.

Cowan JE(1), McCarthy NI(1), Parnell SM(1), White AJ(1), Bacon A(1), Serge A(2), 
Irla M(3), Lane PJ(1), Jenkinson EJ(1), Jenkinson WE(1), Anderson G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Immune Regulation, Institute for
Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United
Kingdom; (2)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Institut
Paoli-Calmettes, INSERM Unité Mixte de Recherche 1068, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 7258, Aix-Marseille University,
UM 105, F-13009 Marseille, France; and. (3)Centre d'Immunologie de
Marseille-Luminy, INSERM Unité Mixte de Recherche 631, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 6102, Aix-Marseille University,
UM 2, F-13009 Marseille, France. (4)Medical Research Council Centre for Immune
Regulation, Institute for Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom; g.anderson@bham.ac.uk.

aßT cell development depends upon serial migration of thymocyte precursors
through cortical and medullary microenvironments, enabling specialized stromal
cells to provide important signals at specific stages of their development.
Although conventional aßT cells are subject to clonal deletion in the medulla,
entry into the thymus medulla also fosters aßT cell differentiation. For example,
during postnatal periods, the medulla is involved in the intrathymic generation
of multiple aßT cell lineages, notably the induction of Foxp3(+) regulatory T
cell development and the completion of invariant NKT cell development. Although
migration of conventional aßT cells to the medulla is mediated by the chemokine
receptor CCR7, how other T cell subsets gain access to medullary areas during
their normal development is not clear. In this study, we show that combining a
panel of thymocyte maturation markers with cell surface analysis of CCR7 and CCR4
identifies distinct stages in the development of multiple aßT cell lineages in
the thymus. Although Aire regulates expression of the CCR4 ligands CCL17 and
CCL22, we show that CCR4 is dispensable for thymocyte migration and development
in the adult thymus, demonstrating defective T cell development in Aire(-/-) mice
is not because of a loss of CCR4-mediated migration. Moreover, we reveal that
CCR7 controls the development of invariant NKT cells by enabling their access to 
IL-15 trans-presentation in the thymic medulla and influences the balance of
early and late intrathymic stages of Foxp3(+) regulatory T cell development.
Collectively, our data identify novel roles for CCR7 during intrathymic T cell
development, highlighting its importance in enabling multiple aßT cell lineages
to access the thymic medulla.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4105241
PMID: 24990081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 2;9(7):e101616. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101616. eCollection
2014.

New splice site acceptor mutation in AIRE gene in autoimmune polyendocrine
syndrome type 1.

Mora M(1), Hanzu FA(1), Pradas-Juni M(2), Aranda GB(1), Halperin I(3),
Puig-Domingo M(4), Aguiló S(5), Fernández-Rebollo E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain; 
Laboratory of Endocrine Disorders, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August
Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain; Spanish Biomedical Research Centre in
Diabetes and Associated Metabolic Disorders (CIBERDEM), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Spanish Biomedical Research Centre in Diabetes and Associated Metabolic
Disorders (CIBERDEM), Barcelona, Spain; Diabetes and Obesity Research Laboratory 
- Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, 
Spain. (3)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, 
Spain; Laboratory of Endocrine Disorders, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques
August Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain. (4)Department of Endocrinology
and Nutrition, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol Research Institut and Hospital,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Badalona, Spain. (5)Department of Internal
Medicine, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS-1, OMIM 240300) is a rare autosomal
recessive disorder, characterized by the presence of at least two of three major 
diseases: hypoparathyroidism, Addison's disease, and chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis. We aim to identify the molecular defects and investigate the
clinical and mutational characteristics in an index case and other members of a
consanguineous family. We identified a novel homozygous mutation in the splice
site acceptor (SSA) of intron 5 (c.653-1G>A) in two siblings with different
clinical outcomes of APS-1. Coding DNA sequencing revealed that this AIRE
mutation potentially compromised the recognition of the constitutive SSA of
intron 5, splicing upstream onto a nearby cryptic SSA in intron 5. Surprisingly, 
the use of an alternative SSA entails the uncovering of a cryptic donor splice
site in exon 5. This new transcript generates a truncated protein (p.A214fs67X)
containing the first 213 amino acids and followed by 68 aberrant amino acids. The
mutation affects the proper splicing, not only at the acceptor but also at the
donor splice site, highlighting the complexity of recognizing suitable splicing
sites and the importance of sequencing the intron-exon junctions for a more
precise molecular diagnosis and correct genetic counseling. As both siblings were
carrying the same mutation but exhibited a different APS-1 onset, and one of the 
brothers was not clinically diagnosed, our finding highlights the possibility to 
suspect mutations in the AIRE gene in cases of childhood chronic candidiasis
and/or hypoparathyroidism otherwise unexplained, especially when the phenotype is
associated with other autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC4079332
PMID: 24988226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2014 Nov;166:24-33. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpc.2014.06.005. Epub 2014 Jun 28.

The effects on steroidogenesis and histopathology of adult male Japanese quails
(Coturnix coturnix japonica) testis following pre-pubertal exposure to
di(n-butyl) phthalate (DBP).

Bello UM(1), Madekurozwa MC(2), Groenewald HB(2), Aire TA(3), Arukwe A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, University of Pretoria, Private Bag X04,
Onderstepoort 0110, South Africa; Department of Veterinary Anatomy, Ahmadu Bello 
University, Zaria, Nigeria. (2)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, University
of Pretoria, Private Bag X04, Onderstepoort 0110, South Africa. (3)Department of 
Anatomy and Physiology, University of Pretoria, Private Bag X04, Onderstepoort
0110, South Africa; Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Pharmacology, School of
Veterinary Medicine, St. George's University, True Blue, St George's, Grenada.
(4)Department of Biology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), 
Høgskoleringen 5, 7491 Trondheim, Norway. Electronic address: arukwe@bio.ntnu.no.

In the present study, we have investigated the effects of 30-day dietary
(pre-pubertal) exposure to different doses (0 (control), 1, 10, 50, 200 and 400
mg/kg bodyweight/day) of di(n-butyl) phthalate (DBP) on Leydig cells of adult
male Japanese quails by quantifying the transcript levels for P450 side-chain
cleavage (p450scc), P450c17 (CYP17), and 3ß- and 17ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
(hsd) using quantitative (real-time) polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). In
addition, the plasma testosterone levels were analysed using radioimmunoassay
(RIA) and testis was examined for evidence of gross pathology and histopathology.
Our data showed that pre-pubertal exposure to DBP produced alterations in
testicular architecture as evident by poorly developed or mis-shaped testis, and 
altered spermatogenesis due to tubular degeneration and atrophy of seminiferous
tubules especially in the high DBP dose (200 and 400 mg/kg) treated groups. In
addition, DBP altered several key enzymes involved in testicular steroidogenesis 
pathways in an apparent dose-dependent manner. For example, biphasic effects of
DBP were observed for P450scc and 3ß-hsd mRNA, that were generally increasing at 
low dose 10 mg/kg, and thereafter, an apparent dose-dependent decrease between 50
and 400mg/kg. The steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein was at the lowest
detectable limits and therefore not quantifiable. These effects did not parallel 
the non-significant changes observed for plasma testosterone levels. The present 
data is consistent with previous reports showing that DBP modulates Leydig cell
steroidogenesis in several species, with a potential negative effect on
reproduction in those avian species that are vulnerable to endocrine disrupting
chemicals.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24983780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2014;37(3):133-8.

[Function of Aire in central and peripheral immune tolerance].

[Article in Japanese]

Hanafusa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Postdoctoral Fellow, Laboratory of Dr. Mark S Anderson, Diabetes Center,
University of California, San Francisco.

Negative selection induces central tolerance in which self-reactive T cells are
deleted by medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) to prevent autoimmunity. The
transcriptional factor, autoimmune regulator (Aire), controls the expression of
tissue-specific antigens (TSAs) by mTECs for negative selection. The mechanisms
by which Aire targets loci which encode TSAs are unknown in detail; recently,
however, the ATF7ip-MBD1 complex was identified as an Aire-interacting
transcriptional protein complex required for its targeting the loci. Lineage
tracing of Aire(+) mTECs identified that mTECs have a post-Aire stage during the 
development, where they lost maturation markers but maintained intermediate TSA
expression, and Aire is required for the terminal differentiation of mTEC's.
Extrathymic Aire-expressing cells (eTACs) are identified in murine and human
secondary lymphoid organs. eTACs express major histocompatibility complex class
II(hi), CD80(lo), CD86(lo), epithelial cell adhesion molecule(hi), CD45(lo) bone 
marrow-derived peripheral antigen-presenting cell population, which is distinct
from mTECs and dendritic cells. They can induce activation-induced cell death of 
self-reactive CD8(+) T cells and unresponsiveness of self-reactive CD4(+) T cells
through a mechanism that does not require regulatory T cells, suggesting that
peripheral Aire plays a complementary role for central tolerance.

PMID: 24974924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Autoimmunity. 2014 Dec;47(8):556-62. doi: 10.3109/08916934.2014.929666. Epub 2014
Jun 24.

In vivo analysis of helper T cell responses in patients with autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy - candidiasis - ectodermal dystrophy provides evidence in
support of an IL-22 defect.

Laakso SM(1), Kekäläinen E, Heikkilä N, Mannerström H, Kisand K, Peterson P,
Ranki A, Arstila TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Haartman Institute, and Research Programs Unit,
Immunobiology, University of Helsinki , Helsinki , Finland .

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy - candidiasis - ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is
caused by mutations in the Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene and is associated
with neutralizing anti-cytokine autoantibodies. We have used an in vivo challenge
model to analyze antigen-specific CD4(+) T cell responses. Bacille
Calmette-Guérin (BCG)-vaccinated patients and controls were injected tuberculin
intradermally, skin blisters were induced by suction on the indurations and on
unexposed skin, and the infiltrating cells harvested. The patients had a
quantitatively normal CD4(+) T cell response and no significant abnormalities in 
the expression of T helper type (Th) 1- or Th2-related genes. The expression of
interleukin (IL)-22, in contrast, was lower in the patients. Two patients, both
with a pre-existing ocular keratopathy, experienced a relapse of
keratoconjunctivitis, suggesting a possible immunological basis for this APECED
component. Our in vivo data are compatible with a selective IL-22 defect in the
activated CD4(+) T cells of APECED patients, affecting also unexposed skin in
steady-state conditions.

PMID: 24957984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Diabetes. 2014 Dec;63(12):4378-87. doi: 10.2337/db14-0319. Epub 2014 Jun 19.

Common genetic variants highlight the role of insulin resistance and body fat
distribution in type 2 diabetes, independent of obesity.

Scott RA(1), Fall T(2), Pasko D(3), Barker A(4), Sharp SJ(4), Arriola L(5),
Balkau B(6), Barricarte A(7), Barroso I(8), Boeing H(9), Clavel-Chapelon F(6),
Crowe FL(10), Dekker JM(11), Fagherazzi G(6), Ferrannini E(12), Forouhi NG(4),
Franks PW(13), Gavrila D(14), Giedraitis V(15), Grioni S(16), Groop LC(17), Kaaks
R(18), Key TJ(10), Kühn T(18), Lotta LA(4), Nilsson PM(19), Overvad K(20), Palli 
D(21), Panico S(22), Quirós JR(23), Rolandsson O(24), Roswall N(25), Sacerdote
C(26), Sala N(27), Sánchez MJ(28), Schulze MB(9), Siddiq A(29), Slimani N(30),
Sluijs I(31), Spijkerman AM(32), Tjonneland A(25), Tumino R(33), van der A
DL(32), Yaghootkar H(3); RISC Study Group; EPIC-InterAct Consortium, McCarthy
MI(34), Semple RK(35), Riboli E(29), Walker M(36), Ingelsson E(2), Frayling
TM(3), Savage DB(35), Langenberg C(4), Wareham NJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Epidemiology Unit, Institute of Metabolic Science, Cambridge Biomedical
Campus, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge, U.K.
robert.scott@mrc-epid.cam.ac.uk. (2)Department of Medical Sciences, Molecular
Epidemiology, and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden. (3)Genetics of Complex Traits, University of Exeter Medical School,
Exeter, U.K. (4)MRC Epidemiology Unit, Institute of Metabolic Science, Cambridge 
Biomedical Campus, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine,
Cambridge, U.K. (5)Public Health Division of Gipuzkoa, San Sebastian, Spain
Instituto BioDonostia, Basque Government, San Sebastian, Spain Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red Epidemiología y Salud Pública, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)INSERM, Centre de recherché en Épidémilogie et Santé des Populations, U1018,
Villejuif, France Université Paris-Sud, UMRS 1018, Villejuif, France. (7)Centro
de Investigación Biomédica en Red Epidemiología y Salud Pública, Barcelona, Spain
Navarre Public Health Institute, Pamplona, Spain. (8)Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Cambridge, U.K. University of Cambridge Metabolic Research
Laboratories, Cambridge, U.K. (9)German Institute of Human Nutrition,
Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Germany. (10)University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.
(11)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Vrije Universiteit Medical
Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (12)Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (13)Lund University, Malmö, Sweden Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden. (14)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red
Epidemiología y Salud Pública, Barcelona, Spain Department of Epidemiology,
Murcia Regional Health Council, Murcia, Spain. (15)Department of Public Health
and Caring Sciences, Geriatrics, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(16)Epidemiology and Prevention Unit, Milan, Italy. (17)University Hospital
Scania, Malmö, Sweden Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (18)German Cancer Research Centre, Heidelberg,
Germany. (19)Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. (20)Department of Public Health,
Section for Epidemiology, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark Aalborg University
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark. (21)Cancer Research and Prevention Institute,
Florence, Italy. (22)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Federico II
University, Naples, Italy. (23)Public Health Directorate, Asturias, Spain.
(24)Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden. (25)Danish Cancer Society Research Center,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (26)Unit of Cancer Epidemiology, Citta' della Salute e della
Scienza Hospital-University of Turin and Center for Cancer Prevention, Torino,
Italy Human Genetics Foundation, Torino, Italy. (27)Unit of Nutrition,
Environment and Cancer, Cancer Epidemiology Research Program, and Translational
Research Laboratory, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain. (28)Centro 
de Investigación Biomédica en Red Epidemiología y Salud Pública, Barcelona, Spain
Andalusian School of Public Health, Granada, Spain Instituto de Investigación
Biosanitaria de Granada, Granada, Spain. (29)School of Public Health, Imperial
College London, London, U.K. (30)International Agency for Research on Cancer,
Lyon, France. (31)University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(32)National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, the
Netherlands. (33)Azienda Sanitaria Provinciale, Ragusa, Italy Aire Onlus, Ragusa,
Italy. (34)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, University 
of Oxford, Oxford, U.K. Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of
Oxford, Oxford, U.K. National Institute of Health Research Oxford Biomedical
Research Centre, Oxford, U.K. (35)University of Cambridge Metabolic Research
Laboratories, Cambridge, U.K. (36)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.

We aimed to validate genetic variants as instruments for insulin resistance and
secretion, to characterize their association with intermediate phenotypes, and to
investigate their role in type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk among normal-weight,
overweight, and obese individuals. We investigated the association of genetic
scores with euglycemic-hyperinsulinemic clamp- and oral glucose tolerance
test-based measures of insulin resistance and secretion and a range of metabolic 
measures in up to 18,565 individuals. We also studied their association with T2D 
risk among normal-weight, overweight, and obese individuals in up to 8,124
incident T2D cases. The insulin resistance score was associated with lower
insulin sensitivity measured by M/I value (ß in SDs per allele [95% CI], -0.03
[-0.04, -0.01]; P = 0.004). This score was associated with lower BMI (-0.01
[-0.01, -0.0]; P = 0.02) and gluteofemoral fat mass (-0.03 [-0.05, -0.02; P = 1.4
× 10(-6)) and with higher alanine transaminase (0.02 [0.01, 0.03]; P = 0.002) and
<U+03B3>-glutamyl transferase (0.02 [0.01, 0.03]; P = 0.001). While the secretion score 
had a stronger association with T2D in leaner individuals (Pinteraction = 0.001),
we saw no difference in the association of the insulin resistance score with T2D 
among BMI or waist strata (Pinteraction > 0.31). While insulin resistance is
often considered secondary to obesity, the association of the insulin resistance 
score with lower BMI and adiposity and with incident T2D even among individuals
of normal weight highlights the role of insulin resistance and ectopic fat
distribution in T2D, independently of body size.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMCID: PMC4241116
PMID: 24947364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Nov;27(11-12):1257-60. doi:
10.1515/jpem-2013-0328.

Polyglandular autoimmune syndrome type I - a novel AIRE mutation in a North
American patient.

Huibregtse KE, Wolfgram P, Winer KK, Connor EL.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS-1), also referred to as autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), is a rare
autoimmune disease that results from autosomal recessive mutations of the human
autoimmune regulatory (AIRE) gene. We present the case of a 17-year-old North
American girl of primarily Norwegian descent with a novel AIRE gene mutation
causing APS-1. In addition to the classic triad of chronic candidiasis,
hypoparathyoidism and autoimmune adrenocortical insufficiency, she also has
vitiligo, intestinal malabsorption, autoimmune hepatitis, autoimmune
hypothyroidism, myositis, myalgias, chronic fatigue, and failure to thrive.
Genetic testing revealed heterozygosity for c.20_115de196 and c.967_979del13
mutations in the AIRE gene. The AIRE gene c.20_115de196 mutation has not been
previously reported.

PMCID: PMC4407642
PMID: 24945421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol. 2014 Jul;89(7):257-9. doi: 10.1016/j.oftal.2014.04.002.
Epub 2014 Jun 14.

[Non-organic visual loss].

[Article in Spanish]

Santos-Bueso E(1), Zarco-Villarosa D(2), Esteban-de-Antonio M(3), Vinuesa-Silva
JM(4), García-Sánchez J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Neurooftalmología, Servicio de Oftalmología, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San Carlos (IdISSC), Madrid, España.
Electronic address: esbueso@hotmail.com. (2)Clínica Oftalmológica Xabia,
Valencia, España. (3)Servicio de Oftalmología, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, España.
(4)Cátedra de Oftalmología, Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, España.
(5)Unidad de Neurooftalmología, Servicio de Oftalmología, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San Carlos (IdISSC), Madrid, España.

PMID: 24939287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Autoimmun. 2014 Aug;52:1-28. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.05.001. Epub 2014 Jun 13.

Myasthenia Gravis: paradox versus paradigm in autoimmunity.

Berrih-Aknin S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Myology Research Center UM76,
F-75013 Paris, France; INSERM U974, F-75013 Paris, France; CNRS FRE 3617, F-75013
Paris, France; Institute of Myology, F-75013 Paris, France. Electronic address:
sonia.berrih-aknin@upmc.fr.

Myasthenia Gravis (MG) is a paradigm of organ-specific autoimmune disease (AID). 
It is mediated by antibodies that target the neuromuscular junction. The purpose 
of this review is to place MG in the general context of autoimmunity, to
summarize the common mechanisms between MG and other AIDs, and to describe the
specific mechanisms of MG. We have chosen the most common organ-specific AIDs to 
compare with MG: type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM), autoimmune thyroid diseases
(AITD), multiple sclerosis (MS), some systemic AIDs (systemic lupus erythematous 
(SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Sjogren's syndrome (SS)), as well as
inflammatory diseases of the gut and liver (celiac disease (CeD), Crohn's disease
(CD), and primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC)). Several features are similar between 
all AIDs, suggesting that common pathogenic mechanisms lead to their development.
In this review, we address the predisposing factors (genetic, epigenetic,
hormones, vitamin D, microbiota), the triggering components (infections, drugs)
and their interactions with the immune system [1,2]. The dysregulation of the
immune system is detailed and includes the role of B cells, Treg cells, Th17 and 
cytokines. We particularly focused on the role of TNF-a and interferon type I
whose role in MG is very analogous to that in several other AIDS. The implication
of AIRE, a key factor in central tolerance is also discussed. Finally, if MG is a
prototype of AIDS, it has a clear specificity compared to the other AIDS, by the 
fact that the target organ, the muscle, is not the site of immune infiltration
and B cell expansion, but exclusively that of antibody-mediated pathogenic
mechanisms. By contrast, the thymus in the early onset subtype frequently
undergoes tissue remodeling, resulting in the development of ectopic germinal
centers surrounded by high endothelial venules (HEV), as observed in the target
organs of many other AIDs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24934596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 16;9(6):e98994. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098994. eCollection
2014.

An ecosystem-based approach to assess the status of a Mediterranean ecosystem,
the Posidonia oceanica seagrass meadow.

Personnic S(1), Boudouresque CF(1), Astruch P(2), Ballesteros E(3), Blouet S(4), 
Bellan-Santini D(5), Bonhomme P(2), Thibault-Botha D(1), Feunteun E(6),
Harmelin-Vivien M(1), Pergent G(7), Pergent-Martini C(7), Pastor J(8), Poggiale
JC(1), Renaud F(5), Thibaut T(1), Ruitton S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aix-Marseille University, Mediterranean Institute of Oceanography (MIO),
Université de Toulon, CNRS/INSU, IRD, UM 110, Marseille, France. (2)GIS
Posidonie, Pytheas Institute, Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France.
(3)Centre d'Estudis Avançats de Blanes - CSIC, Blanes, Spain. (4)Aire marine
protégée de la côte Agathoise, site natura 2000, Agde, France. (5)Aix-Marseille
University, Institut Méditerranéen de Biodiversité et d'Ecologie (IMBE), UMR
7263, Station Marine d'Endoume, Marseille, France. (6)Museum National d'Histoire 
Naturelle, UMR 7208, Station Marine de Dinard, France. (7)Equipe Ecosystèmes
Littoraux, FRES 3041, University of Corsica, Corte, France. (8)Université de
Perpignan, Via Domitia, Centre de Formation et de Recherche sur les
Environnements Méditerranéens, UMR 5110, Perpignan, France.

Biotic indices, which reflect the quality of the environment, are widely used in 
the marine realm. Sometimes, key species or ecosystem engineers are selected for 
this purpose. This is the case of the Mediterranean seagrass Posidonia oceanica, 
widely used as a biological quality element in the context of the European Union 
Water Framework Directive (WFD). The good quality of a water body and the
apparent health of a species, whether or not an ecosystem engineer such as P.
oceanica, is not always indicative of the good structure and functioning of the
whole ecosystem. A key point of the recent Marine Strategy Framework Directive
(MSFD) is the ecosystem-based approach. Here, on the basis of a simplified
conceptual model of the P. oceanica ecosystem, we have proposed an
ecosystem-based index of the quality of its functioning, compliant with the MSFD 
requirements. This index (EBQI) is based upon a set of representative functional 
compartments, the weighting of these compartments and the assessment of the
quality of each compartment by comparison of a supposed baseline. The index well 
discriminated 17 sites in the north-western Mediterranean (French Riviera,
Provence, Corsica, Catalonia and Balearic Islands) covering a wide range of human
pressure levels. The strong points of the EBQI are that it is easy to implement, 
non-destructive, relatively robust, according to the selection of the
compartments and to their weighting, and associated with confidence indices that 
indicate possible weakness and biases and therefore the need for further field
data acquisition.

PMCID: PMC4059631
PMID: 24933020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Environ Int. 2014 Sep;70:25-31. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2014.05.004. Epub 2014 May 
28.

Comparing measured and modelled PFOS concentrations in a UK freshwater catchment 
and estimating emission rates.

Earnshaw MR(1), Paul AG(1), Loos R(2), Tavazzi S(2), Paracchini B(2), Scheringer 
M(3), Hungerbühler K(3), Jones KC(1), Sweetman AJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lancaster Environment Centre, Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YQ, UK.
(2)European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Institute for Environment and
Sustainability, 21020 Ispra, Italy. (3)Institute for Chemical and Bioengineering,
ETH Zürich, CH-8093 Zürich, Switzerland. (4)Lancaster Environment Centre,
Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YQ, UK; Centre for Ecology and Hydrology,
LA1 4AP, UK. Electronic address: a.sweetman@lancaster.ac.uk.

The lifecycle, sources and fate of perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) continue to
generate scientific and political interest, particularly since PFOS was listed by
the Stockholm Convention and largely restricted in Europe. It continues to be
detected in aquatic environments, with only limited studies into the on-going
sources. This paper explores PFOS emissions discharged by the general population 
into a small catchment comprising two rivers in the UK. A sampling campaign was
undertaken to improve our understanding of population-derived PFOS sources from
sewage treatment plants (STPs) and in rivers. A corresponding modelling exercise 
allowed an emission estimate of 13µg/day/per capita to be derived for the Aire
and Calder rivers. PFOS emission was linked to STP discharges bylinear regression
of measured and modelled concntrations (R(2)=0.49-0.85). The model was able to
accurately estimate the spatial trends of PFOS in the rivers, while predicted
concentrations were within a factor of three based on per capita emission values 
taken from the literature. Measured PFOS concentrations in rivers suggested that 
emissions from STPs are partially dependent on treatment type, where plants with 
secondary or tertiary treatment such as activated sludge processes emit less
PFOS, possibly due to increased partitioning and retention. With refinements
based on the type of treatment at each STP, predictions were further improved.
The total PFOS mass discharged annually via rivers from the UK has been estimated
to be between 215 and 310kg, based on the per capita emission range derived in
this study.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24879369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2014 Apr 24;7:7. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-7-7. eCollection
2014.

ChIP-less analysis of chromatin states.

Su Z(1), Boersma MD(2), Lee JH(1), Oliver SS(1), Liu S(3), Garcia BA(3), Denu
JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
53706, USA ; Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
WI 53715, USA. (2)Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, WI 53715, USA ; Biotechnology Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 
WI 53706, USA. (3)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

BACKGROUND: Histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) are key epigenetic
regulators in chromatin-based processes. Increasing evidence suggests that vast
combinations of PTMs exist within chromatin histones. These complex patterns,
rather than individual PTMs, are thought to define functional chromatin states.
However, the ability to interrogate combinatorial histone PTM patterns at the
nucleosome level has been limited by the lack of direct molecular tools.
RESULTS: Here we demonstrate an efficient, quantitative, antibody-free, chromatin
immunoprecipitation-less (ChIP-less) method for interrogating diverse epigenetic 
states. At the heart of the workflow are recombinant chromatin reader domains,
which target distinct chromatin states with combinatorial PTM patterns. Utilizing
a newly designed combinatorial histone peptide microarray, we showed that three
reader domains (ATRX-ADD, ING2-PHD and AIRE-PHD) displayed greater specificity
towards combinatorial PTM patterns than corresponding commercial histone
antibodies. Such specific recognitions were employed to develop a chromatin
reader-based affinity enrichment platform (matrix-assisted reader chromatin
capture, or MARCC). We successfully applied the reader-based platform to capture 
unique chromatin states, which were quantitatively profiled by mass spectrometry 
to reveal interconnections between nucleosomal histone PTMs. Specifically, a
highly enriched signature that harbored H3K4me0, H3K9me2/3, H3K79me0 and
H4K20me2/3 within the same nucleosome was identified from chromatin enriched by
ATRX-ADD. This newly reported PTM combination was enriched in heterochromatin, as
revealed by the associated DNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest the broad utility of recombinant reader domains 
as an enrichment tool specific to combinatorial PTM patterns, which are difficult
to probe directly by antibody-based approaches. The reader affinity platform is
compatible with several downstream analyses to investigate the physical
coexistence of nucleosomal PTM states associated with specific genomic loci.
Collectively, the reader-based workflow will greatly facilitate our understanding
of how distinct chromatin states and reader domains function in gene regulatory
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4022240
PMID: 24872844  [PubMed]


162. Rev Panam Salud Publica. 2014 Apr;35(4):305-16.

[Explaining racial disparities in infant health in Brazil].

[Article in Spanish]

A Nyarko K(1), López-Camelo J(2), E Castilla E(2), L Wehby G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Gestión y Políticas de Salud, Universidad de Iowa en la ciudad
de Iowa, Iowa, Estados Unidos de América, george-wehby@uiowa.edu.
(2)Latinoamericano de Malformaciones Congénitas, Centro de Educación Médica e
Investigación Clínica, Buenos Aire, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

OBJECTIVES: We sought to quantify how socioeconomic, health care, demographic,
and geographic effects explain racial disparities in low birth weight (LBW) and
preterm birth (PTB) rates in Brazil.
METHODS: We employed a sample of 8 949 infants born between 1995 and 2009 in 15
cities and 7 provinces in Brazil. We focused on disparities in LBW (< 2 500 g)
and PTB (< 37 gestational weeks) prevalence between infants of African ancestry
alone or African mixed with other ancestries, and European ancestry alone. We
used a decomposition model to quantify the contributions of conceptually relevant
factors to these disparities.
RESULTS: The model explained 45% to 94% of LBW and 64% to 94% of PTB disparities 
between the African ancestry groups and European ancestry. Differences in
prenatal care use and geographic location were the most important contributors,
followed by socioeconomic differences. The model explained the majority of the
disparities for mixed African ancestry and part of the disparity for African
ancestry alone.
CONCLUSIONS: Public policies to improve children's health should target prenatal 
care and geographic location differences to reduce health disparities between
infants of African and European ancestries in Brazil.

PMID: 24870011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. PLoS Med. 2014 May 20;11(5):e1001647. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001647.
eCollection 2014.

Gene-lifestyle interaction and type 2 diabetes: the EPIC interact case-cohort
study.

Langenberg C(1), Sharp SJ(1), Franks PW(2), Scott RA(1), Deloukas P(3), Forouhi
NG(1), Froguel P(4), Groop LC(5), Hansen T(6), Palla L(1), Pedersen O(7), Schulze
MB(8), Tormo MJ(9), Wheeler E(3), Agnoli C(10), Arriola L(11), Barricarte A(12), 
Boeing H(8), Clarke GM(13), Clavel-Chapelon F(14), Duell EJ(15), Fagherazzi
G(14), Kaaks R(16), Kerrison ND(1), Key TJ(17), Khaw KT(18), Kröger J(8), Lajous 
M(19), Morris AP(13), Navarro C(20), Nilsson PM(21), Overvad K(22), Palli D(23), 
Panico S(24), Quirós JR(25), Rolandsson O(26), Sacerdote C(27), Sánchez MJ(28),
Slimani N(29), Spijkerman AM(30), Tumino R(31), van der A DL(30), van der Schouw 
YT(32), Barroso I(33), McCarthy MI(34), Riboli E(35), Wareham NJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom. (2)Lund University, Malmö, Sweden; Umeå University,
Umeå, Sweden. (3)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. 
(4)Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. (5)University Hospital
Scania, Malmö, Sweden; Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (6)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic
Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. (7)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for
Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Faculty of Health Science, University of Aarhus,
Aarhus, Denmark; Institute of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (8)German Institute of Human
Nutrition, Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Germany. (9)Department of Epidemiology, Murcia
Regional Health Council, Murcia, Spain; Consorcio de Investigación Biomédica de
Epidemiología y Salud Pública, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain;
Department of Health and Social Sciences, Universidad de Murcia, Spain.
(10)Epidemiology and Prevention Unit, Milan, Italy. (11)Consorcio de
Investigación Biomédica de Epidemiología y Salud Pública, Instituto de Salud
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain; Public Health Division of Gipuzkoa, San Sebastian,
Spain; Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria BioDonostia, Basque Government, San
Sebastian, Spain. (12)Consorcio de Investigación Biomédica de Epidemiología y
Salud Pública, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain; Navarre Public
Health Institute, Pamplona, Spain. (13)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (14)Inserm, CESP U1018, Villejuif, 
France; Université Paris-Sud, UMRS 1018, Villejuif, France. (15)Catalan Institute
of Oncology, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain.
(16)German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. (17)University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom. (18)University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(19)Inserm, CESP U1018, Villejuif, France; Center for Research on Population
Health, National Institute of Public Health of Mexico, Cuernavaca, Mexico;
Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (20)Department of Epidemiology, Murcia
Regional Health Council, Murcia, Spain; Consorcio de Investigación Biomédica de
Epidemiología y Salud Pública, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain; Unit
of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, School of Medicine, University of
Murcia, Murcia, Spain. (21)Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. (22)Department of
Public Health, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark; Aalborg University Hospital,
Aalborg, Denmark. (23)Cancer Research and Prevention Institute, Florence, Italy. 
(24)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Federico II University, Naples,
Italy. (25)Public Health Directorate, Asturias, Spain. (26)Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden. (27)Unit of Cancer Epidemiology, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Città 
della Salute e della Scienza, University of Turin, Turin, Italy; Piedmont
Reference Center for Epidemiology and Cancer Prevention, Torino, Italy; Human
Genetics Foundation, Torino, Italy. (28)Consorcio de Investigación Biomédica de
Epidemiología y Salud Pública, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain;
Andalusian School of Public Health, Granada, Spain. (29)International Agency for 
Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. (30)National Institute for Public Health and
the Environment, Bilthoven, The Netherlands. (31)Azienda Sanitaria Provinciale di
Ragusa, Ragusa, Italy; Aire Onlus, Ragusa, Italy. (32)University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (33)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Cambridge, United Kingdom; University of Cambridge Metabolic Research
Laboratories, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (34)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human
Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom; Oxford Centre for
Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford, United Kingdom;
NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom. (35)School of
Public Health, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2014 Jul;139(28-29):1452.

BACKGROUND: Understanding of the genetic basis of type 2 diabetes (T2D) has
progressed rapidly, but the interactions between common genetic variants and
lifestyle risk factors have not been systematically investigated in studies with 
adequate statistical power. Therefore, we aimed to quantify the combined effects 
of genetic and lifestyle factors on risk of T2D in order to inform strategies for
prevention.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: The InterAct study includes 12,403 incident T2D cases and a
representative sub-cohort of 16,154 individuals from a cohort of 340,234 European
participants with 3.99 million person-years of follow-up. We studied the combined
effects of an additive genetic T2D risk score and modifiable and non-modifiable
risk factors using Prentice-weighted Cox regression and random effects
meta-analysis methods. The effect of the genetic score was significantly greater 
in younger individuals (p for interaction <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.20×10-4). Relative genetic risk
(per standard deviation [4.4 risk alleles]) was also larger in participants who
were leaner, both in terms of body mass index (p for interaction <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.50×10-3)
and waist circumference (p for interaction <U+200A>=<U+200A>7.49×10-9). Examination of absolute
risks by strata showed the importance of obesity for T2D risk. The 10-y
cumulative incidence of T2D rose from 0.25% to 0.89% across extreme quartiles of 
the genetic score in normal weight individuals, compared to 4.22% to 7.99% in
obese individuals. We detected no significant interactions between the genetic
score and sex, diabetes family history, physical activity, or dietary habits
assessed by a Mediterranean diet score.
CONCLUSIONS: The relative effect of a T2D genetic risk score is greater in
younger and leaner participants. However, this sub-group is at low absolute risk 
and would not be a logical target for preventive interventions. The high absolute
risk associated with obesity at any level of genetic risk highlights the
importance of universal rather than targeted approaches to lifestyle
intervention.

PMCID: PMC4028183
PMID: 24845081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2014 Aug;31(8):935-46. doi: 10.1007/s10815-014-0257-5.
Epub 2014 May 20.

Genetic associations with diminished ovarian reserve: a systematic review of the 
literature.

Greene AD(1), Patounakis G, Segars JH.

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics & Gynecology Department, St Luke's Roosevelt Hospital Center, 1000 
Tenth Ave, Suite 10 C, New York, NY, 10019, USA.

PURPOSE: Diminished ovarian reserve (DOR) affects 10 % of women seeking fertility
treatment. Although it is much more prevalent than premature ovarian failure,
less is known about its etiology. The purpose of this article is to review the
possible genetic causes of, and associations with, pathologic DOR.
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted using PubMed from 1966 through
November 2013.
RESULTS: Twenty-one articles identified genes associated with DOR: one gene
mutation (FMR1), three polymorphisms (GDF9, FSHR, and ESR1), and seven genes
differentially expressed between women with DOR and controls (AMH, LHCGR, IGF1,
IGF2, IGF1R, IGF2R and GREM1). Six candidate genes were discovered in mice,
including Foxl2, Gdf9, Bmp15, Aire, Wnt4, and Gpr3. Two case reports of
chromosomal translocations were also identified.
CONCLUSIONS: While the etiology of pathologic DOR is likely multifactorial, it is
possible that many cases attributed to an idiopathic cause may have a genetic
component. Larger studies are needed to expose the impact gene mutations,
polymorphisms, and epigenetics have on pathologic DOR.

PMCID: PMC4130940
PMID: 24840722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:159247. doi: 10.1155/2014/159247. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Differential transcript profiles of MHC class Ib(Qa-1, Qa-2, and Qa-10) and Aire 
genes during the ontogeny of thymus and other tissues.

Melo-Lima BL(1), Evangelista AF(2), de Magalhães DA(2), Passos GA(2), Moreau
P(3), Donadi EA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Basic and Applied Immunology Program, Division of Clinical Immunology,
Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University of São 
Paulo, Avenida Bandeirantes 3900, 14049-900 Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil ;
Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives, Institut des
Maladies Emergentes et des Therapies Innovantes, Service de Recherches en
Hémato-Immunologie, Hôpital Saint-Louis, 1 avenue Claude Vellefaux, Bâtiment
Lailler, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France ; Université Paris-Diderot, Sorbonne
Paris-Cité, UMR E5, Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Hôpital Saint-Louis, 1 
avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France. (2)Molecular
Immunogenetics Group, Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão
Preto, University of São Paulo, Avenida Bandeirantes 3900, 14049-900 Ribeirão
Preto, SP, Brazil. (3)Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique et aux Energies
Alternatives, Institut des Maladies Emergentes et des Therapies Innovantes,
Service de Recherches en Hémato-Immunologie, Hôpital Saint-Louis, 1 avenue Claude
Vellefaux, Bâtiment Lailler, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France ; Université
Paris-Diderot, Sorbonne Paris-Cité, UMR E5, Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie,
Hôpital Saint-Louis, 1 avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France.
(4)Basic and Applied Immunology Program, Division of Clinical Immunology,
Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University of São 
Paulo, Avenida Bandeirantes 3900, 14049-900 Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

Qa-2 and Qa-1 are murine nonclassical MHC class I molecules involved in the
modulation of immune responses by interacting with T CD8(+) and NK cell
inhibitory receptors. During thymic education, the Aire gene imposes the
expression of thousands of tissue-related antigens in the thymic medulla,
permitting the negative selection events. Aiming to characterize the
transcriptional profiles of nonclassical MHC class I genes in spatial-temporal
association with the Aire expression, we evaluated the gene expression of
H2-Q7(Qa-2), H2-T23(Qa-1), H2-Q10(Qa-10), and Aire during fetal and postnatal
development of thymus and other tissues. In the thymus, H2-Q7(Qa-2) transcripts
were detected at high levels throughout development and were positively
correlated with Aire expression during fetal ages. H2-Q7(Qa-2) and H2-T23(Qa-1)
showed distinct expression patterns with gradual increasing levels according to
age in most tissues analyzed. H2-Q10(Qa-10) was preferentially expressed by the
liver. The Aire transcriptional profile showed increased levels during the fetal 
period and was detectable in postnatal ages in the thymus. Overall, nonclassical 
MHC class I genes started to be expressed early during the ontogeny. Their levels
varied according to age, tissue, and mouse strain analyzed. This differential
expression may contribute to the distinct patterns of mouse
susceptibility/resistance to infectious and noninfectious disorders.

PMCID: PMC4009201
PMID: 24829926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Rheumatol Int. 2014 Dec;34(12):1701-8. doi: 10.1007/s00296-014-3032-0. Epub 2014 
May 10.

Practical application of acid dissociation in monitoring patients treated with
adalimumab.

Llinares-Tello F(1), Rosas-Gómez de Salazar J, Senabre-Gallego JM, Santos-Soler
G, Santos-Ramírez C, Salas-Heredia E, Barber-Vallés X, Molina-García J; AIRE-MB
Group.

Collaborators: Rosas J, de Salazar G, Santos-Soler G, Pérez CC, Bas AP, Betoret
ML, Llinares-Tello F, García JM, Santos-Ramírez C, Vallés XB, Sánchez
Barrioluengo M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Department, Marina Baixa Hospital, Av Jaime Botella Mayor nº7,
03570, Villajoyosa, Alicante, Spain, paquillinares@eresmas.com.

Erratum in
    Rheumatol Int. 2014 Dec;34(12):1709.

Patients treated with adalimumab (ADL) can induce anti-ADL antibodies (AAA)
formation that is associated with low drug levels and clinical non-response. But,
in the majority of the assays, the measurement of AAA is hampered by the presence
of the drug itself. In support of immunogenicity assessment in clinical samples
with subtherapeutic ADL levels, we proved acid pre-treatment for AAA detection
with the Promonitor-enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Were measured AAA 
after acidification in 32 serum samples with a subtherapeutic ADL trough level.
ADL and AAA concentrations were measured by ELISA (Promonitor). The impact of
drug concentration on AAA recovery (with or without acidification) was also
evaluated by mixing known amounts of ADL (0.25, 0.5 and 1 mg/L) and AAA (100,
200, 300 and 400 AU/mL) from clinical samples in pooled serum. The drug
significantly inhibited the detection of AAA in untreated samples. And
progressively higher levels of ADL cause increasing inhibition of signal. Acid
pre-treatment carried a significant increase in assay response, particularly at
lower free ADL concentrations. AAA were detected in the 53 % of the samples after
acid dissociation. In seven patients, the positive AAA after dissociation was
detected in the first monitoring of ADL and five patients were positive 3 months 
later for AAA with the standard assay. Monitoring AAA using acid dissociation in 
patients with subtherapeutic circulating level of ADL could detect precocious
problems of bioavailability, assess the immunogenicity of ADL and may be used to 
optimise dose regimens, thereby preventing prolonged use of inadequate therapy
and guide change of treatment.

PMID: 24816715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Encephale. 2015 Jun;41(3):202-8. doi: 10.1016/j.encep.2014.03.002. Epub 2014 Apr 
30.

[Magneto-encephalographic (MEG) brain recordings during traumatic memory recall
in women with post-traumatic stress disorder: A pilot study].

[Article in French]

Cottraux J(1), Lecaignard F(2), Yao SN(3), De Mey-Guillard C(3), Haour F(4),
Delpuech C(5), Servan-Schreiber D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unité de traitement de l'anxiété, service de psychologie médicale, hôpital
neurologique, 59, boulevard Pinel, 69677 Bron, France. Electronic address:
cottraux@univ-lyon1.fr. (2)Cermep, centre hospitalier du Vinatier, 95, boulevard 
Pinel, 69500 Lyon, France. (3)Unité de traitement de l'anxiété, service de
psychologie médicale, hôpital neurologique, 59, boulevard Pinel, 69677 Bron,
France. (4)Institut français d'EMDR, association EMDR-France, 30, place
Saint-Georges, 75009 Paris, France. (5)Cermep, centre hospitalier du Vinatier,
95, boulevard Pinel, 69500 Lyon, France; Inserm, U1028, CNRS UMR5292, centre de
recherche en neurosciences, UCB Lyon 1, centre hospitalier Le-Vinatier, bâtiment 
452, 95, boulevard Pinel, 69675 Bron cedex, France.

AIM OF THE STUDY: The experiment studied the effects of a short duration exposure
to traumatic memories using magneto-encephalography (MEG).
PATIENTS: Nine right-handed DSM-4 PTSD patients were recruited from a unit for
anxiety disorders and an organisation supporting victims of violence. In order to
have a homogeneous sample, we included only women who suffered from civilian
PTSD. Exclusion criteria were co-morbid major medical illness, metallic dental
prostheses that would interfere in the magnetic measurement, and current drug
treatment. All participants were free from neurological disease and had normal
hearing. They signed a written informed consent form. An ethics committee
accepted the study.
METHOD: A tape-recorded voice administered a script-driven imagery. The patients 
had to imagine, successively, a neutral image, a traumatic memory and rest, while
MEG measured brain activities across delta, theta, alpha and beta bands. Each
condition lasted three minutes. Heart rate (HR), anxiety and the vividness of
mental images were recorded at the end of each phase. MEG power analysis was
carried out with Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM) 8. The signals were
averaged for each of the three conditions of threeminutes duration. The dependent
variable was a subtracted value: (trauma - rest) - (neutral - rest). The
significance threshold was set at P<0.01.
RESULTS: Anxiety and HR significantly increased during the trauma condition and
returned to the neutral level during rest. The vividness of the mental imagery
remained stable across the three conditions. The left-brain demonstrated a
statistically significant power decrease in the secondary visual cortex (BA
18-19) in the delta band, the insula (BA13) in the beta band, the insula (BA13), 
premotor cortex (BA 6), Broca area (BA 44), and BA 43, in the alpha band.
DISCUSSION: The symptom provocation protocol was successful in eliciting
subjective anxiety and HR response in relation to traumatic memories. Our MEG
results are in keeping with previous neuro-imagery studies showing decreased
activities in the insula and Broca area during PTSD symptom provocation. However,
we did not replicate the activation in the amygdala and the cingulate and
prefrontal cortex found in some studies. Moreover, the within-group design, the
small sample, and the inclusion of only female patients with milder dissociative 
symptoms limit our conclusions. The MEG protocol we used may also explain some
partial discrepancies with previous MEG studies. However, our aim was to provoke 
a specific autobiographic recall of a traumatic event unfolding several
sequential mental images along three minutes as in exposure therapy for PTSD.
CONCLUSION: Despite its limitations, this pilot study is the first to provide MEG
data during trauma recall. It suggests that recalling a specific traumatic event 
along three minutes results in hypo-activations of the brain regions regulating
language and emotions. This paves the way to recording whole sessions of specific
therapies for PTSD, with MEG using the millisecond resolution. MEG might be of
interest to study the suppression of traumatic memories and their activation and 
habituation through prolonged graduated exposure in imagination across several
sessions. MEG could also be used to study the effects of medication on PTSD
symptoms. A controlled replication in a larger sample including male and female
patients with various traumatic experiences is needed.

Copyright © 2014 LEncéphale, Paris. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 24793794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl Ed). 2014 Apr;67(4):270-6. doi: 10.1016/j.rec.2013.09.027. 
Epub 2014 Feb 5.

Resistant hypertension: demography and clinical characteristics in 6,292 patients
in a primary health care setting.

Gijón-Conde T(1), Graciani A(2), Banegas JR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Salud Universitario Cerro del Aire, Dirección Asistencial Noroeste, 
Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain; Departamento de Medicina Preventiva y Salud Pública, 
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid/IdiPaz, CIBER de Epidemiología y Salud Pública
(CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: gijonmt@gmail.com. (2)Departamento
de Medicina Preventiva y Salud Pública, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid/IdiPaz,
CIBER de Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl Ed). 2014 Apr;67(4):251-3.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: The prevalence of resistant hypertension has
recently been reported, but there are no studies on its demography. This study
aimed to examine the demography and clinical characteristics of resistant
hypertension in a large sample of primary care patients.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was performed of all computerized medical
records of hypertensive patients in Health Area 6 of Madrid (Spain). Of 63 167
hypertensive patients, we selected 48 744 with prescription of antihypertensive
medication; of these, we selected those who met the American Heart Association
criteria for resistant hypertension.
RESULTS: A total of 6292 patients had resistant hypertension, representing 9.9%
of all hypertensive patients and 12.9% of those treated. A total of 5.5% were <
50 years (8.5% men and 3.2% women) and 24.7% were > 80 years (15.8% men and 31.4%
women) (P < .001). In patients < 50 years, resistant hypertension was associated 
with male sex (odds ratio female/male = 0.006; 95% confidence interval,
0.000-0.042; P < .001), systolic blood pressure, obesity, stroke, and chronic
kidney disease (P < .001). In those > 80 years, resistant hypertension was
associated with female sex (odds ratio female/male = 1.27; 95% confidence
interval, 1.08-1,10; P = .004), systolic blood pressure, diabetes mellitus,
obesity, chronic kidney disease, coronary heart disease, and atrial fibrillation 
(P < .001). More than 50% of patients > 80 years with resistant hypertension had 
cardiovascular disease.
CONCLUSIONS: One in 4 patients with resistant hypertension is > 80 years.
Resistant hypertension is associated with cardiovascular disease, age < 50 years 
in men and age > 80 years in women. There is a high proportion of cardiovascular 
disease in elderly patients with resistant hypertension.

Copyright © 2013 Sociedad Española de Cardiología. Published by Elsevier Espana. 
All rights reserved.

PMID: 24774589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Immunol Lett. 2014 Sep;161(1):50-6. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2014.04.008. Epub 2014
Apr 21.

Autoimmune regulator expression in thymomas with or without autoimmune disease.

Liu Y(1), Zhang H(1), Zhang P(2), Meng F(1), Chen Y(1), Wang Y(1), Yao Y(1), Qi
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery General Hospital at Tianjin Medical
University, No. 154, Anshan Road, Heping District, Tianjin300052 PR China.
(2)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery General Hospital at Tianjin Medical
University, No. 154, Anshan Road, Heping District, Tianjin300052 PR China.
Electronic address: zhp-gh@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) regulates autoimmunity and
self-antigen expression, such as acetylcholine receptor (AchR), in the thymus.
Regulatory T cells (Tregs) can down-regulate autoimmunity, but also promote tumor
growth. The objective of this study was to examine the levels of AIRE, AchR, and 
Foxp3 expression in thymomas.
METHODS: The relative levels of AIRE, AchR, and Foxp3 mRNA transcripts and the
frequency of AIRE+, AchR+, and Foxp3+ cells were determined by quantitative
RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry in 79 thymoma tissue samples from 21 patients
with simple thymoma (the Tm group), 39 patients with myasthenia gravis (the MG
group) and 19 patients with myasthenia gravis and one other autoimmune disease
(the AD group). The numbers of peripheral blood CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ Tregs were
determined by flow cytometry analysis.
RESULTS: The relative levels of AIRE and AchR mRNA transcripts in the MG group
were significantly lower than that in the Tm group (p=0.04, p=0.03), but higher
than that in the AD group (p=0.03, p=0.04). The relative levels of Foxp3 mRNA
transcripts in the Tm group were significantly higher than that in the MG and AD 
groups (p=0.03 for both). A similar pattern of the percentages of AIRE+, AchR+,
and Foxp3+ cells in the thymoma tissues and the numbers of peripheral blood Tregs
were detected in these patients. The levels of AIRE mRNA transcripts were
correlated positively with that of the AchR and Foxp3 in this population. The
levels of AIRE and AchR mRNA transcripts in the A/AB/B1 types of thymomas were
significantly higher than that in the B2/B3/C types of thymomas in this
population.
CONCLUSION: Significantly lower levels of AIRE, AchR, and Foxp3 expression are
associated with the development of thymoma-related autoimmune diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24768600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Exp Med. 2014 May 5;211(5):761-8. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131889. Epub 2014 Apr 21.

Enhancement of an anti-tumor immune response by transient blockade of central T
cell tolerance.

Khan IS(1), Mouchess ML, Zhu ML, Conley B, Fasano KJ, Hou Y, Fong L, Su MA,
Anderson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center and 2 Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143.

Thymic central tolerance is a critical process that prevents autoimmunity but
also presents a challenge to the generation of anti-tumor immune responses.
Medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) eliminate self-reactive T cells by
displaying a diverse repertoire of tissue-specific antigens (TSAs) that are also 
shared by tumors. Therefore, while protecting against autoimmunity, mTECs
simultaneously limit the generation of tumor-specific effector T cells by
expressing tumor self-antigens. This ectopic expression of TSAs largely depends
on autoimmune regulator (Aire), which is expressed in mature mTECs. Thus,
therapies to deplete Aire-expressing mTECs represent an attractive strategy to
increase the pool of tumor-specific effector T cells. Recent work has implicated 
the TNF family members RANK and RANK-Ligand (RANKL) in the development of
Aire-expressing mTECs. We show that in vivo RANKL blockade selectively and
transiently depletes Aire and TSA expression in the thymus to create a window of 
defective negative selection. Furthermore, we demonstrate that RANKL blockade can
rescue melanoma-specific T cells from thymic deletion and that persistence of
these tumor-specific effector T cells promoted increased host survival in
response to tumor challenge. These results indicate that modulating central
tolerance through RANKL can alter thymic output and potentially provide
therapeutic benefit by enhancing anti-tumor immunity.

PMCID: PMC4010907
PMID: 24752296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Insect Sci. 2013;13:113. doi: 10.1673/031.013.11301.

Faunistic inventory of spheciformes wasps at three protected areas in Portugal.

Vieira LC(1), Oliveira NG, Brewster CC, Gayubo SF.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Entomology, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061-0319, USA.

The importance of considering insects in the protection of biodiversity has been 
recently recognized. However, despite the importance of Spheciformes wasps
(Hymenoptera: Ampulicidae, Sphecidae and Crabronidae) in natural ecosystems and
their potential as bioindicators, the Spheciformes communities in Portugal (part 
of the European biodiversity hotspot) have rarely been studied, and data for
Portuguese protected areas are scarce. The Spheciformes wasp communities at 3
protected areas in Portugal, Douro International Natural Park, Serras de Aire e
Candeeiros Natural Park, and Paúl do Boquilobo Nature Reserve, were studied in
2000 and 2001. During the study, 134 species of Spheciformes belonging to 3
families, Ampulicidae, Sphecidae, and Crabronidae, were identified. The species
collected constituted nearly 1/3 of the species known in the Iberian Peninsula,
42 were new records for Portugal. Additionally, several specimens of 6
potentially new species were collected. Douro International Natural Park had the 
highest species richness, followed by Serras de Aire e Candeeiros Natural Park
and Paúl do Boquilobo Nature Reserve. All the protected areas studied had species
that were found exclusively at an individual protected area and species that were
found to be new records for Portugal. Based on the literature review of the
geographic distribution, nidification types, and prey orders, it was found that
most species collected had a Euroasiatic or Mediterranean distribution, species
with fossorial habits predominated, and the orders/suborders of insects preyed
upon by most species were Diptera, Orthoptera, Sternorrhyncha, and
Auchenorrhyncha. This study underscores the importance of including the protected
areas studied in the conservation of Spheciformes diversity and also suggests
that insect diversity should be studied separately, as it does not necessarily
follow the same patterns as other, more studied, groups.

PMCID: PMC4011373
PMID: 24738990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Am J Pathol. 2014 Jun;184(6):1695-705. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.02.024. Epub
2014 Apr 13.

Spontaneous development of autoimmune uveitis Is CCR2 dependent.

Chen YF(1), Zhou D(1), Metzger T(2), Gallup M(1), Jeanne M(3), Gould DB(3),
Anderson MS(2), McNamara NA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Francis I. Proctor Foundation, University of California, San Francisco,
California. (2)Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco,
California. (3)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, San
Francisco, California. (4)Francis I. Proctor Foundation, University of
California, San Francisco, California; Department of Ophthalmology, University of
California, San Francisco, California; Department of Anatomy, University of
California, San Francisco, California; School of Optometry, University of
California, Berkeley, California; Vision Science Program, University of
California, Berkeley, California. Electronic address: nancy.mcnamara@ucsf.edu.

Development of novel strategies to treat noninfectious posterior uveitis is an
ongoing challenge, in part because of limited availability of animal models that 
mimic the naturally occurring disease in humans. Mice deficient in the autoimmune
regulatory gene Aire develop a spontaneous T-cell and macrophage-mediated
autoimmune uveitis that closely recapitulates human endogenous uveitis and thus
provide a useful model for mechanistic and therapeutic investigations.
Lymphocytic and mononuclear infiltration of the retina in Aire knockout (KO) mice
triggers the onset of uveitis from initial retinal inflammation to eventual
destruction of the neuroretina with loss of photoreceptors. The C-C chemokine
receptor type 2 protein (CCR2) functions in directing monocyte and macrophage
migration to inflamed tissues via interaction with monocyte chemotactic proteins.
Using the Aire KO mouse model, we demonstrated an essential role for CCR2 in the 
pathogenesis of autoimmune-mediated uveitis. Loss of functional CCR2 effectively 
reduced immune cell infiltration and rescued the retina from destruction.
CCR2-dependent migration of bone marrow-derived cells provided the driving force 
for retinal inflammation, with CCR2-expressing mononuclear cells contributing to 
retinal damage via recruitment of CD4(+) T cells. These studies identify the CCR2
pathway as a promising therapeutic target that may prove an effective approach to
treat uveitis associated with autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4044718
PMID: 24736166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Immunol Rev. 2014 May;259(1):245-58. doi: 10.1111/imr.12166.

Shaping the repertoire of tumor-infiltrating effector and regulatory T cells.

Savage PA(1), Leventhal DS, Malchow S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Many tumors express antigens that can be specifically or selectively recognized
by T lymphocytes, suggesting that T-cell-mediated immunity may be harnessed for
the immunotherapy of cancer. However, since tumors originate from normal cells
and evolve within the context of self-tissues, the immune mechanisms that prevent
the autoimmune attack of normal tissues function in parallel to restrict
anti-tumor immunity. In particular, the purging of autoreactive T cells and the
development of immune-suppressive regulatory T cells (Tregs) are thought to be
major barriers impeding anti-tumor immune responses. Here, we discuss current
understanding regarding the antigens recognized by tumor-infiltrating T-cell
populations, the mechanisms that shape the repertoire of these cells, and the
role of the transcription factor autoimmune regulator (Aire) in these processes. 
Further elucidation of these principles is likely to be critical for optimizing
emerging cancer immunotherapies, and for the rational design of novel therapies
exhibiting robust anti-tumor activity with limited toxicity.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4122093
PMID: 24712470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jul;99(7):E1236-44. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-4271. Epub
2014 Apr 7.

Expression of thyrotropin receptor, thyroglobulin, sodium-iodide symporter, and
thyroperoxidase by fibrocytes depends on AIRE.

Fernando R(1), Lu Y, Atkins SJ, Mester T, Branham K, Smith TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences (R.F., Y.L., S.J.A., T.M.,
K.B., T.J.S.), Kellogg Eye Center, and Division of Metabolism, Diabetes, and
Endocrinology (T.J.S.), Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48105.

CONTEXT: CD34(+) fibrocytes, bone marrow-derived progenitor cells, infiltrate
orbital connective tissue in thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy, a manifestation
of Graves' disease. In the orbit, they become CD34(+) fibroblasts and coexist
with native CD34(-) fibroblasts. Fibrocytes have been shown to express TSH
receptor and thyroglobulin.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to determine whether a broader
repertoire of thyroid protein expression can be detected in fibrocytes and
whether a common factor is responsible.
DESIGN/SETTING/PARTICIPANTS: Fibrocytes and fibroblasts were collected and
analyzed from healthy individuals and those with Graves' disease in an academic
clinical practice.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Real-time PCR, Western blot analysis, gene promoter
analysis, cell transfections, and flow cytometric cell sorting were performed.
RESULTS: We detect two additional thyroid proteins expressed by fibrocytes,
namely sodium-iodide symporter and thyroperoxidase. The autoimmune regulator
(AIRE) protein appears necessary for this expression. AIRE expression in
fibrocytes results from an active AIRE gene promoter and stable AIRE mRNA.
Knocking down AIRE with a targeting small interfering RNA reduces the expression 
of these thyroid proteins in fibrocytes as well as the transcription factors
paired box-8 and thyroid transcription factor-1. When compared with an unaffected
first-degree relative, levels of these proteins are substantially reduced in
fibrocytes from an individual with an inactivating AIRE mutation. Levels of AIRE 
and the thyroid proteins are lower in orbital fibroblasts from patients with
thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy than in fibrocytes. However, when mixed
fibroblast populations are sorted into pure CD34(+) and CD34(-) subsets, the
levels of these proteins are dramatically increased selectively in CD34(+)
fibroblasts.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrocytes express four proteins, the aggregate expression of which 
was previously thought to be restricted to thyroid epithelium. These proteins
represent the necessary molecular biosynthetic machinery necessary for thyroid
hormone production. Our findings implicate AIRE in the promiscuous expression of 
thyroid proteins in fibrocytes.

PMCID: PMC4079309
PMID: 24708100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 2014 Apr;141(4):290-4. doi: 10.1016/j.annder.2014.01.012. 
Epub 2014 Feb 18.

[The challenge for dermatologists of early APECED diagnosis].

[Article in French]

Puzenat E(1), Bellaud G(2), Saugier-Veber P(3), Crémillieux C(4), Mignot B(4),
Humbert P(5), Aubin F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Service de dermatologie, CHU Jean Minjoz, 3, boulevard Alexandre-Fleming,
25030 Besançon cedex, France. Electronic address: epuzenat@chu-besancon.fr.
(2)Service de dermatologie, CHU Jean Minjoz, 3, boulevard Alexandre-Fleming,
25030 Besançon cedex, France. (3)Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, CHU, 1,
rue de Germont, 76000 Rouen, France. (4)Service de pédiatrie, CHU de Besançon,
25030 Besançon cedex, France. (5)Service de dermatologie, CHU Jean Minjoz, 3,
boulevard Alexandre-Fleming, 25030 Besançon cedex, France; Inserm U1098, SFR FED 
4234 IBCT, université de Franche-Comté, 25030 Besançon cedex, France. (6)Service 
de dermatologie, CHU Jean Minjoz, 3, boulevard Alexandre-Fleming, 25030 Besançon 
cedex, France; EA3081, SFR FED 4234 IBCT, université de Franche-Comté, 25030
Besançon cedex, France.

BACKGROUND: Polyglandular auto-immune syndrome type 1 (PAS-1) or auto-immune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare autosomal 
recessive disorder linked to auto-immune regulator (AIRE) gene mutations. Herein,
we report the case of a 3-year-old boy with APECED emphasizing the wide
phenotypic variability and the extent of skin lesions.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A 3-year-old boy with a history of auto-immune hepatitis
was referred for a generalized pruriginous urticaria-like eruption present for
one month. He was born to non-consanguineous parents. Cutaneous examination
revealed twenty-nail dystrophy, which had been present since the age of 2 years. 
Both direct microscopy and culture of nail samples were negative for Candida
albicans. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed esophageal candidiasis. A diagnosis
of APECED was suspected and subsequently confirmed by molecular analysis of the
AIRE gene, which showed two mutations. No other auto-immune endocrinopathies were
found.
DISCUSSION: Our case report illustrates the phenotypic variability of APECED with
the absence of typical manifestations such as Addison's disease and
hypoparathyroidism. APECED should thus be systematically suspected in young
children presenting with cutaneous lesions associated with mucocutaneous
candidiasis or auto-immune disease, even in the absence of known
endocrinopathies.
CONCLUSION: Dermatologists should be aware of this association since early
diagnosis of APECED is critical in preventing life-threatening endocrinological
crises.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24703644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:206929. doi: 10.1155/2014/206929. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

Thymic epithelial cell development and its dysfunction in human diseases.

Sun L(1), Li H(1), Luo H(1), Zhao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation Biology Research Division, State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane
and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beichen Xi Road 1-5, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, China.

Thymic epithelial cells (TECs) are the key components in thymic microenvironment 
for T cells development. TECs, composed of cortical and medullary TECs, are
derived from a common bipotent progenitor and undergo a stepwise development
controlled by multiple levels of signals to be functionally mature for supporting
thymocyte development. Tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) family members
including the receptor activator for NF <U+03BA> B (RANK), CD40, and lymphotoxin ß
receptor (LT ß R) cooperatively control the thymic medullary microenvironment and
self-tolerance establishment. In addition, fibroblast growth factors (FGFs), Wnt,
and Notch signals are essential for establishment of functional thymic
microenvironment. Transcription factors Foxn1 and autoimmune regulator (Aire) are
powerful modulators of TEC development, differentiation, and self-tolerance.
Dysfunction in thymic microenvironment including defects of TEC and thymocyte
development would cause physiological disorders such as tumor, infectious
diseases, and autoimmune diseases. In the present review, we will summarize our
current understanding on TEC development and the underlying molecular signals
pathways and the involvement of thymus dysfunction in human diseases.

PMCID: PMC3929497
PMID: 24672784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Ann Fr Anesth Reanim. 2014 Apr;33(4):240-7. doi: 10.1016/j.annfar.2014.01.021.
Epub 2014 Mar 14.

[Contribution of ultrasonography for the preoperative assessment of gastric
contents].

[Article in French]

Bouvet L(1), Chassard D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Service d'anesthésie-réanimation, Pavillon C, groupement hospitalier
Édouard-Herriot, hospices civils de Lyon, 5, place d'Arsonval, 69003 Lyon,
France. Electronic address: lionel.bouvet@chu-lyon.fr. (2)Service
d'anesthésie-réanimation, hôpital Femme-Mère-Enfant, hospices civils de Lyon, 59,
boulevard Pinel, 69500 Bron, France; Université de Lyon, Claude-Bernard - Lyon 1,
France.

The assessment of the risk of pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents may be
difficult in the preoperative period, apart from typical circumstances. The
development of ultrasonography in anesthesia and critical care has led to
consider ultrasonic imaging of gastric contents for preoperative risk assessment 
of "full" stomach in clinical practice. Ultrasonography of the body of the
stomach allows direct visualization of the gastric contents. However, the stomach
is often difficult to identify, particularly when it is empty. Moreover,
quantitative assessment of gastric volume is delicate, and no standardized method
of ultrasonography of the body of the stomach for preoperative assessment of
gastric contents was described. On the contrary, ultrasonography of the antral
cross-sectional area, which was initially described for the assessment of gastric
emptying as an alternative method to repeated measurements of the variations of
antropyloric volume after ingestion of a test meal, is easy to perform and is
highly reproducible through using the aorta and the left lobe of the liver as
internal landmarks. Qualitative assessment of the gastric antrum allows easily
diagnosis of a "full" stomach. The measurement of antral area may allow a more
accurate estimate of the presence or absence of gastric contents at risk of lung 
injury in the event of regurgitation and aspiration (gastric volume >0.8 ml/kg
and/or with solid particles), defining the "risk" stomach. The use of antral
ultrasonography may help the anesthesiologist to assess the risk of pulmonary
aspiration according to clinical history of the patient, in order to choose an
appropriate strategy minimizing the occurrence of this complication.

Copyright © 2014 Société française danesthésie et de réanimation (Sfar).
Published by Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24631006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Front Immunol. 2014 Feb 13;5:51. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00051. eCollection 2014.

Lymphopenia-induced proliferation in aire-deficient mice helps to explain their
autoimmunity and differences from human patients.

Kisand K(1), Peterson P(1), Laan M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine,
University of Tartu , Tartu , Estonia.

Studies on autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED) and its mouse model - both caused by mutant AIRE - have greatly advanced
the understanding of thymic processes that generate a self-tolerant T-cell
repertoire. Much is now known about the molecular mechanisms by which AIRE
induces tissue-specific antigen expression in thymic epithelium, and how this
leads to negative selection of auto-reactive thymocytes. However, we still do not
understand the processes that lead to the activation of any infrequent naïve
auto-reactive T-cells exported by AIRE-deficient thymi. Also, the striking
phenotypic differences between APECED and its mouse models have puzzled
researchers for years. The aim of this review is to suggest explanations for some
of these unanswered questions, based on a fresh view of published experiments. We
review evidence that auto-reactive T-cells can be activated by the prolonged
neonatal lymphopenia that naturally develops in young Aire-deficient mice due to 
delayed export of mature thymocytes. Lymphopenia-induced proliferation (LIP)
helps to fill the empty space; by favoring auto-reactive T-cells, it also leads
to lymphocyte infiltration in the same tissues as in day 3 thymectomized animals.
The LIP becomes uncontrolled when loss of Aire is combined with defects in genes 
responsible for anergy induction and Treg responsiveness, or in signaling from
the T-cell receptor and homeostatic cytokines. In APECED patients, LIP is much
less likely to be involved in activation of naïve auto-reactive T-cells, as
humans are born with a more mature immune system than in neonatal mice. We
suggest that human AIRE-deficiency presents with different phenotypes because of 
additional precipitating factors that compound the defective negative selection
of potentially autoaggressive tissue-specific thymocytes.

PMCID: PMC3923166
PMID: 24592265  [PubMed]


179. Int J Occup Environ Health. 2013 Oct-Dec;19(4):325-31.

Using exhaled carbon monoxide and carboxyhemoglobin to evaluate the effectiveness
of a chimney stove model in Peru.

Eppler AR(1), Fitzgerald C(1), Dorner SC(1), Aguilar-Villalobos M(2), Rathbun
SL(3), Adetona O(1), Naeher LP(1).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Georgia, College of Public Health, Department of
Environmental Health Science, Athens, Georgia, USA. (2)Asociación del Aire
Ambiental, Lima, Peru. (3)The University of Georgia, College of Public Health,
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Athens, Georgia, USA.

BACKGROUND: Measurement of biological indicators of physiological change may be
useful in evaluating the effectiveness of stove models, which are intended to
reduce indoor smoke exposure and potential health effects.
OBJECTIVES: We examined changes in exhaled carbon monoxide (CO), percentage
carboxy-hemoglobin, and total hemoglobin in response to the installation of a
chimney stove model by the Juntos National Program in Huayatan, Peru in 2008.
METHODS: Biomarkers were measured in a convenience sample comprising 35 women who
met requirements for participation, and were measured before and three weeks
after installation of a chimney stove. The relationships between exposure to
indoor smoke and biomarker measurements were also analyzed using simple linear
regression models.
RESULTS: Exhaled CO reduced from 6.71 ppm (95% CI 5.84-7.71) to 3.14 ppm (95% CI 
2.77-3.66) three weeks after stove installation (P < 0.001) while % COHb reduced 
from 1.76% (95% CI 1.62-1.91) to 1.18% (95% CI 1.12-1.25; P < 0.001). Changes in 
exhaled CO and % COHb from pre- to post-chimney stove installation were not
correlated with corresponding changes in exposure to CO and PM2.5 even though the
exposures also reduced after stove installation.
CONCLUSION: Exhaled CO and % COHb both showed improvement with reduction in
concentration after the installation of the chimney cook stoves, indicating a
positive physiological response subsequent to the intervention.

PMID: 24588039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. An Pediatr (Barc). 2015 Jan;82(1):e60-3. doi: 10.1016/j.anpedi.2014.01.012. Epub 
2014 Feb 26.

[Type 1 polyglandular autoimmune syndrome associated with C322fsx372 mutation].

[Article in Spanish]

Roncalés-Samanes P(1), de Arriba Muñoz A(2), Lou Francés GM(2), Ferrer Lozano
M(2), Justa Roldán ML(3), Labarta Aizpun JI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Endocrinología Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet,
Zaragoza, España. Electronic address: Pilar.roncales@gmail.com. (2)Unidad de
Endocrinología Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza,
España. (3)Unidad de Nefrología Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet,
Zaragoza, España.

Polyglandular autoimmune syndromes are rare diseases based on autoimmune
mechanisms in which endocrine and non-endocrine disorders coexist. In type 1 the 
characteristic manifestations are chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis,
hypoparathyroidism and adrenal insufficiency. A case is presented of a patient
with typical clinical sequence, along with other changes, and in whom a mutation 
in homozygosis, C322fsX372, was detected after performing a molecular analysis of
autoimmunity regulator gene (AIRE). Inheritance is autosomal recessive,
associated with mutations in the AIRE gene, which encodes a protein involved in
autoimmunity and immunodeficiency. For diagnosis, At least two of the three major
clinical manifestations are required for a diagnosis. However, only one of them
is necessary in the study of relatives of affected patients. These syndromes must
be diagnosed early, given their high morbidity and mortality. Every manifestation
needs to be treated, in order to maintain the quality of life.

Copyright © 2013 Asociación Española de Pediatría. Published by Elsevier Espana. 
All rights reserved.

PMID: 24582129  [PubMed - in process]


241. Endocr Connect. 2013 Feb 25;2(1):61-8. doi: 10.1530/EC-12-0074. Print 2013 Mar 1.

Absence of some common organ-specific and non-organ-specific autoimmunity in
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy.

Kluger N(1), Krohn K, Ranki A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Allergology and Venereology Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Skin and Allergies Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki
University Central Hospital Meilahdentie 2, PO Box 16000029, Helsinki Finland.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations of the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene, whose loss of function leads to the escape of
self-reactive T cells from the thymus and autoimmunity. APECED patients typically
develop tissue-specific autoantibodies and anti-cytokine antibodies.
Consequently, various endocrine and non-endocrine autoimmune disorders appear.
However, only a certain number of autoimmune diseases develop, while some common 
autoimmune conditions have not been reported or are seen only anecdotally.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the clinical manifestations and occurrence of
antinuclear antibodies (AN-Abs) and antibodies against extractable nuclear
antigens, citrullinated peptide, and transglutaminase in 24 patients and against 
bullous pemphigoid antigen 180 and desmogleins 1 (Dsg1) and Dsg3 in 30 patients
of a Finnish cohort of APECED patients.
RESULTS: Despite the loss of central tolerance, the autoantibodies investigated
were not overrepresented among the APECED patients. None of the patients had a
history of autoimmune connective tissue disease, rheumatoid arthritis, celiac
disease, or autoimmune cutaneous bullous disorders. Altogether, 25% (6/24) had
low-titer (1:80) AN-Abs. Two patients had anti-BP180 antibodies and two others
had anti-Dsg3 antibodies without any cutaneous or mucosal symptoms. No
anti-citrullinated peptide and anti-transglutaminase reactivity was found.
CONCLUSIONS: The mechanisms that drives tolerance to tissue autoantigens is not
fully understood as even APECED patients, who are genetically prone to develop
autoantibodies, are tolerant against some common autoantigens. The hypothesis
that some of the anti-cytokine antibodies commonly found in APECED patients may
be protective should be investigated in larger series.

PMCID: PMC3680957
PMID: 23781320  [PubMed]


242. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2013 Aug;25(4):492-7. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e3283623b9f.

Cutaneous manifestations of primary immunodeficiency.

Sillevis Smitt JH(1), Kuijpers TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. j.h.sillevissmitt@amc.uva.nl

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To show that skin symptoms help in the recognition of primary 
immunodeficiencies (PIDs). To analyze whether recent molecular data help in
understanding genotype/phenotype relations.
RECENT FINDINGS: Erythroderma in Omenn syndrome may be caused by either mutations
in genes associated with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) in which the
generation of some T cells is possible, which results in potentially autoreactive
lymphoid clones, or by selective proliferation of revertant CD8 T cells in the
skin due to clonal expansion in response to infections or autoantigens.The
newborn eczematous eruption, which occurs mainly in the
signal-transducer-and-activator-of-transcription-3 (STAT3) variant, helps to
differentiate STAT3 from Dedicator of Cytokinesis 8-related Hyper-IgE-syndrome
(HIES).Impaired T helper 17 cell (TH17) immunity [HIES and defects of autoimmune 
regulator element (AIRE), STAT-1, and interleukin17 receptor(IL17(R))] may give
rise to localized chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, whereas a defective innate
immune system predisposes to systemic candidiasis [congenital neutropenia,
neutrophil dysfunction, and caspase recruitment domain 9 (CARD9)
deficiency].Noninfectious granulomas may be the presenting symptom in innate
immunity defects [such as chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) or in predominantly
humoral immunodeficiencies such as common variable immunodeficiency], as well as 
ataxia teleangiectasia or rare recombination-activating gene-deficient cases.
SUMMARY: The skin is important in the diagnosis of PIDs. In particular eczematous
lesions, erythroderma, noninfectious granuloma, and microbial manifestations may 
help to direct further diagnostic laboratory analysis.

PMID: 23744097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 11;110(24):9885-90. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1301799110. Epub 2013 May 29.

Aire-expressing thymic medullary epithelial cells originate from ß5t-expressing
progenitor cells.

Ohigashi I(1), Zuklys S, Sakata M, Mayer CE, Zhanybekova S, Murata S, Tanaka K,
Holländer GA, Takahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Immunology, Institute for Genome Research, University
of Tokushima, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

The thymus provides multiple microenvironments that are essential for the
development and repertoire selection of T lymphocytes. The thymic cortex induces 
the generation and positive selection of T lymphocytes, whereas the thymic
medulla establishes self-tolerance among the positively selected T lymphocytes.
Cortical thymic epithelial cells (cTECs) and medullary TECs (mTECs) constitute
the major stromal cells that structurally form and functionally characterize the 
cortex and the medulla, respectively. cTECs and mTECs are both derived from the
endodermal epithelium of the third pharyngeal pouch. However, the molecular and
cellular characteristics of the progenitor cells for the distinct TEC lineages
are unclear. Here we report the preparation and characterization of mice that
express the recombinase Cre instead of ß5t, a proteasome subunit that is abundant
in cTECs and not detected in other cell types, including mTECs. By crossing
ß5t-Cre knock-in mice with loxP-dependent GFP reporter mice, we found that
ß5t-Cre-mediated recombination occurs specifically in TECs but not in any other
cell types in the mouse. Surprisingly, in addition to cTECs,
ß5t-Cre-loxP-mediated GFP expression was detected in almost all mTECs. These
results indicate that the majority of mTECs, including autoimmune
regulator-expressing mTECs, are derived from ß5t-expressing progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC3683726
PMID: 23720310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Blood. 2013 Aug 1;122(5):837-41. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-474759. Epub 2013 May
29.

Epithelial cytoprotection sustains ectopic expression of tissue-restricted
antigens in the thymus during murine acute GVHD.

Dertschnig S(1), Nusspaumer G, Ivanek R, Hauri-Hohl MM, Holländer GA, Krenger W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel and Basel University Children's
Hospital, Mattenstrasse 28, Basel, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Aug 1;122(5):623-4.

Development of acute graft-versus-host disease (aGVHD) predisposes to chronic
GVHD with autoimmune manifestations. A characteristic of experimental aGVHD is
the de novo generation of autoreactive T cells. Central tolerance is dependent on
the intrathymic expression of tissue-restricted peripheral self-antigens (TRA),
which is in mature medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTEC(high)) partly
controlled by the autoimmune regulator (Aire). Because TECs are targets of donor 
T-cell alloimmunity, we tested whether murine aGVHD interfered with the capacity 
of recipient Aire(+)mTEC(high) to sustain TRA diversity. We report that aGVHD
weakens the platform for central tolerance induction because individual TRAs are 
purged from the total repertoire secondary to a decline in the Aire(+)mTEC(high) 
cell pool. Peritransplant administration of an epithelial cytoprotective agent,
fibroblast growth factor-7, maintained a stable pool of Aire(+)mTEC(high), with
an improved TRA transcriptome despite aGVHD. Taken together, our data provide a
mechanism for how autoimmunity may develop in the context of antecedent
alloimmunity.

PMID: 23719300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Ocul Immunol Inflamm. 2013 Apr;21(2):153-7. doi: 10.3109/09273948.2012.754906.

Autoimmune retinopathy in a patient with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type
I.

Breunig A(1), Lee MS, Miller BS, Binstadt BA, Anderson MS, Montezuma S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
55455-0501, USA.

PURPOSE: To present a case of autoimmune retinopathy resulting from a mutation in
the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene.
DESIGN: Case study.
METHODS: Case review.
RESULTS: Mild improvement of goldmann visual field following treatment with
systemic and local immunosuppression.
CONCLUSIONS: There are a limited number of cases linking autoimmune retinopathy
with a mutation in the AIRE gene. Further research is needed to find more
effective treatment and to prevent tissue damage.

PMID: 23697860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Environ Pollut. 2013 Aug;179:194-200. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2013.04.001. Epub
2013 May 16.

Occurrence and risk assessment of organophosphorus and brominated flame
retardants in the River Aire (UK).

Cristale J(1), Katsoyiannis A, Sweetman AJ, Jones KC, Lacorte S.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Environmental Chemistry, IDAEA-CSIC, Jordi Girona 18-26, 08034
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

This study presents the occurrence and risk of PBDEs, new brominated and
organophosphorus flame retardants along a river affected by urban and industrial 
pressures (River Aire, UK). Tris(2-choroethyl) phosphate (TCEP),
tris(2-chloro-1-methylethyl) phosphate (TCPP),
tris[2-chloro-1-(chloromethyl)ethyl] phosphate (TDCP) and triphenyl phosphate
(TPhP) were detected in all samples, with TCPP present at the highest
concentrations, ranging from 113 to 26,050 ng L<U+207B>¹. BDE-209 was detected in most
of the sampled sites, ranging from 17 to 295 ng L<U+207B>¹, while hexabromobenzene (HBB)
and pentabromoethyl benzene (PBEB) were seldom detected. A risk quotients based
on predicted no effect concentrations (PNEC) and flame retardants water
concentration proved significant risk for adverse effects for algae, Daphnia and 
fish in sites close to industrial and urban sewage discharges. This study
provides a protocol for the risk estimation of priority and new generation flame 
retardants based on river concentrations and toxicological values.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23685632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Genomics. 2013 Sep;102(3):163-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2013.04.016. Epub 2013 Apr 
30.

Analysis of the autoimmune regulator gene in patients with autoimmune non-APECED 
polyendocrinopathies.

Palma A(1), Gianchecchi E, Palombi M, Luciano R, Di Carlo P, Crinò A, Cappa M,
Fierabracci A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratories, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
alessia.palma@opbg.net

The pathogenesis of autoimmunity was derived from a complex interaction of
genetic and environmental factors. Autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy is a rare autosomal recessive
disease caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. AIRE gene
variants and, in particular, heterozygous loss-of-function mutations were also
discovered in organ-specific autoimmune disorders, possibly contributing to their
etiopathogenesis. It was suggested that even predisposition to develop certain
autoimmune conditions may be derived from AIRE gene polymorphisms including S278R
and intronic IVS9+6 G>A. In this study we unravel the hypothesis on whether AIRE 
gene variants may predispose individuals to associated autoimmune conditions in
41 Italian patients affected by non-APECED autoimmune polyendocrinopathies. We
could not detect any heterozygous mutations of the AIRE gene. Although a trend of
association was observed, heterozygous polymorphisms S278R and IVS9+6 G>A were
detected in patients without statistically significant prevalence than in
controls. Their putative contribution to autoimmune polyendocrinopathies and
their predictive value in clinical strategies of disease development could be
unravelled by analysing a larger sample of diseased patients and healthy
individuals.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23643663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Sci China Life Sci. 2013 May;56(5):392-8. doi: 10.1007/s11427-013-4482-4. Epub
2013 May 1.

Medullary thymic epithelial cells, the indispensable player in central tolerance.

Shi Y(1), Zhu M.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Crosstalk between thymocytes and thymic epithelial cells is critical for T cell
development and the establishment of central tolerance. Medullary thymic
epithelial cells (mTECs) play important roles in the late stage of T cell
development, especially negative selection and Treg generation. The function of
mTECs is highly dependent on their characteristic features such as ectopic
expression of peripheral tissue restricted antigens (TRAs) and their master
regulator-autoimmune regulator (Aire), expression of various chemokines and
cytokines. In this review, we summarize the current understanding of cellular and
molecular mechanisms of mTEC development and its functions in T cell development 
and the establishment of central tolerance. The open questions in this field are 
also discussed. Understanding the function and underlying mechanisms of mTECs
will contribute to the better control of autoimmune diseases and the improvement 
of immune reconstitution during aging or after infection, chemotherapy or
radiotherapy.

PMID: 23633070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Ulster Med J. 2012 Sep;81(3):118-22.

Clinical phenotypes of autoimmune polyendocrinopathycandidiasis-ectodermal
dystrophy seen in the Northern Ireland paediatric population over the last 30
years.

Millar S(1), Carson D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Royal Belfast Hospital for Sick
Children, Belfast BT12 6BE, UK. Sarinda_millar@yahoo.co.uk

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), also
known as autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1, is a rare autosomal
recessive disorder with a variable and evolving phenotypic course. It is caused
by mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. APECED syndrome is
diagnosed clinically by the presence of 2 from 3 major criteria; chronic
mucocutaneous candidasis, primary hypoparathyroidism and primary adrenocortical
insufficiency. Many of the patients develop all three before the age of 20 years.
There is also a wide spectrum of other associated conditions including endocrine 
and non endocrine manifestations. This paper reviews the clinical phenotypes seen
in the paediatric population of Northern Ireland during the last 30 years
detailed from a retrospective review of clinical notes. Eight patients were
identified with APECED and all patients were found to be homozygous for the
c.964dell3 mutation. A wide clinical variation is apparent within APECED
syndrome. Paediatricians should be vigilant of the diagnosis when they encounter 
any of the features described and consider the future development of associated
diseases. In confirmed APECED syndrome, clinical and laboratory investigation is 
essential to initiate early treatment in the patient and other affected members
of the family.

PMCID: PMC3632819
PMID: 23620608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2014;373:19-47. doi: 10.1007/82_2013_320.

Mechanisms of thymus medulla development and function.

Anderson G(1), Baik S, Cowan JE, Holland AM, McCarthy NI, Nakamura K, Parnell SM,
White AJ, Lane PJ, Jenkinson EJ, Jenkinson WE.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Immune Regulation, Institute for Biomedical Research, Medical
School, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK,
g.anderson@bham.ac.uk.

The development of CD4(+) helper and CD8(+) cytotoxic T-cells expressing the aß
form of the T-cell receptor (aßTCR) takes place in the thymus, a primary lymphoid
organ containing distinct cortical and medullary microenvironments. While the
cortex represents a site of early T-cell precursor development, and the positive 
selection of CD4(+)8(+) thymocytes, the thymic medulla plays a key role in
tolerance induction, ensuring that thymic emigrants are purged of autoreactive
aßTCR specificities. In recent years, advances have been made in understanding
the development and function of thymic medullary epithelial cells, most notably
the subset defined by expression of the Autoimmune Regulator (Aire) gene. Here,
we summarize current knowledge of the developmental mechanisms regulating thymus 
medulla development, and examine the role of the thymus medulla in recessive
(negative selection) and dominant (T-regulatory cell) tolerance.

PMID: 23612988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Cytokine. 2013 Jun;62(3):433-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2013.03.026. Epub 2013 Apr
15.

Self-antigen expression in thymic epithelial cells in Ifn-<U+03B3> or Tnf-a deficiency.

Levi D(1), Polychronakos C.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Genetics, Research Institute of the McGill University Health Center,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Insulin expression in the thymic medullary epithelial cells (mTECs) is found to
be a critical aspect of maintaining self-tolerance towards that antigen. A
lowered insulin expression level in the thymus correlates with susceptibility to 
Type 1 Diabetes in humans and lead to higher levels of autoreactive T cells in
mice. It is therefore, essential to understand the regulatory mechanism of
insulin in the mTECs. Previous in vitro studies have shown a negative effect on
the expression of insulin in mTECs upon stimulation with the cytokines Ifn-<U+03B3> and 
Tnf-a, separately. The objective of this study was to examine the physiological
role of these cytokines in vivo. For this purpose, we examined whether these
cytokines have a physiological role in regulating thymic insulin expression using
the Ifn-<U+03B3> and Tnf-a knockout models. We found that insulin expression increased
in the knockout mice compared to their wild-type counterparts. Aire
transcriptional regulator, a known switch for self-antigen expression in the
thymus, was also increased in the knockout animals. Four antigens targeted in
other autoimmune disorders were also found to have a pattern of increase in the
Ifn-<U+03B3> or Tnf-a knockout models, including one that is known to be
Aire-independent in its expression. An increase in mTEC population or thymocyte
population was not seen in these knockout mice, revealing a regulatory mechanism 
that involves cytokine action directly on the transcription of the antigens.
These findings suggest regulation of tissue-specific antigen production in the
thymus by these two cytokines that is parallel to that controlled by AIRE.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23597589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Jul;43(7):1769-78. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343343. Epub 2013 May 
17.

An evolutionarily conserved mutual interdependence between Aire and microRNAs in 
promiscuous gene expression.

Ucar O(1), Tykocinski LO, Dooley J, Liston A, Kyewski B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Immunology, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany.

The establishment and maintenance of central tolerance depends to a large extent 
on the ability of medullary thymic epithelial cells to express a variety of
tissue-restricted antigens, the so-called promiscuous gene expression (pGE).
Autoimmune regulator (Aire) is to date the best characterised transcriptional
regulator known to at least partially coordinate pGE. There is accruing evidence 
that the expression of Aire-dependent and -independent genes is modulated by
higher order chromatin configuration, epigenetic modifications and
post-transcriptional control. Given the involvement of microRNAs (miRNAs) as
potent post-transcriptional modulators of gene expression, we investigated their 
role in the regulation of pGE in purified mouse and human thymic epithelial cells
(TECs). Microarray profiling of TEC subpopulations revealed evolutionarily
conserved cell type and differentiation-specific miRNA signatures with a subset
of miRNAs being significantly upregulated during terminal medullary thymic
epithelial cell differentiation. The differential regulation of this subset of
miRNAs was correlated with Aire expression and some of these miRNAs were
misexpressed in the Aire knockout thymus. In turn, the specific absence of miRNAs
in TECs resulted in a progressive reduction of Aire expression and pGE, affecting
both Aire-dependent and -independent genes. In contrast, the absence of miR-29a
only affected the Aire-dependent gene pool. These findings reveal a mutual
interdependence of miRNA and Aire.

© 2013 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology published byWiley-VCH Verlag
GmbH & Co. KGaA Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3816332
PMID: 23589212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Protein Cell. 2013 May;4(5):342-55. doi: 10.1007/s13238-013-3014-0. Epub 2013 Apr
15.

Thymic epithelial cell development and differentiation: cellular and molecular
regulation.

Sun L(1), Luo H, Li H, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Thymic epithelial cells (TECs) are one of the most important components in thymic
microenvironment supporting thymocyte development and maturation. TECs, composed 
of cortical and medullary TECs, are derived from a common bipotent progenitor,
mediating thymocyte positive and negative selections. Multiple levels of signals 
including intracellular signaling networks and cell-cell interaction are required
for TEC development and differentiation. Transcription factors Foxn1 and
autoimmune regulator (Aire) are powerful regulators promoting TEC development and
differentiation. Crosstalks with thymocytes and other stromal cells for extrinsic
signals like RANKL, CD40L, lymphotoxin, fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and Wnt
are also definitely required to establish a functional thymic microenvironment.
In this review, we will summarize our current understanding about TEC development
and differentiation, and its underlying multiple signal pathways.

PMID: 23589020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Immunol. 2013 May 15;190(10):5110-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203203. Epub 2013
Apr 12.

Lymphotoxin ß receptor regulates the development of CCL21-expressing subset of
postnatal medullary thymic epithelial cells.

Lkhagvasuren E(1), Sakata M, Ohigashi I, Takahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Immunology, Institute for Genome Research, University
of Tokushima, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) play a pivotal role in the
establishment of self-tolerance in T cells by ectopically expressing various
tissue-restricted self-Ags and by chemoattracting developing thymocytes. The
nuclear protein Aire expressed by mTECs contributes to the promiscuous expression
of self-Ags, whereas CCR7-ligand (CCR7L) chemokines expressed by mTECs are
responsible for the attraction of positively selected thymocytes. It is known
that lymphotoxin signals from the positively selected thymocytes preferentially
promote the expression of CCR7L rather than Aire in postnatal mTECs. However, it 
is unknown how lymphotoxin signals differentially regulate the expression of
CCR7L and Aire in mTECs and whether CCR7L-expressing mTECs and Aire-expressing
mTECs are distinct populations. In this study, we show that the majority of
postnatal mTECs that express CCL21, a CCR7L chemokine, represent an mTEC
subpopulation distinct from the Aire-expressing mTEC subpopulation.
Interestingly, the development of CCL21-expressing mTECs, but not Aire-expressing
mTECs, is impaired in mice deficient in the lymphotoxin ß receptor. These results
indicate that postnatal mTECs consist of heterogeneous subsets that differ in the
expression of CCL21 and Aire, and that lymphotoxin ß receptor regulates the
development of the CCL21-expressing subset rather than the Aire-expressing subset
of postnatal mTECs.

PMID: 23585674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Exp Med. 2013 Apr 8;210(4):715-28. doi: 10.1084/jem.20112061. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Epithelial and dendritic cells in the thymic medulla promote CD4+Foxp3+
regulatory T cell development via the CD27-CD70 pathway.

Coquet JM(1), Ribot JC, Babala N, Middendorp S, van der Horst G, Xiao Y, Neves
JF, Fonseca-Pereira D, Jacobs H, Pennington DJ, Silva-Santos B, Borst J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and 2 Division of Biological Stress Responses, The
Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066 CX Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2013 May;13(5):304.

CD4(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells (Treg cells) are largely autoreactive yet
escape clonal deletion in the thymus. We demonstrate here that CD27-CD70
co-stimulation in the thymus rescues developing Treg cells from apoptosis and
thereby promotes Treg cell generation. Genetic ablation of CD27 or its ligand
CD70 reduced Treg cell numbers in the thymus and peripheral lymphoid organs,
whereas it did not alter conventional CD4(+)Foxp3(-) T cell numbers. The
CD27-CD70 pathway was not required for pre-Treg cell generation, Foxp3 induction,
or mature Treg cell function. Rather, CD27 signaling enhanced positive selection 
of Treg cells within the thymus in a cell-intrinsic manner. CD27 signals promoted
the survival of thymic Treg cells by inhibiting the mitochondrial apoptosis
pathway. CD70 was expressed on Aire(-) and Aire(+) medullary thymic epithelial
cells (mTECs) and on dendritic cells (DCs) in the thymic medulla. CD70 on both
mTECs and DCs contributed to Treg cell development as shown in BM chimera
experiments with CD70-deficient mice. In vitro experiments indicated that CD70 on
the CD8a(+) subset of thymic DCs promoted Treg cell development. Our data suggest
that mTECs and DCs form dedicated niches in the thymic medulla, in which
CD27-CD70 co-stimulation rescues developing Treg cells from apoptosis, subsequent
to Foxp3 induction by TCR and CD28 signals.

PMCID: PMC3620350
PMID: 23547099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Autoimmun Rev. 2013 Aug;12(10):967-71. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2013.02.003. Epub
2013 Mar 26.

Assessment of intracellular cytokines and regulatory cells in patients with
autoimmune diseases and primary immunodeficiencies - novel tool for diagnostics
and patient follow-up.

Osnes LT(1), Nakken B, Bodolay E, Szodoray P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Rikshospitalet, Oslo University Hospital, Norway.

Serum and intracytoplasmic cytokines are mandatory in host defense against
microbes, but also play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases
by initiating and perpetuating various cellular and humoral autoimmune processes.
The intricate interplay and fine balance of pro- and anti-inflammatory processes 
drive, whether inflammation and eventually organ damage will occur, or the
inflammatory cascade quenches. In the early and late, as well as inactive and
active stages of autoimmune diseases, different cellular and molecular patterns
can dominate in these patients. However, the simultaneous assessment of pro- and 
anti-inflammatory biomarkers aids to define the immunological state of a patient.
A group of the most useful inflammatory biomarkers are cytokines, and with
increasing knowledge during the last decade their role have been well-defined in 
patients with autoimmune diseases and immunodeficiencies. Multiple pathological
processes drive the development of autoimmunity and immunodeficiencies, most of
which involve quantitative and qualitative disturbances in regulatory cells,
cytokine synthesis and signaling pathways. The assessment of these biomarkers
does not aid only in the mechanistic description of autoimmune diseases and
immunodeficiencies, but further helps to subcategorize diseases and to evaluate
therapy responses. Here, we provide an overview, how monitoring of cytokines and 
regulatory cells aid in the diagnosis and follow-up of patients with autoimmune
diseases and immunodeficiencies furthermore, we pinpoint novel cellular and
molecular diagnostic possibilities in these diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23541481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Autoimmun Rev. 2013 Jul;12(9):875-84. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2013.03.007. Epub
2013 Mar 25.

The different roles of the thymus in the pathogenesis of the various myasthenia
gravis subtypes.

Marx A(1), Pfister F, Schalke B, Saruhan-Direskeneli G, Melms A, Ströbel P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Centre Mannheim, University of
Heidelberg, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, D-68167 Mannheim, Germany.
alexander.marx@umm.de

The thymus plays distinct roles in the pathogenesis of the different Myasthenia
gravis (MG) subtypes. Inflammatory, neoplastic and age-related alterations of the
thymus are of pivotal relevance for the initiation of anti-acetylcholine receptor
(AChR) autoimmunity in early onset MG, thymoma-associated MG and, likely, late
onset MG, respectively. By contrast, the thymus is presumably not related to MG
that is due to autoantibodies to the muscle specific kinase, MuSK. Finally, the
role of the thymus is still obscure in MG defined by antibodies against the agrin
receptor LRP4 and in MG without all of the above autoantibdies (triple
sero-negative MG) since these MG subtypes have been described only recently and
thymectomy has not been their standard treatment. This review aims to give an
update on intrathymic mechanisms of tolerance breakdown in MG, including abnormal
T cell selection and activation, the role of thymic myoid cells, the autoimmune
regulator (AIRE) and regulatory T cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23535159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Am J Public Health. 2013 May;103(5):777-80. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2012.301056. Epub
2013 Mar 14.

Mental illness stigma, help seeking, and public health programs.

Henderson C(1), Evans-Lacko S, Thornicroft G.

Author information: 
(1)Health Service and Population Research Department, King's College London
Institute of Psychiatry, London, UK. aire.1.henderson@kcl.ac.uk

Globally, more than 70% of people with mental illness receive no treatment from
health care staff. Evidence suggests that factors increasing the likelihood of
treatment avoidance or delay before presenting for care include (1) lack of
knowledge to identify features of mental illnesses, (2) ignorance about how to
access treatment, (3) prejudice against people who have mental illness, and (4)
expectation of discrimination against people diagnosed with mental illness. In
this article, we reviewed the evidence on whether large-scale anti-stigma
campaigns could lead to increased levels of help seeking.

PMCID: PMC3698814
PMID: 23488489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Immunol. 2013 Apr 15;190(8):3895-904. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203001. Epub 2013 
Mar 13.

Divergent effects of T cell costimulation and inflammatory cytokine production on
autoimmune peripheral neuropathy provoked by Aire deficiency.

Zeng XL(1), Nagavalli A, Smith CJ, Howard JF, Su MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy results from autoimmune
destruction of the peripheral nervous system and is a component of the multiorgan
autoimmunity syndrome that results from Aire gene mutations in humans. In
parallel, peripheral nervous system autoimmunity resembling chronic inflammatory 
demyelinating polyneuropathy develops spontaneously in NOD mice with a partial
loss of Aire function (NOD.Aire(GW/+) mice) and is a T cell-mediated disease. In 
this study, we analyze how key aspects of T cell activation and function modulate
disease development in Aire-deficient mice. We show that genetic ablation of the 
Th1 cytokine IFN-<U+03B3> completely prevents clinical and electrophysiological evidence
of neuropathy in NOD.Aire(GW/+) mice. IFN-<U+03B3> deficiency is associated with absence
of immune infiltration and decreased expression of the T cell chemoattractant
IP-10 in sciatic nerves. Thus, IFN-<U+03B3> is absolutely required for the development
of autoimmune peripheral neuropathy in NOD.Aire(GW/+) mice. Because IFN-<U+03B3>
secretion is enhanced by B7-CD28 costimulation of T cells, we sought to determine
the effects of these costimulatory molecules on neuropathy development.
Surprisingly, B7-2 deficiency accelerated neuropathy development in
NOD.Aire(GW/+) mice, and Ab blockade of both B7-1 and B7-2 resulted in fulminant,
early-onset neuropathy. Thus, in contrast to IFN-<U+03B3>, B7-2 alone and B7-1/B7-2 in
combination function to ameliorate neuropathy development in NOD.Aire(GW/+) mice.
Together, these findings reveal distinct and opposing effects of the T cell
costimulatory pathway and IFN-<U+03B3> production on the pathogenesis of autoimmune
peripheral neuropathy.

PMCID: PMC3622123
PMID: 23487421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Science. 2013 Mar 8;339(6124):1219-24. doi: 10.1126/science.1233913.

Aire-dependent thymic development of tumor-associated regulatory T cells.

Malchow S(1), Leventhal DS, Nishi S, Fischer BI, Shen L, Paner GP, Amit AS, Kang 
C, Geddes JE, Allison JP, Socci ND, Savage PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2013 Mar 8;339(6124):1160-1.
    J Urol. 2013 Nov;190(5):1954.

Despite considerable interest in the modulation of tumor-associated Foxp3(+)
regulatory T cells (T(regs)) for therapeutic benefit, little is known about the
developmental origins of these cells and the nature of the antigens that they
recognize. We identified an endogenous population of antigen-specific T(regs)
(termed MJ23 T(regs)) found recurrently enriched in the tumors of mice with
oncogene-driven prostate cancer. MJ23 T(regs) were not reactive to a
tumor-specific antigen but instead recognized a prostate-associated antigen that 
was present in tumor-free mice. MJ23 T(regs) underwent autoimmune regulator
(Aire)-dependent thymic development in both male and female mice. Thus,
Aire-mediated expression of peripheral tissue antigens drives the thymic
development of a subset of organ-specific T(regs), which are likely coopted by
tumors developing within the associated organ.

PMCID: PMC3622085
PMID: 23471412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Arerugi. 2013 Jan;62(1):20-4.

[Role of aire in the development of autoimmune disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Matsumoto M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, University of
Tokushima. mitsuru@tokushima-u.ac.jp

PMID: 23470422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Zoology (Jena). 2013 Apr;116(2):106-12. doi: 10.1016/j.zool.2012.09.003. Epub
2013 Mar 7.

Patterns of parasitism in insular lizards: effects of body size, condition and
resource availability.

Garrido M(1), Pérez-Mellado V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, University of Salamanca, Campus Miguel de
Unamuno, Salamanca 37007, Spain. gaiarrido@usal.es

The spatial distribution of a population of lizards is influenced by the
distribution of resources and the individuals' skills to gain access to them. On 
several Mediterranean islands with food scarcity and unpredictable resource
availability, some resources can be extremely important during some periods of
the year, as, e.g., the dead horse arum, Dracunculus muscivorus, on Aire Island, 
Spain. In this study, we analysed parasite infestation in an endemic lizard,
Podarcis lilfordi, in relation to the distribution of D. muscivorus during
spring. We found a higher prevalence of parasitism in males from a central area
where the plant was significantly more abundant. Also, in this area, males were
more abundant and larger than in two areas with lower plant densities. Moreover, 
overall differences appeared in the intensity of infection, which was higher in
individuals from the central area, and we found a relationship between body size 
and parasite load, with more infected cells in larger individuals. Spatial
distribution of individuals due to differential availabilities of D. muscivorus
is proposed as an explanation for the observed differences.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23466293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Immunol. 2013 Mar 15;190(6):2479-82. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203210.

The mechanism of tissue-restricted antigen gene expression by AIRE.

Zumer K(1), Saksela K, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Haartman Institute, Helsinki University Central
Hospital, University of Helsinki, FIN-00014 Helsinki, Finland.

The autoimmune regulator is a critical transcription factor for generating
central tolerance in the thymus. Recent studies have revealed how the autoimmune 
regulator targets many otherwise tissue-restricted Ag genes to enable negative
selection of autoreactive T cells.

PMID: 23456700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Cell Transplant. 2014;23(8):1019-29. doi: 10.3727/096368913X664568. Epub 2013 Feb
26.

Improved expression of Sirt1 on thymic epithelial cells of SAMP10 after Intrabone
marrow-bone marrow transplantation.

Li M(1), Shi M, Abraham NG, Ikehara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Disorders, Kansai Medical University, Hirakata City,
Osaka, Japan.

Aging is accompanied by various forms of immune dysfunction, leading to an
increase in frequency of infections and the development of malignant tumors in
mice and humans. Sirt1 has been implicated in processes as varied as metabolism, 
differentiation, cancer, and the stress response and aging.
Senescence-accelerated mice prone 10 (SAMP10) show not only spontaneously
occurring brain atrophy, with deficits in learning and memory, but also emotional
disorders. We attempted in this study to clarify the deficits and found that the 
percentage of CD4/TNF-a T-cells in the spleen of 24-week-old (but not 6-week-old)
SAMP10 to be significantly reduced. The thymus was significantly lighter, and the
percentage of CD4<U+207A>CD8<U+207A> cells was significantly lower in the 24-week-old SAMP10
than 6-week-old SAMP10. Microarray analyses indicated that genes related to
transcription coactivator activity, growth factor activity, hormone activity,
cytokine activity, receptor activity, and regulation of the immune system were
downregulated in the thymus of 24-week-old SAMP10. Real-time PCR analysis showed 
that the expression of KGF, Aire, and Sirt1 was decreased on the thymic
epithelial cells (TECs) of 24-week-old SAMP10. However, these parameters improved
after the mice were treated with intrabone marrow-bone marrow transplantation.
This is the first report of age-related changes in immune system dysfunction in
24-week-old SAMP10 and the first to show that dysfunction on the TECs of
24-week-old SAMP10 was modulated by allogeneic bone marrow cells.

PMID: 23452762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Immunol. 2013 Apr 1;190(7):3289-98. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203086. Epub 2013
Feb 25.

IRF7-dependent IFN-ß production in response to RANKL promotes medullary thymic
epithelial cell development.

Otero DC(1), Baker DP, David M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

The contributions of IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3/7 and the type I IFNs IFN-a/ß 
to the innate host defense have been extensively investigated; however, their
role in thymic development is less clear. In this study, we show that mice
lacking the type I IFN receptor IFN-a/ß receptor (IFNAR) or the downstream
transcription factor STAT1 harbor a significant reduction in self-Ag-presenting, 
autoimmune regulator (AIRE)(+) medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs).
Constitutive IFNAR signaling occurs in the thymic medulla in the absence of
infection or inflammation. Receptor activator for NF-<U+03BA>B (RANK) ligand stimulation
results in IFN-ß upregulation, which in turn inhibits RANK signaling and
facilitates AIRE expression in mTECs. Finally, we find that IRF7 is required for 
thymic IFN-ß induction, maintenance of thymic architecture, and mTEC
differentiation. We conclude that spatially and temporally coordinated cross
talks between the RANK ligand/RANK and IRF7/IFN-ß/IFNAR/STAT1 pathways are
essential for differentiation of AIRE(+) mTECs.

PMCID: PMC3608802
PMID: 23440417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56378. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056378. Epub 2013 Feb 11.

Homeostatic properties and phenotypic maturation of murine CD4+ pre-thymic
emigrants in the thymus.

Dong J(1), Chen Y, Xu X, Jin R, Teng F, Yan F, Tang H, Li P, Sun X, Li Y, Wu H,
Zhang Y, Ge Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology, Ministry of Health, Department of
Immunology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China.

After a tightly regulated developmental program in the thymus, "mature" single
positive (SP) thymocytes leave the thymus and enter the periphery. These newly
arrived recent thymic emigrants (RTEs) are phenotypically and functionally
immature, and will complete a dynamic maturation in the peripheral lymphoid
organs before being licensed to be resident naïve T cells. To study the early
events occurring in the RTE maturation process, we identified the phenotype of
CD4(+) pre-RTEs, a population of CD4(+) SP thymocytes that have acquired the
thymus egress capability. Compared to peripheral naïve T cells, CD4(+) pre-RTEs
displayed superior survival capability in lymphoreplete mice and faster
proliferation under lymphopenic condition. The differences in Bcl2/Bim expression
and/or heightened IL-7 signaling pathway may account for the pre-RTEs' better
responsiveness to homeostatic signals. Qa2, the expression of which indicates the
phenotypic maturation of SPs and RTEs, was found to be upregulated in CD4(+)
pre-RTEs in thymic perivascular space. Migratory dendritic cells that surround
this region contribute to Qa2 expression in pre-RTEs. The dendritic cell-driven
Qa2 induction of CD4(+) pre-RTEs is independent of MHC class II and Aire
molecules.

PMCID: PMC3569422
PMID: 23409179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013 Mar;24(4):573-85. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012090898. Epub 2013
Feb 7.

Thymic deletion and regulatory T cells prevent antimyeloperoxidase GN.

Tan DS(1), Gan PY, O'Sullivan KM, Hammett MV, Summers SA, Ooi JD, Lundgren BA,
Boyd RL, Scott HS, Kitching AR, Chidgey AP, Holdsworth SR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Inflammatory Diseases, Monash University Department of Medicine,
Monash Medical Centre, 246 Clayton Road, Clayton, VIC 3168, Australia.

Loss of tolerance to neutrophil myeloperoxidase (MPO) underlies the development
of ANCA-associated vasculitis and GN, but the mechanisms underlying this loss of 
tolerance are poorly understood. Here, we assessed the role of the thymus in
deletion of autoreactive anti-MPO T cells and the importance of peripheral
regulatory T cells in maintaining tolerance to MPO and protecting from GN. Thymic
expression of MPO mRNA predominantly localized to medullary thymic epithelial
cells. To assess the role of MPO in forming the T cell repertoire and the role of
the autoimmune regulator Aire in thymic MPO expression, we compared the effects
of immunizing Mpo(-/-) mice, Aire(-/-) mice, and control littermates with MPO.
Immunized Mpo(-/-) and Aire(-/-) mice developed significantly more
proinflammatory cytokine-producing anti-MPO T cells and higher ANCA titers than
control mice. When we triggered GN with a subnephritogenic dose of
anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody, Aire(-/-) mice had more severe renal 
disease than Aire(+/+) mice, consistent with a role for Aire-dependent central
deletion in establishing tolerance to MPO. Furthermore, depleting peripheral
regulatory T cells in wild-type mice also led to more anti-MPO T cells, higher
ANCA titers, and more severe GN after immunization with MPO. Taken together,
these results suggest that Aire-dependent central deletion and regulatory T
cell-mediated peripheral tolerance both play major roles in establishing and
maintaining tolerance to MPO, thereby protecting against the development of
anti-MPO GN.

PMCID: PMC3609139
PMID: 23393320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Exp Med. 2013 Feb 11;210(2):287-300. doi: 10.1084/jem.20122149. Epub 2013 Feb
4.

Macroautophagy substrates are loaded onto MHC class II of medullary thymic
epithelial cells for central tolerance.

Aichinger M(1), Wu C, Nedjic J, Klein L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, 80336 Munich,
Germany.

Macroautophagy serves cellular housekeeping and metabolic functions through
delivery of cytoplasmic constituents for lysosomal degradation. In addition, it
may mediate the unconventional presentation of intracellular antigens to CD4(+) T
cells; however, the physiological relevance of this endogenous MHC class II
loading pathway remains poorly defined. Here, we characterize the role of
macroautophagy in thymic epithelial cells (TECs) for negative selection. Direct
presentation for clonal deletion of MHC class II-restricted thymocytes required
macroautophagy for a mitochondrial version of a neo-antigen, but was
autophagy-independent for a membrane-bound form. A model antigen specifically
expressed in Aire(+) medullary TECs (mTECs) induced efficient deletion via direct
presentation when targeted to autophagosomes, whereas interference with
autophagosomal routing of this antigen through exchange of a single amino acid or
ablation of an essential autophagy gene abolished direct presentation for
negative selection. Furthermore, when this autophagy substrate was expressed by
mTECs in high amounts, endogenous presentation and indirect presentation by DCs
operated in a redundant manner, whereas macroautophagy-dependent endogenous
loading was essential for clonal deletion at limiting antigen doses. Our findings
suggest that macroautophagy supports central CD4(+) T cell tolerance through
facilitating the direct presentation of endogenous self-antigens by mTECs.

PMCID: PMC3570095
PMID: 23382543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Clin Exp Immunol. 2013 Mar;171(3):263-72. doi: 10.1111/cei.12024.

Anti-cytokine autoantibodies suggest pathogenetic links with autoimmune regulator
deficiency in humans and mice.

Kärner J(1), Meager A, Laan M, Maslovskaja J, Pihlap M, Remm A, Juronen E, Wolff 
AS, Husebye ES, Podkrajek KT, Bratanic N, Battelino T, Willcox N, Peterson P,
Kisand K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Group, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a
recessive disorder resulting from mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE).
The patients' autoantibodies recognize not only multiple organ-specific targets, 
but also many type I interferons (IFNs) and most T helper type 17 (Th17)
cell-associated cytokines, whose biological actions they neutralize in vitro.
These anti-cytokine autoantibodies are highly disease-specific: otherwise, they
have been found only in patients with thymomas, tumours of thymic epithelial
cells that fail to express AIRE. Moreover, autoantibodies against Th17
cell-associated cytokines correlate with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis in
both syndromes. Here, we demonstrate that the immunoglobulin (Ig)Gs but not the
IgAs in APECED sera are responsible for neutralizing IFN-<U+03C9>, IFN-a2a, interleukin 
(IL)-17A and IL-22. Their dominant subclasses proved to be IgG1 and,
surprisingly, IgG4 without IgE, possibly implicating regulatory T cell responses 
and/or epithelia in their initiation in these AIRE-deficiency states. The
epitopes on IL-22 and IFN-a2a appeared mainly conformational. We also found
mainly IgG1 neutralizing autoantibodies to IL-17A in aged AIRE-deficient BALB/c
mice - the first report of any target shared by these human and murine
AIRE-deficiency states. We conclude that autoimmunization against cytokines in
AIRE deficiency is not simply a mere side effect of chronic mucosal Candida
infection, but appears to be related more closely to disease initiation.

© 2012 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC3569533
PMID: 23379432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Cancer Res. 2013 Apr 1;73(7):2104-16. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3781. Epub
2013 Jan 31.

Aire deficiency promotes TRP-1-specific immune rejection of melanoma.

Zhu ML(1), Nagavalli A, Su MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Microbiology/Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

The thymic transcription factor autoimmune regulator (Aire) prevents autoimmunity
in part by promoting expression of tissue-specific self-antigens, which include
many cancer antigens. For example, AIRE-deficient patients are predisposed to
vitiligo, an autoimmune disease of melanocytes that is often triggered by
efficacious immunotherapies against melanoma. Therefore, we hypothesized that
Aire deficiency in mice may elevate immune responses to cancer and provide
insights into how such responses might be triggered. In this study, we show that 
Aire deficiency decreases thymic expression of TRP-1 (TYRP1), which is a
self-antigen in melanocytes and a cancer antigen in melanomas. Aire deficiency
resulted in defective negative selection of TRP-1-specific T cells without
affecting thymic numbers of regulatory T cells. Aire-deficient mice displayed
elevated T-cell immune responses that were associated with suppression of
melanoma outgrowth. Furthermore, transplantation of Aire-deficient thymic stroma 
was sufficient to confer more effective immune rejection of melanoma in an
otherwise Aire wild-type host. Together, our work showed how Aire deficiency can 
enhance immune responses against melanoma and how manipulating TRP-1-specific
T-cell negative selection may offer a logical strategy to enhance immune
rejection of melanoma.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3618494
PMID: 23370329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53981. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053981. Epub 2013 Jan 8.

A functional alternative splicing mutation in AIRE gene causes autoimmune
polyendocrine syndrome type 1.

Zhang J(1), Liu H, Liu Z, Liao Y, Guo L, Wang H, He L, Zhang X, Xing Q.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital and Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1) is a rare autosomal recessive
disease defined by the presence of two of the three conditions: mucocutaneous
candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, and Addison's disease. Loss-of-function
mutations of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene have been linked to APS-1. Here
we report mutational analysis and functional characterization of an AIRE mutation
in a consanguineous Chinese family with APS-1. All exons of the AIRE gene and
adjacent exon-intron sequences were amplified by PCR and subsequently sequenced. 
We identified a homozygous missense AIRE mutation c.463G>A (p.Gly155Ser) in two
siblings with different clinical features of APS-1. In silico splice-site
prediction and minigene analysis were carried out to study the potential
pathological consequence. Minigene splicing analysis and subsequent cDNA
sequencing revealed that the AIRE mutation potentially compromised the
recognition of the splice donor of intron 3, causing alternative pre-mRNA
splicing by intron 3 retention. Furthermore, the aberrant AIRE transcript was
identified in a heterozygous carrier of the c.463G>A mutation. The aberrant
intron 3-retaining transcript generated a truncated protein (p.G155fsX203)
containing the first 154 AIRE amino acids and followed by 48 aberrant amino
acids. Therefore, our study represents the first functional characterization of
the alternatively spliced AIRE mutation that may explain the pathogenetic role in
APS-1.

PMCID: PMC3540864
PMID: 23342054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Arthritis Res Ther. 2013 Jan 15;15(1):R11. doi: 10.1186/ar4141.

Association of the AIRE gene with susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis in a
European population: a case control study.

García-Lozano JR, Torres-Agrela B, Montes-Cano MA, Ortiz-Fernández L,
Conde-Jaldón M, Teruel M, García A, Núñez-Roldán A, Martín J, González-Escribano 
MF.

INTRODUCTION: AIRE is a transcriptional regulator playing a functional role in
thymocyte education and negative selection by controlling the expression of
peripheral antigens in the thymus. Recently, the AIRE gene was identified as a
genetic risk factor for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in genome wide association
(GWA) studies performed in the Japanese population. According to the available
data this association is restricted to the Asian population. However, different
facts could influence the lack of association in Caucasian populations. The aim
of this study was to further investigate the possible role of the AIRE gene in
susceptibility to RA in a Caucasian population.
METHODS: A total of 472 Spanish Caucasian RA patients and 475 ethnically matched 
controls were included in the study. Three single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
(rs2776377, rs878081 and rs1055311) with a minor allele frequency>0.05 in the
Caucasian population which were not included in the high-throughput platforms
used in the GWA studies performed in susceptibility to RA, and two SNPs
(rs2075876 and rs1800520) associated with RA in the Japanese population, were
selected and genotyped using TaqMan assays.
RESULTS: No significant differences in the distribution of the alleles of
rs2776377, rs2075876, rs1055311 and rs1800520 SNPs between RA patients and
controls were observed. Nevertheless, the frequency of the C allele of rs878081
was significantly higher among RA patients (80.5% vs. 74.6% in the control group,
pc=0.012, OR=1.41, 95%CI 1.13-1.75). Regarding the distribution of the rs878081
genotypes, a higher frequency of CC homozygous individuals was found in the RA
patient group (65.56% vs. 56.47% in the control group, pc=0.013, OR=1.47, 95%CI
1.12-1.93). The in silico analysis predicted lower affinity to the binding-site
of a motif of the transcription NF-<U+03BA>B family and lower transcription levels of
AIRE gene for the rs878081C risk variant
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the AIRE gene is associated with
susceptibility to RA in the Spanish population. Probably, this association has
not been detected in the European population in the GWA studies because the
earliest high-throughput platforms did not include SNP suitable markers (e.g.
rs878081).

PMCID: PMC3672784
PMID: 23320549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jan 29;110(5):1833-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1222023110. Epub 2013 Jan 14.

Aire's plant homeodomain(PHD)-2 is critical for induction of immunological
tolerance.

Yang S(1), Bansal K, Lopes J, Benoist C, Mathis D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Aire impacts immunological tolerance by regulating the expression of a large set 
of genes in thymic medullary epithelial cells, thereby controlling the repertoire
of self-antigens encountered by differentiating thymocytes. Both humans and mice 
lacking Aire develop multiorgan autoimmunity. Currently, there are few molecular 
details on how Aire performs this crucial function. The more amino-terminal of
its two plant homeodomains (PHDs), PHD1, helps Aire target poorly transcribed
loci by "reading" the methylation status of a particular lysine residue of
histone-3, a process that does not depend on the more carboxyl-terminal PHD-2.
This study addresses the role of PHD2 in Aire function by comparing the behavior 
of wild-type and PHD2-deleted Aire in both transfected cells and transgenic mice.
PHD2 was required for Aire to interact with sets of protein partners involved in 
chromatin structure/binding or transcription but not with those implicated in
pre-mRNA processing; it also was not required for Aire's nuclear translocation or
regional distribution. PHD2 strongly influenced the ability of Aire to regulate
the medullary epithelial cell transcriptome and so was crucial for effective
central tolerance induction. Thus, Aire's two PHDs seem to play distinct roles in
the scenario by which it assures immunological tolerance.

PMCID: PMC3562810
PMID: 23319629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Res Rep Health Eff Inst. 2012 Oct;(171):5-86.

Multicity study of air pollution and mortality in Latin America (the ESCALA
study).

Romieu I(1), Gouveia N, Cifuentes LA, de Leon AP, Junger W, Vera J, Strappa V,
Hurtado-Díaz M, Miranda-Soberanis V, Rojas-Bracho L, Carbajal-Arroyo L,
Tzintzun-Cervantes G; HEI Health Review Committee.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.

INTRODUCTION: The ESCALA* project (Estudio de Salud y Contaminación del Aire en
Latinoamérica) is an HEI-funded study that aims to examine the association
between exposure to outdoor air pollution and mortality in nine Latin American
cities, using a common analytic framework to obtain comparable and updated
information on the effects of air pollution on several causes of death in
different age groups. This report summarizes the work conducted between 2006 and 
2009, describes the methodologic issues addressed during project development, and
presents city-specific results of meta-analyses and meta-regression analyses.
METHODS: The ESCALA project involved three teams of investigators responsible for
collection and analysis of city-specific air pollution and mortality data from
three different countries. The teams designed five different protocols to
standardize the methods of data collection and analysis that would be used to
evaluate the effects of air pollution on mortality (see Appendices B-F). By
following the same protocols, the investigators could directly compare the
results among cities. The analysis was conducted in two stages. The first stage
included analyses of all-natural-cause and cause-specific mortality related to
particulate matter < or = 10 pm in aerodynamic diameter (PM10) and to ozone (O3) 
in cities of Brazil, Chile, and México. Analyses for PM10 and O3 were also
stratified by age group and O3 analyses were stratified by season. Generalized
linear models (GLM) in Poisson regression were used to fit the time-series data. 
Time trends and seasonality were modeled using natural splines with 3, 6, 9, or
12 degrees of freedom (df) per year. Temperature and humidity were also modeled
using natural splines, initially with 3 or 6 df, and then with degrees of freedom
chosen on the basis of residual diagnostics (i.e., partial autocorrelation
function [PACF], periodograms, and a Q-Q plot) (Appendix H, available on the HEI 
Web site). Indicator variables for day-of-week and holidays were used to account 
for short-term cyclic fluctuations. To assess the association between exposure to
air pollution and risk of death, the PM10 and O3 data were fit using distributed 
lag models (DLMs). These models are based on findings indicating that the health 
effects associated with air pollutant concentrations on a given day may
accumulate over several subsequent days. Each DLM measured the cumulative effect 
of a pollutant concentration on a given day (day 0) and that day's contribution
to the effect of that pollutant on multiple subsequent (lagged) days. For this
study, exposure lags of up to 3, 5, and 10 days were explored. However, only the 
results of the DLMs using a 3-day lag (DLM 0-3) are presented in this report
because we found a decreasing association with mortality in various age-cause
groups for increasing lag effects from 3 to 5 days for both PM10 and O3. The
potential modifying effect of socioeconomic status (SES) on the association of
PM10 or O3 concentration and mortality was also explored in four cities: Mexico
City, Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, and Santiago. The methodology for developing a
common SES index is presented in the report. The second stage included
meta-analyses and metaregression. During this stage, the associations between
mortality and air pollution were compared among cities to evaluate the presence
of heterogeneity and to explore city-level variables that might explain this
heterogeneity. Meta-analyses were conducted to combine mortality effect estimates
across cities and to evaluate the presence of heterogeneity among city results,
whereas meta-regression models were used to explore variables that might explain 
the heterogeneity among cities in mortality risks associated with exposures to
PM10 (but not to O3).
RESULTS: The results of the mortality analyses are presented as risk percent
changes (RPC) with a 95% confidence interval (CI). RPC is the increase in
mortality risk associated with an increase of 10 microg/m3 in the 24-hour average
concentration of PM10 or in the daily maximum 8-hour moving average concentration
of O3. Most of the results for PM10 were positive and statistically significant, 
showing an increased risk of mortality with increased ambient concentrations.
Results for O3 also showed a statistically significant increase in mortality in
the cities with available data. With the distributed lag model, DLM 0-3, PM10
ambient concentrations were associated with an increased risk of mortality in all
cities except Concepci6n and Temuco. In Mexico City and Santiago the RPC and 95% 
CIs were 1.02% (0.87 to 1.17) and 0.48% (0.35 to 0.61), respectively. PM10 was
also significantly associated with increased mortality from cardiopulmonary,
respiratory, cardiovascular, cerebrovascular-stroke, and chronic obstructive lung
diseases (COPD) in most cities. The few nonsignificant effects generally were
observed in the smallest cities (Concepción, Temuco, and Toluca). The percentage 
increases in mortality associated with ambient O3 concentrations were smaller
than for those associated with PM10. All-natural-cause mortality was
significantly related to O3 in Mexico City, Monterrey, São Paulo and Rio de
Janeiro. Increased mortality risks for some specific causes were also observed in
these cities and in Santiago. In the analyses stratified by season, different
patterns in mortality and O3 were observed for cold and warm seasons. Risk
estimates for the warm season were larger and significant for several causes of
death in São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. Risk estimates for the cold season were
larger and significant for some causes of death in Mexico City, Monterrey, and
Toluca. In an analysis stratified by SES, the all-natural-cause mortality risk in
Mexico City was larger for people with a medium SES; however we observed that the
risk of mortality related to respiratory causes was larger among people with a
low SES, while the risk of mortality related to cardiovascular and
cerebrovascular-stroke causes was larger among people with medium or high SES. In
São Paulo, the all-natural-cause mortality risk was larger in people with a high 
SES, while in Rio de Janeiro the all-natural-cause mortality risk was larger in
people with a low SES. In both Brazilian cities, the risks of mortality were
larger for respiratory causes, especially for the low- and high-SES groups. In
Santiago, all-natural-cause mortality risk did not vary with level of SES;
however, people with a low SES had a higher respiratory mortality risk,
particularly for COPD. People with a medium SES had larger risks of mortality
from cardiovascular and cerebrovascular-stroke disease. The effect of ambient
PM10 concentrations on infant and child mortality from respiratory causes and
lower respiratory infection (LRI) was studied only for Mexico City, Santiago, and
São Paulo. Significant increased mortality risk from these causes was observed in
both Santiago (in infants and older children) and Mexico City (only in infants). 
For O3, an increased mortality risk was observed in Mexico City (in infants and
older children) and in São Paulo (only in infants during the warm season). The
results of the meta-analyses confirmed the positive and statistically significant
association between PM10 and all-natural-cause mortality (RPC = 0.77% [95% CI:
0.60 to 1.00]) using the random-effects model. For mortality from specific
causes, the percentage increase in mortality ranged from 0.72% (0.54 to 0.89) for
cardiovascular disease to 2.44% (1.36 to 3.59) for COPD, also using the
random-effects model. For O3, significant positive associations were observed
using the random-effects model for some causes, but not for all natural causes or
for respiratory diseases in people 65 years or older (> or = 65 years), and not
for COPD and cerebrovascular-stroke in the all-age and the > or = 65 age groups. 
The percentage increase in all-natural-cause mortality was 0.16% (-0.02 to 0.33).
In the meta-regression analyses, variables that best explained heterogeneity in
mortality risks among cities were the mean average of temperature in the warm
season, population percentage of infants (< 1 year), population percentage of
children at least 1 year old but < 5 years (i.e., 1-4 years), population
percentage of people > or = 65 years, geographic density of PM10 monitors, annual
average concentrations of PM10, and mortality rates for lung cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: The ESCALA project was undertaken to obtain information for
assessing the effects of air pollutants on mortality in Latin America, where
large populations are exposed to relatively high levels of ambient air pollution.
An important goal was to provide evidence that could inform policies for
controlling air pollution in Latin America. This project included the development
of standardized protocols for data collection and for statistical analyses as
well as statistical analytic programs (routines developed in R by the ESCALA
team) to insure comparability of results. The analytic approach and statistical
programming developed within this project should be of value for researchers
carrying out single-city analyses and should facilitate the inclusion of
additional Latin American cities within the ESCALA multicity project. Our
analyses confirm what has been observed in other parts of the world regarding the
effects of ambient PM10 and 03 concentrations on daily mortality. They also
suggest that SES plays a role in the susceptibility of a population to air
pollution; people with a lower SES appeared to have an increased risk of death
from respiratory causes, particularly COPD. Compared with the general population,
infants and young children appeared to be more susceptible to both PM10 and O3,
although an increased risk of mortality was not observed in these age groups in
all cities. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED)

PMID: 23311234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Mar;43(3):589-94. doi: 10.1002/eji.201243209. Epub 2013 Feb
11.

Generation of both cortical and Aire(+) medullary thymic epithelial compartments 
from CD205(+) progenitors.

Baik S(1), Jenkinson EJ, Lane PJ, Anderson G, Jenkinson WE.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Immune Regulation, Institute for Biomedical Research,
University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2013 Mar;43(3):580-3.

In the adult thymus, the development of self-tolerant thymocytes requires
interactions with thymic epithelial cells (TECs). Although both cortical and
medullary TECs (cTECs/mTECs) are known to arise from common bipotent TEC
progenitors, the phenotype of these progenitors and the timing of the emergence
of these distinct lineages remain unclear. Here, we have investigated the
phenotype and developmental properties of bipotent TEC progenitors during
cTEC/mTEC lineage development. We show that TEC progenitors can undergo a
stepwise acquisition of first cTEC and then mTEC hallmarks, resulting in the
emergence of a progenitor population simultaneously expressing the cTEC marker
CD205 and the mTEC regulator Receptor Activator of NF-<U+03BA>B (RANK). In vivo analysis
reveals the capacity of CD205(+) TECs to generate functionally competent cortical
and medullary microenvironments containing both cTECs and Aire(+) mTECs. Thus,
TEC development involves a stage in which bipotent progenitors can co-express
hallmarks of the cTEC and mTEC lineages through sequential acquisition, arguing
against a simple binary model in which both lineages diverge simultaneously from 
bipotent lineage negative TEC progenitors. Rather, our data reveal an unexpected 
overlap in the phenotypic properties of these bipotent TECs with their
lineage-restricted counterparts.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3960635
PMID: 23299414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012 Dec;1275:107-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06843.x.

Experimental myasthenia gravis in Aire-deficient mice: a link between Aire and
regulatory T cells.

Aricha R(1), Feferman T, Berrih-Aknin S, Fuchs S, Souroujon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.

Aire (autoimmune regulator) has a key role in the establishment of tolerance to
autoantigens. Aire(-/-) mice present decreased thymic expression of AChR,
significantly lower frequencies of regulatory T (T(reg)) cells, and higher
expression of Th17 markers, compared to controls. We therefore predicted that
Aire(-/-) mice would be more susceptible to induction of experimental autoimmune 
myasthenia gravis (EAMG). However, when EAMG was induced in young mice, Aire(-/-)
mice presented a milder disease that wild-type (WT) controls. In contrast, when
EAMG was induced in older mice, Aire(-/-) mice were more severely affected than
WT mice. The relative resistance to EAMG in young Aire(-/-) mice correlated with 
increased numbers of T(reg) cells in their spleens compared to young controls. A 
similar age-related susceptibility was also observed when EAE was induced in
Aire(-/-) mice, suggesting an age-related link among Aire, disease
susceptibility, and peripheral T(reg) cells that may be a general feature of
autoimmunity.

© 2012 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 23278585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Bull Acad Natl Med. 2013 Jan;197(1):19-30.

[Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1: clinical features and course in
France].

[Article in French]

Wemeau JL, Proust-Lemoine E.

Nineteen patients with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 were identified
in a longitudinal study conducted in northern France (Nord-Picardie-Normandie
region, 9 million inhabitants), giving a prevalence of 1/500 000 inhabitants.
This survey confirmed the usual onset in childhood, and the high frequency of
candidiasis, adrenal insufficiency, alopecia and hypoparathyroidism. Broad
phenotypic variability was observed, even within a given family. The AIRE gene
mutations identified in these patients were closer to those observed in the
United Kingdom than in Finland. Preliminary results of an ongoing nationwide
survey suggest that the prevalence tends to be higher in the north.

PMID: 24672977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Immunol. 2013 Feb 1;190(3):1085-93. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201843. Epub 2012
Dec 26.

An organotypic coculture model supporting proliferation and differentiation of
medullary thymic epithelial cells and promiscuous gene expression.

Pinto S(1), Schmidt K, Egle S, Stark HJ, Boukamp P, Kyewski B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Immunology, German Cancer Research Center, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany.

Understanding intrathymic T cell differentiation has been greatly aided by the
development of various reductionist in vitro models that mimic certain
steps/microenvironments of this complex process. Most models focused on the
faithful in vitro restoration of T cell differentiation and selection. In
contrast, suitable in vitro models emulating the developmental pathways of the
two major thymic epithelial cell lineages--cortical thymic epithelial cells and
medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs)--are yet to be developed. In this
regard, lack of an in vitro model mimicking the developmental biology of the mTEC
lineage has hampered the molecular analysis of the so-called "promiscuous
expression" of tissue-restricted genes, a key property of terminally
differentiated mTECs. Based on the close biological relationship between the skin
and thymus epithelial cell compartments, we adapted a three-dimensional
organotypic coculture model, originally developed to provide a bona fide in vitro
dermal equivalent, for the culture of isolated mTECs. This three-dimensional
model preserves key features of mTECs: proliferation and terminal differentiation
of CD80(lo), Aire(-) mTECs into CD80(hi), Aire(+) mTECs; responsiveness to RANKL;
and sustained expression of FoxN1, Aire, and tissue-restricted genes in CD80(hi) 
mTECs. This in vitro culture model should facilitate the identification of
molecular components and pathways involved in mTEC differentiation in general and
in promiscuous gene expression in particular.

PMID: 23269248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Autoimmun. 2013 May;42:62-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2012.11.004. Epub 2012 Dec
21.

AIRE expressing marginal zone dendritic cells balances adaptive immunity and
T-follicular helper cell recruitment.

Lindmark E(1), Chen Y, Georgoudaki AM, Dudziak D, Lindh E, Adams WC, Loré K,
Winqvist O, Chambers BJ, Karlsson MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital,
Solna, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome Type I (APS I) results in multiple endocrine
organ destruction and is caused by mutations in the Autoimmune regulator gene
(AIRE). In the thymic stroma, cells expressing the AIRE gene dictate T cell
education and central tolerance. Although this function is the most studied, AIRE
is also expressed in the periphery in DCs and stromal cells. Still, how AIRE
regulated transcription modifies cell behaviour in the periphery is largely
unknown. Here we show that AIRE is specifically expressed by 33D1(+) DCs and
dictates the fate of antibody secreting cell movement within the spleen. We also 
found that AIRE expressing 33D1(+) DCs expresses self-antigens as exemplified by 
the hallmark gene insulin. Also, as evidence for a regulatory function, absence
of Aire in 33D1(+) DCs led to reduced levels of the chemokine CXCL12 and
increased co-stimulatory properties. This resulted in altered activation and
recruitment of T-follicular helper cells and germinal centre B cells. The altered
balance leads to a change of the early response to a T cell-dependent antigen in 
Aire(-/-) mice. These findings add to the understanding of how specific DC
subtypes regulate the early responses during T cell-dependent antibody responses 
within the spleen and further define the role of AIRE in the periphery as
regulator of self-antigen expression and lymphocyte migration.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23265639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Gene. 2013 Feb 25;515(2):439-43. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.12.007. Epub 2012 Dec
20.

Multiorgan autoimmunity in a Turner syndrome patient with partial monosomy 2q and
trisomy 10p.

Grossi A(1), Palma A, Zanni G, Novelli A, Loddo S, Cappa M, Fierabracci A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital IRCCS, Rome,
Italy.

Turner syndrome is a condition caused by numeric and structural abnormalities of 
the X chromosome, and is characterized by a series of clinical features, the most
common being short stature and gonadal dysgenesis. An increased frequency of
autoimmune diseases as well as an elevated incidence of autoantibodies has been
observed in Turner patients. We present a unique case of mosaic Turner syndrome
with a complex rearrangement consisting of a partial deletion of chromosome 2q
and duplication of chromosome 10p
{[46],XX,der(2)t(2;10)(2pter<U+2192>2q37::10p13<U+2192>10pter)[127]/45,X,der(2)t(2;10)(2pter<U+2192>2q
37::10p13<U+2192>10pter)[23]}. The patient is affected by partial empty sella, in
association with a group of multiorgan autoimmunity-related manifestations
including Hashimoto's thyroiditis, celiac disease, insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus (Type 1 diabetes, T1D), possible autoimmune inner ear disease with
sensorineural deficit, preclinical Addison disease and alopecia universalis. The 
patient was previously described at the age of 2.4 years and now re-evaluated at 
the age of 14 years after she developed autoimmune conditions. AIRE gene
screening revealed heterozygous c.834 C>G polymorphism (p.Ser278Arg) and
IVS9+6G>A variation, thus likely excluding autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome Type
1 (APECED). Heterozygous R620W polymorphism of the protein tyrosine phosphatase
non receptor type 22 (PTPN22) gene was detected in patient's DNA. SNP-array
analysis revealed that autoimmunity-related genes could be affected by the
partial monosomy 2q and trisomy 10p. These data suggest that early genetic
analysis in TS patients with complex associations of multiorgan autoimmune
manifestations would permit a precise diagnostic classification and also be an
indicator for undiscovered pathogenetic mechanisms.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23262341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2013 Jan;9(1):43-51. doi: 10.1586/eci.12.88.

Alterations of the autoimmune regulator transcription factor and failure of
central tolerance: APECED as a model.

Gallo V(1), Giardino G, Capalbo D, Palamaro L, Romano R, Santamaria F, Maio F,
Salerno M, Vajro P, Pignata C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University, S Pansini 5, 8013 Naples,
Italy.

Self-nonself discrimination plays a key role in inducing a productive immunity
and in preventing autoimmune reactions. Central tolerance within the thymus and
peripheral tolerance in peripheral lymphoid organs lead to immunologic
nonresponsiveness against self-components. The central tolerance represents the
mechanism by which T cells binding with high avidity to self-antigens are
eliminated through the so-called negative selection. Thymic medullary epithelial 
cells and medullary dendritic cells play a key role in this process, through the 
expression of a large number of tissue-specific self-antigens involving the
transcription factor autoimmune regulator (AIRE). Mutations of AIRE result in
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy, a rare autosomal 
recessive disease (OMIM 240300), which is the paradigm of a genetically
determined failure of central tolerance and autoimmunity. This review focuses on 
recent advances in the molecular mechanisms of central tolerance, their
alterations and clinical implication.

PMID: 23256763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Clin Imaging Sci. 2012;2:62. doi: 10.4103/2156-7514.103018. Epub 2012 Oct 31.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1.

Ponranjini VC(1), Jayachandran S, Kayal L, Bakyalakshmi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Radiology, Sri Ramachandra University,
Chennai, India.

Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome (APS) Type 1 is a rare hereditary disorder that
damages organs in the body. This disease entity is the result of a mutation in
the AIRE gene. It is characterized by three classic clinical features -
hypoparathyroidism, Addison's disease, and chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. For
a patient to be diagnosed as having APS Type 1 syndrome at least two of these
features needs to be present. The third entity may develop as the disease
progresses. We report a case of a 35-year-old female patient with a history of
seizure from the age of 11 years, who was managed with anticonvulsant drugs. With
worsening of the seizure episodes, patient was diagnosed to have
hypoparathyroidism together with the manifestations of oral candidiasis, nails
dystrophy, enamel hypoplasia, and hypogonadism. A diagnosis of APS-1 was
considered. The facility for genetic analysis of the AIRE gene mutation was not
accessible, as the test costs were prohibitive and not affordable for the
patient. Patient management was directed to treating individual disease
components. However, cerebral and dental changes were irreversible.

PMCID: PMC3515937
PMID: 23230544  [PubMed]


283. Presse Med. 2012 Dec;41(12 P 2):e651-62. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2012.10.005. Epub
2012 Nov 23.

Polyglandular autoimmune syndrome type I.

Proust-Lemoine E(1), Saugier-Veber P, Wémeau JL.

Author information: 
(1)CHRU de Lille, hôpital Claude-Huriez, clinique endocrinologique
Marc-Linquette, 4e Ouest, 59037 Lille cedex, France.

Polyglandular Autoimmune Syndrom type 1 (PAS-1) or Autoimmune PolyEndocrinopathy 
Candidiasis-Ectodermal-Dystrophy (APECED) is a rare recessive autosomal disease
related to Autoimmune Regulator (AIRE) gene mutations. AIRE is mainly implicated 
in central and peripheric immune tolerance. Diagnosis was classically based on
presence of at least two out of three "majors" criterions of Whitaker's triad
(candidiasis, autoimmune hypoparathyroidism and adrenal insufficiency). Presence 
of one criterion was sufficient when a sibling was previously diagnosed. However,
some atypic or poorly symptomatic variants do not correspond to these criterions.
As a matter of fact, digestive (malabsorption, pernicious anemia, hepatitis),
cutaneous (alopecia, vitiligo, enamel dysplasia) or ophtalmological (keratitis)
components could prevail. In these cases, diagnosis could be made by molecular
genetics. Prognosis is influenced by genetic (AIRE mutations, HLA), hormonal and 
environmental (infections) factors. Potentially letal components (hepatitis and
severe malabsorption) could be treated by immunosuppressors. Candidiasis and
other infections should be carefully screened and treated before beginning those 
therapies, in order to avoid severe systemic infections.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23182677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Med Intensiva. 2014 Mar;38(2):111-21. doi: 10.1016/j.medin.2012.09.007. Epub 2012
Nov 15.

Noninvasive mechanical ventilation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and
in acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Rialp Cervera G(1), del Castillo Blanco A(2), Pérez Aizcorreta O(2), Parra Morais
L(2); GT-IRA of SEMICYUC.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Intensiva, Hospital Son Llàtzer, Palma de Mallorca, Illes
Balears, España. Electronic address: grialp@gmail.com. (2)Servicio de Medicina
Intensiva, Hospital Son Llàtzer, Palma de Mallorca, Illes Balears, España.

Noninvasive ventilation (NIV) with conventional therapy improves the outcome of
patients with acute respiratory failure due to hypercapnic decompensation of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema
(ACPE). This review summarizes the main effects of NIV in these pathologies. In
COPD, NIV improves gas exchange and symptoms, reducing the need for endotracheal 
intubation, hospital mortality and hospital stay compared with conventional
oxygen therapy. NIV may also avoid reintubation and may decrease the length of
invasive mechanical ventilation. In ACPE, NIV accelerates the remission of
symptoms and the normalization of blood gas parameters, reduces the need for
endotracheal intubation, and is associated with a trend towards lesser mortality,
without increasing the incidence of myocardial infarction. The ventilation
modality used in ACPE does not affect the patient prognosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier España, S.L. y SEMICYUC. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23158869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Med Intensiva. 2013 Dec;37(9):593-9. doi: 10.1016/j.medin.2012.10.002. Epub 2012 
Nov 15.

Exhaled breath condensate pH in mechanically ventilated patients.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Nannini LJ(1), Quintana R, Bagilet DH, Druetta M, Ramírez M, Nieto R, Guelman
Greta G.

Author information: 
(1)Neumonología, Universidad Nacional de Rosario, Hospital Escuela "Eva Perón",
Argentina. Electronic address: nanninilj@cimero.org.ar.

OBJECTIVES: In this prospective clinical trial we aimed to answer if spontaneous 
exhaled breath condensate (EBC) in the trap of the expiratory arm of the
ventilator could replace EBC collected by coolant chamber standardized with Argon
as an inert gas. Second, if EBC pH could predict ventilator associated pneumonia 
(VAP) and mortality.
PATIENTS: We included 34 critically ill patients (males = 26), aged = 54.85 ±
19.86 (mean ± SD) yrs, that required mechanical ventilation due to non-pulmonary 
direct cause (APACHE II score = 23.58 ± 14.7; PaO(2)/FiO(2) = 240.00 ± 98.29).
SETTING: ICU with 9 beds from a regional teaching hospital.
INTERVENTION AND RESULTS: The patients were followed up until development of VAP,
successful weaning or death. There were significant differences between mean EBC 
pH from the 4 procedures with the exception of spontaneous EBC de-aerated with
Argon (n = 79; 6.74 ± 0.28) and coolant chamber deaerated with Argon (n = 79;
6.70 ± 0.36; p = NS by Tukey's Multiple Comparison Test). However, none of the
procedures were extrapolated between each other according to Bland & Altman
method. The mean EBC pH from the trap without Argon was 6.50 ± 0.28. From the
total of 34 patients, 22 survived and were discharged and 12 patients died in the
ICU.
CONCLUSION: Spontaneous EBC pH could not be extrapolated to EBC pH from coolant
chamber and it did not change in subjects who dead, neither subject with VAP in
comparison with baseline data. The lack of other biomarker in EBC and the lack of
a control group determinate the need for further studies in this setting.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier España, S.L. and SEMICYUC. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23158868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Int J Endocrinol. 2012;2012:353250. doi: 10.1155/2012/353250. Epub 2012 Oct 22.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy: insights into
genotype-phenotype correlation.

Capalbo D(1), De Martino L, Giardino G, Di Mase R, Di Donato I, Parenti G, Vajro 
P, Pignata C, Salerno M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Naples Federico II, 80131 Naples,
Italy.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
autosomal recessive disease, caused by mutations of a single gene named
autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE) which results in a failure of T cell tolerance
within the thymus. Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, chronic hypoparathyroidism,
and Addison's disease are the hallmarks of the syndrome. APECED is also
characterized by several autoimmune endocrine and nonendocrine manifestations,
and the phenotype is often complex. Moreover, even though APECED is a monogenic
disease, its clinical picture is generally dominated by a wide heterogeneity both
in the severity and in the number of components even among siblings with the same
AIRE genotype. The variability of its clinical expression implies that diagnosis 
can be challenging, and a considerable delay often occurs between the appearance 
of symptoms and the diagnosis. Since a prompt diagnosis is essential to prevent
severe complications, clinicians should be aware of all symptoms and signs of
suspicion. The aim of this paper is to give an overview on the clinical
presentation and diagnostic criteria of APECED and to focus on current knowledge 
on genotype-phenotype correlation.

PMCID: PMC3485503
PMID: 23133448  [PubMed]


287. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Jan;7(1):159-65. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.1150. Epub 2012 Oct 24.

Macrophages overexpressing Aire induce CD4+Foxp3+ T cells.

Sun J(1), Fu H, Wu J, Zhu W, Li Y, Yang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Norman Bethune College of Medicine, Jilin
University, Changchun, PR China.

Aire plays an important role in central immune tolerance by regulating the
transcription of thousands of genes. However, the role of Aire in the peripheral 
immune system is poorly understood. Regulatory T (Treg) cells are considered
essential for the maintenance of peripheral tolerance, but the effect of Aire on 
Treg cells in the peripheral immune system is currently unknown. In this study,
we investigated the effects of macrophages overexpressing Aire on CD4+Foxp3+ Treg
cells by co-culturing Aire-overexpressing RAW264.7 cells or their supernatant
with splenocytes. The results show that macrophages overexpressing Aire enhanced 
the expression of Foxp3 mRNA and induced different subsets of Treg cells in
splenocytes through cell-cell contact or a co-culture supernatants. TGF-ß is a
key molecule in the increases of CD4+CD45RA+Foxp3hi T cell and activating Treg
(aTreg) levels observed following cell-supernatant co-culturing. Subsets of Treg 
cells were induced by Aire-overexpressing macrophages, and the manipulation of
Treg cells by the targeting of Aire may provide a method for the treatment of
inflammatory or autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 23128958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Clin Dev Immunol. 2012;2012:207403. doi: 10.1155/2012/207403. Epub 2012 Oct 22.

Expression of the autoimmune regulator gene and its relevance to the mechanisms
of central and peripheral tolerance.

Perniola R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care, Department of Pediatrics, V. Fazzi Regional Hospital,
Piazza F. Muratore, 73100 Lecce, Italy. rperniola@hotmail.com

The autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1) is a monogenic disease due
to pathogenic variants occurring in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. Its
related protein, AIRE, activates the transcription of genes encoding for
tissue-specific antigens (TsAgs) in a subset of medullary thymic epithelial
cells: the presentation of TsAgs to the maturating thymocytes induces the
apoptosis of the autoreactive clones and constitutes the main form of central
tolerance. Dysregulation of thymic AIRE expression in genetically transmitted and
acquired diseases other than APS-1 may contribute to further forms of
autoimmunity. As AIRE and its murine homolog are also expressed in the secondary 
lymphoid organs, the extent and relevance of AIRE participation in the mechanisms
of peripheral tolerance need to be thoroughly defined.

PMCID: PMC3485510
PMID: 23125865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. BMC Immunol. 2012 Nov 2;13:58. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-13-58.

DNA methylation profile of Aire-deficient mouse medullary thymic epithelial
cells.

Wu G(1), Hirabayashi K, Sato S, Akiyama N, Akiyama T, Shiota K, Yagi S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Animal Resource
Sciences/Veterinary Medical Science, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) are characterized by
ectopic expression of self-antigens during the establishment of central
tolerance. The autoimmune regulator (Aire), which is specifically expressed in
mTECs, is responsible for the expression of a large repertoire of
tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs) and plays a role in the development of mTECs.
However, Aire-deficient mTECs still express TRAs. Moreover, a subset of mTECs,
which are considered to be at a stage of terminal differentiation, exists in the 
Aire-deficient thymus. The phenotype of a specific cell type in a multicellular
organism is governed by the epigenetic regulation system. DNA methylation
modification is an important component of this system. Every cell or tissue type 
displays a DNA methylation profile, consisting of tissue-dependent and
differentially methylated regions (T-DMRs), and this profile is involved in
cell-type-specific genome usage. The aim of this study was to examine the DNA
methylation profile of mTECs by using Aire-deficient mTECs as a model.
RESULTS: We identified the T-DMRs of mTECs (mTEC-T-DMRs) via genome-wide DNA
methylation analysis of Aire(-/-) mTECs by comparison with the liver, brain,
thymus, and embryonic stem cells. The hypomethylated mTEC-T-DMRs in Aire(-/-)
mTECs were associated with mTEC-specific genes, including Aire, CD80, and Trp63, 
as well as other genes involved in the RANK signaling pathway. While these
mTEC-T-DMRs were also hypomethylated in Aire(+/+) mTECs, they were
hypermethylated in control thymic stromal cells. We compared the pattern of DNA
methylation levels at a total of 55 mTEC-T-DMRs and adjacent regions and found
that the DNA methylation status was similar for Aire(+/+) and Aire(-/-) mTECs but
distinct from that of athymic cells and tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate a unique DNA methylation profile that is
independent of Aire in mTECs. This profile is distinct from other cell types in
the thymic microenvironment and is indicated to be involved in the
differentiation of the mTEC lineage.

PMCID: PMC3546423
PMID: 23116172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Int Rev Immunol. 2012 Oct;31(5):344-62. doi: 10.3109/08830185.2012.697230.

Genetic basis of altered central tolerance and autoimmune diseases: a lesson from
AIRE mutations.

Capalbo D(1), Giardino G, Martino LD, Palamaro L, Romano R, Gallo V, Cirillo E,
Salerno M, Pignata C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.

The thymus is a specialized organ that provides an inductive environment for the 
development of T cells from multipotent hematopoietic progenitors. Self-nonself
discrimination plays a key role in inducing a productive immunity and in
preventing autoimmune reactions. Tolerance represents a state of immunologic
nonresponsiveness in the presence of a particular antigen. The immune system
becomes tolerant to self-antigens through the two main processes, central and
peripheral tolerance. Central tolerance takes place within the thymus and
represents the mechanism by which T cells binding with high avidity
self-antigens, which are potentially autoreactive, are eliminated through
so-called negative selection. This process is mostly mediated by medullary thymic
epithelia cells (mTECs) and medullary dendritic cells (DCs). A remarkable event
in the process is the expression of tissue-specific antigens (TSA) by mTECs
driven by the transcription factor autoimmune regulator (AIRE). Mutations in this
gene result in autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED), a rare autosomal recessive disease (OMIM 240300). Thus far, this
syndrome is the paradigm of a genetically determined failure of central tolerance
and autoimmunty. Patients with APECED have a variable pattern of autoimmune
reactions, involving different endocrine and nonendocrine organs. However,
although APECED is a monogenic disorder, it is characterized by a wide
variability of the clinical expression, thus implying a further role for
disease-modifying genes and environmental factors in the pathogenesis. Studies on
this polyreactive autoimmune syndrome contributed enormously to unraveling
several issues of the molecular basis of autoimmunity. This review focuses on the
developmental, functional, and molecular events governing central tolerance and
on the clinical implication of its failure.

PMID: 23083345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Int Rev Immunol. 2012 Oct;31(5):299-301. doi: 10.3109/08830185.2012.723509.

Topics in this issue: cancer testes antigens, immune checkpoints, inflammation
associated with ischemia-reperfusion and integrin targeting.

Bot A, Chiriva-Internati M.

This issue of the International Reviews of Immunology is dedicated to several
topics: cancer immunotherapy, and basic and translational aspects of immunity.
Two reviews, one focused on breast and the other on lung cancer, highlight the
need to redefine the cancer testes antigens (CTAs) as novel information regarding
their expression profile and biological role emerges. Two other reviews showcase 
pivotal molecules that keep in check immunity at two different levels: the
transcription factor autoimmune regulator (AIRE) important to negative selection 
of the T-cell repertoire, and CD22 that limits the antigen-initiated B-cell
response. Two other articles focus on the debated role of Toll-like receptors
(TLRs) and inflammation in general, in ischemia-reperfusion lesions that follow
cardiovascular disorders and stroke. Last but not the least, this issue hosts a
review that discusses the role and translational potential of the a4 integrin for
the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).

PMID: 23083342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46902. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046902. Epub 2012 Oct 15.

Exploring PHD fingers and H3K4me0 interactions with molecular dynamics
simulations and binding free energy calculations: AIRE-PHD1, a comparative study.

Spiliotopoulos D(1), Spitaleri A, Musco G.

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute c/o S. Raffaele Scientific Institute, Biomolecular
NMR Laboratory, Center for Translational Genomics and Bioinformatics, Milano,
Italy.

PHD fingers represent one of the largest families of epigenetic readers capable
of decoding post-translationally modified or unmodified histone H3 tails. Because
of their direct involvement in human pathologies they are increasingly considered
as a potential therapeutic target. Several PHD/histone-peptide structures have
been determined, however relatively little information is available on their
dynamics. Studies aiming to characterize the dynamic and energetic determinants
driving histone peptide recognition by epigenetic readers would strongly benefit 
from computational studies. Herein we focus on the dynamic and energetic
characterization of the PHD finger subclass specialized in the recognition of
histone H3 peptides unmodified in position K4 (H3K4me0). As a case study we
focused on the first PHD finger of autoimmune regulator protein (AIRE-PHD1) in
complex with H3K4me0. PCA analysis of the covariance matrix of free AIRE-PHD1
highlights the presence of a "flapping" movement, which is blocked in an open
conformation upon binding to H3K4me0. Moreover, binding free energy calculations 
obtained through Molecular Mechanics/Poisson-Boltzmann Surface Area (MM/PBSA)
methodology are in good qualitative agreement with experiments and allow
dissection of the energetic terms associated with native and alanine mutants of
AIRE-PHD1/H3K4me0 complexes. MM/PBSA calculations have also been applied to the
energetic analysis of other PHD fingers recognizing H3K4me0. In this case we
observe excellent correlation between computed and experimental binding free
energies. Overall calculations show that H3K4me0 recognition by PHD fingers
relies on compensation of the electrostatic and polar solvation energy terms and 
is stabilized by non-polar interactions.

PMCID: PMC3471955
PMID: 23077531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Dec;40(22):11756-68. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks933. Epub 2012
Oct 15.

AIRE-PHD fingers are structural hubs to maintain the integrity of
chromatin-associated interactome.

Gaetani M(1), Matafora V, Saare M, Spiliotopoulos D, Mollica L, Quilici G,
Chignola F, Mannella V, Zucchelli C, Peterson P, Bachi A, Musco G.

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular NMR Laboratory, Center of Translational Genomics and
Bioinformatics, Dulbecco Telethon Institute c/o S. Raffaele Scientific Institute,
Milano, Italy.

Mutations in autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene cause autoimmune polyendocrinopathy
candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy. AIRE is expressed in thymic medullary
epithelial cells, where it promotes the expression of peripheral-tissue antigens 
to mediate deletional tolerance, thereby preventing self-reactivity. AIRE
contains two plant homeodomains (PHDs) which are sites of pathological mutations.
AIRE-PHD fingers are important for AIRE transcriptional activity and presumably
play a crucial role in the formation of multimeric protein complexes at chromatin
level which ultimately control immunological tolerance. As a step forward the
understanding of AIRE-PHD fingers in normal and pathological conditions, we
investigated their structure and used a proteomic SILAC approach to assess the
impact of patient mutations targeting AIRE-PHD fingers. Importantly, both
AIRE-PHD fingers are structurally independent and mutually non-interacting
domains. In contrast to D297A and V301M on AIRE-PHD1, the C446G mutation on
AIRE-PHD2 destroys the structural fold, thus causing aberrant AIRE localization
and reduction of AIRE target genes activation. Moreover, mutations targeting
AIRE-PHD1 affect the formation of a multimeric protein complex at chromatin
level. Overall our results reveal the importance of AIRE-PHD domains in the
interaction with chromatin-associated nuclear partners and gene regulation
confirming the role of PHD fingers as versatile protein interaction hubs for
multiple binding events.

PMCID: PMC3526288
PMID: 23074189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Environ Pollut. 2013 Jan;172:163-9. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2012.08.014. Epub 2012 
Oct 11.

Assessment of flame retardants in river water using a ceramic dosimeter passive
sampler.

Cristale J(1), Katsoyiannis A, Chen C, Jones KC, Lacorte S.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Environmental Chemistry, IDAEA-CSIC, Jordi Girona 18-26, 08034
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Novel brominated (BFRs) and organophosphorus (OPFRs) flame retardants were
monitored in river water using the ceramic dosimeter passive sampling device with
HLB (hydrophilic-lipophilic balance) as sorbent. Laboratory calibrations were
performed to determine sampling rates for each compound using the Archie's law
exponent. The passive sampling device was used to determine the presence of 6
BFRs in the River Aire (United Kingdom), selected according to their ubiquitous
presence in the River Aire. Passive sampling integrated river water
concentrations ranged from 0.010 to 5.6 µg L(-1) for all OPFRs, while BFRs were
not detected with this specific passive sampler configuration. Decreased sampling
rates were evidenced after 3 weeks of deployment, probably due to fouling. Good
agreement between integrated and snapshot water concentrations was obtained,
indicating the efficiency of the passive sampler for the monitoring of OPFRs in
river water.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23063991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Jan;43(1):75-84. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242761. Epub 2012 Dec 6.

Aire mediates thymic expression and tolerance of pancreatic antigens via an
unconventional transcriptional mechanism.

Danso-Abeam D(1), Staats KA, Franckaert D, Van Den Bosch L, Liston A, Gray DH,
Dooley J.

Author information: 
(1)Autoimmune Genetics Laboratory, VIB, Leuven, Belgium.

The autoimmune regulator (Aire), mediates central tolerance of peripheral self.
Its activity in thymic epithelial cells (TECs) directs the ectopic expression of 
thousands of tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs), causing the deletion of
autoreactive thymocytes. The molecular mechanisms orchestrating the breadth of
transcriptional regulation by Aire remain unknown. One prominent model capable of
explaining both the uniquely high number of Aire-dependent targets and their
specificity posits that tissue-specific transcription factors induced by Aire
directly activate their canonical targets, exponentially adding to the total
number of Aire-dependent TRAs. To test this "Hierarchical Transcription" model,
we analysed mice deficient in the pancreatic master transcription factor
pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 (Pdx1), specifically in TECs (Pdx1(<U+0394>Foxn1) ), 
for the expression and tolerance of pancreatic TRAs. Surprisingly, we found that 
lack of Pdx1 in TECs did not reduce the transcription of insulin or somatostatin,
or alter glucagon expression. Moreover, in a model of thymic deletion driven by a
neo-TRA under the control of the insulin promoter, Pdx1 in TECs was not required 
to affect thymocyte deletion or the generation of regulatory T (Treg) cells.
These findings suggest that the capacity of Aire to regulate expression of a huge
array of TRAs relies solely on an unconventional transcriptional mechanism,
without intermediary transcription factors.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23041971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Nat Commun. 2012;3:1098. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2105.

Mst1 regulates integrin-dependent thymocyte trafficking and antigen recognition
in the thymus.

Ueda Y(1), Katagiri K, Tomiyama T, Yasuda K, Habiro K, Katakai T, Ikehara S,
Matsumoto M, Kinashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Science, 10-15
Fumizono-cho, Osaka 570-8506, Japan.

Thymocyte trafficking has an important role in thymic selection. Here we show
that the Hippo homologue Mst1 is required for thymocyte migration and antigen
recognition by LFA-1 and ICAM-1 within the medulla. Using two-photon imaging of
thymic tissues, we found that highly motile mature thymocytes arrest and are
activated in the vicinity of rare populations of Aire(+) ICAM-1(hi) medullary
thymic epithelia in a negatively selecting environment. Notably, Mst1 deficiency 
or blocking the cell adhesion molecules LFA-1 and ICAM-1 results in inefficient
migration and antigen recognition of CD4(+) thymocytes within the medulla.
Consistent with these defects, thymocyte selection is impaired in Mst1(-/-) mice,
which display T cell-dependent inflammatory infiltrates in multiple organs and
develop autoantibodies. Our results suggest that Mst1 has a key role in
regulating thymocyte self-antigen recognition in the medulla.

PMID: 23033074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Addict Nurs. 2012 Oct;23(3):191-9. doi: 10.1097/JAN.0b013e31826f4bf2.

Are the dental health needs of adults with illegal drug dependence being met by
current service provision in the United Kingdom?: a literature review.

Hewson V(1), Wray J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health and Social Care, University of Hull, Hull, United Kingdom.
Correspondence related to content to: Victoria Hewson, MSc, BSc (Hons), DipHPS,
RDN, Room 103, Aire Building, Faculty of Health and Social Care, University of
Hull, Cottingham Road, Hull HU6 7 RX, United Kingdom.

This literature review outlines the current issues and debates relating to the
dental health of adults with drug dependence. The dental health of adults with
illegal drug dependence (IDD) continues to be under debate throughout dental
practice, and the most appropriate model of care suitable to meet the high
complex needs of this client group remains uncertain. The study aims to review
and critically analyze available research relating to the oral health effects of 
illegal drug misuse and the dental health needs and status of adults with drug
dependence. Second, it aims to identify and critically evaluate current models of
dental service/care delivery, including relevant best practice guidance and
potential barriers to dental access for adults with IDD. The available literature
pertaining to dental health and adults with drug dependence are systematically
reviewed and critically analyzed and evaluated in order to execute a rigorous
investigation. The oral effects along with general medical complications
associated with IDD are increasingly being recognized. There are substantive
negative effects of IDD on oral health, particularly for those with opioid
dependence; therefore, these clients have high complex dental needs and low use
of dental services. Adults with drug dependence comprise a group with special
dental needs and therefore need greater access to dental care than most people
due to their high level of need. A high awareness of the implications for oral
health care for adults with drug dependence is essential. Dental professionals
have a key role in supporting the rehabilitation of these patients from
potentially severe or fatal addictions. There is a distinct lack of national
policy and guidance relating specifically to adults with drug dependence, and
therefore, problems persist. Key findings and recommendations are presented to
enhance the development of dental services for adults with IDD.

PMID: 24335736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Gene. 2012 Dec 10;511(1):113-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.09.029. Epub 2012 Sep
18.

A novel heterozygous mutation of the AIRE gene in a patient with autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy syndrome (APECED).

Fierabracci A(1), Bizzarri C, Palma A, Milillo A, Bellacchio E, Cappa M.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Area, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
alessandra.fierabracci@opbg.net

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy
syndrome (APECED) is an autosomal recessive disease due to mutations of the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. Typical manifestations include candidiasis,
Addison's disease, and hypoparathyroidism. Type 1 diabetes, alopecia, vitiligo,
ectodermal dystrophy, celiac disease and other intestinal dysfunctions, chronic
atrophic gastritis, chronic active hepatitis, autoimmune thyroid disorders,
pernicious anemia and premature ovarian failure are other rare associated
diseases although other conditions have been associated with APECED.
CASE PRESENTATION: What follows is the clinical, endocrinological and molecular
data of a female APECED patient coming from Lithuania. The patient was affected
by chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism and pre-clinical
Addison's disease. Using direct sequencing of all the 14 exons of the AIRE gene
in the patient's DNA, we identified in exon 6 the known mutation c.769 C>T
(p.Arg257X) in compound heterozygosity with the newly discovered mutation
c.1214delC (p.Pro405fs) in exon 10. The novel mutation results in a frameshift
that is predicted to alter the sequence of the protein starting from amino acid
405 as well as to cause its premature truncation, therefore a non-functional Aire
protein.
CONCLUSIONS: A novel mutation has been described in a patient with APECED with
classical clinical components, found in compound heterozygosity with the c.769
C>T variation. Expanded epidemiological investigations based on AIRE gene
sequencing are necessary to verify the relevancy of the novel mutation to APECED 
etiopathogenesis in the Lithuanian population and to prove its diagnostic
efficacy in association with clinical and immunological findings.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23000069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Front Immunol. 2012 Sep 4;3:278. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00278. eCollection 2012.

TNF receptor family signaling in the development and functions of medullary
thymic epithelial cells.

Akiyama T(1), Shinzawa M, Akiyama N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Department of Cancer Biology,
Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo Tokyo, Japan.

Thymic epithelial cells (TECs) provide the microenvironment required for the
development of T cells in the thymus. A unique property of medullary thymic
epithelial cells (mTECs) is their expression of a wide range of tissue-restricted
self-antigens, critically regulated by the nuclear protein AIRE, which
contributes to the selection of the self-tolerant T cell repertoire, thereby
suppressing the onset of autoimmune diseases. The TNF receptor family (TNFRF)
protein receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B (RANK), CD40 and lymphotoxin ß receptor
(LtßR) regulate the development and functions of mTECs. The engagement of these
receptors with their specific ligands results in the activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B
family of transcription factors. Two NF-<U+03BA>B activation pathways, the classical and
non-classical pathways, promote the development of mature mTECs induced by these 
receptors. Consistently, TNF receptor-associated factor (TRAF6), the signal
transducer of the classical pathway, and NF-<U+03BA>B inducing kinase (NIK), the signal 
transducer of the non-classical pathway, are essential for the development of
mature mTECs. This review summarizes the current understanding of how the
signaling by the TNF receptor family controls the development and functions of
mTEC.

PMCID: PMC3432834
PMID: 22969770  [PubMed]


300. Schizophr Res Treatment. 2012;2012:625738. doi: 10.1155/2012/625738. Epub 2012
Apr 8.

Where Does Evidence from New Trials for Schizophrenia Fit with the Existing
Evidence: A Case of the Emperor's New Clothes?

Jayaram M(1), Rattehalli RD, Adams CE.

Author information: 
(1)Leeds and York Partnerships NHS Foundation Trust, Aire Court Community Unit,
Lingwell Grove, Leeds LS10 4BS, UK.

Advent of "atypical" antipsychotics has spawned new trials in the recent years
and the number of such trial reports has been increasing exponentially. As
clinicians we have been led to believe that "atypicals" are better than
"typicals" despite the odd dissenting voice in academic and clinical circles.
This has been largely ignored until the publication of two landmark, independent,
pragmatic trials, Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness
(CATIE) and Cost Utility of the Latest Antipsychotic Drugs in Schizophrenia Study
(CUtLASS), which proved that thoughtfully chosen "typical" antipsychotics were as
good as the newer "atypicals." We pooled "leaving the study early data" from
Cochrane Reviews that existed before CATIE and CUtLASS and added data from CATIE 
and CUtLASS to the pool for a "before and after" comparison. Addition of CATIE
and CUtLASS data only led to narrowing of the already existing confidence
intervals, merely increasing precision, and decreasing the risk of Type II error.
Perhaps surprisingly, CATIE and CUtLASS when pooled with the already existing
data showed us that we had chosen to turn a blind eye to findings that already
existed. This leads clinicians to question as to whether, in future, we need to
feel less guilty about crying out early on that the emperor has no clothes on.

PMCID: PMC3420610
PMID: 22966441  [PubMed]


301. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Sep;42(9):2246-54. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242605.

Immunity to infection in IL-17-deficient mice and humans.

Cypowyj S(1), Picard C, Maródi L, Casanova JL, Puel A.

Author information: 
(1)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA. socy641@rockefeller.edu

Mice with defective IL-17 immunity display a broad vulnerability to various
infectious agents at diverse mucocutaneous surfaces. In humans, the study of
patients with various primary immunodeficiencies, including autosomal dominant
hyper-IgE syndrome caused by dominant-negative STAT3 mutations and autosomal
recessive autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 caused by null mutations 
in AIRE, has suggested that IL-17A, IL-17F and/or IL-22 are essential for
mucocutaneous immunity to Candida albicans. This hypothesis was confirmed by the 
identification of rare patients with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) due 
to autosomal recessive IL-17RA deficiency and autosomal dominant IL-17F
deficiency. Heterozygosity for gain-of-function mutations in STAT1 in additional 
patients with CMC was recently shown to inhibit the development of IL-17 T cells.
Although the infectious phenotype of patients with CMC and inborn errors of IL-17
immunity remains to be finely delineated, it appears that human IL-17A and IL-17F
display redundancy for protective immunity in natural conditions that is not seen
in their mouse orthologs in experimental conditions.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3720135
PMID: 22949323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Sci Total Environ. 2012 Oct 15;437:42-52. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2012.07.045.
Epub 2012 Aug 16.

A risk-based approach to prioritise catchments for diffuse metal pollution
management.

Chon HS(1), Ohandja DG, Voulvoulis N.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Environmental Policy, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK.

Catchment management integrates a wide range of water management aspects taking
into account the interaction between land-use and water quality. While most
sources of pollution can be identified, monitoring and tackling diffuse pollution
are difficult due to the abundance of its sources and pathways. As a result, the 
application of risk assessment of diffuse pollution at the catchment level has
been limited. This study aimed to develop a risk-based approach to rank and
prioritise catchments based on the need for managing diffuse metal pollution,
using a multi-criteria evaluation framework. Source-pathway-receptor linkages
were the basis for the selection of criteria and associated indicators. The
methodology was applied to eight catchments located in the Humber River Basin
District (RBD) that were comparatively evaluated, and difficulties in selecting
weightings for the criteria used were discussed. Results showed that Don and
Rother, Aire and Calder and Trent were the three catchments with the highest risk
of diffuse metal pollution in this RBD. The findings demonstrate the potential of
the proposed risk-based approach to inform more detailed investigations to follow
and prioritise the need for investments on relevant programmes to prevent diffuse
metal pollution in catchments where these are needed most.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22903003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Acta Clin Belg. 2012 May-Jun;67(3):209-13.

The appearance of the thymus and the integrated evolution of adaptive immune and 
neuroendocrine systems.

Geenen V(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Liege, Centre of Immunology, Institute of Pathology CHU-B23,
Liege--Sart Tilman, Belgium. vgeenen@ulg.ac.be

The immune system may be considered as a sensory organ able to respond to
different kinds of danger signals that are not detected by nervous cells. The
immune response is not autonomous but also regulated by the central and
peripheral nervous system, as well as by neuropeptides, vitamin D and
neuroendocrine axes such as the corticotrope, somatotrope, thyrotrope and
gonadotrope axes. During evolution, the thymus emerged concomitantly with
recombinase-dependent adaptive immunity as an'immune brain' or a'master class'
highly specialized in the orchestration of central immunological self-tolerance. 
This was an absolute requirement for survival of species because of the high risk
of autotoxicity inherent to the stochastic generation of extreme diversity
characterizing this novel adaptive type of immune defenses against non-self. The 
thymus now appears to be an obligatory intersection for the integrated evolution 
of the major systems of cell-to-cell signalling, the nervous, endocrine and
immune systems. The presentation of many self-peptides by thymic major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins is controlled by the autoimmune
regulator (AIRE) gene/protein and is responsible for the clonal deletion of
self-reactive T cells. In the same time, by still unexplained mechanisms, MHC
presentation of the same self-peptides in the thymus promotes the generation of
self-specific FOXP3+ CD4+CD25+ natural regulatory T cells (nTreg) that are able
to inhibit in periphery self-reactive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells having escaped the
thymus censorship. Moreover, a thymus dysfunction is more and more established as
the primary event driving the development of organ-specific autoimmunity, which
is the tribute paid, mainly by mankind, for the preservation of self against
non-self. Our novel knowledge about thymus physiology and physiopathology already
serves as the basis for the development of various innovative and efficient
immunomodulating strategies in pharmacology.

PMID: 22897070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Dairy Sci. 2012 Oct;95(10):5788-97. doi: 10.3168/jds.2012-5617. Epub 2012 Aug
9.

Alterations in milk and blood metabolomes during the first months of lactation in
dairy cows.

Ilves A(1), Harzia H, Ling K, Ots M, Soomets U, Kilk K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Animal Products Quality, Institute of Veterinary
Medicine and Animal Sciences, Estonian University of Life Sciences, 46
Kreutzwaldi St., 51006 Tartu, Estonia. aire.ilves@emu.ee

The molecular composition of milk is influenced by various genetic and
environmental factors. Time is one important factor, and the fact that certain
milk components change over the course of lactation is widely accepted.
Untargeted global metabolomics is an approach to study hundreds of low molecular 
weight compounds simultaneously. In this study, mass spectrometry-based global
metabolomics was used to follow the course of changes in milk (n=133) and blood
plasma (n=133) during the early stage of lactation. Little correlation was found 
between the molecular composition of blood plasma and milk. Blood showed a higher
dependence on animal individuality than did milk, in which common evolutions in
time resolved. Citrate and lactose had the greatest effect on these changes;
however, the most significant changes in milk during the first months of
lactation were associated with phosphorylated saccharide levels, whereas the most
significant changes in blood plasma were associated with levels of
polyunsaturated fatty acids containing phosphatidylcholine. In conclusion, a new 
systemic approach was used to search for minor metabolites whose concentrations
were significantly altered in milk and blood during the first months of
lactation.

Copyright © 2012 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22884339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Immunobiology. 2013 Apr;218(4):554-60. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2012.06.013. Epub
2012 Jul 2.

Autoimmune regulator (Aire) controls the expression of microRNAs in medullary
thymic epithelial cells.

Macedo C(1), Evangelista AF, Marques MM, Octacílio-Silva S, Donadi EA,
Sakamoto-Hojo ET, Passos GA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunogenetics Group, Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine of
Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo (USP), 14040-900 Ribeirão Preto, SP,
Brazil.

The autoimmune regulator (Aire) is a transcription factor that controls the
ectopic expression of a large set of peripheral tissue antigen (PTA) genes in
medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs). Recent evidence has demonstrated that 
Aire releases stalled RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II) from blockage at the
promoter region of its target genes. Given that, in addition to messenger RNAs
(mRNA), RNA Pol II also transcribes microRNAs (miRNAs), we raised the hypothesis 
that Aire might play a role as an upstream controller of miRNA transcription. To 
test this, we initially analyzed the expression profiles of 662 miRNAs in control
and Aire-silenced (siRNA) murine mTEC 3.10 cells using microarrays. The
bioinformatics programs SAM and Cluster-TreeView were then used to identify the
differentially expressed miRNAs and their profiles, respectively. Thirty
Aire-dependent miRNAs were identified in the Aire-silenced mTECs, of which 18
were up- and 12 were down-regulated. The down-regulated miR-376 family was the
focus of this study because its members (miR-376a, miR-376b and miR-376c) are
located in the genome within the Gm2922 open-reading frame (ORF) gene segment on 
the chromosome 12F1. The T-boxes (TTATTA) and G-boxes (GATTGG), which represent
putative RNA Pol II promoter motifs, were located in a portion spanning 10 kb
upstream of the ATG codon of Gm2922. Moreover, we found that Gm2922 encodes an
mRNA, which was also down-regulated in Aire-silenced mTECs. These results
represent the first evidence that Aire can play a role as a controller of
transcription of miRNAs located within genomic regions encompassing ORF and/or
mRNA genes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22883565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Front Immunol. 2012 Aug 2;3:232. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00232. eCollection 2012.

APECED: is this a model for failure of T cell and B cell tolerance?

Kluger N(1), Ranki A, Krohn K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Allergology and Venereology, Institute of Clinical 
Medicine, Skin and Allergy Hospital, Helsinki University Central Hospital,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

In APECED, the key abnormality is in the T cell defect that may lead to tissue
destruction chiefly in endocrine organs. Besides, APECED is characterized by
high-titer antibodies against a wide variety of cytokines that could partly be
responsible for the clinical symptoms during APECED, mainly chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis, and linked to antibodies against Th17 cells effector molecules,
IL-17 and IL-22. On the other hand, the same antibodies, together with antibodies
against type I interferons may prevent the patients from other immunological
diseases, such as psoriasis and systemic lupus erythematous. The same effector
Th17 cells, present in the lymphocytic infiltrate of target organs of APECED,
could be responsible for the tissue destruction. Here again, the antibodies
against the corresponding effector molecules, anti-IL-17 and anti-IL-22 could be 
protective. The occurrence of several effector mechanisms (CD4(+) Th17 cell and
CD8(+) CTL and the effector cytokines IL-17 and IL-22), and simultaneous
existence of regulatory mechanisms (CD4(+) Treg and antibodies neutralizing the
effect of the effector cytokines) may explain the polymorphism of APECED. Almost 
all the patients develop the characteristic manifestations of the complex, but
temporal course and severity of the symptoms vary considerably, even among
siblings. The autoantibody profile does not correlate with the clinical picture. 
One could speculate that a secondary homeostatic balance between the harmful
effector mechanisms, and the favorable regulatory mechanisms, finally define both
the extent and severity of the clinical condition in the AIRE defective
individuals. The proposed hypothesis that in APECED, in addition to strong tissue
destructive mechanisms, a controlling regulatory mechanism does exist, allow us
to conclude that APECED could be treated, and even cured, with immunological
manipulation.

PMCID: PMC3410439
PMID: 22876245  [PubMed]


307. Arthritis Res Ther. 2012 Jul 23;14(4):217. doi: 10.1186/ar3893.

Mucocutaneous candidiasis: the IL-17 pathway and implications for targeted
immunotherapy.

Huppler AR, Bishu S, Gaffen SL.

IL-17 and related cytokines are direct and indirect targets of selective
immunosuppressive agents for the treatment of autoimmune diseases and other
diseases of pathologic inflammation. Insights into the potential adverse effects 
of IL-17 blockade can be drawn from the experience of patients with deficiencies 
in the IL-17 pathway. A unifying theme of susceptibility to mucocutaneous
candidiasis is seen in both mice and humans with a variety of genetic defects
that converge on this pathway. Mucocutaneous candidiasis is a superficial
infection of mucosal, nail or skin surfaces usually caused by the fungal pathogen
Candida albicans. The morbidity of the disease includes significant pain, weight 
loss and secondary complications, including carcinoma and aneurysms. This review 
describes the known human diseases associated with chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis (CMC) as well as the known and proposed connections to IL-17
signaling. The human diseases include defects in IL-17 signaling due to
autoantibodies (AIRE deficiency), receptor mutations (IL-17 receptor mutations)
or mutations in the cytokine genes (IL17F and IL17A). Hyper-IgE syndrome is
characterized by elevated serum IgE, dermatitis and recurrent infections,
including CMC due to impaired generation of IL-17-producing Th17 cells. Mutations
in STAT1, IL12B and IL12RB1 result in CMC secondary to decreased IL-17 production
through different mechanisms. Dectin-1 defects and CARD9 defects result in
susceptibility to C. albicans because of impaired host recognition of the
pathogen and subsequent impaired generation of IL-17-producing T cells. Thus,
recent discoveries of genetic predisposition to CMC have driven the recognition
of the role of IL-17 in protection from mucosal fungal infection and should guide
counseling and management of patients treated with pharmacologic IL-17 blockade.

PMCID: PMC3580547
PMID: 22838497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Am J Pathol. 2012 Sep;181(3):753-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.05.014. Epub 2012
Jul 4.

Critical involvement of macrophage infiltration in the development of Sjögren's
syndrome-associated dry eye.

Zhou D(1), Chen YT, Chen F, Gallup M, Vijmasi T, Bahrami AF, Noble LB, van
Rooijen N, McNamara NA.

Author information: 
(1)Francis I. Proctor Foundation, University of California, San Francisco, USA.

Lymphocytic infiltration of the lacrimal gland and ocular surface in autoimmune
diseases such as Sjögren's syndrome (SS) causes an aqueous-deficient dry eye that
is associated with significant morbidity. Previous studies from our laboratory
and others have established autoimmune regulator (Aire)-deficient mice as a
useful model to examine exocrinopathy and ocular surface disease associated with 
SS. Consistent with human SS, autoreactive CD4(+) T cells play an indispensible
role in the development of exocrine and ocular surface disease in Aire knockout
mice. We report that in addition to CD4(+) T cells, a large number of macrophages
infiltrate the corneal stroma, limbus, and lacrimal glands of diseased mice.
Adoptive transfer of autoreactive CD4(+) T cells from Aire knockout mice led to
local infiltration of macrophages and ocular surface damage in immunodeficient
recipients. Depletion of local macrophages, through subconjunctival injection of 
clodronate liposome, attenuated lissamine green staining and improved ocular
phenotype. Alternatively, systemic depletion of macrophages had no effect on
ocular phenotype but led to significant improvements in lacrimal gland
exocrinopathy and tear secretion. Our results suggested that autoreactive CD4(+) 
T cells provoked macrophage infiltration to the eye and lacrimal gland, where
they played a functional role in directing the development of autoimmune dry eye.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3432423
PMID: 22770665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Cell Death Differ. 2012 Dec;19(12):1962-71. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2012.84. Epub 2012
Jun 29.

Elevated Mcl-1 inhibits thymocyte apoptosis and alters thymic selection.

Campbell KJ(1), Gray DH, Anstee N, Strasser A, Cory S.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade,
Melbourne, Victoria 3052, Australia.

T cells developing in the thymus undergo rigorous positive and negative selection
to ensure that those exported to peripheral lymphoid organs bear T-cell receptors
(TCRs) capable of reacting with foreign antigens but tolerant of self. At each
checkpoint, whether a thymocyte survives or dies is determined by antiapoptotic
and proapoptotic Bcl-2 family members. We used Mcl-1 transgenic (tg) mice to
investigate the impact of elevated expression of antiapoptotic Mcl-1 on thymocyte
apoptosis and selection, making a side-by-side comparison with thymocytes from
BCL-2tg mice. Mcl-1 was as effective as Bcl-2 at protecting thymocytes against
spontaneous cell death, diverse cytotoxic insults and TCR-CD3 stimulation-driven 
apoptosis. In three different TCR tg models, Mcl-1 markedly enhanced positive
selection of thymocytes, as did Bcl-2. In H-Y TCR tg mice, elevated Mcl-1 and
Bcl-2 were equally effective at inhibiting deletion of autoreactive thymocytes.
However, in the OT-1tg model where deletion is mediated by a peripheral antigen
whose expression is regulated by Aire, Mcl-1 was less effective than Bcl-2. Thus,
the capacity of Mcl-1 overexpression to inhibit apoptosis triggered by TCR
stimulation apparently depends on the thymocyte subset subject to deletion,
presumably due to differences in the profiles of proapoptotic Bcl-2 family
members mediating the deletion.

PMCID: PMC3504710
PMID: 22743995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Aging Dis. 2012 Jun;3(3):248-59. Epub 2012 May 1.

Age-Related Disruption of Steady-State Thymic Medulla Provokes Autoimmune
Phenotype via Perturbing Negative Selection.

Xia J(1), Wang H, Guo J, Zhang Z, Coder B, Su DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Immunology, University of North Texas
Health Science Center at Fort Worth, Fort Worth, TX, 76107, USA.

The hymic medulla plays an essential role in the generation of central tolerance 
by eliminating self-reactive T-cell clones through thymic negative selection and 
developing natural regulatory T cells. Age-related FoxN1 decline induces
disruption of medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs). However, it is unknown
whether this perturbs central tolerance to increase autoimmune predisposition in 
the elderly. Using a loxP-floxed-FoxN1 (FoxN1(flox)) mouse model, which exhibits 
a spontaneous ubiquitous deletion of FoxN1 with age to accelerate thymic aging,
we investigated whether disruption of steady-state thymic medulla results in an
increase of autoimmune-prone associated with age. We demonstrated age-associated 
ubiquitous loss of FoxN1(flox)-formed two-dimensional thymic epithelial cysts
were primarily located in the medulla. This resulted in disruption of thymic
medullary steady state, with evidence of perturbed negative selection, including 
reduced expression of the autoimmune regulator (Aire) gene and disrupted
accumulation of thymic dendritic cells in the medulla, which are required for
negative selection. These provoke autoimmune phenotypes, including increased
inflammatory cell infiltration in multiple organs in these mice. This finding in 
an animal model provides a mechanistic explanation of increased susceptibility to
autoimmunity in aged humans, although they may not show clinic manifestations
without induction.

PMCID: PMC3375081
PMID: 22724083  [PubMed]


311. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012 Oct;98(1):26-32. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2012.05.023. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

Thymus and type 1 diabetes: an update.

Geenen V(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Liege, GIGA-I3 Center of Immunology, CHU-B34, B-4000 Liege-Sart 
Tilman, Belgium. vgeenen@ulg.ac.be

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a chronic disease resulting from the selective
autoimmune destruction of pancreatic islet ß cells. The absence and/or breakdown 
of immune self-tolerance to islet ß cells is now recognized as the essential
cause for the development of the diabetogenic autoimmune response. For a long
time, a failure in peripheral tolerogenic mechanisms was regarded as the main
source of an inappropriate immune process directed against insulin-secreting ß
cells. While defective peripheral self-tolerance still deserves to be further
investigated, the demonstration that all members of the insulin gene family are
transcribed in thymic epithelial cells (TECs) of different species under the
control of the AutoImmune REgulator (AIRE) gene/protein has highlighted the
importance of central self-tolerance to insulin-secreting islet ß cells.
Moreover, there is now evidence that a primary or acquired failure in
thymus-dependent central self-tolerance to ß cells plays a primary role in T1D
pathogenesis. This novel knowledge is currently translated into the development
of innovative tolerogenic/regulatory approaches designed to reprogram the
specific immune self-tolerance to islet ß cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22717497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Aug 15;318(14):1767-78. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.04.013. Epub
2012 May 30.

Autoimmune regulator is acetylated by transcription coactivator CBP/p300.

Saare M(1), Rebane A, Rajashekar B, Vilo J, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology, Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, University 
of Tartu, 19th Ravila Str, Tartu, Estonia. mario.saare@ut.ee

The Autoimmune Regulator (AIRE) is a regulator of transcription in the thymic
medulla, where it controls the expression of a large set of peripheral-tissue
specific genes. AIRE interacts with the transcriptional coactivator and
acetyltransferase CBP and synergistically cooperates with it in transcriptional
activation. Here, we aimed to study a possible role of AIRE acetylation in the
modulation of its activity. We found that AIRE is acetylated in tissue culture
cells and this acetylation is enhanced by overexpression of CBP and the CBP
paralog p300. The acetylated lysines were located within nuclear localization
signal and SAND domain. AIRE with mutations that mimicked acetylated K243 and
K253 in the SAND domain had reduced transactivation activity and accumulated into
fewer and larger nuclear bodies, whereas mutations that mimicked the unacetylated
lysines were functionally similar to wild-type AIRE. Analogously to CBP, p300
localized to AIRE-containing nuclear bodies, however, the overexpression of p300 
did not enhance the transcriptional activation of AIRE-regulated genes. Further
studies showed that overexpression of p300 stabilized the AIRE protein.
Interestingly, gene expression profiling revealed that AIRE, with mutations
mimicking K243/K253 acetylation in SAND, was able to activate gene expression,
although the affected genes were different and the activation level was lower
from those regulated by wild-type AIRE. Our results suggest that the AIRE
acetylation can influence the selection of AIRE activated genes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22659170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Atten Percept Psychophys. 2012 Aug;74(6):1252-9. doi: 10.3758/s13414-012-0314-z.

Visibility versus accountability in pooling local motion signals into global
motion direction.

Raidvee A(1), Averin K, Allik J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Estonian Center of Behavioral and Health
Sciences, University of Tartu, Tiigi 78, Tartu 50410, Estonia. aire.raidvee@ut.ee

The human observer is surprisingly inaccurate in discriminating proportions
between two spatially overlapping sets of randomly distributed elements moving in
opposite directions. It was shown that observers took into account an equivalent 
of 74 % of all moving elements when the task was to estimate their relative
number, but only an equivalent of 21 % of the same elements when the task was to 
discriminate between opposite directions. It was concluded that, in the motion
direction discrimination task, a large proportion of the signal from all of the
elements was inaccessible to the observers, whereas the majority of the signal
was accessible in a numerosity task. This type of perceptual limitation belongs
to the attentional blindness category, where a strong sensory signal cannot be
noticed when processing is diverted by parallel events. In addition, we found no 
evidence for the common-fate principle, as the ability to discriminate numerical 
proportions remained the same, irrespective of whether all estimated elements
were moving coherently in one direction or unpredictably in opposite directions.

PMID: 22648603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jun 22;423(1):32-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.05.057. Epub 2012 May 18.

AIRE-induced apoptosis is associated with nuclear translocation of stress sensor 
protein GAPDH.

Liiv I(1), Haljasorg U, Kisand K, Maslovskaja J, Laan M, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology, Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, University 
of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. ingrid.liiv@ut.ee

AIRE (Autoimmune Regulator) has a central role in the transcriptional regulation 
of self-antigens in medullary thymic epithelial cells, which is necessary for
negative selection of autoreactive T cells. Recent data have shown that AIRE can 
also induce apoptosis, which may be linked to cross-presentation of these
self-antigens. Here we studied AIRE-induced apoptosis using AIRE over-expression 
in a thymic epithelial cell line as well as doxycycline-inducible HEK293 cells.
We show that the HSR/CARD domain in AIRE together with a nuclear localization
signal is sufficient to induce apoptosis. In the nuclei of AIRE-positive cells,
we also found an increased accumulation of a glycolytic enzyme,
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GAPDH) reflecting cellular stress and apoptosis.
Additionally, AIRE-induced apoptosis was inhibited with an anti-apoptotic agent
deprenyl that blocks GAPDH nitrosylation and nuclear translocation. We propose
that the AIRE-induced apoptosis pathway is associated with GAPDH nuclear
translocation and induction of NO-induced cellular stress in AIRE-expressing
cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22613203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat. 2012;21(1):15-9.

Epidemiologic and genetic characteristics of alopecia areata (part 2).

Alzolibani AA(1), Zari S, Ahmed AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, College of Medicine, Qassim University, Buraidah,
Saudi Arabia. azolibani@yahoo.com

Alopecia areata (AA) is hypothesized to be an organ-specific autoimmune disease
mediated by T cells to the hair follicles. Despite the fact that most cases of AA
are sporadic, there is an accumulation of evidence that AA is a complex
multigenetic trait with components of inherited predisposition. In the last
decade, rapid progress in molecular genetics and biotechnology has led to the
identification of many candidate genes in humans that confer susceptibility to
AA. The first part of this review focused on the association of HLA genes with
the disease. The second part reviews non-HLA and other genes associated with AA, 
including the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. Recently, the lymphoid-specific
protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 22 (PTPN22) gene was found to be 
an additional immunoregulatory gene associated with AA. In addition, alleles of
genes coding for cytokines and their receptors, such as the interleukin-1
receptor antagonist (IL1RN) and chemokines (MCP-1), have also been associated
with AA. Some studies have hypothesized that filaggrin gene mutations (FLG) may
also play a role in AA, particularly in patients with comorbid atopic disease.
MX1 is another new candidate gene in AA. Thus, this second part of the review
completes the overview of current knowledge about the molecular genetics of AA
begun in the first part.

PMID: 22584901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Muscle Nerve. 2012 Jun;45(6):904-8. doi: 10.1002/mus.23321.

Myopathy in autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy.

Watanabe M(1), Ochi H, Arahata H, Matsuo T, Nagafuchi S, Ohyagi Y, Kira J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Neurological Institute, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by monogenic mutations in 
the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. No attention has been paid to muscle
manifestations in this disorder. We aimed to uncover whether progressive myopathy
is a component of this disorder.
METHODS: A case description and literature search for APECED cases presenting
with myopathy and analysis of AIRE gene expression in biopsied muscles from 4
healthy volunteers and the patient by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: A 52-year-old woman with APECED caused by AIRE gene mutations developed 
progressive myopathy involving proximal limb and paraspinal muscles. Muscle
biopsy specimens showed myopathic changes without inflammatory cell infiltrate.
We detected AIRE gene expression in all muscle tissues examined. An extensive
literature search uncovered 5 cases of APECED with myopathy, all of whom had
similar features.
CONCLUSIONS: Progressive myopathy involvement could be a hitherto unknown
manifestation of APECED.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22581549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Immunobiology. 2013 Jan;218(1):96-104. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2012.02.005. Epub
2012 Feb 14.

Expression profile of peripheral tissue antigen genes in medullary thymic
epithelial cells (mTECs) is dependent on mRNA levels of autoimmune regulator
(Aire).

Oliveira EH(1), Macedo C, Donate PB, Almeida RS, Pezzi N, Nguyen C, Rossi MA,
Sakamoto-Hojo ET, Donadi EA, Passos GA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunogenetics Group, Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine of
Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo (USP), 14040-900 Ribeirão Preto, SP,
Brazil.

In the thymus of non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice, the expression of the autoimmune 
regulator (Aire) gene varies with age, and its down-regulation in young mice
precedes the later emergence of type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D). In addition, the 
insulin (Ins2) peripheral tissue antigen (PTA) gene, which is Aire-dependent, is 
also deregulated in these mice. Based in these findings, we hypothesized that the
imbalance in PTA gene expression in the thymus can be associated with slight
variations in Aire transcript levels. To test this, we used siRNA to knockdown
Aire by in vivo electro-transfection of the thymus of BALB/c mice. The efficiency
of the electro-transfection was monitored by assessing the presence of irrelevant
Cy3-labeled siRNA in the thymic stroma. Importantly, Aire-siRNA reached medullary
thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) down-regulating Aire. As expected, the in vivo
Aire knockdown was partial and transient; the maximum 59% inhibition occurred in 
48 h. The Aire knockdown was sufficient to down-regulate PTA genes; however,
surprisingly, several others, including Ins2, were up-regulated. The modulation
of these genes after in vivo Aire knockdown was comparable to that observed in
NOD mice before the emergence of T1D. The in vitro transfections of 3.10 mTEC
cells with Aire siRNA resulted in samples featuring partial (69%) and complete
(100%) Aire knockdown. In these Aire siRNA-transfected 3.10 mTECs, the expression
of PTA genes, including Ins2, was down-regulated. This suggests that the
expression profile of PTA genes in mTECs is affected by fine changes in the
transcription level of Aire.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22564670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Oncogene. 2013 Mar 21;32(12):1594-600. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.151. Epub 2012 May
7.

The Trop-2 signalling network in cancer growth.

Guerra E(1), Trerotola M, Aloisi AL, Tripaldi R, Vacca G, La Sorda R, Lattanzio
R, Piantelli M, Alberti S.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Cancer Pathology, Department of Oncology and Experimental Medicine and
CeSI, Foundation University 'G. d'Annunzio', Chieti, Italy.

Our findings show that upregulation of a wild-type Trop-2 has a key controlling
role in human cancer growth, and that tumour development is quantitatively driven
by Trop-2 expression levels. However, little is known about the regulation of
expression of the TROP2 gene. Hence, we investigated the TROP2 transcription
control network. TROP2 expression was shown to depend on a highly interconnected 
web of transcription factors: TP63/TP53L, ERG, GRHL1/Get-1 (grainyhead-like
epithelial transactivator), HNF1A/TCF-1 (T-cell factor), SPI1/PU.1, WT (Wilms'
tumour)1, GLIS2, AIRE (autoimmune regulator), FOXM1 (forkhead box M1) and FOXP3, 
with HNF4A as the major network hub. TROP2 upregulation was shown to subsequently
drive the expression and activation of CREB1 (cyclic AMP-responsive-element
binding protein), Jun, NF-<U+03BA>B, Rb, STAT1 and STAT3 through induction of the cyclin
D1 and ERK (extracellular signal regulated kinase)/MEK (MAPK/ERK kinase)
pathways. Growth-stimulatory signalling through NF-<U+03BA>B, cyclin D1 and ERK was
shown to require an intact Trop-2 cytoplasmic tail. Network hubs and interacting 
partners are co-expressed with Trop-2 in primary human tumours, supporting a role
of this signalling network in cancer growth.

PMID: 22562244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 15;109(20):7847-52. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1120607109. Epub 2012 May 2.

Detection of an autoreactive T-cell population within the polyclonal repertoire
that undergoes distinct autoimmune regulator (Aire)-mediated selection.

Taniguchi RT(1), DeVoss JJ, Moon JJ, Sidney J, Sette A, Jenkins MK, Anderson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

The autoimmune regulator (Aire) plays a critical role in central tolerance by
promoting the display of tissue-specific antigens in the thymus. To study the
influence of Aire on thymic selection in a physiological setting, we used
tetramer reagents to detect autoreactive T cells specific for the Aire-dependent 
tissue-specific antigen interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein (IRBP), in
the polyclonal repertoire. Two class II tetramer reagents were designed to
identify T cells specific for two different peptide epitopes of IRBP. Analyses of
the polyclonal T-cell repertoire showed a high frequency of activated T cells
specific for both IRBP tetramers in Aire(-/-) mice, but not in Aire(+/+) mice.
Surprisingly, although one tetramer-binding T-cell population was efficiently
deleted in the thymus in an Aire-dependent manner, the second tetramer-binding
population was not deleted and could be detected in both the Aire(-/-) and
Aire(+/+) T-cell repertoires. We found that Aire-dependent thymic deletion of
IRBP-specific T cells relies on intercellular transfer of IRBP between thymic
stroma and bone marrow-derived antigen-presenting cells. Furthermore, our data
suggest that Aire-mediated deletion relies not only on thymic expression of IRBP,
but also on proper antigen processing and presentation of IRBP by thymic
antigen-presenting cells.

PMCID: PMC3356674
PMID: 22552229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Oct 10;21(15):2878-90. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0097. Epub 2012
Jun 11.

Aire promotes the self-renewal of embryonic stem cells through Lin28.

Bin G(1), Jiarong Z, Shihao W, Xiuli S, Cheng X, Liangbiao C, Ming Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China .

Abstract Autoimmune regulator (Aire) is one of the most well-characterized
molecules in autoimmunity, but its function outside the immune system is largely 
unknown. The recent discovery of Aire expression in stem cells and early
embryonic cells and its function in the self-renewal of embryonic stem (ES) cells
highlight the importance of Aire in these cells. In this study, we present
evidence that Aire promotes the expression of the pluripotent factor Lin28 and
the self-renewal of ES cells. We presented the first evidence that the let-7
microRNA family contributed to the self-renewal promoting effect of Aire on ES
cells. Moreover, we showed that Aire and Lin28 are co-expressed in the genital
ridge, oocytes, and cleavage-stage embryos, and the expression level of Lin28 is 
correlated with the expression level of Aire. Although it is widely considered to
be a promiscuous gene expression activator, these results indicated that Aire
promotes the self-renewal of ES cells through a specific pathway (i.e., the
activation of Lin28 and the inhibition of the let-7 microRNA family). The
correlation between Aire and Lin28 expression in germ cells and early embryos
indicated an in vivo function for Aire in toti- and pluripotent stem cells. This 
study presents the first molecular pathway that incorporates Aire into the
pluripotency network. Moreover, it presents the first evidence that microRNAs
contribute to the regulatory function of Aire and highlights a novel function of 
Aire in stem cell biology and reproduction. These functions reveal novel
perspectives for studying the molecular mechanisms behind the establishment and
sustenance of pluripotent identity.

PMCID: PMC3464070
PMID: 22540148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Eur J Nutr. 2013 Mar;52(2):547-57. doi: 10.1007/s00394-012-0357-x. Epub 2012 Apr 
24.

LDL-cholesterol-lowering effect of a dietary supplement with plant extracts in
subjects with moderate hypercholesterolemia.

Ogier N(1), Amiot MJ, Georgé S, Maillot M, Mallmann C, Maraninchi M, Morange S,
Lescuyer JF, Peltier SL, Cardinault N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Lescuyer, Department of Research, ZAC Belle-Aire Nord, Aytré,
France.

PURPOSE: Red yeast rice (RYR), sugar cane-derived policosanols (SCdP) and
artichoke leaf extracts (ALEs) are currently incorporated alone or in combination
into dietary supplements for their potential low-density-lipoprotein cholesterol 
(LDL-cholesterol)-lowering effects. Yet, there is no information supporting the
efficacy of this association on the reduction in LDL-cholesterol. The main
objective of this study was to investigate the effects of a new dietary
supplement (DS) with RYR, SCdP and ALEs on LDL-cholesterol.
METHODS: In a double-blind, randomized, parallel controlled study, 39 subjects
from 21 to 55 years with moderate hypercholesterolemia without drug treatment
were assigned to 2 groups and then consumed either a DS containing RYR, SCdP and 
ALEs or a placebo over a 16-week period. Plasma concentrations of lipids
[LDL-cholesterol, total cholesterol (TC), high-density-lipoprotein cholesterol
(HDL-cholesterol), triacylglycerols (TG)] and plasma levels of vitamins C and E, 
total polyphenols and malondialdehyde were determined at baseline and after 4, 8,
12 and 16 weeks.
RESULTS: LDL-cholesterol and TC were reduced by, respectively, 21.4 % (95 % CI,
-13.3 to -24.9 %, p < 0.001) and 14.1 % (95 % CI, -10.1 to -18.0 %, p < 0.001) at
week 16 in the DS group compared with baseline. Similar results were obtained at 
weeks 4, 8 and 12. TG decreased by 12.2 % after 16 weeks in the DS group (95 %
CI: -24.4 to -0.1 %, p < 0.05). For the vitamin E/TC ratio, a difference was
observed between groups at week 16 (p < 0.05). Other parameters were not
modified.
CONCLUSIONS: Daily consumption of this new DS decreased LDL-cholesterol and TC
and is therefore an interesting, convenient aid in managing mild to moderate
hypercholesterolemia.

PMID: 22527287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Eur J Pharmacol. 2012 Aug 5;688(1-3):84-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2012.03.047.
Epub 2012 Apr 3.

Screening for novel lead compounds increasing insulin expression in medullary
thymic epithelial cells.

Yang XY(1), Levi D, Ounissi-Benkalha H, Yu XY, Qu HQ, Polychronakos C, Du GH.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Drug Targets Identification and Drug Screening,
Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union 
Medical College, Beijing, China.

Insulin expression in the thymus has been implicated in regulating the negative
selection of autoreactive T cells and in mediating the central immune tolerance
to pancreatic beta-cells. Thymic insulin expression modulation might be an
important drug target for preventing type 1 diabetes. We performed a
high-throughput screening to identify compounds with such activity. A reporter
plasmid was constructed with the human insulin promoter sequence including a
short allele of the upstream variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) sequence (32
repeats), subcloned into the pGL4.17 vector. The plasmid was stably transfected
into an insulin-transcribing medullary thymic epithelial cell (mTEC) line.
Primary high-throughput screening assays were carried out by stimulating with
candidate compounds for 24h, and the activity of luciferase was measured.
Positive compounds were further validated by real-time PCR. Of 19,707 compounds, 
we identified one compound that could enhance mTEC insulin expression, as
confirmed by real-time PCR. We also observed that transfection with the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) increased endogenous AIRE expression in mTECs. Our
insulin-VNTRI-promoter reporter system is consistent with the insulin expression 
regulation in mTECs, and one compound that was identified could increase insulin 
expression in mTECs. A positive feedback effect of AIRE in mTECS was observed.
Whether these efforts in murine thymus cells apply to humans remains to be
determined.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22507222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35005. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035005. Epub 2012 Apr 10.

The immune response to melanoma is limited by thymic selection of self-antigens.

Träger U(1), Sierro S, Djordjevic G, Bouzo B, Khandwala S, Meloni A, Mortensen M,
Simon AK.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Immunology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

The expression of melanoma-associated antigens (MAA) being limited to normal
melanocytes and melanomas, MAAs are ideal targets for immunotherapy and melanoma 
vaccines. As MAAs are derived from self, immune responses to these may be limited
by thymic tolerance. The extent to which self-tolerance prevents efficient immune
responses to MAAs remains unknown. The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) controls the
expression of tissue-specific self-antigens in thymic epithelial cells (TECs).
The level of antigens expressed in the TECs determines the fate of auto-reactive 
thymocytes. Deficiency in AIRE leads in both humans (APECED patients) and mice to
enlarged autoreactive immune repertoires. Here we show increased IgG levels to
melanoma cells in APECED patients correlating with autoimmune skin features.
Similarly, the enlarged T cell repertoire in AIRE(-/-) mice enables them to mount
anti-MAA and anti-melanoma responses as shown by increased anti-melanoma
antibodies, and enhanced CD4(+) and MAA-specific CD8(+) T cell responses after
melanoma challenge. We show that thymic expression of gp100 is under the control 
of AIRE, leading to increased gp100-specific CD8(+) T cell frequencies in
AIRE(-/-) mice. TRP-2 (tyrosinase-related protein), on the other hand, is absent 
from TECs and consequently TRP-2 specific CD8(+) T cells were found in both
AIRE(-/-) and AIRE(+/+) mice. This study emphasizes the importance of
investigating thymic expression of self-antigens prior to their inclusion in
vaccination and immunotherapy strategies.

PMCID: PMC3323626
PMID: 22506061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Immunol. 2012 May 15;188(10):4906-12. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200493. Epub 2012 
Apr 6.

Defective autoimmune regulator-dependent central tolerance to myelin protein zero
is linked to autoimmune peripheral neuropathy.

Su MA(1), Davini D, Cheng P, Giang K, Fan U, DeVoss JJ, Johannes KP, Taylor L,
Shum AK, Valenzise M, Meloni A, Bour-Jordan H, Anderson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599, USA. masu@email.unc.edu

Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy is a debilitating autoimmune
disease characterized by peripheral nerve demyelination and dysfunction. How the 
autoimmune response is initiated, identity of provoking Ags, and pathogenic
effector mechanisms are not well defined. The autoimmune regulator (Aire) plays a
critical role in central tolerance by promoting thymic expression of self-Ags and
deletion of self-reactive T cells. In this study, we used mice with hypomorphic
Aire function and two patients with Aire mutations to define how Aire deficiency 
results in spontaneous autoimmune peripheral neuropathy. Autoimmunity against
peripheral nerves in both mice and humans targets myelin protein zero, an Ag for 
which expression is Aire-regulated in the thymus. Consistent with a defect in
thymic tolerance, CD4(+) T cells are sufficient to transfer disease in mice and
produce IFN-<U+03B3> in infiltrated peripheral nerves. Our findings suggest that
defective Aire-mediated central tolerance to myelin protein zero initiates an
autoimmune Th1 effector response toward peripheral nerves.

PMCID: PMC3579634
PMID: 22490868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2012 Feb;56(1):54-66.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1: case report and review of literature.

Weiler FG(1), Dias-da-Silva MR, Lazaretti-Castro M.

Author information: 
(1)Bone and Mineral Unit, Division of Endocrinology, Escola Paulista de Medicina,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Brazil. fgweiler@unifesp.br

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APECED) is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder characterized by autoimmune multiorgan attack. The disease is caused by 
mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE), resulting in defective AIRE
protein, which is essential for selftolerance. Clinical manifestations are widely
variable. Although the classic triad is composed by mucocutaneous candidiasis,
hypoparathyroidism and adrenal failure, many other components may develop.
Treatment is based on supplementation of the various deficiencies, and patients
require regular follow-up throughout their lifespan. This article describes the
case of a patient with the disease, and reviews literature data on the
epidemiology, clinical course, immunogenetic aspects, diagnosis and treatment of 
the syndrome.

PMID: 22460196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Int J Qual Health Care. 2012 Jun;24(3):301-10. doi: 10.1093/intqhc/mzs006. Epub
2012 Mar 28.

Finding the right indicators for assessing quality midwifery care.

de Bruin-Kooistra M(1), Amelink-Verburg MP, Buitendijk SE, Westert GP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Prevention and Health Services Research, National Institute for
Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, The Netherlands.
mieneke.kooistra@rivm.nl

OBJECTIVE: To identify a set of indicators for monitoring the quality of
maternity care for low-risk women provided by primary care midwives and general
practitioners (GPs) in the Netherlands.
DESIGN: A Project Group (midwives, GPs, policymakers and researchers) defined a
long list of potential indicators based on the literature, national guidelines
and expert opinion. This list was assessed against the AIRE (Appraisal of
Indicators through Research and Evaluation) instrument criteria, resulting in a
short list of draft indicators. In a two-round Delphi survey, a multidisciplinary
group of stakeholders reviewed the elaborated draft indicators, rating both the
relationship between indicator and quality of care and the feasibility.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: A multidisciplinary expert panel consisting of 28
midwives, 2 GPs, 3 obstetricians and 3 maternity assistants, randomly selected
from different regions in the Netherlands.
INTERVENTION: None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Set of quality indicators for midwifery care.
RESULTS: The Project Group generated a list of 115 potential indicators which was
reduced to 35 using the AIRE criteria. The 35 draft indicators were discussed by 
a Delphi panel. In total, 26 indicators were recommended by the participants as
relevant indicators of midwifery care, representing several levels of
measurement. Eight structure indicators, 12 process indicators and 6 outcome
indicators were addressing the various phases of midwifery care.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a set of quality indicators concerning midwifery care 
provision in a low-risk population. Practicing maternity care providers adopted
the large majority (83%) of the draft indicators proposed as a feasible set of
indicators, describing the structure, process and outcome. The input from
multidisciplinary experts in the process of identifying the right indicators
showed to be essential in all phases of development.

PMID: 22457241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Gene. 2012 May 15;499(2):343-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.03.032. Epub 2012 Mar
17.

Identification of two novel mutations in the first Sicilian APECED patient with
no R203X mutation in AIRE gene and review of Italian APECED genotypes.

Valenzise M(1), Wasniewska M, Mirabelli S, De Luca F, Cervato S, Betterle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
mvalenzise@unime.it

Erratum in
    Gene. 2012 Aug 10;504(2):314.

Aims of the present study are: 1) to report an additional Sicilian patient with
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal-dystrophy (APECED), whose
genotypic features are original, in that she is the first APECED patient with
three coexisting mutations of Autoimmune Regulator (AIRE) gene, two of which had 
never been reported to date; 2) to review the genotypic epidemiology of APECED in
Italy, in order to underline the great genetic heterogeneity of this disorder in 
Italian patients. Both the novel mutations of our new patient, named S107C and
Q108fs respectively, were detected on exon 3 and were inherited by the mother,
whereas the third one (T16M) was inherited by the father. Phenotypically, the
present case is quite characteristic, in that she exhibited a classical clinical 
picture, with no original features.CONCLUSIONS: a) this is the seventh Sicilian
APECED patient identified to date, and the first one with no R203X mutation; b)
our data confirm that distribution of mutations may considerably vary according
to different geographical distribution, within the same country, thus suggesting 
a potential founder effect.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22450362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Front Immunol. 2012 Mar;3(March):19.

Post-Aire maturation of thymic medullary epithelial cells involves selective
expression of keratinocyte-specific autoantigens.

Wang X(1), Laan M, Bichele R, Kisand K, Scott HS, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology, Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, University 
of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.

The autoimmune regulator (Aire)-directed ectopic expression of tissue-specific
antigens (TSAs) by mature medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) has been
viewed as an essential mechanism in the induction of central tolerance. Recent
data suggest that the survival of mTECs extends beyond the Aire+ cell population 
to form the post-Aire mTEC population and Hassall's corpuscles (HCs). The nature 
and function of these post-Aire epithelial cells and structures, however, have
remained unidentified. In this study, we characterized in detail the end-stage
development of mTECs and HCs in both Aire-sufficient and Airedeficient mice. In
addition, using a transgenic mouse model in which the LacZ reporter gene is under
the control of the endogenous Aire promoter, we purified and analyzed the
post-Aire mTECs to characterize their function. We showed that the end-stage
maturation of mTECs closely resembles that of keratinocytes and that the lack of 
Aire results in a marked block of mTEC differentiation, which is partially
overcome by ligands for RANK and CD40. We also provide evidence that, during mTEC
development, Aire is expressed only once and during a limited 1-2 day period. The
following loss of Aire expression is accompanied by a quick downregulation of MHC
class II and CD80, and of most of the Aire-dependent and Aire-independent TSAs,
with the exception of keratinocyte-specific genes. In the final stage of
maturation, the mTECs lose their nuclei to become HCs and specifically express
desmogleins (DGs) 1 and 3, which, via cross-presentation by APCs, may contribute 
to tolerance against these pemphigus vulgaris-related TSAs.

PMCID: PMC3310317
PMID: 22448160  [PubMed]


329. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 18;287(21):17882-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.319020. Epub
2012 Mar 24.

Sequence variation in promoter of Ica1 gene, which encodes protein implicated in 
type 1 diabetes, causes transcription factor autoimmune regulator (AIRE) to
increase its binding and down-regulate expression.

Bonner SM(1), Pietropaolo SL, Fan Y, Chang Y, Sethupathy P, Morran MP, Beems M,
Giannoukakis N, Trucco G, Palumbo MO, Solimena M, Pugliese A, Polychronakos C,
Trucco M, Pietropaolo M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, Brehm Center for Diabetes Research, Department
of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 
48105, USA.

ICA69 (islet cell autoantigen 69 kDa) is a protein implicated in type 1 diabetes 
mellitus in both the non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse model and humans. ICA69 is
encoded by the Ica1 gene on mouse chromosome 6 A1-A2. We previously reported
reduced ICA69 expression in the thymus of NOD mice compared with thymus of
several non-diabetic mouse strains. We propose that reduced thymic ICA69
expression could result from variations in transcriptional regulation of the gene
and that polymorphisms within the Ica1 core promoter may partially determine this
transcriptional variability. We characterized the functional promoter of Ica1 in 
NOD mice and compared it with the corresponding portions of Ica1 in non-diabetic 
C57BL/6 mice. Luciferase reporter constructs demonstrated that the NOD Ica1
promoter region exhibited markedly reduced luciferase expression in transiently
transfected medullary thymus epithelial (mTEC(+)) and B-cell (M12)-derived cell
lines. However, in a non-diabetic strain, C57BL/6, the Ica1 promoter region was
transcriptionally active when transiently transfected into the same cell lines.
We concomitantly identified five single nucleotide polymorphisms within the NOD
Ica1 promoter. One of these single nucleotide polymorphisms increases the binding
affinity for the transcription factor AIRE (autoimmune regulator), which is
highly expressed in thymic epithelial cells, where it is known to play a key role
regulating self-antigen expression. We conclude that polymorphisms within the NOD
Ica1 core promoter may determine AIRE-mediated down-regulation of ICA69
expression in medullary thymic epithelial cells, thus providing a novel
mechanistic explanation for the loss of immunologic tolerance to this
self-antigen in autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC3366781
PMID: 22447927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Immunity. 2012 Mar 23;36(3):427-37. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.01.016. Epub 2012 
Mar 15.

Rank signaling links the development of invariant <U+03B3>d T cell progenitors and
Aire(+) medullary epithelium.

Roberts NA(1), White AJ, Jenkinson WE, Turchinovich G, Nakamura K, Withers DR,
McConnell FM, Desanti GE, Benezech C, Parnell SM, Cunningham AF, Paolino M,
Penninger JM, Simon AK, Nitta T, Ohigashi I, Takahama Y, Caamano JH, Hayday AC,
Lane PJ, Jenkinson EJ, Anderson G.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Immune Regulation, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15
2TT, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 May;12(5):320-1.

The thymic medulla provides a specialized microenvironment for the negative
selection of T cells, with the presence of autoimmune regulator (Aire)-expressing
medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) during the embryonic-neonatal period
being both necessary and sufficient to establish long-lasting tolerance. Here we 
showed that emergence of the first cohorts of Aire(+) mTECs at this key
developmental stage, prior to aß T cell repertoire selection, was jointly
directed by Rankl(+) lymphoid tissue inducer cells and invariant V<U+03B3>5(+) dendritic
epidermal T cell (DETC) progenitors that are the first thymocytes to express the 
products of gene rearrangement. In turn, generation of Aire(+) mTECs then
fostered Skint-1-dependent, but Aire-independent, DETC progenitor maturation and 
the emergence of an invariant DETC repertoire. Hence, our data attributed a
functional importance to the temporal development of V<U+03B3>5(+) <U+03B3>d T cells during
thymus medulla formation for aß T cell tolerance induction and demonstrated a
Rank-mediated reciprocal link between DETC and Aire(+) mTEC maturation.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3368267
PMID: 22425250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Med Sci (Paris). 2012 Feb;28(2):146-9. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2012282010. Epub 2012 
Feb 27.

[Medullary thymic epithelial cells expressing Aire, key mediators in the
induction of T-cell tolerance].

[Article in French]

Irla M.

PMID: 22377300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Int J Biometeorol. 2013 Mar;57(2):207-23. doi: 10.1007/s00484-012-0525-y. Epub
2012 Feb 26.

The uncertainty of UTCI due to uncertainties in the determination of radiation
fluxes derived from numerical weather prediction and regional climate model
simulations.

Schreier SF(1), Suomi I, Bröde P, Formayer H, Rieder HE, Nadeem I, Jendritzky G, 
Batchvarova E, Weihs P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Meteorology, University of Applied life Sciences and Natural
Resources, Vienna, Austria. schreier@iup.physik.uni-bremen.de

In this study we examine the determination accuracy of both the mean radiant
temperature (Tmrt) and the Universal Thermal Climate Index (UTCI) within the
scope of numerical weather prediction (NWP), and global (GCM) and regional (RCM) 
climate model simulations. First, Tmrt is determined and the so-called UTCI-Fiala
model is then used for the calculation of UTCI. Taking into account the
uncertainties of NWP model (among others the HIgh Resolution Limited Area Model
HIRLAM) output (temperature, downwelling short-wave and long-wave radiation)
stated in the literature, we simulate and discuss the uncertainties of Tmrt and
UTCI at three stations in different climatic regions of Europe. The results show 
that highest negative (positive) differences to reference cases (under assumed
clear-sky conditions) of up to -21°C (9°C) for Tmrt and up to -6°C (3.5°C) for
UTCI occur in summer (winter) due to cloudiness. In a second step, the
uncertainties of RCM simulations are analyzed: three RCMs, namely ALADIN (Aire
Limitée Adaptation dynamique Développement InterNational), RegCM (REGional
Climate Model) and REMO (REgional MOdel) are nested into GCMs and used for the
prediction of temperature and radiation fluxes in order to estimate Tmrt and
UTCI. The inter-comparison of RCM output for the three selected locations shows
that biases between 0.0 and ±17.7°C (between 0.0 and ±13.3°C) for Tmrt (UTCI),
and RMSE between ±0.5 and ±17.8°C (between ±0.8 and ±13.4°C) for Tmrt (UTCI) may 
be expected. In general the study shows that uncertainties of UTCI, due to
uncertainties arising from calculations of radiation fluxes (based on NWP models)
required for the prediction of Tmrt, are well below ±2°C for clear-sky cases.
However, significant higher uncertainties in UTCI of up to ±6°C are found,
especially when prediction of cloudiness is wrong.

PMID: 22367169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Apr;97(4):1114-24. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-2461. Epub 
2012 Feb 16.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1: an extensive longitudinal study in
Sardinian patients.

Meloni A(1), Willcox N, Meager A, Atzeni M, Wolff AS, Husebye ES, Furcas M,
Rosatelli MC, Cao A, Congia M.

Author information: 
(1)Clinica Pediatrica II and Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, 
Ospedale Microcitemico, Via Jenner s/n, 09121 Cagliari, Sardinia, Italy.
ameloni@mcweb.unica.it

CONTEXT: Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS1) is a childhood-onset
monogenic disorder caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene,
including the distinctive R139X in Sardinia. Its rarity and great variability in 
manifestations/onset ages make early diagnosis difficult. To date, very few
longitudinal studies of APS1 patients have been reported.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to describe the features and clinical course
of APS1 and correlate them with AIRE and HLA class II genotypes in a large
homogeneous cohort of Sardinian patients followed for up to 25 yr.
PATIENTS: Twenty-two pediatric APS1 patients were studied prospectively.
RESULTS: This Sardinian series (female/male ratio, 1.44; median current age, 30.7
yr; range, 1.8-46 yr) showed early disease onset (age range, 0.3-10 yr; median,
3.5 yr) and severe phenotype (on average, seven manifestations per patient).
Besides the classic triad of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis,
hypoparathyroidism, and Addison's disease, autoimmune hepatitis was a serious and
surprisingly common/early/presenting feature (27%; two deaths), with a 5:1 female
bias (median age, 6 yr; range, 2.5-11 yr). By contrast, type 1 diabetes was rare 
(one patient), and hypothyroidism was not seen. Additional disease components
(several of them potentially life-threatening) appeared in adulthood. The major
nonsense mutation, R139X, was found in 93% of the mutant AIRE alleles. High-titer
interferon (IFN)-<U+03C9> and IFN-a autoantibodies were detected in all patients tested,
even preclinically at 4 months of age in one sibling. HLA alleles appear to
influence the exact phenotype-the most interesting apparent association being
between HLA-DRB1*0301-DQB1*0201, liver-kidney microsome autoantibodies
(anti-CYP1A2), and autoimmune hepatitis.
CONCLUSION: APS1 in Sardinia is characterized by severe phenotype, marked
clinical heterogeneity, and relative genetic homogeneity. The single AIRE
mutation, R139X, and the anti-IFN-<U+03C9> and IFN-a autoantibodies are helpful for
earlier diagnosis, especially when APS1 presents unusually. HLA genotypes can
modify the phenotype.

PMID: 22344197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Apr;32(8):1354-62. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06359-11. Epub 2012 Feb
6.

Unmodified histone H3K4 and DNA-dependent protein kinase recruit autoimmune
regulator to target genes.

umer K(1), Low AK, Jiang H, Saksela K, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland.

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) directs the expression of otherwise tissue-restricted
antigens (TRAs) in medullary thymic epithelial cells, allowing their presentation
to developing T cells, which leads to central tolerance. We addressed the
conundrum of how AIRE is recruited to these otherwise silent genes in cells. Our 
studies confirmed that interactions between AIRE and the unmodified histone H3K4 
(H3K4me0) are important for targeting AIRE to the mouse insulin promoter in
chromatin. By replacing its H3K4me0-binding module with one that binds to the
methylated H3K4me3, we redirected the mutant AIRE.ING protein to an actively
transcribed gene. Nevertheless, the mutant AIRE D297A protein, which could not
bind to H3K4me0, still activated the human insulin promoter on an episomal
plasmid target. This targeting was due to DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK). 
Thus, in cells that lacked the catalytic subunit of DNA-PK (DNA-PKcs), the
assembly and activity of AIRE on DNA, whether in chromatin or on episomal
plasmids, was abrogated. However, by the heterologous tethering of AIRE to DNA,
we could restore its activity on a plasmid target in DNA-PKcs-negative cells.
Importantly, mutations in the putative DNA-binding residues in its SAND domain
had no effect on the transcriptional effects of AIRE. Thus, AIRE is recruited to 
TRA genes in chromatin via cooperative interactions with H3K4me0 and DNA-PK.

PMCID: PMC3318594
PMID: 22310661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Parasitology. 2012 May;139(6):774-80. doi: 10.1017/S003118201100240X. Epub 2012
Feb 6.

Branchiobdellidan infestation on endangered white-clawed crayfish
(Austropotamobius pallipes) in the UK.

Rosewarne PJ(1), Mortimer RJ, Dunn AM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Integrative and Comparative Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds
LS2 9JT, UK.

Branchiobdellidans or crayfish worms are clitellate annelids and ectosymbionts of
freshwater crayfish. An investigation of branchiobdellidan infestation was
undertaken in a population of endangered white-clawed crayfish (Austropotamobius 
pallipes) in the river Aire, UK. Thirty two percent of animals were infested
either by the adult parasite or their cocoons (n=107). Parasite burden increased 
with host size, but did not differ with sex. Observations of crayfish gill tissue
revealed a strong positive relationship between melanization of filaments and
parasite prevalence and burden. Taxonomic identification revealed that 1 species 
of branchiobdellidan was present, Branchiobdella astaci. The first sequences were
generated for this species and phylogenetically analysed alongside published
sequences for 5 other branchiobdellidan species in Europe. The position of B.
astaci within the genus Branchiobdella was confirmed, and it was found to cluster
as a sister group to B. parasita.

PMID: 22310336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Cell Immunol. 2012;273(2):115-23. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2011.12.010. Epub 2012
Jan 12.

Essential roles of insulin expression in Aire+ tolerogenic dendritic cells in
maintaining peripheral self-tolerance of islet ß-cells.

Grupillo M(1), Gualtierotti G, He J, Sisino G, Bottino R, Rudert WA, Trucco M,
Fan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunogenetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, PA, USA.

Anti-insulin autoimmunity is one of the primary forces in initiating and
progressing ß-cell destruction in type 1 diabetes. While insulin expression in
thymic medullary epithelial cells has been shown to be essential for establishing
ß-cell central tolerance, the function of insulin expression in
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) of hematopoietic lineage remains elusive. With a 
Cre-lox reporter approach, we labeled Aire-expressing cells with enhanced yellow 
fluorescent proteins, and found that insulin expression in the spleen was
restricted predominantly to a population of Aire(+)CD11c(int)B220(+) dendritic
cells (DCs). Targeted insulin deletion in APCs failed to induce anti-islet
autoimmunity in B6 mice. In contrast, elevated levels of T cell infiltration into
islets were observed in B6(g7) congenic mice when insulin was specifically
deleted in their CD11c-expressing DCs (B6(g7)·CD11c-<U+0394>Ins mice). Thus, insulin
expression in BM-derived, Aire(+) tolerogenic DCs may play an essential role to
prevent the activation and expansion of insulin-reactive T cells in the
periphery.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22297234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. PLoS Genet. 2012 Jan;8(1):e1002480. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002480. Epub 2012 
Jan 26.

A genome-wide association scan on the levels of markers of inflammation in
Sardinians reveals associations that underpin its complex regulation.

Naitza S(1), Porcu E, Steri M, Taub DD, Mulas A, Xiao X, Strait J, Dei M, Lai S, 
Busonero F, Maschio A, Usala G, Zoledziewska M, Sidore C, Zara I, Pitzalis M, Loi
A, Virdis F, Piras R, Deidda F, Whalen MB, Crisponi L, Concas A, Podda C, Uzzau
S, Scheet P, Longo DL, Lakatta E, Abecasis GR, Cao A, Schlessinger D, Uda M,
Sanna S, Cucca F.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 
Cagliari, Italy.

Identifying the genes that influence levels of pro-inflammatory molecules can
help to elucidate the mechanisms underlying this process. We first conducted a
two-stage genome-wide association scan (GWAS) for the key inflammatory biomarkers
Interleukin-6 (IL-6), the general measure of inflammation erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR), monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), and
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) in a large cohort of individuals from
the founder population of Sardinia. By analysing 731,213 autosomal or X
chromosome SNPs and an additional ~1.9 million imputed variants in 4,694
individuals, we identified several SNPs associated with the selected quantitative
trait loci (QTLs) and replicated all the top signals in an independent sample of 
1,392 individuals from the same population. Next, to increase power to detect and
resolve associations, we further genotyped the whole cohort (6,145 individuals)
for 293,875 variants included on the ImmunoChip and MetaboChip custom arrays.
Overall, our combined approach led to the identification of 9 genome-wide
significant novel independent signals-5 of which were identified only with the
custom arrays-and provided confirmatory evidence for an additional 7. Novel
signals include: for IL-6, in the ABO gene (rs657152, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.13×10(-29)); for ESR,
at the HBB (rs4910472, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.31×10(-11)) and UCN119B/SPPL3 (rs11829037,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>8.91×10(-10)) loci; for MCP-1, near its receptor CCR2 (rs17141006,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>7.53×10(-13)) and in CADM3 (rs3026968, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>7.63×10(-13)); for hsCRP, within
the CRP gene (rs3093077, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>5.73×10(-21)), near DARC (rs3845624,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.43×10(-10)), UNC119B/SPPL3 (rs11829037, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.50×10(-14)), and ICOSLG/AIRE 
(rs113459440, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.54×10(-08)) loci. Confirmatory evidence was found for IL-6 in
the IL-6R gene (rs4129267); for ESR at CR1 (rs12567990) and TMEM57 (rs10903129); 
for MCP-1 at DARC (rs12075); and for hsCRP at CRP (rs1205), HNF1A (rs225918), and
APOC-I (rs4420638). Our results improve the current knowledge of genetic variants
underlying inflammation and provide novel clues for the understanding of the
molecular mechanisms regulating this complex process.

PMCID: PMC3266885
PMID: 22291609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Apr;97(4):1219-26. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-3093. Epub 
2012 Jan 25.

Prevalence and significance of NALP5 autoantibodies in patients with idiopathic
hypoparathyroidism.

Tomar N(1), Kaushal E, Das M, Gupta N, Betterle C, Goswami R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi 110029, India.

CONTEXT: Role of parathyroid autoimmunity in idiopathic hypoparathyroidism (IH)
is not clear. Recently, parathyroid-specific NACHT leucine-rich-repeat protein 5 
(NALP5) autoantibodies (Ab) have been reported in autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to assess prevalence and significance of NALP5 Ab in
patients with IH.
DESIGN AND SETTING: This was a case-control study at a tertiary care hospital.
SUBJECTS: Subjects included 145 patients with IH recruited from 1998-2011 and 152
healthy controls.
METHODS: Immunoprecipitation (IP) and Western blot (WB) assays were performed
using ³5S-labeled NALP5 protein produced by in vitro transcription-translation
and recombinant NALP5 protein in Escherichia coli, respectively. AIRE gene
sequencing was performed in NALP5 Ab-positive patients.
RESULTS: One of 145 patients (0.69%) and none of the 152 controls had NALP5 Ab on
IP assay. Nine of 147 patients (6.12%) and four of 152 controls (2.63%) had NALP5
Ab on WB. One patient with NALP5 Ab on IP (36.6 sd score), also positive on WB,
had a frameshift p.Ala386Serfs*38 AIRE gene mutation and adrenocortical Ab. Eight
subjects with NALP5 Ab detected on WB had normal AIRE gene sequence.
CONCLUSIONS: IP is currently the best assay to detect clinically relevant NALP5
Ab. Presence of NALP5 Ab in only one patient with IH who also had AIRE gene
mutation suggests that these Ab are exceptionally rare in IH (0.69%) and, when
present, occur in context of the autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy syndrome.

PMID: 22278434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29667. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029667. Epub 2012 Jan 9.

A new approach for assessment of mental architecture: repeated tagging.

Raidvee A(1), Põlder A, Allik J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Estonian Center of Behavioral and Health
Sciences, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. aire.raidvee@ut.ee

A new approach to the study of a relatively neglected property of mental
architecture-whether and when the already-processed elements are separated from
the to-be-processed elements-is proposed. The process of numerical proportion
discrimination between two sets of elements defined either by color or by
orientation can be described as sampling with or without replacement
(characterized by binomial or hypergeometric probability distributions
respectively) depending on the possibility to tag an element once or repeatedly. 
All empirical psychometric functions were approximated by a theoretical model
showing that the ability to keep track of the already tagged elements is not an
inflexible part of the mental architecture but rather an individually variable
strategy which also depends on conspicuity of perceptual attributes. Strong
evidence is provided that in a considerable number of trials, observers tagged
the same element repeatedly which can only be done serially at two separate time 
moments.

PMCID: PMC3253800
PMID: 22253757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Scand J Immunol. 2012 May;75(5):479-88. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2012.02682.x.

DNA-PKcs interacts with Aire and regulates the expression of toll-like receptors 
in RAW264.7 cells.

Wu J(1), Zhu W, Fu H, Zhang Y, Sun J, Yang W, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Norman Bethune College of Medicine, Jilin
University, Changchun, China.

The autoimmune regulator (Aire) is a key mediator of the central tolerance for
peripheral tissue self-antigen (PTAs) and is involved in the transcriptional
control of many antigens in thymic medullary epithelial cells (mTECs). However,
the function of Aire in peripheral lymphoid tissues and haematopoietic cells,
particularly in monocytes and macrophages, remains poorly understood. We
previously found that the expression of Toll-like receptor (TLR) 1, TLR3 and TLR8
was notably upregulated in pEGFPC1/Aire stably transfected RAW264.7
(GFP-Aire/RAW) cells, while the expressions of other TLRs were not significantly 
changed. The mechanism by which Aire affects TLR1, TLR3 and TLR8 expression is
not clear. Interactions with other proteins, such as DNA-dependent protein kinase
(DNA-PK), are crucial for regulating the transcriptional activity of Aire. In
this study, we found that Aire and DNA-PK catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) were
co-located in the nucleus of GFP-Aire/RAW cells, and they interact with each
other. Small interfering RNA knock-down of DNA-PKcs in these cells decreased the 
expression of TLR1, TLR3 and TLR8, but no change was observed in pEGFPC1 stably
transfected RAW264.7 (GFP/RAW) cells. We did not observe any change in the
expressions of other TLRs after DNA-PKcs knock-down in GFP-Aire/RAW or GFP/RAW
cells. A similar observation has been made in pEGFPC1/Aire or pEGFPC1 transiently
transfected primary peritoneal macrophages. Using a luciferase activity assay, we
found the that the transcriptional activity of TLR1, TLR3 and TLR8 promoters was 
also decreased after knock-down of DNA-PKcs in GFP-Aire/RAW cells. In conclusion,
our results suggest that DNA-PKcs may interact with Aire to promote the
expression of TLRs in RAW264.7 cells.

© 2012 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology © 2012 Blackwell
Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22239103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2011 Dec;1246:77-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06308.x.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy: known and novel
aspects of the syndrome.

Kisand K(1), Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia. kai.kisand@ut.ee

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a
monogenic autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in the autoimmune
regulator (AIRE) gene and, as a syndrome, is characterized by chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis and the presentation of various autoimmune diseases.
During the last decade, research on APECED and AIRE has provided immunologists
with several invaluable lessons regarding tolerance and autoimmunity. This review
describes the clinical and immunological features of APECED and discusses
emerging alternative models to explain the pathogenesis of the disease.

© 2011 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 22236432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Lab Invest. 2012 Apr;92(4):556-70. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2011.189. Epub 2012 Jan
9.

Interleukin-1 receptor mediates the interplay between CD4+ T cells and ocular
resident cells to promote keratinizing squamous metaplasia in Sjögren's syndrome.

Chen YT(1), Lazarev S, Bahrami AF, Noble LB, Chen FY, Zhou D, Gallup M, Yadav M, 
McNamara NA.

Author information: 
(1)Francis I Proctor Foundation, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Keratinizing squamous metaplasia (SQM) of the ocular mucosal epithelium is a
blinding corneal disease characterized by the loss of conjunctival goblet cells
(GCs), pathological ocular surface keratinization and tissue recruitment of
immune cells. Using the autoimmune regulator (Aire)-deficient mouse as a model
for Sjögren's syndrome (SS)-associated SQM, we identified CD4(+) T lymphocytes as
the main immune effectors driving SQM and uncovered a pathogenic role for
interleukin-1 (IL-1). IL-1, a pleiotropic cytokine family enriched in ocular
epithelia, governs tissue homeostasis and mucosal immunity. Here, we used
adoptive transfer of autoreactive CD4(+) T cells to dissect the mechanism whereby
IL-1 promotes SQM. CD4(+) T cells adoptively transferred from both Aire knockout 
(KO) and Aire/IL-1 receptor type 1 (IL-1R1) double KO donors conferred SQM to
severe-combined immunodeficiency (scid) recipients with functional IL-1R1, but
not scid recipients lacking IL-1R1. In the lacrimal gland, IL-1R1 was primarily
immunolocalized to ductal epithelium surrounded by CD4(+) T cells. In the eye,
IL-1R1 was expressed on local mucosal epithelial and stromal cells, but not on
resident antigen-presenting cells or infiltrating immune cells. In both tissues, 
autoreactive CD4(+) T-cell infiltration was only observed in the presence of
IL-1R1-postive resident cells. Moreover, persistent activation of IL-1R1
signaling led to chronic immune-mediated inflammation by retaining CD4(+) T cells
in the local microenvironment. Following IL-1R1-dependent infiltration of CD4(+) 
T cells, we observed SQM hallmarks in local tissues-corneal keratinization,
conjunctival GC mucin acidification and epithelial cell hyperplasia throughout
the ocular surface mucosa. Proinflammatory IL-1 expression in ocular epithelial
cells significantly correlated with reduced tear secretion, while CD4(+) T-cell
infiltration of the lacrimal gland predicted the development of ocular SQM.
Collectively, data in this study indicated a central role for IL-1 in
orchestrating a functional interplay between immune cells and resident cells of
SS-targeted tissues in the pathogenesis of SQM.

PMCID: PMC3725338
PMID: 22231738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Leukoc Biol. 2012 Mar;91(3):417-26. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1011501. Epub 2012 Jan 6.

Unusual timing of CD127 expression by mouse uterine natural killer cells.

Zhang J(1), Chen Z, Fritz JH, Rochman Y, Leonard WJ, Gommerman JL, Plumb AW,
Abraham N, Croy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 25 Orde St.,
Toronto, ON, Canada. jhz.zhang@utoronto.ca

Decidualization, a progesterone-dependent process that alters endometrial stromal
cells at implantation sites in humans and rodents, is accompanied by a highly
regulated, NK cell-dominated leukocyte influx into decidual basalis (DB). Whether
uNK cells differentiate from uterine progenitor cells is unknown, as are the
mechanisms restricting leukocytes to DB. We asked if cells expressing the early
NK lineage marker CD127 (IL-7Ra) occurred in mouse decidua. CD127 was absent from
gd6.5 decidual lymphoid cells but became expressed by a mature uNK cell subset in
gd10.5 DB. DB and transient myometrial structures (MLAp) that ring maternal blood
vessels supplying placentae expressed IL-7 and TSLP, the CD127 ligands, but with 
differing temporal and spatial patterns. UNK cells expressed TSLPR, and study of 
gd10.5 implantation sites from mice deleted for IL-7, CD127, or TSLPR suggested
that IL-7 and its receptor have physiological roles in limiting expansion of
immature uNK cells within MLAp, while the TSLP signaling pathway is used in DB to
sustain IFN-<U+03B3> production from a subset of mature uNK cells. Regionalized, dynamic
expression of the additional lymphoid organ stromal markers gp38/podoplanin and
ER-TR7, but not CD157, were seen by immunohistochemistry in implantation sites,
and DB and MLAp contained transcripts for Aire, a tolerance-promoting factor.
These observations suggest that CD127(+) NK lineage progenitors are not present
in the early postimplantation period of mouse uterus and that decidualized
endometrial stroma has key immunoregulatory properties.

PMCID: PMC3289395
PMID: 22227963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Biol Reprod. 2012 Apr 12;86(4):110. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.097501. Print
2012 Apr.

The autoimmune regulator prevents premature reproductive senescence in female
mice.

Jasti S(1), Warren BD, McGinnis LK, Kinsey WH, Petroff BK, Petroff MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2012 Apr;86(4):109.

Loss-of-function mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene are
responsible for autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS-1), which commonly 
manifests as infertility in women. AIRE is a transcriptional regulator that
promotes expression of tissue-restricted antigens in the thymus, including
antigens specific to the ovary. Thymic expression of ovarian genes under AIRE's
control may be critical for preventing ovarian autoimmune disease. Because mice
lacking Aire are an important APS-1 model, we examined the reproductive
properties of female Aire-deficient (Aire(-/-)) mice. Female Aire(-/-) mice on
the BALB/c background were examined for reproductive parameters, including
fertility, litter sizes, and ovarian follicular reserves. Although delayed
puberty was observed in Aire(-/-) mice, all mice entered puberty and exhibited
mating behavior. Only 50% of Aire(-/-) females gave an initial litter, and only
16% were able to produce two litters. Ovarian histopathologic examination
revealed that 83% of previously bred females lost all ovarian follicular
reserves. Among virgin females, follicular depletion was observed in 25% by 8 wk,
and by 20 wk, 50%-60% of mice lost all follicles. This was associated with
elevated serum follicle-stimulating hormone level and ovarian infiltration of
proliferating CD3+ T lymphocytes. Ovulation rates of 6-wk-old Aire(-/-) mice were
reduced by 22%, but this difference was not statistically significant. Finally,
transplantation experiments revealed that follicular loss depended on factors
extrinsic to the ovary. These results suggest that immune-mediated ovarian
follicular depletion is a mechanism of infertility in Aire(-/-) mice. The results
have important implications in the pathogenesis of ovarian autoimmune disease in 
women.

PMCID: PMC3338656
PMID: 22219212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Apr;42(4):924-35. doi: 10.1002/eji.201142024. Epub 2012 Jan
19.

CD24 on thymic APCs regulates negative selection of myelin antigen-specific T
lymphocytes.

Zhang X(1), Liu JQ, Shi Y, Reid HH, Boyd RL, Khattabi M, El-Omrani HY, Zheng P,
Liu Y, Bai XF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Negative selection plays a key role in the clonal deletion of autoreactive T
cells in the thymus. However, negative selection is incomplete; as high numbers
of autoreactive T cells can be detected in normal individuals, mechanisms that
regulate negative selection must exist. In this regard, we previously reported
that CD24, a GPI-anchored glycoprotein, is required for thymic generation of
autoreactive T lymphocytes. The CD24-deficient 2D2 TCR transgenic mice (2D2(+)
CD24(-/-) ), whose TCR recognizes myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG), fail
to generate functional 2D2 T cells. However, it was unclear if CD24 regulated
negative selection, and if so, what cellular mechanisms were involved. Here, we
show that elimination of MOG or Aire gene expression in 2D2(+) CD24(-/-) mice -
through the creation of 2D2(+) CD24(-/-) MOG(-/-) or 2D2(+) CD24(/) ~Aire(-/-)
mice - completely restores thymic cellularity and function of 2D2 T cells.
Restoration of CD24 expression on DCs, but not on thymocytes also partially
restores 2D2 T-cell generation in 2D2(+) CD24(-/-) mice. Taken together, we
propose that CD24 expression on thymic antigen-presenting cells (mTECs, DCs)
down-regulates autoantigen-mediated clonal deletion of autoreactive thymocytes.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3359065
PMID: 22213356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Hormones (Athens). 2013 Jan-Mar;12(1):39-45.

Thyroid autoimmunity and polyglandular endocrine syndromes.

Wémeau JL(1), Proust-Lemoine E, Ryndak A, Vanhove L.

Author information: 
(1)Clinique Endocrinologique Marc Linquette, Service d'Endocrinologie et des
Maladies Métaboliques, Hôpital Claude Huriez, 4(ème) Ouest, CHRU, Lille Cedex,
France. jl-wemeau@chru-lille.fr

Even though autoimmune thyroiditis is considered as the most emblematic type of
organ-specific autoimmune disorder of autoimmunity, autoimmune thyroid diseases
can be associated with other autoimmune endocrine failures or non-endocrine
diseases (namely vitiligo, pernicious anemia, myasthenia gravis, autoimmune
gastritis, celiac disease, hepatitis). Thyroid disorders, which are the most
frequent expression of adult polyendocrine syndrome type 2, occur concomitantly
with or secondarily to insulinodependent diabetes, premature ovarian failure,
Addison's disease (Schmidt syndrome, or Carpenter syndrome if associated with
diabetes). Testicular failure and hypoparathyroidism are unusual. The disease is 
polygenic and multifactorial. Disorders of thyroid autoimmunity are,
surprisingly, very rare in polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (or APECED) beginning
during childhood. They are related to mutations of the AIRE gene that encodes for
a transcriptional factor implicated in central and peripheral immune tolerance.
Hypothyroidism can also be observed in the very rare IPEX and POEMS syndromes.

PMID: 23624130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 10;109(2):535-40. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1119351109. Epub 2011 Dec 27.

Aire unleashes stalled RNA polymerase to induce ectopic gene expression in thymic
epithelial cells.

Giraud M(1), Yoshida H, Abramson J, Rahl PB, Young RA, Mathis D, Benoist C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Aire is a transcriptional regulator that induces expression of peripheral tissue 
antigens (PTA) in thymic medullary epithelial cells (MECs), driving immunological
self-tolerance in differentiating T cells. To elucidate its mechanistic pathways,
we examined its transcriptional impact in MECs in vivo by microarray analysis
with mRNA-spanning probes. This analysis revealed initiation of Aire-activated
genes to be comparable in Aire-deficient and wild-type MECs, but with a block to 
elongation after 50-100 bp in the absence of Aire, suggesting activation by
release of stalled polymerases by Aire. In contrast, patterns of activation by
transcription factors such as Klf4 were consistent with regulation of initiation.
Mapping of Aire and RNA polymerase-II (Pol-II) by ChIP and high-throughput
sequencing (ChIP-seq) revealed that Aire bound all Pol-II-rich transcriptional
start sites (TSS), irrespective of its eventual effect. However, the genes it
preferentially activated were characterized by a relative surfeit of stalled
polymerases at the TSS, which resolved once Aire was introduced into cells. Thus,
transcript mapping and ChIP-seq data indicate that Aire activates ectopic
transcription not through specific recognition of PTA gene promoters but by
releasing stalled polymerases.

PMCID: PMC3258631
PMID: 22203960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Tissue Cell. 2012 Feb;44(1):63-7. doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2011.10.004. Epub 2011 Nov 
29.

Components and development of the centriolar complex during and beyond
spermiogenesis in a passeridan bird, the Masked weaver (Ploceus velatus).

Aire TA(1), Ozegbe PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy & Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, 
University of Pretoria, Onderstepoort, South Africa. taire@sgu.edu

The fate of the proximal centriole in passeridan birds is an area of controversy 
and relative lack of knowledge in avian spermatogenesis and spermatology. This
study examines, for the first time, spatiotemporal changes in the centriolar
complex in various phases of spermiogenesis in a passerine bird, the Masked
weaver (Ploceus velatus). It also describes the configuration of the centriolar
complex and the relationship between it and the granular body in both intra- and 
extra-testicular spermatozoa. It is shown that the proximal centriole is retained
and attaches, at its free end, to the granular body of spermatids in every step
of spermiogenesis, as well as in mature intra-testicular and post-testicular
spermatozoa, including those in the lumen of the seminal glomus. As the
centriolar complex, along with its attached granular body, approaches the nucleus
in the early spermatid, the proximal centriole articulates with the distal
centriole at an acute angle of about 45°, and thereafter, both centrioles, still 
maintaining this conformation, implant, by means of their articulating proximal
ends, at the implantation fossa of the nucleus. In the mature spermatid and
spermatozoon, the granular body winds itself helically around the centriolar
complex in the neck/midpiece region of the cell, and, thus, becomes the granular 
helix. The significance of this observation must await future studies, including 
possible phylogenetic re-evaluation and classification of birds.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22129754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Clin Immunol. 2012 Apr;32(2):230-7. doi: 10.1007/s10875-011-9617-4. Epub 2011
Nov 30.

Radioligand-binding assay reveals distinct autoantibody preferences for type I
interferons in APS I and myasthenia gravis subgroups.

Hapnes L(1), Willcox N, Oftedal BE, Owe JF, Gilhus NE, Meager A, Husebye ES,
Wolff AS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen, Norway.

Patients with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I (APS I) or acquired
thymoma-associated myasthenia gravis (MG) surprisingly share several common
features, including defective expression of the transcription factor AIRE and
autoantibodies against type I interferons. Here, we have adapted and validated
the radioligand-binding assay we recently developed against
(35)S-Met-interferon-<U+03C9>, for rapid and specific screening for autoantibodies
against interferons-a2 and -a8. We then investigated their potential for
diagnosis and for predicting clinical manifestations in patients with APS I and
different subgroups of MG. Autoantibodies against interferons-<U+03C9>, -a2, and -a8
occurred more often in patients with APS I (100%) and MG with thymoma (73%) than 
in late-onset MG (39%) and early-onset MG (5%). These autoantibodies showed
preferences for interferon-<U+03C9> in APS I and for the interferon-as in MG, hinting at
thymic aberrations in both groups. The exact profile of type I interferon
antibodies may indicate MG subtype and may hint at thymoma recurrence.

PMID: 22127461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Autoimmun Rev. 2012 Jul;11(9):653-8. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2011.11.008. Epub 2011
Nov 22.

The viral enterprises in autoimmunity: conversion of target cells into de novo
APCs is the presage to autoimmunity.

Temajo NO(1), Howard N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Endocrinology and Diabetes, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia. temajo@grapevine.net.au

An autoimmune disease (AD) occurs in a situation where an individual's protective
immune system attacks and destroys the individual's own tissues and organ(s),
causing a recognizable syndrome(s). The viruses feature in the triggering of
autoimmune diseases in genetically primed individuals through generating a viral 
group of regulatory immediate early proteins (IE). The IE indulges in promiscuous
regulations of the viral replications as well as of host intracellular proteins. 
But there are consequences in the IE controlling host cell protein regulations,
which we suggest as: the IE titration of the transactivator protein, autoimmune
regulator (AIRE), which causes abolition of central tolerance; and the IE
titration of the repressor protein, FOXP3, which results in the breach of
peripheral tolerance. Titrations of AIRE and FOXP3 allow the escape of
autoreactive T cells into the (peripheral) circulation where they can reach and
zero in on self-tissues. The AD-predisposing MHC-II-DR-DQ haplotypes probably
play a crucial role in the shaping of the T cell repertoire intrathymically for
the survival of budding autoreactive T cell receptors (TCRs). Finally, we suggest
there is IE titration of the repressors, the histone deacetylases (HDACs), in
target organ cells which then consequentially express de novo MHC-II molecules
and become de novo non-professional antigen-presenting cells (APCs), able to
present viral peptides to cognate TCRs, thereby enrolling themselves for
apoptotic death: a destiny of all APCs in immune responses, in general. Extensive
apoptotic destruction of organ cells leads to an autoimmune syndrome(s).

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22122867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Endocrinol Invest. 2012 Nov;35(10):877-81. doi: 10.3275/8109. Epub 2011 Nov 21.

Autoimmune-polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal-dystrophy in Calabria:
clinical, immunological and genetic patterns.

Betterle C(1), Ghizzoni L, Cassio A, Baronio F, Cervato S, Garelli S, Barbi E,
Tonini G.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
corrado.betterle@unipd.it

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal- dystrophy (APECED), also
known as autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1), is a very rare
disease. Diagnosis requires the presence of at least two of three major clinical 
features: chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, chronic hypoparathyroidism, and
Addison's disease.DESIGN: In this study, we analyzed Autoimmune Regulator (AIRE) 
gene mutations and genotype-phenotype correlation in APECED patients originating 
from Calabria, a region in the south of Italy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Four patients and their first-degree relatives were
evaluated for clinical manifestations, autoantibody presence and AIRE gene
mutations.
RESULTS: Three patients carried a homozygous W78R mutation on exon 2, typical of 
patients with APECED from Apulia; the fourth patient had a homozygous R203X
mutation on exon 5, typical of APECED patients from Sicily. Clinical disease
expression showed wide variability. Analysis of relatives allowed the
identification of 6 heterozygotes, none of whom showed major findings of APECED.
CONCLUSIONS: No AIRE gene mutations specific to Calabria were found in patients
with APS-1, but mutations similar to those in patients from Apulia and Sicily.
Heterozygosity for AIRE gene mutation is not associated with major findings of
APECED.

PMID: 22104652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs. 2011 Nov-Dec;40(6):732-41. doi:
10.1111/j.1552-6909.2011.01298.x. Epub 2011 Nov 3.

Beliefs associated with Mexican immigrant families' practice of la cuarentena
during postpartum recovery.

Waugh LJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Care Policy and Financing, Denver, CO 80203, USA.
lisa.waugh@state.co.us

OBJECTIVE: To examine underlying beliefs that motivate the observed behaviors of 
la cuarentena, which refers to the 40 days (6 weeks) of postpartum recovery
observed by Mexican immigrant women in the United States.
DESIGN: Qualitative/descriptive.
PARTICIPANTS/SETTING: Forty Spanish speaking individuals from 19 different
Mexican immigrant families in Colorado were visited in their homes during
pregnancy and the postpartum period.
METHODS: Ethnographic methods for this study focused on participant observation
and interviews during traditional observance of la cuarentena. Mothers, their
partners, and caregivers were interviewed in their homes in a series of four
visits.
RESULTS: Families described perceptions of the body as "open" and vulnerable to
drafts or aire. Women reported that the cultural traditions of la cuarentena will
"close" the body, and this was seen as the central purpose of postpartum
recovery. Immigrant women reported that they hide their traditions in health care
settings, recognizing that many providers don't understand or trivialize their
beliefs and customs. A lack of awareness of la cuarentena among health care
providers is a barrier to many women seeking professional care.
CONCLUSIONS: Understanding the underlying fears associated with la cuarentena
will assist nurses and clinicians in supporting immigrant families during
postpartum recovery. Support from health care providers is particularly important
given the occasional lack of family social support for immigrant women after they
give birth.

© 2011 AWHONN, the Association of Women's Health, Obsteric and Neonatal Nurses.

PMID: 22092447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Tissue Cell. 2012 Feb;44(1):22-31. doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2011.10.002. Epub 2011 Nov
12.

The cytoskeletal proteins in the contractile tissues of the testis and its
excurrent ducts of the passerine bird, Masked Weaver (Ploceus velatus).

Ozegbe PC(1), Aire TA, Deokar MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy & Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, 
University of Pretoria, Onderstepoort 0110, South Africa.

The cellular composition of the testicular capsule, seminiferous peritubular
tissue, the epithelia as well as periductal muscle cell layers of the excurrent
ducts was studied, in sexually mature and active Masked Weaver (Ploceus velatus) 
birds of the passerine family, Ploceidae. Ultrastructure of the contractile cells
in the testicular capsule, peritubular and periductal tissues showed that these
cells were smooth muscles of typical morphological characteristics. Variability
in the immunohistochemical co-expression of microfilaments and intermediate
filaments in the different tissues was evident. Actin and desmin proteins were
co-expressed immunohistochemically in the testicular capsule and seminiferous
peritubular smooth muscle layer. Actin was singly and very weakly expressed in
the rete testis epithelium while cytokeratins and desmin were co-expressed in the
epithelium of the excurrent ducts. The periductal muscle layer of all ducts of
the epididymis, the ductus deferens as well as the seminal glomus, strongly
co-expressed actin and desmin. Vimentin was absent in all cells and tissue types 
studied. There is clear evidence that the tissues of the male gonad and its
excurrent ducts in the Masked Weaver, as has been reported for members of the
Galloanserae and Ratitae, contain well-formed contractile tissues whose function 
would include the transportation of luminal through-flow from the testis into,
and through, its excurrent ducts. The microtubule helix in the head and of the
mid-piece, of elongating spermatids, as well as of the mature spermatozoa in the 
various excurrent ducts, including some spermatozoa in the seminal glomus, also
co-expressed these three proteins.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22079203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2011 Oct;31(5):687-92. doi:
10.1007/s11596-011-0583-0. Epub 2011 Oct 25.

Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21 by dosage ratio of fetal
chromosome-specific epigenetic markers in maternal plasma.

Zhang M(1), Li T, Chen J, Li L, Zhou C, Wang Y, Liu W, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China. zhangming00011@126.com

This study examined the methylation difference in AIRE and RASSF1A between
maternal and placental DNA, and the implication of this difference in the
identification of free fetal DNA in maternal plasma and in prenatal diagnosis of 
trisomy 21. Maternal plasma samples were collected from 388 singleton
pregnancies, and placental or chorionic villus tissues from 112 of them.
Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme
digestion followed by fluorescent quantitative PCR (MSRE + PCR) were employed to 
detect the maternal-fetal methylation difference in AIRE and RASSF1A. Diagnosis
of trisomy 21 was established according to the ratio of fetal-specific AIRE to
RASSF1A in maternal plasma. Both methods confirmed that AIRE and RASSF1A were
hypomethylated in maternal blood cells but hypermethylated in placental or
chorionic villus tissues. Moreover, the differential methylation for each locus
could be seen during the whole pregnant period. The positive rates of fetal AIRE 
and RASSF1A in maternal plasma were found to be 78.1% and 82.1% by MSP and 94.8% 
and 96.9% by MSRE + PCR. MSRE + PCR was superior to MSP in the identification of 
fetal-specific hypermethylated sequences (P<0.05). Based on the data from 266
euploidy pregnancies, the 95% reference interval of the fetal AIRE/RASSF1A ratio 
in maternal plasma was 0.33-1.77, which was taken as the reference value for
determining the numbers of fetal chromosome 21 in 102 pregnancies. The accuracy
rate in 98 euploidy pregnancies was 96.9% (95/98). Three of the four trisomy 21
pregnancies were confirmed with this method. It was concluded that
hypermethylated AIRE and RASSF1A may serve as fetal-specific markers for the
identification of fetal DNA in maternal plasma and may be used for noninvasive
prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21.

PMID: 22038362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Mol Immunol. 2011 Dec;49(3):518-26. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.09.022. Epub 2011 
Oct 27.

DNA methylation signatures of the AIRE promoter in thymic epithelial cells,
thymomas and normal tissues.

Kont V(1), Murumägi A, Tykocinski LO, Kinkel SA, Webster KE, Kisand K, Tserel L, 
Pihlap M, Ströbel P, Scott HS, Marx A, Kyewski B, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Group, Tartu University, 50411 Tartu, Estonia.

Mutations in the AIRE gene cause autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis
ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), which is associated with autoimmunity towards
several peripheral organs. The AIRE protein is almost exclusively expressed in
medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTEC) and CpG methylation in the promoter of
the AIRE gene has been suggested to control its tissue-specific expression
pattern. We found that in human AIRE-positive medullary and AIRE-negative
cortical epithelium, the AIRE promoter is hypomethylated, whereas in thymocytes, 
the promoter had high level of CpG methylation. Likewise, in mouse mTECs the AIRE
promoter was uniformly hypomethylated. In the same vein, the AIRE promoter was
hypomethylated in AIRE-negative thymic epithelial tumors (thymomas) and in
several peripheral tissues. Our data are compatible with the notion that promoter
hypomethylation is necessary but not sufficient for tissue-specific regulation of
the AIRE gene. In contrast, a positive correlation between AIRE expression and
histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation, an active chromatin mark, was found in the
AIRE promoter in human and mouse TECs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22036612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Z Rheumatol. 2011 Nov;70(9):752-4, 756-9. doi: 10.1007/s00393-011-0786-6.

[Polyglandular autoimmune syndromes].

[Article in German]

Maurer A(1), Schwarting A, Kahaly GJ.

Author information: 
(1)I. Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik, Universitätsmedizin Mainz, Deutschland.

Polyglandular autoimmune syndromes (PGA) are a heterogeneous group of diseases in
which a genetically caused dysfunction of the immune system leads to a
destruction of endocrine glands with subsequent loss of function. In addition
non-endocrine autoimmune diseases are also frequently present. Due to different
patterns of inheritance and occurrence of disease a differentiation is made
between juvenile PGA (also called APECED, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy
candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy) with a monogenetic alteration of the AIRE
(autoimmune regulator) gene, different ethnic distribution and a typical triad of
diseases and the adult form, mainly conditioned by mutations of the HLA (human
leukocyte antigens) alleles on chromosome 6. The article will briefly deal with
the very rare IPEX (immune dysfunction, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy,
x-linked) syndrome, where the FOXP3 gene on chromosome X is altered. Important
for the diagnosis are the clinical appearance and functional tests of the
endocrine glands and the testing for antibodies. Additionally for PGA I and IPEX 
genetic testing is advisable. Currently patient-adjusted hormone replacement
therapy is very important and screening of family members is recommended.

PMID: 22033826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Endocrinol Invest. 2012 Apr;35(4):384-8. doi: 10.3275/7965. Epub 2011 Sep 27.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal-dystrophy (APECED) in
Sicily: confirmation that R203X is the peculiar AIRE gene mutation.

Giordano C(1), Modica R, Allotta ML, Guarnotta V, Cervato S, Masiero S, Giordano 
R, Garelli S, Betterle C.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Unit, Department of Biomedical Internal and Specialist Medicine,
Palermo University, Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathycandidiasis-ectodermal-dystrophy
(APECED), also known as autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1) (OMIM
240300), is a very rare disease. Accepted criteria for diagnosis require the
presence of at least 2 of 3 major clinical features: chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis (CMC), chronic hypoparathyroidism (CH), and Addison's disease (AD).
AIM: We analyzed AIRE gene mutations and genotype-phenotype correlation in APECED
patients originating from Sicily and in their relatives.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: In 4 patients, clinical evaluations, genetic analysis of
AIRE, and APECED-related autoantibodies were performed.
RESULTS: Two patients carried the mutation R203X in homozygosis on exon 5. One
had the mutation R203X combined with R139X. The fourth had the R203X mutation in 
heterozygosis with R257X. Expression of the disease showed wide variability of
clinical manifestations. Analysis of relatives allowed the identification of 10
heterozygotes for AIRE gene mutations. None of these subjects presented major
findings of APECED. Three of the 4 patients were positive for autoantibodies to
interferon-<U+03C9>.
CONCLUSIONS: In Sicily, R203X is confirmed to be the typical recessive and
prevalent AIRE gene mutation on exon 5. Genotype-phenotype correlation failed to 
reveal a relationship between detected mutations and clinical expression.
Mutations in heterozygosity in AIRE gene are not associated with major findings
of APECED.

PMID: 22024611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012 Feb;129(2):464-72, 472.e1-3. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2011.08.027. Epub 2011 Sep 29.

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) contributes to Dectin-1-induced TNF-a production and 
complexes with caspase recruitment domain-containing protein 9 (CARD9), spleen
tyrosine kinase (Syk), and Dectin-1.

Pedroza LA(1), Kumar V, Sanborn KB, Mace EM, Niinikoski H, Nadeau K, Vasconcelos 
Dde M, Perez E, Jyonouchi S, Jyonouchi H, Banerjee PP, Ruuskanen O, Condino-Neto 
A, Orange JS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Investigation in Pediatrics, University of Campinas Medical School,
São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED) syndrome is a complex immunologic disease caused by mutation of the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. Autoimmunity in patients with APECED syndrome
has been shown to result from deficiency of AIRE function in transcriptional
regulation of thymic peripheral tissue antigens, which leads to defective T-cell 
negative selection. Candidal susceptibility in patients with APECED syndrome is
thought to result from aberrant adaptive immunity.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether AIRE could function in anticandidal innate immune
signaling, we investigated an extrathymic role for AIRE in the immune recognition
of ß-glucan through the Dectin-1 pathway, which is required for defense against
Candida species.
METHODS: Innate immune signaling through the Dectin-1 pathway was assessed in
both PBMCs from patients with APECED syndrome and a monocytic cell line.
Subcellular localization of AIRE was assessed by using confocal microscopy.
RESULTS: PBMCs from patients with APECED syndrome had reduced TNF-a responses
after Dectin-1 ligation but in part used a Raf-1-mediated pathway to preserve
function. In the THP-1 human monocytic cell line, reducing AIRE expression
resulted in significantly decreased TNF-a release after Dectin-1 ligation. AIRE
formed a transient complex with the known Dectin-1 pathway components
phosphorylated spleen tyrosine kinase and caspase recruitment domain-containing
protein 9 after receptor ligation and localized with Dectin-1 at the cell
membrane.
CONCLUSION: AIRE can participate in the Dectin-1 signaling pathway, indicating a 
novel extrathymic role for AIRE and a defect that likely contributes to fungal
susceptibility in patients with APECED syndrome.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21962774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Neuroimmunomodulation. 2011;18(5):314-9. doi: 10.1159/000329498. Epub 2011 Sep
22.

The role of the thymus in the integrated evolution of the recombinase-dependent
adaptive immune response and the neuroendocrine system.

Mottet M(1), Goffinet L, Beckers A, Bodart G, Morrhaye G, Kermani H, Renard C,
Martens H, Geenen V.

Author information: 
(1)University of Liege Center of Immunology, Institute of Pathology CHU-B23,
Liege-Sart Tilman, Belgium.

Before being able to react against infectious non-self-antigens, the immune
system has to be educated in recognition and tolerance of neuroendocrine
self-proteins. This sophisticated educational process takes place only in the
thymus. The development of an autoimmune response directed to neuroendocrine
glands has been shown to result from a thymus dysfunction in programming
immunological self-tolerance to neuroendocrine-related antigens. This thymus
dysfunction leads to a breakdown of immune homeostasis with an enrichment of
'forbidden' self-reactive T cells and a deficiency in self-antigen-specific
natural regulatory T cells in the peripheral T lymphocyte repertoire. A large
number of neuroendocrine self-antigens are expressed by the thymic epithelium,
under the control of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene/protein in the medulla.
Based on the close homology and cross-tolerance between thymic type 1
diabetes-related self-antigens and peripheral antigens targeted in ß-cells by
autoimmunity, a novel type of vaccination is currently developed for the
prevention and cure of type 1 diabetes. If this approach were found to be
effective in reprogramming immunological tolerance that is absent or broken in
this disease, it could pave the way for the design of negative/tolerogenic
self-vaccines against other endocrine and organ-specific autoimmune disorders.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21952683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Mol Ther. 2012 Jan;20(1):178-86. doi: 10.1038/mt.2011.192. Epub 2011 Sep 27.

Aire controls mesenchymal stem cell-mediated suppression in chronic colitis.

Parekkadan B(1), Fletcher AL, Li M, Tjota MY, Bellemare-Pelletier A, Milwid JM,
Lee JW, Yarmush ML, Turley SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Center for Engineering in Medicine and Surgical
Services, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School and the Shriners
Hospitals for Children, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
biju_parekkadan@hms.harvard.edu

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are emerging as a promising immunotherapeutic,
based largely on their overt suppression of T lymphocytes under inflammatory and 
autoimmune conditions. While paracrine cross-talk between MSCs and T cells has
been well-studied, an intrinsic transcriptional switch that programs MSCs for
immunomodulation has remained undefined. Here we show that bone marrow-derived
MSCs require the transcriptional regulator Aire to suppress T cell-mediated
pathogenesis in a mouse model of chronic colitis. Surprisingly, Aire did not
control MSC suppression of T cell proliferation in vitro. Instead, Aire reduced T
cell mitochondrial reductase by negatively regulating a proinflammatory cytokine,
early T cell activation factor (Eta)-1. Neutralization of Eta-1 enabled Aire(-/-)
MSCs to ameliorate colitis, reducing the number of infiltrating effector T cells 
in the colon, and normalizing T cell reductase levels. We propose that Aire
represents an early molecular switch imposing a suppressive MSC phenotype via
regulation of Eta-1. Monitoring Aire expression in MSCs may thus be a critical
parameter for clinical use.

PMCID: PMC3255580
PMID: 21952165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2011;24(7-8):599-601.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy syndrome (APECED) 
due to AIRET16M mutation in a consanguineous Greek girl.

Kollios K(1), Tsolaki A, Antachopoulos C, Moix I, Morris MA, Papadopoulou M,
Roilides E.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Pediatrics, Aristotle University School of Medicine,
Hippokration Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy syndrome (APECED) 
or autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1) is a rare autosomal recessive
disease caused by mutations of the AutoImmune REgulator (AIRE) gene, an important
mediator of tolerance to self-antigens. It is characterized by two out of three
major components: chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism and
Addison's disease. We present an 11-year-old girl suffering from recurrent
episodes of mucocutaneous candidiasis and onychomycosis from 1 to 6 years of age,
and transient alopecia at the age of 4 years. Hypoparathyroidism and dental
enamel hypoplasia were diagnosed at 8 years. Autoantibodies to thyroid and
adrenal glands were not detected and all other endocrine functions have remained 
normal. Genetic analysis revealed that the patient was homozygous for the
mutation T16M in exon 1 of the AIRE gene (p.T16M, c.47C>T). This is the first
APECED case reported for carrying this mutation in homozygous form. Parents were 
third cousins and heterozygous carriers of this mutation.

PMID: 21932610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Rev Clin Esp. 2012 Feb;212(2):55-62. doi: 10.1016/j.rce.2011.07.013. Epub 2011
Sep 13.

[Cardiovascular disease in hypertension: gender differences in 100,000 clinical
records].

[Article in Spanish]

Gijón-Conde T(1), Banegas JR.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Salud Universitario Cerro del Aire, Majadahonda, Madrid, España.
gijonmt@gmail.com

Comment in
    Rev Clin Esp. 2012 Feb;212(2):81-3.

OBJECTIVES: To examine the type of cardiovascular disease (CVD) and treatment and
achievement of treatment goals in blood pressure and lipids in hypertensive
patients in primary care.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A cross-sectional study of all medical records of
hypertensive patients, from which patients with antihypertensive treatment who
visited the 25 Primary Health Care Centers of the 6(th) sanitary district of
Madrid during 2008 were selected.
RESULTS: From a total of 92,079 patients, 19,501 (21 2%) with an arterial
hypertension had a previous diagnosis of CVD (23.9% in males and 19.1% in
females). In hypertensive with CVD, the most frequent diagnosis and their
proportion in males and females were: ischemic heart disease 35.6% (43.7%/27.6%),
atrial fibrillation 29.5% (25%/33.9%), stroke 24% (22%/26.7%), chronic renal
disease 15.7% (18.2%/13.2%), heart failure 15.3% (10.4%/20.2%) and peripheral
artery disease 7.5% (8.7%/6.4%) (P<.05). Antihypertensive drugs, lipid-lowering
drugs and antiplatelet therapy were used more often by males, with women
predominating in the prescription of diuretics and angiotensin receptor blockers 
and anticoagulants, (P<.05).The proportion of patients with blood pressure<140/90
mmHg was 60.5% and 59.1%, and that of LDL-cholesterol <100mg/ dl was 40.4% y 31% 
(P<.005), in males and females, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In almost all the 20,000 patients with CVD studied, substantial
gender differences in the prevalence, therapy and achievements of goals in the
different types of CVD were observed. These results suggest the convenience of
homogenization of the computerized registries at the present, for monitoring
results over time, with no need of continuous sampling-based studies.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier España, S.L. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21917249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Immunotherapy. 2011 Sep;3(9):1103-11. doi: 10.2217/imt.11.101.

Immune tolerance and autoimmune uveoretinitis: the role of the ocular
microenvironment.

Takeuchi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, National Defense Medical College, 3-2 Namiki
Tokorozawa Saitama, 359-8513, Japan. masatake@ndmc.ac.jp

Two major self-antigens, S-antigen and interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding
protein, which can induce uveoretinitis, exist in the eye. However, immunologic
tolerance to these self-antigens is generated and maintained. Two major
mechanisms have been demonstrated by which tolerance to tissue-specific
self-antigens is maintained. One is central tolerance in the thymus where
autoreactive T cells are deleted by medullary thymic epithelial cells expressing 
the autoimmune regulator gene (Aire) and the other is peripheral tolerance
mediated by regulatory T cells such as Foxp3(+)CD25(+)CD4(+) T cells. In
addition, the eye is an immune privileged site where indigenous immunomodulatory 
mechanisms allow immune protection of the eye in a manner that is largely devoid 
of immunogenic inflammation.

PMID: 21913832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2012 Jan;47(1):84-7. doi: 10.1002/ppul.21520. Epub 2011 Sep 7.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1: Utility of KCNRG autoantibodies as a
marker of active pulmonary disease and successful treatment with rituximab.

Popler J(1), Alimohammadi M, Kämpe O, Dalin F, Dishop MK, Barker JM,
Moriarty-Kelsey M, Soep JB, Deterding RR.

Author information: 
(1)Georgia Pediatric Pulmonology Associates, Atlanta, Georgia 3042, USA.
JPopler@gppa.net

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1), also known as Autoimmune
Polyendocrinopathy Candidiasis and Ectodermal Dysplasia (APECD) is a disorder
caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. In some APS-1
patients, significant pulmonary disease is observed. Autoantibodies directed
against the potassium channel regulatory protein (KCNRG), found in epithelial
cells of terminal bronchioles, have been suggested as a marker for pulmonary
disease in APS-1 patients. We report two patients with APS-1; one with and one
without lung disease. Patient 1 had multiple admissions for pneumonia and
respiratory insufficiency, required non-invasive ventilation, and had findings of
bronchiectasis on thoracic imaging and significant lymphocytic infiltrates of the
airways on lung biopsy. To verify the autoimmune cause of pulmonary symptoms
APS-1 patients, both were tested in a blinded manner for the presence of
autoantibodies to KCNRG in serum. We found that only Patient 1 had autoantibodies
present. Additionally, Patient 1 had progressive disease despite treatment with
several immunomodulating agents, including corticosteroids, azathioprine, and
mycophenolate. Patient 1 had a lung biopsy performed which was consistent with B 
cell lymphocytic aggregates. Rituximab treatment was initiated with apparent good
response. This report illustrates the practical use of KCNRG autoantibodies to
identify APS-1 patients with pulmonary risk and the successful use of the
monoclonal antibody, Rituximab, to treat pulmonary disease in APS-1 patients.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21901851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2011 Aug;5(8):e1268. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001268. Epub 
2011 Aug 16.

Chagasic thymic atrophy does not affect negative selection but results in the
export of activated CD4+CD8+ T cells in severe forms of human disease.

Morrot A(1), Terra-Granado E, Pérez AR, Silva-Barbosa SD, Milicevic NM,
Farias-de-Oliveira DA, Berbert LR, De Meis J, Takiya CM, Beloscar J, Wang X, Kont
V, Peterson P, Bottasso O, Savino W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Microbiology Institute, Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. morrot@micro.ufrj.br

Extrathymic CD4+CD8+ double-positive (DP) T cells are increased in some
pathophysiological conditions, including infectious diseases. In the murine model
of Chagas disease, it has been shown that the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma
cruzi is able to target the thymus and induce alterations of the thymic
microenvironment and the lymphoid compartment. In the acute phase, this results
in a severe atrophy of the organ and early release of DP cells into the
periphery. To date, the effect of the changes promoted by the parasite infection 
on thymic central tolerance has remained elusive. Herein we show that the
intrathymic key elements that are necessary to promote the negative selection of 
thymocytes undergoing maturation during the thymopoiesis remains functional
during the acute chagasic thymic atrophy. Intrathymic expression of the
autoimmune regulator factor (Aire) and tissue-restricted antigen (TRA) genes is
normal. In addition, the expression of the proapoptotic Bim protein in thymocytes
was not changed, revealing that the parasite infection-induced thymus atrophy has
no effect on these marker genes necessary to promote clonal deletion of T cells. 
In a chicken egg ovalbumin (OVA)-specific T-cell receptor (TCR) transgenic
system, the administration of OVA peptide into infected mice with thymic atrophy 
promoted OVA-specific thymocyte apoptosis, further indicating normal negative
selection process during the infection. Yet, although the intrathymic checkpoints
necessary for thymic negative selection are present in the acute phase of Chagas 
disease, we found that the DP cells released into the periphery acquire an
activated phenotype similar to what is described for activated effector or memory
single-positive T cells. Most interestingly, we also demonstrate that increased
percentages of peripheral blood subset of DP cells exhibiting an activated
HLA-DR+ phenotype are associated with severe cardiac forms of human chronic
Chagas disease. These cells may contribute to the immunopathological events seen 
in the Chagas disease.

PMCID: PMC3156684
PMID: 21858238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Immunol. 2011 Sep 15;187(6):3422-30. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003053. Epub 2011
Aug 19.

Decreased AIRE expression and global thymic hypofunction in Down syndrome.

Lima FA(1), Moreira-Filho CA, Ramos PL, Brentani H, Lima Lde A, Arrais M,
Bento-de-Souza LC, Bento-de-Souza L, Duarte MI, Coutinho A, Carneiro-Sampaio M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo,
05403-900 São Paulo, Brazil.

The Down syndrome (DS) immune phenotype is characterized by thymus hypotrophy,
higher propensity to organ-specific autoimmune disorders, and higher
susceptibility to infections, among other features. Considering that AIRE
(autoimmune regulator) is located on 21q22.3, we analyzed protein and gene
expression in surgically removed thymuses from 14 DS patients with congenital
heart defects, who were compared with 42 age-matched controls with heart anomaly 
as an isolated malformation. Immunohistochemistry revealed 70.48 ± 49.59
AIRE-positive cells/mm(2) in DS versus 154.70 ± 61.16 AIRE-positive cells/mm(2)
in controls (p < 0.0001), and quantitative PCR as well as DNA microarray data
confirmed those results. The number of FOXP3-positive cells/mm(2) was equivalent 
in both groups. Thymus transcriptome analysis showed 407 genes significantly
hypoexpressed in DS, most of which were related, according to network
transcriptional analysis (FunNet), to cell division and to immunity. Immune
response-related genes included those involved in 1) Ag processing and
presentation (HLA-DQB1, HLA-DRB3, CD1A, CD1B, CD1C, ERAP) and 2) thymic T cell
differentiation (IL2RG, RAG2, CD3D, CD3E, PRDX2, CDK6) and selection (SH2D1A,
CD74). It is noteworthy that relevant AIRE-partner genes, such as TOP2A, LAMNB1, 
and NUP93, were found hypoexpressed in DNA microarrays and quantitative real-time
PCR analyses. These findings on global thymic hypofunction in DS revealed
molecular mechanisms underlying DS immune phenotype and strongly suggest that DS 
immune abnormalities are present since early development, rather than being a
consequence of precocious aging, as widely hypothesized. Thus, DS should be
considered as a non-monogenic primary immunodeficiency.

PMID: 21856934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Front Immunol. 2011 May 10;2(15). pii: 00015.

Abnormalities of thymic stroma may contribute to immune dysregulation in murine
models of leaky severe combined immunodeficiency.

Rucci F(1), Poliani PL, Caraffi S, Paganini T, Fontana E, Giliani S, Alt FW,
Notarangelo LD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and The Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research,
Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, USA.

Lymphostromal cross-talk in the thymus is essential to allow generation of a
diversified repertoire of T lymphocytes and to prevent autoimmunity by
self-reactive T cells. Hypomorphic mutations in genes that control T cell
development have been associated with immunodeficiency and immune dysregulation
both in humans and in mice. We have studied T cell development and thymic stroma 
architecture and maturation in two mouse models of leaky severe combined immune
deficiency, carrying hypomorphic mutations in rag1 and lig4 genes. Defective T
cell development was associated with abnormalities of thymic architecture that
predominantly affect the thymic medulla, with reduction of the pool of mature
medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs). While the ability of mTECs to express 
autoimmune regulator (Aire) is preserved in mutant mice, the frequency of mature 
mTECs expressing Aire and tissue-specific antigens is severely reduced.
Similarly, the ability of CD4(+) T cells to differentiate into Foxp3(+) natural
regulatory T cells is preserved in rag1 and lig4 mutant mice, but their number is
greatly reduced. These data indicate that hypomorphic defects in T cell
development may cause defective lymphostromal cross-talk and impinge on thymic
stromal cells maturation, and thus favor immune dysregulation.

PMCID: PMC3150116
PMID: 21822418  [PubMed]


368. Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Aug;89(4):411-22. doi: 10.1139/O11-029.

AIRE1A might be involved in cyclin B2 degradation in testicular lysates.

Brahmaraju M(1), Bhagya KP, Titus S, Sebastian A, Devi AN, Laloraya M, Kumar PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Reproduction, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology,
Thycaud PO, Poojappura, Trivandrum, Kerala, India.

The autoimmune regulator gene Aire shows predominant expression in thymus and
other immunologically relevant tissues, and is assigned the major function of
programming autoreactive T-cell deletion. However, the expression of this gene in
tissues outside the immune system raises a question about its possible function
beyond the T-cell deletion dogma. We detected Aire in mouse testis, and the
expression of AIRE protein was remarkably high in postmeiotic germ cells.
Sequencing results indicate that testis expressed Aire variant 1a. AIRE could be 
detected in spermatozoa, with heavy localization on the principal acrosomal
domains. Mouse oocytes stained negatively for AIRE before fertilization, but
stained positively for AIRE 30 min after fertilization. In the zygote, the levels
of AIRE correlated negatively with cyclin B2 levels. Goat testicular lysates
spiked with recombinant human AIRE exhibited augmented cyclin B2 degradation in
the presence of protease inhibitors, which was inhibited by MG-132, indicating
the operation of proteasomal pathways. Thus, this study identifies a correlation 
between the presence of AIRE and proteasomal breakdown of cyclin B2, which leads 
us to speculate that cyclin B2 could be a target of AIRE's E3-ubiquitin ligase
activity.

PMID: 21819345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Clin Calcium. 2011 Aug;21(8):1193-9. doi: CliCa110811931199.

[Regulation of central tolerance by RANKL signaling].

[Article in Japanese]

Shinzawa M(1), Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Japan.

RANKL (receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand) is a member of TNF (tumor-necrosis
factor) family cytokine. Several genetic studies indicated critical roles of
RANKL and its receptor RANK in bone homeostasis. RANKL-RANK signal regulates
differentiation, survival and activation of osteoclasts. Therefore, suppression
of the RANKL signal would be a promising strategy for interventions in
osteoporosis or rheumatoid arthritis. Indeed, humanized anti-RANKL neutralizing
antibody is coming onto the market as an antiresorptive agent for osteoporosis
treatment. In addition to the role on bone homeostasis, several studies suggested
that the RANKL-RANK interaction regulates immune response and development. For
instance, RANKL was previously identified as a survival factor for dendritic
cells. Moreover, we and other groups reported that the RANKL signal contributes
to development of medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) . mTECs ectopically
express and present a number of tissue restricted antigens (e.g. insulin) of
which expressions are in part regulated by autoimmune regulator (Aire) , a factor
responsible for a genetic human autoimmune disorder, thereby eliminating T cells 
reactive to these tissue restricted self-antigens. As result, RANKL is involved
in establishment of self-tolerance in thymus by regulating the development of
mTECs expressing Aire and tissue restricted antigens.

PMID: 21814025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Vision Res. 2011 Sep 1;51(17):1949-57. doi: 10.1016/j.visres.2011.07.004. Epub
2011 Jul 14.

Pooling elementary motion signals into perception of global motion direction.

Raidvee A(1), Averin K, Kreegipuu K, Allik J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Estonian Centre of Behavioural and Health Sciences, 
University of Tartu, Estonia. aire.raidvee@ut.ee

Six observers were asked to indicate in which of two opposite directions, to the 
right or to the left, an entire display appeared to move, based on the proportion
of right vs leftward motion elements, each of which was distinctly visible. The
performance of each observer was described by Thurstone's discriminative
processes and Bernoulli trial models which described empirical psychometric
functions equally well. Although formally it was impossible to discriminate
between these two models, treating observer as a counting device which measures a
randomly selected subsample of all available motion elements had certain
advantages. According to the Bernoulli trial model decisions about the global
motion direction in a range of 12-800 elements were based on taking into account 
about 4±2 random moving dot elements. This small number is not due to
cancellation of the opposite motion vectors since the motion direction
recognition performance did not improve after the compared motion directions were
made orthogonal. This may indicate that the motion pooling mechanism studied in
our experiment is strongly limited in capacity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21777600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Immunol. 2011 Aug 15;187(4):2023-30. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100212. Epub 2011
Jul 13.

IL-7 dysregulation and loss of CD8+ T cell homeostasis in the monogenic human
disease autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy.

Laakso SM(1), Kekäläinen E, Rossi LH, Laurinolli TT, Mannerström H, Heikkilä N,
Lehtoviita A, Perheentupa J, Jarva H, Arstila TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, 00014
Helsinki, Finland.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a
monogenic autoimmune disease that is caused by mutations in the AIRE gene. Murine
studies have linked AIRE to thymocyte selection and peripheral deletional
tolerance, but the pathogenesis of the human disease remains unclear. In this
study, we show that APECED patients have elevated IL-7 levels and a drastically
decreased expression of IL-7R on CD8(+) T cells. This is associated with
increased proliferation and a decreased expression of the negative TCR regulator 
CD5 in the CD45RO(-) subset. The CD45RO(-) cells also display oligoclonal
expansions, decreased expression of the lymph node homing factors CCR7 and CD62L,
and increased expression of perforin, consistent with the accumulation of highly 
differentiated effector cells. The CD45RO(-)CCR7(+)CD8(+) population of cells
with markers characteristic of naive phenotype is also skewed, as shown by
decreased expression of CD5 and increased expression of perforin. The putative
CD31(+) recent thymic emigrant population is likewise affected. These data are
consistent with IL-7 dysregulation inducing a decreased threshold of TCR
signaling and self-antigen-driven proliferation, probably in synergy with the
failed thymic selection. The resultant loss of CD8(+) T cell homeostasis is
likely to play a significant role in the pathogenesis of APECED. Our findings may
also hold lessons for other diseases in which the IL-7-IL-7R pathway has emerged 
as a risk factor.

PMID: 21753149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. PLoS Genet. 2011 Jul;7(7):e1002162. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002162. Epub 2011 
Jul 7.

Interactions between glucocorticoid treatment and cis-regulatory polymorphisms
contribute to cellular response phenotypes.

Maranville JC(1), Luca F, Richards AL, Wen X, Witonsky DB, Baxter S, Stephens M, 
Di Rienzo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Glucocorticoids (GCs) mediate physiological responses to environmental stress and
are commonly used as pharmaceuticals. GCs act primarily through the GC receptor
(GR, a transcription factor). Despite their clear biomedical importance, little
is known about the genetic architecture of variation in GC response. Here we
provide an initial assessment of variability in the cellular response to GC
treatment by profiling gene expression and protein secretion in 114
EBV-transformed B lymphocytes of African and European ancestry. We found that
genetic variation affects the response of nearby genes and exhibits distinctive
patterns of genotype-treatment interactions, with genotypic effects evident in
either only GC-treated or only control-treated conditions. Using a novel
statistical framework, we identified interactions that influence the expression
of 26 genes known to play central roles in GC-related pathways (e.g. NQO1, AIRE, 
and SGK1) and that influence the secretion of IL6.

PMCID: PMC3131293
PMID: 21750684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jul 26;108(30):12437-42. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1107136108. Epub 2011 Jul 11.

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE)-deficient CD8+CD28low regulatory T lymphocytes fail
to control experimental colitis.

Pomié C(1), Vicente R, Vuddamalay Y, Lundgren BA, van der Hoek M, Enault G, Kagan
J, Fazilleau N, Scott HS, Romagnoli P, van Meerwijk JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Toulouse, France.

Mutations in the gene encoding the transcription factor autoimmune regulator
(AIRE) are responsible for autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal
dystrophy syndrome. AIRE directs expression of tissue-restricted antigens in the 
thymic medulla and in lymph node stromal cells and thereby substantially
contributes to induction of immunological tolerance to self-antigens. Data from
experimental mouse models showed that AIRE deficiency leads to impaired deletion 
of autospecific T-cell precursors. However, a potential role for AIRE in the
function of regulatory T-cell populations, which are known to play a central role
in prevention of immunopathology, has remained elusive. Regulatory T cells of
CD8(+)CD28(low) phenotype efficiently control immune responses in experimental
autoimmune and colitis models in mice. Here we show that CD8(+)CD28(low)
regulatory T lymphocytes from AIRE-deficient mice are transcriptionally and
phenotypically normal and exert efficient suppression of in vitro immune
responses, but completely fail to prevent experimental colitis in vivo. Our data 
therefore demonstrate that AIRE plays an important role in the in vivo function
of a naturally occurring regulatory T-cell population.

PMCID: PMC3145727
PMID: 21746930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Crit Rev Immunol. 2011;31(3):171-87.

The contribution of thymic stromal abnormalities to autoimmune disease.

Fletcher AL(1), Calder A, Hince MN, Boyd RL, Chidgey AP.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Immunology and Stem Cell Laboratories, Monash University, Melbourne,
Australia. AnneL_Fletcher@dfci.harvard.edu

In essence, normal thymus function involves the production of a broad repertoire 
of aßT cells capable of responding to foreign antigens with low risk of
autoreactivity. Thymic epithelial cells are an essential component of the thymic 
stromal microenvironment, promoting the growth and export of self-tolerant
thymocytes. Autoimmune disease, resulting from a loss of self-tolerance, is
clinically and genetically complex, and accordingly has many potential
etiological origins. However, it is commonly linked to defects in the thymic
epithelial microenvironment. The study of autoimmune-linked thymic stromal
dysfunction has indisputably advanced our understanding of T cell tolerance;
notably, a field-wide paradigm shift occurred when autoimmune regulator (Aire)
was found to drive expression of a multitude of peripheral tissue-restricted
antigens in medullary thymic epithelial cells. Many other associations with
polygenically controlled autoimmune diseases have been reported but are more
difficult to definitively dissect. Paradoxically, immunodeficiency and
age-related immunosenescence are also linked with increased autoimmunity. Here we
discuss the theoretical basis and the evidence gathered thus far to support these
associations.

PMID: 21740349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Oct;39(18):7908-19. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr527. Epub 2011
Jun 30.

Patient mutation in AIRE disrupts P-TEFb binding and target gene transcription.

umer K(1), Plemenita A, Saksela K, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Vrazov trg 2, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. kristina.zumer@helsinki.fi

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is a transcription factor that induces the expression
of a large subset of otherwise strictly tissue restricted antigens in medullary
thymic epithelial cells, thereby enabling their presentation to developing T
cells for negative selection. Mutations in AIRE lead to
autoimmune-polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), a rare
monogenetic disease. Although it has been reported that AIRE interacts with
proteins involved in nuclear transport, DNA-damage response, chromatin
remodeling, transcription and pre-mRNA-splicing, the precise mechanism of
AIRE-induced tissue restricted antigen expression has remained elusive. In this
study, we investigated an APECED patient mutation that causes the loss of the
extreme C-terminus of AIRE and found that this mutant protein is transcriptionaly
inactive. When tethered heterologously to DNA, this domain could stimulate
transcription and splicing by itself. Moreover, the loss of this C-terminus
disrupted interactions with the positive transcription elongation factor b
(P-TEFb). Via P-TEFb, AIRE increased levels of RNA polymerase II on and enhanced 
pre-mRNA splicing of heterologous and endogenous target genes. Indeed, the
inhibition of CDK9, the kinase subunit of P-TEFb, inhibited AIRE-induced pre-mRNA
splicing of these genes. Thus, AIRE requires P-TEFb to activate transcription
elongation and co-transcriptional processing of target genes.

PMCID: PMC3185428
PMID: 21724609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. N Engl J Med. 2011 Jul 7;365(1):54-61. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1100102. Epub 2011 Jun 
29.

STAT1 mutations in autosomal dominant chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis.

van de Veerdonk FL(1), Plantinga TS, Hoischen A, Smeekens SP, Joosten LA,
Gilissen C, Arts P, Rosentul DC, Carmichael AJ, Smits-van der Graaf CA, Kullberg 
BJ, van der Meer JW, Lilic D, Veltman JA, Netea MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) is characterized by
susceptibility to candida infection of skin, nails, and mucous membranes.
Patients with recessive CMC and autoimmunity have mutations in the autoimmune
regulator AIRE. The cause of autosomal dominant CMC is unknown.
METHODS: We evaluated 14 patients from five families with autosomal dominant CMC.
We incubated their peripheral-blood mononuclear cells with different combinations
of stimuli to test the integrity of pathways that mediate immunity, which led to 
the selection of 100 genes that were most likely to contain the genetic defect.
We used an array-based sequence-capture assay, followed by next-generation
sequencing, to identify mutations.
RESULTS: The mononuclear cells from the affected patients were characterized by
poor production of interferon-<U+03B3>, interleukin-17, and interleukin-22, suggesting
that the defect lay within the interleukin-12 receptor and interleukin-23
receptor signaling pathways. We identified heterozygous missense mutations in the
DNA sequence encoding the coiled-coil (CC) domain of signal transducer and
activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) in the patients. These mutations lead to
defective responses in type 1 and type 17 helper T cells (Th1 and Th17). The
interferon-<U+03B3> receptor pathway was intact in these patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in the CC domain of STAT1 underlie autosomal dominant CMC 
and lead to defective Th1 and Th17 responses, which may explain the increased
susceptibility to fungal infection. (Funded by the Netherlands Organization for
Scientific Research and others.).

PMID: 21714643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Int J Health Sci (Qassim). 2011 Jul;5(2):167-79.

Update on the genetics characterization of vitiligo.

Al-Shobaili HA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, College of Medicine, Qassim University, Saudi
Arabia.

Vitiligo is an autoimmune skin disorder in which autoimmune-mediated destruction 
of melanocytes caused depigmentation of skin patches. The complex genetics of
vitiligo involves multiple susceptibility loci, genetic heterogeneity and
incomplete penetrance with gene-gene and gene-environment interactions. In order 
to clarify the genetic factors, two different principal approaches have applied
for the identification of genomic regions or candidate genes that mediate
susceptibility to vitiligo. First approach is the genome-wide linkage analyses,
which is conducted by scanning of entire human genome for genomic regions that
are linked to the development of vitiligo. The other approach is functional
candidate gene association (FCGA) analyses that detect specific candidate genes, 
which are expected to involve in disease on the basis of their priori biological 
functions. Genomic-wide scans have provided a strong support for vitiligo
susceptibility genes on chromosomes 4q13-q21, 1p31, 7q22, 8p12 and 17p13, while
loci of interest at 6p, 6q, 14q, 9q, 13q, 19p and 22q required further follow-up.
Whereas, FCGA studies have identified some candidate genes which are associated
with vitiligo, such as HLA, AIRE, VIT1, CAT, FOXD3, ESR1, COMT, PTPN22, NALP1,
PDGFRA, MYG1, MITF, CD117, XBP1, FAS, COX2, EDN1 and ACE, but few of them reports
now appear to be false-positive. This review will provides an update on genetics 
of vitiligo based on the identification of novel candidate genes that represent, 
in my opinion as optimal utility for future therapeutic targets in the
pathogenesis of vitiligo.

PMCID: PMC3521835
PMID: 23267294  [PubMed]


378. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Aug 15;317(14):2019-30. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.05.002. Epub
2011 Jun 15.

Mouse thymic epithelial cell lines expressing "Aire" and peripheral
tissue-specific antigens reproduce in vitro negative selection of T cells.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Takayanagi A, Chen J, Sakai K, Kudoh J, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Research Center for Genome Super Power, Keio University, 2 Okubo,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-2611, Japan.

In the human thymus, AIRE (autoimmune regulator) gene is expressed in a very
limited type of medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) and no cognate cell
lines are available, hence the molecular analysis of AIRE gene function has been 
difficult. To improve this situation, we attempted to isolate Aire-expressing
cells and established three cell lines (Aire<U+207A>TEC1, Aire<U+207A>TEC2, Aire<U+207A>DC) from the
abnormally enlarged thymus, which was developed in the transgenic mice expressing
SV40 T-antigen driven by the mouse Aire gene promoter. When these Aire<U+207A> cell
lines were co-cultured with fresh thymocytes, they adhered to the majority of
thymocytes and induced apoptosis as if negative selection of T-cells in the
thymus is occurring in vitro. Further analysis revealed that these Aire<U+207A> cell
lines are derived from mTECs and exhibit characteristic natures of "antigen
presenting cells" including several distinct abilities: to express a variety of
peripheral tissue-specific antigens, to produce immunoproteasome and
immunological synapse, and to express some of TNFSFs (tumor necrosis factor super
families). Thus, the newly established Aire<U+207A> cell lines will be invaluable for
the further detailed analysis of AIRE gene function in the central tolerance of
immunity and autoimmune disease.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21683072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Clin Dev Immunol. 2011;2011:349368. doi: 10.1155/2011/349368. Epub 2011 May 23.

Thymic self-antigen expression for the design of a negative/tolerogenic
self-vaccine against type 1 diabetes.

Chentoufi AA(1), Geenen V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, King Fahad Medical City,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Before being able to react against infectious non-self-antigens, the immune
system has to be educated in the recognition and tolerance of neuroendocrine
proteins, and this critical process essentially takes place in the thymus. The
development of the autoimmune diabetogenic response results from a thymus
dysfunction in programming central self-tolerance to pancreatic insulin-secreting
islet ß cells, leading to the breakdown of immune homeostasis with an enrichment 
of islet ß cell reactive effector T cells and a deficiency of ß cell-specific
natural regulatory T cells (nTreg) in the peripheral T-lymphocyte repertoire.
Insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF-2) is the dominant member of the insulin family
expressed during fetal life by the thymic epithelium under the control of the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene/protein. Based on the close homology and
cross-tolerance between insulin, the primary T1D autoantigen, and IGF-2, the
dominant self-antigen of the insulin family, a novel type of vaccination,
so-called "negative/tolerogenic self-vaccination", is currently developed for
prevention and cure of T1D. If this approach were found to be effective for
reprogramming immunological tolerance in T1D, it could pave the way for the
design of negative self-vaccines against autoimmune endocrine diseases, as well
as other organ-specific autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC3102425
PMID: 21647405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Dev Biol. 2011 Aug 15;356(2):411-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.05.665. Epub 2011 
May 30.

DNA methylation plays an important role in promoter choice and protein production
at the mouse Dnmt3L locus.

O'Doherty AM(1), Rutledge CE, Sato S, Thakur A, Lees-Murdock DJ, Hata K, Walsh
CP.

Author information: 
(1)Transcriptional Regulation and Epigenetics Research Group, Centre for
Molecular Biosciences, School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulster,
Coleraine, Northern Ireland, UK.

The DNA methyltransferase 3-like (Dnmt3L) protein is a crucial cofactor in the
germ line for the de novo methyltransferase Dnmt3a, which establishes imprints
and represses transposable elements. We have previously shown that Dnmt3L
transcription is regulated via three different promoters in mice, producing
transcripts we term Dnmt3L(s) (stem cell), Dnmt3L(o) (oocyte) and Dnmt3L(at)
(adult testis). Here we show that both Dnmt3L(s) and Dnmt3L(o) produce
full-length proteins but that the Dnmt3L(at) transcripts are not translated.
Although not a canonical CpG island, the Dnmt3L(s) promoter is silenced by
methylation during somatic differentiation in parallel with germ-cell-specific
genes. During oocyte growth, Dnmt3L(s) also becomes heavily methylated and
silenced and this requires its own gene product, since there is complete loss of 
methylation and derepression of transcription from this promoter in oocytes
derived from Dnmt3L(-/-) mice. Methylation of the Dnmt3L(s) promoter is
established prior to the completion of imprinting and explains the requirement in
mouse oocytes for the Dnmt3L(o) promoter, located in an intron of the neighboring
unmethylated Aire gene. Overall these results give insight into how and why
promoter switching at the mouse Dnmt3L locus occurs and provide one of the first 
examples of a non-imprinted locus where methylation plays a role in promoter
choice. The derepression of the Dnmt3L(s) promoter in the knockout oocytes also
suggests that other non-imprinted loci may be dysregulated in these cells and
contribute to the phenotype of the resultant mice.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21645502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Cell Immunol. 2011;270(2):156-63. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2011.05.002. Epub 2011
May 12.

Overexpressing autoimmune regulator regulates the expression of toll-like
receptors by interacting with their promoters in RAW264.7 cells.

Zhu W(1), Yang W, He Z, Liao X, Wu J, Sun J, Yang Y, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Norman Bethune College of Medicine, Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin Province, China.

Autoimmune regulator (Aire) is a transcriptional activator that regulates the
ectopic expression of many tissue-restricted antigens in medullary thymic
epithelial cells, and that has an important role in the negative selection of
autoreactive T cells. However, the roles of Aire expression in peripheral
lymphoid tissues and hematopoietic cells, especially monocytes/macrophages,
remain poorly understood. In this study, we found that the mRNA and protein
expression levels of toll-like receptor (TLR)1, TLR3, and TLR8 were notably
up-regulated in a mouse macrophage-like cell line (RAW264.7) stably expressing
Aire, while the expression of TLR2, TLR4, TLR5, TLR6, TLR7, and TLR9 were not
significantly changed. In addition, the mRNA expression of TLR3 and TLR8 were
significantly increased in primary peritoneal macrophages transiently transfected
with Aire. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation and a luciferase activity assay,
we also found that Aire interacted with the TLR1, TLR3, and TLR8 promoters and
increased the luciferase transcriptional activity of these promoters in RAW264.7 
cells. Moreover, after stimulation by Pam(3)CSK(4), a TLR1 ligand, and poly(I:C),
a TLR3 ligand, we found that the mRNA expression levels of IL-1a, TNFa, iNOS, and
IFNa were increased in RAW264.7 cells stably expressing Aire. Together, these
data suggest that Aire has a crucial role in the recognition of pathogenic
microorganisms and peripheral immune tolerance in antigen-presenting cells (APCs)
by regulating the expression of TLRs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21628060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Jun;41(6):1517-27. doi: 10.1002/eji.201041253. Epub 2011 May 
13.

Mucocutaneous candidiasis and autoimmunity against cytokines in APECED and
thymoma patients: clinical and pathogenetic implications.

Kisand K(1), Lilic D, Casanova JL, Peterson P, Meager A, Willcox N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Group, Institute of General and Molecular Pathology,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. kai.kisand@ut.ee

Much has been learnt about the mechanisms of thymic self-tolerance induction from
work on both the rare autosomal recessive disease autoimmune polyendocrinopathy
candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) and the autoimmune regulator (AIRE)
protein mutated in this disease. Normally, AIRE drives low-level expression of
huge numbers of peripheral tissue-specific antigens (TSAgs) in medullary thymic
epithelial cells (mTECs), leading to the deletion of TSAg-reactive thymocytes
maturing nearby. The very recently discovered neutralizing autoantibodies
(autoAbs) against Th17-related cells and cytokines in two autoimmunity-related
syndromes associated with AIRE-mutant thymi or AIRE-deficient thymomas help to
explain the chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) seen in both syndromes. The
surprising parallels between these syndromes also demand new hypotheses and
research into the consequences of AIRE deficiency and the ensuing autoimmunizing 
pathways, and suggest more appropriate treatment regimens as discussed in this
review.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21574164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Endocrinol Invest. 2012 Feb;35(2):169-73. doi: 10.3275/7677. Epub 2011 Apr 20.

Molecular background and genotype-phenotype correlation in
autoimmune-polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal-distrophy patients from
Campania and in their relatives.

Capalbo D(1), Mazza C, Giordano R, Improda N, Arvat E, Cervato S, Morlin L,
Pignata C, Betterle C, Salerno M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University "Federico II" of Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune-polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis- ectodermal-distrophy
(APECED) is a recessive disease, caused by mutations in the AutoImmune REgulator 
(AIRE) gene. Different mutations are peculiar of particular populations. In
Italy, 3 hot spots areas where APECED shows an increased prevalence, have been
identified in Sardinia, Apulia, and in the Venetian region.
AIM: In this study, we analyzed AIRE mutations and genotype-phenotype correlation
in APECED patients originating from Campania and in their relatives.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In 6 patients affected with APECED clinical findings,
genetic analysis of AIRE, and APECED-related autoantibodies were performed.
RESULTS: All patients carried at least 1 mutation on exon 1 or on splice-site
flanking exon 1. Two siblings carried a complex homozygous mutation [IVS1 + 1G>C;
IVS1 + 5delG] on intron 1; 2 patients were compound heterozygous for
[T16M]+[W78R] (exons 1+2); 1 patient was compound heterozygous for
[A21V]+[C322fs] (exons 1+8) and another was homozygous for [T16M]+[T16M] on exon 
1. Expression of the disease showed wide variability while circulating
autoantibodies paralleled to phenotype in each patient. Analysis of relatives
allowed the identification of 8 heterozygotes. None of heterozygous subjects
presented major findings of APECED.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations localized on exon 1 and the region flanking exon 1 are
common in APECED patients originating from Campania. Genotype-phenotype
correlation failed to reveal a relationship between detected mutations and
clinical expression. Mutations in heterozygosis in AIRE gene are not associated
to major findings of APECED.

PMID: 21508664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Blood. 2011 Sep 1;118(9):2462-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-06-286393. Epub 2011
Apr 19.

Aire regulates the transfer of antigen from mTECs to dendritic cells for
induction of thymic tolerance.

Hubert FX(1), Kinkel SA, Davey GM, Phipson B, Mueller SN, Liston A, Proietto AI, 
Cannon PZ, Forehan S, Smyth GK, Wu L, Goodnow CC, Carbone FR, Scott HS, Heath WR.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Australia.

Comment in
    Blood. 2011 Sep 1;118(9):2380-1.

To investigate the role of Aire in thymic selection, we examined the cellular
requirements for generation of ovalbumin (OVA)-specific CD4 and CD8 T cells in
mice expressing OVA under the control of the rat insulin promoter. Aire
deficiency reduced the number of mature single-positive OVA-specific CD4(+) or
CD8(+) T cells in the thymus, independent of OVA expression. Importantly, it also
contributed in 2 ways to OVA-dependent negative selection depending on the T-cell
type. Aire-dependent negative selection of OVA-specific CD8 T cells correlated
with Aire-regulated expression of OVA. By contrast, for OVA-specific CD4 T cells,
Aire affected tolerance induction by a mechanism that operated independent of the
level of OVA expression, controlling access of antigen presenting cells to
medullary thymic epithelial cell (mTEC)-expressed OVA. This study supports the
view that one mechanism by which Aire controls thymic negative selection is by
regulating the indirect presentation of mTEC-derived antigens by thymic dendritic
cells. It also indicates that mTECs can mediate tolerance by direct presentation 
of Aire-regulated antigens to both CD4 and CD8 T cells.

PMID: 21505196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Jul 1;20(13):2680-5. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr161. Epub 2011 Apr
19.

The human AIRE gene at chromosome 21q22 is a genetic determinant for the
predisposition to rheumatoid arthritis in Japanese population.

Terao C(1), Yamada R, Ohmura K, Takahashi M, Kawaguchi T, Kochi Y; Human Disease 
Genomics Working Group; RA Clinical and Genetic Study Consortium, Okada Y,
Nakamura Y, Yamamoto K, Melchers I, Lathrop M, Mimori T, Matsuda F.

Collaborators: Kokubo M, Diop G, Yukawa N, Kawabata D, Usui T, Fujii T, Yoshimura
N, Matsuo K, Tajima K, Meziani R, Shimada K, Toma S, Takasugi K, Nakagome K,
Yamanaka H, Kamatani N.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine, Department of Rheumatology and Clinical
Immunology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a typical complex trait and the major cause of
chronic inflammation worldwide. Although multiple genetic loci have been shown
for their association with the onset of RA, they cover only a part of its genetic
components and are largely ethnicity-specific. To identify novel genetic factors 
related to the predisposition and prognosis of RA in Japanese, we conducted a
large-scale genome-wide association (GWA) study. We performed a GWA analysis by
scanning the genome of 1247 RA cases and 1486 controls for 277 420 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), followed by replication analysis using two
independent sample sets consisting of 1865 cases and 1623 controls, and 2303
cases and 3380 controls. We identified two SNPs, rs2075876 and rs760426, in
intron of the autoimmune regulator AIRE gene at chromosome 21q22 that showed
strong associations with the disease (P= 3.6 × 10(-9) and P= 4.4 × 10(-8),
respectively). Rs1800250, in exon7 of AIRE, was in strong linkage disequilibrium 
(r(2)= 0.94) with rs2075876 and introduced an amino acid alteration (S278R) in
the SAND domain of the AIRE protein. In silico analysis showed the decreased
transcription of AIRE by the risk allele of rs2075876 compared with the
alternative allele (P= 6.8 × 10(-5)). No correlation was observed between the
rs2075876 genotype and quantitative traits reflecting the progression of RA. As
AIRE is a key molecule which regulates the expression and presentation of
self-antigens in thymic negative selection, its downregulation by genetic
polymorphisms may result in the survival of auto-reactive T cells to trigger
auto-inflammation in RA.

PMID: 21505073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Immunol Rev. 2011 May;241(1):89-103. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2011.01008.x.

Control of central and peripheral tolerance by Aire.

Metzger TC(1), Anderson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA.

The negative selection of self-reactive thymocytes depends on the expression of
tissue-specific antigens by medullary thymic epithelial cells. The autoimmune
regulator (Aire) protein plays an important role in turning on these antigens,
and the absence of even one Aire-induced tissue-specific antigen in the thymus
can lead to autoimmunity in the antigen-expressing target organ. Recently, Aire
protein has been detected in peripheral lymphoid organs, suggesting that
peripheral Aire plays a complementary role here. In these peripheral sites, Aire 
was found to regulate the expression of a group of tissue-specific antigens that 
is distinct from those expressed in the thymus. Furthermore, transgenic antigen
expression in extrathymic Aire-expressing cells (eTACs) can mediate deletional
tolerance, but the immunological relevance of Aire-dependent, endogenous
tissue-specific antigens remains to be determined.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3093413
PMID: 21488892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Ethnobiol Ethnomed. 2011 Mar 30;7:12. doi: 10.1186/1746-4269-7-12.

A case of zootherapy with the tarantula Brachypelma vagans Ausserer, 1875 in
traditional medicine of the Chol Mayan ethnic group in Mexico.

Machkour-M'Rabet S(1), Hénaut Y, Winterton P, Rojo R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Bioconservación ante el Cambio Global, El Colegio de la
Frontera Sur (ECOSUR), Av. del Centenario Km. 5.5, C.P. 77900, Chetumal, Quintana
Roo, Mexico. smachkou@ecosur.mx

BACKGROUND: In practically every human culture, the use of arthropods as
medicinal resources has been reported. In Mexico, the Mayan people mainly use
plants but occasionally also animals and minerals in their medicine. This article
is the first to report the traditional use of the tarantula Brachypelma vagans by
medicine men in the Chol community, an ancient indigenous group that inhabits the
southeastern part of Mexico. We also describe the utility of such arachnids in
traditional medicine.
METHODS: This study was carried out in different Chol communities in the states
of Chiapas and Campeche (southeastern Mexico) from 2003 until 2007. We
interviewed the local medicine men, patients and non-Chol people in each village 
visited to collect information about the rituals involved and the effectiveness
of this traditional medicine and also their opinion of this traditional medicine.
RESULTS: In all independent villages, the people who present an illness called
'aire de tarantula' or tarantula wind with symptoms including chest pain,
coughing and asthma, were treated by the medicine man (called 'hierbatero') with 
a tarantula-based beverage. From village to village, the beverage has a similar
base composition but some variations occur in additional ingredients depending on
the individual medicine man. Like in all traditional Mayan medicine, the ritual
of the ceremony consists of drinking the tarantula-based beverage and this is
principally accompanied by chants and burning of incense.
CONCLUSIONS: The recipe of the tarantula-based beverage and the procedure of this
ritual ceremony were fairly constant in all the villages visited. Our work shows 
that despite the tarantula's bad image in several cultures, in others positive
use is made of these spiders, as in modern medicine.

PMCID: PMC3072308
PMID: 21450096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Am J Pathol. 2011 Mar;178(3):983-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.12.007.

The autoimmune regulator (AIRE), which is defective in autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy patients, is expressed in
human epidermal and follicular keratinocytes and associates with the intermediate
filament protein cytokeratin 17.

Kumar V(1), Pedroza LA, Mace EM, Seeholzer S, Cotsarelis G, Condino-Neto A, Payne
AS, Orange JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) syndrome,
which is caused by mutation of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene, is a highly 
variable disease characterized by multiple endocrine failure, chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis, and various ectodermal defects. AIRE is a
transcriptional regulator classically expressed in medullary thymic epithelial
cells, monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells. Previous studies have
suggested that AIRE can shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm of cells,
although its cytoplasmic functions are poorly characterized. Through mass
spectrometry analysis of proteins co-immunoprecipitating with cytoplasmic AIRE,
we identified a novel association of AIRE with the intermediate filament protein 
cytokeratin 17 (K17) in the THP-1 monocyte cell line. We confirmed AIRE
expression in HaCaT epidermal keratinocytes, as well as its interaction with K17.
Confocal microscopy of human fetal and adult scalp hair follicles demonstrated a 
cytoplasmic pattern of AIRE staining that moderately colocalized with K17. The
cytoplasmic association of AIRE with the intermediate filament network in human
epidermal and follicular keratinocytes may provide a new path to understanding
the ectodermal abnormalities associated with the APECED syndrome.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3069874
PMID: 21356351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Scand J Immunol. 2011 Jul;74(1):71-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2011.02543.x.

Defective central tolerance in Aire-deficient mice is not sufficient to induce
symptomatic autoimmunity during lymphopenia-induced T cell proliferation.

Kekäläinen E(1), Lehto MK, Smeds E, Miettinen A, Meri S, Jarva H, Arstila TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland. eliisa.kekalainen@helsinki.fi

Transcriptional regulator autoimmune regulator (AIRE) controls thymic negative
selection but it is also expressed in secondary lymphoid organs. The relative
contribution of AIRE's central and peripheral function to the maintenance of
tolerance is unclear. We transferred mature lymphocytes from Aire(-/-) or
wild-type donors to Aire(+/+) lymphopenic recipients, which allowed us to gauge
the autoreactivity inherent in the cells originating in an Aire(-/-) thymus. In
the ensuing lymphopenia-induced proliferation (LIP), the recipients of cells from
Aire(-/-) showed definite T cell hyperproliferation and developed autoantibodies 
at a higher frequency than the recipients of wild-type cells. However, neither of
the recipient groups developed clinical symptoms, and pathological tissue
infiltrates were also absent. The recipients of Aire(-/-) cells showed
hyperproliferation and increased accumulation of regulatory T cells (Tregs),
especially in tissues susceptible to inflammation triggered by LIP. These data
are consistent with the view that T cells developing in the absence of Aire are
autoreactive. However, overt autoimmunity was prevented, most likely by the
suppressive function of Treg cells in the Aire-sufficient recipients. Our results
support the importance of the peripheral AIRE expression in the maintenance of
immunological tolerance.

© 2011 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology © 2011 Blackwell
Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21352256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Clin Exp Immunol. 2011 Mar;163(3):296-308. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2010.04316.x.

Expression and function of the autoimmune regulator (Aire) gene in non-thymic
tissue.

Eldershaw SA(1), Sansom DM, Narendran P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Institute of Biomedical
Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. s.a.eldershaw@bham.ac,uk

Educational immune tolerance to self-antigens is induced primarily in the thymus 
where tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs) are presented to T lymphocytes by cells
of the thymic stroma - a process known as central tolerance. The expression of
these TRAs is controlled in part by a transcription factor encoded by the
autoimmune regulatory (Aire) gene. Patients with a mutation of this gene develop 
a condition known as
autoimmune-polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal-dystrophy (APECED),
characterized by autoimmune destruction of endocrine organs, fungal infection and
dental abnormalities. There is now evidence for TRA expression and for mechanisms
of functional tolerance outside the thymus. This has led to a number of studies
examining Aire expression and function at these extra-thymic sites. These
investigations have been conducted across different animal models using different
techniques and have often shown discrepant results. Here we review the studies of
extra thymic Aire and discuss the evidence for its expression and function in
both human and murine systems.

© 2011 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Immunology © 2011 British Society
for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC3048612
PMID: 21303359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Exp Med. 2011 Feb 14;208(2):383-94. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102327. Epub 2011 Feb 7.

Aire-dependent production of XCL1 mediates medullary accumulation of thymic
dendritic cells and contributes to regulatory T cell development.

Lei Y(1), Ripen AM, Ishimaru N, Ohigashi I, Nagasawa T, Jeker LT, Bösl MR,
Holländer GA, Hayashi Y, Malefyt Rde W, Nitta T, Takahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Immunology, Institute for Genome Research, University
of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan.

Dendritic cells (DCs) in the thymus (tDCs) are predominantly accumulated in the
medulla and contribute to the establishment of self-tolerance. However, how the
medullary accumulation of tDCs is regulated and involved in self-tolerance is
unclear. We show that the chemokine receptor XCR1 is expressed by tDCs, whereas
medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) express the ligand XCL1. XCL1-deficient
mice are defective in the medullary accumulation of tDCs and the thymic
generation of naturally occurring regulatory T cells (nT reg cells). Thymocytes
from XCL1-deficient mice elicit dacryoadenitis in nude mice. mTEC expression of
XCL1, tDC medullary accumulation, and nT reg cell generation are diminished in
Aire-deficient mice. These results indicate that the XCL1-mediated medullary
accumulation of tDCs contributes to nT reg cell development and is regulated by
Aire.

PMCID: PMC3039864
PMID: 21300913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Clin Immunol. 2011 Apr;139(1):6-11. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2010.12.021. Epub 2011
Feb 3.

Clinical heterogeneity and diagnostic delay of autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy syndrome.

Mazza C(1), Buzi F, Ortolani F, Vitali A, Notarangelo LD, Weber G, Bacchetta R,
Soresina A, Lougaris V, Greggio NA, Taddio A, Pasic S, de Vroede M, Pac M, Kilic 
SS, Ozden S, Rusconi R, Martino S, Capalbo D, Salerno M, Pignata C, Radetti G,
Maggiore G, Plebani A, Notarangelo LD, Badolato R.

Author information: 
(1)A. Nocivelli Institute for Molecular Medicine, Pediatric Clinic, University of
Brescia, and Laboratory of Genetic Disease of Childhood, Spedali Civili, Brescia,
Italy.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
autosomal recessive organ-specific autoimmune disorder that is characterized by a
variable combination of (i) chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, (ii)
polyendocrinopathy and/or hepatitis and (iii) dystrophy of the dental enamel and 
nails. We analyzed the AIRE (autoimmune regulator) gene in subjects who presented
any symptom that has been associated with APECED, including candidiasis and
autoimmune endocrinopathy. We observed that 83.3% of patients presented at least 
two of the three typical manifestations of APECED, while the remaining 16.7% of
patients showed other signs of the disease. Analysis of the genetic diagnosis of 
these subjects revealed that a considerable delay occurs in the majority of
patients between the appearance of symptoms and the diagnosis. Overall, the mean 
diagnostic delay in our patients was 10.2 years. These results suggest that
molecular analysis of AIRE should be performed in patients with relapsing
mucocutaneous candidiasis for early identification of APECED.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21295522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Immunol. 2011 Feb 15;186(4):2024-32. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002296. Epub 2011
Jan 19.

Visualizing the role of Cbl-b in control of islet-reactive CD4 T cells and
susceptibility to type 1 diabetes.

Hoyne GF(1), Flening E, Yabas M, Teh C, Altin JA, Randall K, Thien CB, Langdon
WY, Goodnow CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian
National University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory 0200, Australia.
gerard.hoyne@nd.edu.au

The E3 ubiquitin ligase Cbl-b regulates T cell activation thresholds and has been
associated with protecting against type 1 diabetes, but its in vivo role in the
process of self-tolerance has not been examined at the level of potentially
autoaggressive CD4(+) T cells. In this study, we visualize the consequences of
Cbl-b deficiency on self-tolerance to lysozyme Ag expressed in transgenic mice
under control of the insulin promoter (insHEL). By tracing the fate of pancreatic
islet-reactive CD4(+) T cells in prediabetic 3A9-TCR × insHEL double-transgenic
mice, we find that Cbl-b deficiency contrasts with AIRE or IL-2 deficiency,
because it does not affect thymic negative selection of islet-reactive CD4(+)
cells or the numbers of islet-specific CD4(+) or CD4(+)Foxp3(+) T cells in the
periphery, although it decreased differentiation of inducible regulatory T cells 
from TGF-ß-treated 3A9-TCR cells in vitro. When removed from regulatory T cells
and placed in culture, Cblb-deficient islet-reactive CD4(+) cells reveal a
capacity to proliferate to HEL Ag that is repressed in wild-type cells. This
latent failure of T cell anergy is, nevertheless, controlled in vivo in
prediabetic mice so that islet-reactive CD4(+) cells in the spleen and the
pancreatic lymph node of Cblb-deficient mice show no evidence of increased
activation or proliferation in situ. Cblb deficiency subsequently precipitated
diabetes in most TCR:insHEL animals by 15 wk of age. These results reveal a role 
for peripheral T cell anergy in organ-specific self-tolerance and illuminate the 
interplay between Cblb-dependent anergy and other mechanisms for preventing
organ-specific autoimmunity.

PMID: 21248249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Scand J Immunol. 2011 Feb;73(2):147-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2010.02486.x.

TSGA10 - A target for autoantibodies in autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 
and systemic lupus erythematosus.

Smith CJ(1), Oscarson M, Rönnblom L, Alimohammadi M, Perheentupa J, Husebye ES,
Gustafsson J, Nordmark G, Meloni A, Crock PA, Kämpe O, Bensing S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
casey.smith@neuro.uu.se

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS1) is a rare monogenic autoimmune
disorder caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. High-titre 
autoantibodies are a characteristic feature of APS1 and are often associated with
particular disease manifestations. Pituitary deficits are reported in
approximately 7% of APS1 patients, with immunoreactivity to pituitary tissue
frequently described. Using APS1 patient serum to immunoscreen a pituitary cDNA
expression library, testis specific, 10 (TSGA10) was isolated. Immunoreactivity
against TSGA10 was detected in 5/99 (5.05%) patients with APS1, but also in 5/135
(3.70%) systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients and 1/188 (0.53%) healthy
controls. TSGA10 autoantibodies were not detected in the serum from patients with
any other autoimmune disease. Autoantibodies against TSGA10 were detectable from 
a young age in 4/5 positive APS1 patients with autoantibody titres remaining
relatively constant over time. Furthermore, real-time PCR confirmed TSGA10 mRNA
to be most abundantly expressed in the testis and also showed moderate and low
expression levels throughout the entire body. TSGA10 should be considered as an
autoantigen in a subset of APS1 patients and also in a minority of SLE patients. 
No recognizable clinical phenotype could be found to correlate with positive
autoantibody reactivity.

© 2011 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology © 2011 Blackwell
Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21198756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Clin Dev Immunol. 2010;2010:586342. doi: 10.1155/2010/586342. Epub 2010 Dec 14.

Renal failure associated with APECED and terminal 4q deletion: evidence of
autoimmune nephropathy.

Al-Owain M(1), Kaya N, Al-Zaidan H, Bin Hussain I, Al-Manea H, Al-Hindi H,
Kennedy S, Iqbal MA, Al-Mojalli H, Al-Bakheet A, Puel A, Casanova JL, Al-Muhsen
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Centre, Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene
(AIRE). Terminal 4q deletion is also a rare cytogenetic abnormality that causes a
variable syndrome of dysmorphic features, mental retardation, growth retardation,
and heart and limb defects. We report a 12-year-old Saudi boy with mucocutaneous 
candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, and adrenocortical failure consistent with
APECED. In addition, he has dysmorphic facial features, growth retardation, and
severe global developmental delay. Patient had late development of chronic renal 
failure. The blastogenesis revealed depressed lymphocytes' response to Candida
albicans at 38% when compared to control. Chromosome analysis of the patient
revealed 46,XY,del(4)(q33). FISH using a 4p/4q subtelomere DNA probe assay
confirmed the deletion of qter subtelomere on chromosome 4. Parental chromosomes 
were normal. The deleted array was further defined using array CGH. AIRE full
gene sequencing revealed a homozygous mutation namely 845_846insC. Renal biopsy
revealed chronic interstitial nephritis with advanced fibrosis. In addition,
there was mesangial deposition of C3, C1q, and IgM. This is, to the best of our
knowledge, the first paper showing evidence of autoimmune nephropathy by renal
immunofluorescence in a patient with APECED and terminal 4q deletion.

PMCID: PMC3010696
PMID: 21197407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Front Immunol. 2011 May 9;2:14. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2011.00014. eCollection 2011.

Models of aire-dependent gene regulation for thymic negative selection.

Danso-Abeam D(1), Humblet-Baron S, Dooley J, Liston A.

Author information: 
(1)VIB Autoimmune Genetics Laboratory Leuven, Belgium.

Mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene lead to autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 (APS1), characterized by the development of
multi-organ autoimmune damage. The mechanism by which defects in AIRE result in
autoimmunity has been the subject of intense scrutiny. At the cellular level, the
working model explains most of the clinical and immunological characteristics of 
APS1, with AIRE driving the expression of tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs) in
the epithelial cells of the thymic medulla. This TRA expression results in
effective negative selection of TRA-reactive thymocytes, preventing autoimmune
disease. At the molecular level, the mechanism by which AIRE initiates TRA
expression in the thymic medulla remains unclear. Multiple different models for
the molecular mechanism have been proposed, ranging from classical
transcriptional activity, to random induction of gene expression, to epigenetic
tag recognition effect, to altered cell biology. In this review, we evaluate each
of these models and discuss their relative strengths and weaknesses.

PMCID: PMC3342030
PMID: 22566805  [PubMed]


397. Front Med China. 2010 Sep;4(3):336-41. doi: 10.1007/s11684-010-0096-4. Epub 2010 
Aug 5.

Autoimmune regulator regulates autophagy in THP-1 human monocytes.

Shi L(1), Hu LH, Li YR.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory Medicine Department, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China.
sliang@smail.hust.edu.cn

The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is a crucial factor for the induction of central 
tolerance, and mutations in this gene lead to abnormal immune responses. However,
the role of AIRE in autophagy in immune cells, especially in monocytes, is
obscure. In the present study, we found that overexpression of AIRE in THP-1
human monocytes resulted in increased endogenous light chain 3 (LC3)-II level and
elevated LC3 positive vesicles. Moreover, an autophagy inhibitor or knockdown of 
AIRE by small interference RNA attenuated these effects. In contrast, the
expression of p62/SQSTM1 remained unchanged in THP-1 cells after the
corresponding treatment. Our findings indicate that AIRE plays a role in the
regulation of autophagy in THP-1 human monocytes.

PMID: 21191841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Jan;41(1):235-45. doi: 10.1002/eji.200939883. Epub 2010 Dec
3.

Increased IL-17A secretion in response to Candida albicans in autoimmune
polyendocrine syndrome type 1 and its animal model.

Ahlgren KM(1), Moretti S, Lundgren BA, Karlsson I, Ahlin E, Norling A, Hallgren
A, Perheentupa J, Gustafsson J, Rorsman F, Crewther PE, Rönnelid J, Bensing S,
Scott HS, Kämpe O, Romani L, Lobell A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
Kerstin.Ahlgren@medsci.uu.se

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1) is a multiorgan autoimmune
disease caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. Chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism and adrenal failure are hallmarks
of the disease. The critical mechanisms causing chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
in APS-1 patients have not been identified although autoantibodies to cytokines
are implicated in the pathogenesis. To investigate whether the Th reactivity to
Candida albicans (C. albicans) and other stimuli was altered, we isolated PBMC
from APS-1 patients and matched healthy controls. The Th17 pathway was
upregulated in response to C. albicans in APS-1 patients, whereas the IL-22
secretion was reduced. Autoantibodies against IL-22, IL-17A and IL-17F were
detected in sera from APS-1 patients by immunoprecipitation. In addition,
Aire-deficient (Aire(0/0) ) mice were much more susceptible than Aire(+/+) mice
to mucosal candidiasis and C. albicans-induced Th17- and Th1-cell responses were 
increased in Aire(0/0) mice. Thus an excessive IL-17A reactivity towards C.
albicans was observed in APS-1 patients and Aire(0/0) mice.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21182094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Jan;41(1):12-7. doi: 10.1002/eji.201041024.

Contrasting models for the roles of Aire in the differentiation program of
epithelial cells in the thymic medulla.

Matsumoto M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, University of
Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan. mitsuru@ier.tokushima-u.ac.jp

The current prevailing view regarding the role of Aire in self-tolerance is that 
it is involved in the transcriptional control of many tissue-restricted
self-antigen genes in thymic epithelial cells in the medulla (mTECs); however,
accumulating evidence also suggests that Aire has other roles, e.g. in mTEC
differentiation, and furthermore that Aire can either promote or inhibit the mTEC
differentiation program, i.e. Aire does not play a neutral role in mTEC
differentiation. This review discusses when and how Aire plays an important role 
in controlling the organization of mTECs required for the expression of
self-antigen genes.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21182071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Immunobiology. 2011 May;216(5):591-603. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2010.09.007. Epub
2010 Sep 25.

Collagen induced arthritis (CIA) in mice features regulatory transcriptional
network connecting major histocompatibility complex (MHC H2) with autoantigen
genes in the thymus.

Donate PB(1), Fornari TA, Junta CM, Magalhães DA, Macedo C, Cunha TM, Nguyen C,
Cunha FQ, Passos GA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunogenetics Group, Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine of
Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, 14040-900 Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

Considering that imbalance of central tolerance in the thymus contributes to
aggressive autoimmunity, we compared the expression of peripheral tissue
autoantigens (PTA) genes, which are involved in self-representation in the thymic
stroma, of two mouse strains; DBA-1/J (MHC-H2(q)) susceptible and DBA-2/J
(MHC-H2(d)) resistant to collagen induced arthritis (CIA). We evaluate whether
these strains differ in their thymic gene expression, allowing identification of 
genes that might play a role in susceptibility/resistance to CIA. Microarray
profiling showed that 1093 PTA genes were differentially modulated between
collagen immunized DBA-1/J and DBA-2/J mice. These genes were assigned to 17
different tissues/organs, including joints/bone, characterizing the promiscuous
gene expression (PGE), which is implicated in self-representation. Hierarchical
clustering of microarray data and quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed that Aire
(autoimmune regulator), an important regulator of the PGE process, Aire-dependent
(insulin), Aire-independent (Col2A1 and Gad67), and other 22 joint/bone
autoantigen genes were down-regulated in DBA-1/J compared with DBA-2/J in the
thymus. Considering the importance of MHC-H2 in peptide-self presentation and
autoimmunity susceptibility, we reconstructed transcriptional networks of both
strains based on actual microarray data. The networks clearly demonstrated
different MHC-H2 transcriptional interactions with PTAs genes. DBA-1/J strain
featured MHC-H2 as a node influencing downstream genes. Differently, in DBA-2/J
strain network MHC-H2 was exclusively self-regulated and does not control other
genes. These findings provide evidence that CIA susceptibility in mice may be a
reflex of a cascade-like transcriptional control connecting different genes to
MHC-H2 in the thymus.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21168240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Curr Opin Immunol. 2011 Apr;23(2):198-206. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2010.11.007. Epub
2010 Dec 14.

Aire and T cell development.

Anderson MS(1), Su MA.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center and Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. manderson@diabetes.ucsf.edu

In the thymus, developing T cells that react against self-antigens with high
affinity are deleted in the process of negative selection. An essential component
of this process is the display of self-antigens, including those whose expression
are usually restricted to specific tissues, to developing T cells within the
thymus. The Autoimmune Regulator (Aire) gene plays a crucial role in the
expression of tissue specific self-antigens within the thymus, and disruption of 
Aire function results in spontaneous autoimmunity in both humans and mice. Recent
advances have been made in our understanding of how Aire influences the
expression of thousands of tissue-specific antigens in the thymus. Additional
roles of Aire, including roles in chemokine and cytokine expression, have also
been revealed. Factors important in the differentiation of Aire-expressing
medullary thymic epithelial cells have been defined. Finally, the identity of
antigen presenting cells in negative selection, including the role of medullary
thymic epithelial cells in displaying tissue specific antigens to T cells, has
also been clarified.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3073725
PMID: 21163636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Hepatol. 2011 May;54(5):994-1001. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.08.034. Epub 2010
Oct 26.

Overexpression of the IGF2-mRNA binding protein p62 in transgenic mice induces a 
steatotic phenotype.

Tybl E(1), Shi FD, Kessler SM, Tierling S, Walter J, Bohle RM, Wieland S, Zhang
J, Tan EM, Kiemer AK.

Author information: 
(1)Saarland University, Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Biology,
Saarbrücken, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The insulin-like growth-factor 2 (IGF2) mRNA binding protein
p62 is highly expressed in hepatocellular carcinoma tissue. Still, its potential 
role in liver disease is largely unknown. In this study, we investigated
pathophysiological implications of p62 overexpression in mice.
METHODS: We generated mice overexpressing p62 under a LAP-promotor. mRNA
expression levels and stability were examined by real-time RT-PCR.
Allele-specific expression of Igf2 and H19 was assessed after crossing mice with 
SD7 animals. The Igf2 downstream mediators pAKT and PTEN were determined by
Western blot.
RESULTS: Hepatic p62 overexpression neither induced inflammatory processes nor
liver damage. However, 2.5week old transgenic animals displayed a steatotic
phenotype and improved glucose tolerance. p62 overexpression induced the
expression of the imprinted genes Igf2 and H19 and their transcriptional
regulator Aire (autoimmune regulator). Neither monoallelic expression nor mRNA
stability of Igf2 and H19 was affected. Investigating Igf2 downstream signalling 
pathways showed increased AKT activation and attenuated PTEN expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The induction of a steatotic phenotype implies that p62 plays a role
in hepatic pathophysiology.

Copyright © 2010 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3079004
PMID: 21145819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 2010 Dec;137(12):794-8. doi: 10.1016/j.annder.2010.08.014.
Epub 2010 Sep 28.

[One case of type 1 auto-immune polyendocrinopathy or APECED].

[Article in French]

Puzenat E(1), Pepin L, Bertrand AM, Pelletier F, Monnier D, Levang J, Mermet I,
Humbert P, Aubin F.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Dermatologie, CHU Saint-Jacques, 4, place Saint-Jacques, 25030
Besançon Cedex, France. e1puzenat@chu-besancon.fr

INTRODUCTION: autoimmune polyendocrinopathy with candidiasis and ectodermal
dystrophy (APECED) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in 
the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE). We report the case of a young girl with
APECED.
CASE REPORT: an 18 year-old girl born to consanguineous parents consulted for
diffuse alopecia. Dermatological examination showed nail and dental enamel
dystrophy and angular cheilitis. She had a history of mineralocorticoid
deficiency (Addison's disease), hypoparathyroidism, hypogonadism and Biermer's
disease, and she had also had chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis since childhood. 
She was presenting APECED with autoimmune endocrine failure, chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis and abnormalities of ectoderm-derived tissue. Analysis 
of mutation in the AIRE gene showed the c.769C>T homozygous mutation in exon 6.
DISCUSSION: APECED, a rare autosomal recessive disorder, is a potentially
life-threatening autoimmune disease. Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis is a
common and early feature in children. Dermatologists are likely to be the first
physicians to diagnose this syndrome.

2010. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

PMID: 21134582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Mol Med (Berl). 2011 Mar;89(3):263-77. doi: 10.1007/s00109-010-0700-8. Epub
2010 Nov 26.

Morphogenesis and maintenance of the 3D thymic medulla and prevention of nude
skin phenotype require FoxN1 in pre- and post-natal K14 epithelium.

Guo J(1), Rahman M, Cheng L, Zhang S, Tvinnereim A, Su DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Research, University of Texas Health Science Center
at Tyler, Tyler, TX 75708, USA.

Expansion of thymic epithelial cysts represents disruption of an organized
three-dimensional (3D) thymic epithelial cell (TEC) meshwork, which is crucial
for T-lymphocyte development. Although the FoxN1-null mutant develops a
rudimentary two-dimensional (2D) cystic thymus, 2D thymic cyst lining resulting
from a dGUO culture was reported to be FoxN1-independent; thus, it is unclear
whether loss of FoxN1 facilitates cyst formation and whether FoxN1 regulates the 
morphogenesis and maintenance of the 3D thymic microstructure. Using the
loxP-floxed-FoxN1 mouse model, we demonstrated that specific deletion of FoxN1 in
keratin (K)-14 promoter-driven TECs induced the loss of 3D thymic medullary
structure by producing a large number of morphologic pulmonary alveolar-like 2D
epithelial cysts, which increased with age. The cystic lining was positive for
differential polarized keratins and had strong claudin-3,4, but reduced MHC-II,
expression. However, an increased percentage of claudin-3,4(+) TECs, which are
presumptive precursors of UEA-1(+) and Aire(+) mature medullary TECs, failed to
promote the development of these mature descendants. Meanwhile, the
K14Cre-mediated FoxN1 deletion alone was sufficient to induce a complete hair
follicle defect, causing a nude phenotype in the skin, but was not sufficient to 
cause a complete loss of the thymus. All these changes to occur require deletion 
of FoxN1 in both prenatal (Cre-recombinase from parents during fertilization) and
postnatal (Cre-recombinase from offspring themselves after fertilization) life.
These findings provide new insights into FoxN1 regulation of 3D thymic epithelial
morphogenesis and maintenance, the distinct impacts of FoxN1 in the K14
epithelial subset of the thymus and skin, and its postnatal requirement.

PMCID: PMC3060403
PMID: 21109991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Dec;40(12):3499-509. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040679. Epub 2010
Nov 11.

Transplantation of autoimmune regulator-encoding bone marrow cells delays the
onset of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Ko HJ(1), Kinkel SA, Hubert FX, Nasa Z, Chan J, Siatskas C, Hirubalan P, Toh BH, 
Scott HS, Alderuccio F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Central Clinical School, Monash University,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) promotes "promiscuous" expression of
tissue-restricted antigens (TRA) in thymic medullary epithelial cells to
facilitate thymic deletion of autoreactive T-cells. Here, we show that
AIRE-deficient mice showed an earlier development of myelin oligonucleotide
glycoprotein (MOG)-induced experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). To
determine the outcome of ectopic Aire expression, we used a retroviral
transduction system to over-express Aire in vitro, in cell lines and in bone
marrow (BM). In the cell lines that included those of thymic medullary and
dendritic cell origin, ectopically expressed Aire variably promoted expression of
TRA including Mog and Ins2 (proII) autoantigens associated, respectively, with
the autoimmune diseases multiple sclerosis and type 1 diabetes. BM chimeras
generated from BM transduced with a retrovirus encoding Aire displayed elevated
levels of Mog and Ins2 expression in thymus and spleen. Following induction of
EAE with MOG(35-55), transplanted mice displayed significant delay in the onset
of EAE compared with control mice. To our knowledge, this is the first example
showing that in vivo ectopic expression of AIRE can modulate TRA expression and
alter autoimmune disease development.

Copyright © 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21108470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2011 Jan;7(1):25-33. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2010.200. Epub 2010 
Nov 23.

The role of AIRE in human autoimmune disease.

Akirav EM(1), Ruddle NH, Herold KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology and the School of Public Health, Yale University
School of Medicine, 10 Amistad Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene encodes a transcription factor involved in
the presentation of tissue-restricted antigens during T-cell development in the
thymus. Mutations of this gene lead to type 1 autoimmune polyglandular syndrome
(APS-1), also termed autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal
dystrophy (APECED) syndrome, which is characterized by the clinical presentation 
of at least two of a triad of underlying disorders: Addison disease,
hypoparathyroidism and chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. This Review describes
the process of positive and negative selection of developing T cells in the
thymus and the role of AIRE as a regulator of peripheral antigen presentation.
Furthermore, it addresses how mutations of this gene lead to the failure to
eliminate autoreactive T cells, which can lead to clinical autoimmune syndromes.

PMID: 21102544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Immunol Cell Biol. 2011 Jan;89(1):40-4. doi: 10.1038/icb.2010.132. Epub 2010 Nov 
16.

The role of Aire in clonal selection.

Taniguchi RT(1), Anderson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143-0540, USA.

In his clonal selection theory, Frank Macfarlane Burnet predicted that
autoreactive lymphocytes are deleted to prevent autoimmunity. This and other
principles of lymphocyte behavior outlined by Burnet guided many studies that
lead to our current understanding of thymic selection. Thus, when the genetic
mutation responsible for autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 was mapped to
the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene, and Aire was found to be highly expressed
in thymic epithelium, studying the role of Aire in negative selection made sense 
in the context of modern models of thymic selection. We now know Aire is a
transcription factor required for the expression of many tissue-specific antigens
(TSAs) in the thymus. In the absence of functional Aire, human patients and mice 
develop multi-organ autoimmune disease because of a defect in thymic negative
selection. In addition to its role in the thymus, recent work in our lab suggests
that extrathymic Aire-expressing cells have an important role in the clonal
deletion of autoreactive CD8+ T cells. In this review, we summarize the latest
studies on thymic and peripheral Aire-expressing cells, as well as other
TSA-expressing stromal cell populations in peripheral lymphoid organs. We also
discuss theoretical differences in thymic and peripheral Aire function that
warrant further studies.

PMCID: PMC3017232
PMID: 21079643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2011 Apr;74(4):532-3. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2010.03930.x.

The role of heterozygous mutations of the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE) in
non-APECED autoimmunity: a comment on recent findings.

Fierabracci A.

Comment on
    Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010 Nov;73(5):630-6.
    Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010 May;72(5):641-7.

PMID: 21070315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Invest Dermatol. 2011 Feb;131(2):410-7. doi: 10.1038/jid.2010.330. Epub 2010
Nov 4.

Aire-dependent thymic expression of desmoglein 3, the autoantigen in pemphigus
vulgaris, and its role in T-cell tolerance.

Wada N(1), Nishifuji K, Yamada T, Kudoh J, Shimizu N, Matsumoto M, Peltonen L,
Nagafuchi S, Amagai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

In the mechanism of thymus-induced central tolerance, the transcription factor
Aire has been demonstrated to promote the expression of a wide range of
peripheral organ-specific antigens (Ags) in the medullary thymic epithelial cells
(mTECs), which serve as self-Ags in negative selection. We examined the
expression of desmoglein 3 (Dsg3), the autoantigen in pemphigus vulgaris (PV), in
mouse thymus and the involvement of Aire in tolerance to Dsg3. Immunofluorescence
and in situ hybridization revealed Dsg3 in single cells or in clusters in ~3% of 
mTECs near the cortico-medullary junction of the thymus in C57BL/6 mice.
Dsg3-expressing mTECs also expressed some Ags of skin-unrelated peripheral organs
simultaneously. In contrast, Dsg3-positive mTECs were not detected in the
Aire(-/-) thymus. Adoptive transfer of splenocytes from Aire(-/-) mice immunized 
with Dsg3 did not induce anti-Dsg3 IgG production or PV phenotype in Rag2(-/-)
recipient mice. However, Aire(-/-) CD4(+) T cells, but not Aire(+/+) CD4(+) T
cells, induced low levels of anti-Dsg3 IgG production when transferred with
Dsg3(-/-) B cells. These findings indicate that Aire has an important role in
Dsg3 expression as well as in selection of T cells that help B cells to produce
anti-Dsg3 IgG in thymus.

PMID: 21048786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Autoimmun. 2011 Feb;36(1):16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2010.09.007. Epub 2010 Oct
29.

The susceptibility of Aire(-/-) mice to experimental myasthenia gravis involves
alterations in regulatory T cells.

Aricha R(1), Feferman T, Scott HS, Souroujon MC, Berrih-Aknin S, Fuchs S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 76100
Israel.

The autoimmune regulator (Aire) is involved in the prevention of autoimmunity by 
promoting thymic expression of tissue restricted antigens which leads to
elimination of self-reactive T cells. We found that Aire knockout (KO) mice as
well as mouse strains that are susceptible to experimental autoimmune myasthenia 
gravis (EAMG) have lower thymic expression of acetylcholine receptor (AChR- the
main autoantigen in MG), compared to wild type (WT) mice and EAMG-resistant mouse
strains, respectively. We demonstrated that Aire KO mice have a significant and
reproducible lower frequency of CD4+Foxp3+ cells and a higher expression of Th17 
markers in their thymus, compared to wild type (WT) mice. These findings led us
to expect that Aire KO mice would display increased susceptibility to EAMG.
Surprisingly, when EAMG was induced in young (2 month-old) mice, EAMG was milder 
in Aire KO than in WT mice for several weeks until the age of about 5 months.
However, when EAMG was induced in relatively aged (6 month-old) mice, Aire KO
mice presented higher disease severity than WT controls. This age-related change 
in susceptibility to EAMG correlated with an elevated proportion of Treg cells in
the spleens of young but not old KO, compared to WT mice, suggesting a role for
peripheral Treg cells in the course of disease. Our observations point to a
possible link between Aire and Treg cells and suggest an involvement for both in 
the pathogenesis of myasthenia.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21035305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 20;5(10):e13528. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013528.

ADAM17 deletion in thymic epithelial cells alters aire expression without
affecting T cell developmental progression.

Gravano DM(1), McLelland BT, Horiuchi K, Manilay JO.

Author information: 
(1)School of Natural Sciences, University of California at Merced, Merced,
California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Cellular interactions between thymocytes and thymic stromal cells are
critical for normal T cell development. Thymic epithelial cells (TECs) are
important stromal niche cells that provide essential growth factors, cytokines,
and present self-antigens to developing thymocytes. The identification of genes
that mediate cellular crosstalk in the thymus is ongoing. One candidate gene,
Adam17, encodes a metalloprotease that functions by cleaving the ectodomain of
several transmembrane proteins and regulates various developmental processes. In 
conventional Adam17 knockout mice, a non-cell autonomous role for ADAM17 in adult
T cell development was reported, which strongly suggested that expression of
ADAM17 in TECs was required for normal T cell development. However, knockdown of 
Adam17 results in multisystem developmental defects and perinatal lethality,
which has made study of the role of Adam17 in specific cell types difficult.
Here, we examined T cell and thymic epithelial cell development using a
conditional knockout approach.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We generated an Adam17 conditional knockout mouse
in which floxed Adam17 is deleted specifically in TECs by Cre recombinase under
the control of the Foxn1 promoter. Normal T cell lineage choice and development
through the canonical aß T cell stages was observed. Interestingly, Adam17
deficiency in TECs resulted in reduced expression of the transcription factor
Aire. However, no alterations in the patterns of TEC phenotypic marker expression
and thymus morphology were noted.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In contrast to expectation, our data clearly shows that
absence of Adam17 in TECs is dispensable for normal T cell development.
Differentiation of TECs is also unaffected by loss of Adam17 based on phenotypic 
markers. Surprisingly, we have uncovered a novel genetic link between Adam17and
Aire expression in vivo. The cell type in which ADAM17 mediates its non-cell
autonomous impact and the mechanisms by which it regulates intrathymic T cell
development remain to be identified.

PMCID: PMC2958126
PMID: 20976004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2010 Jul-Sep;23(3):947-9.

Large granular lymphocyte leukemia with pure red cell aplasia associated with
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy: an unfortuitous
association?

Hervier B, Rimbert M, Maisonneuve H, Hamidou MA.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a
recessively inherited monogenic disease caused by a mutation in the autoimmune
regulator (AIRE) gene. AIRE plays a major role in central (thymic) immune
tolerance. In the absence of AIRE, autoimmunity develops that is especially
targeted at endocrine tissues. T-cell large granular lymphocyte (T-LGL) leukemia 
is a monoclonal lymphoproliferative disease characterized by persistent and
indolent lymphocytosis. Autoimmune manifestations, such as rheumatoid arthritis
or autoimmune cytopenia, are also common. We report the case of a patient with
APECED, who presented with pure red cell aplasia associated with T-LGL leukemia. 
The association of T-LGL leukemia and APECED is very rare and may not be
fortuitous. The immunological mechanisms of this association are discussed.

PMID: 20943067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Immunol Lett. 2011 Mar 30;135(1-2):180-3. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2010.09.014. Epub 
2010 Oct 12.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cell deficiency in chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis--a consequence or a cause?

Ng WF(1), Tudhope SJ, von Delwig A, Lilic D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 
4HH, United Kingdom.

Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) is a group of heterogeneous disorders
characterised by primary selective susceptibility to chronic, recurrent Candida
infections. The genetic defect of one subgroup of CMC patients have been
identified as mutations of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. Recent data
implicated the AIRE gene in iNKT cell development, raising the possibility that
iNKT cells may be important in defending against Candida infections. In this
study, we enumerated the circulating iNKT frequency in 22 CMC patients (9 with
AIRE gene mutations) and 25 healthy controls. We also examined the effect of
Candida stimulation on iNKT cells in vitro. Our data demonstrated that peripheral
iNKT cell frequency is significantly reduced in CMC patients compared to healthy 
controls, regardless of their AIRE gene mutation status. Direct stimulation with 
heat-inactivated whole Candida did not induce iNKT cell proliferation.
Furthermore, circulating iNKT cell frequencies in some healthy controls were
comparable to CMC patients. These observations suggest that iNKT cell deficiency 
is part of the CMC disease phenotype irrespective of the presence of AIRE gene
mutations but does not appear to confer susceptibility to chronic Candida
infections. We postulate that the reduced circulating iNKT cell frequency in CMC 
is a consequence rather than a cause of chronic Candida infections.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20923687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Thorac Oncol. 2010 Oct;5(10 Suppl 4):S266-72. doi:
10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181f1f63f.

The autoimmune regulator AIRE in thymoma biology: autoimmunity and beyond.

Marx A(1), Hohenberger P, Hoffmann H, Pfannschmidt J, Schnabel P, Hofmann HS,
Wiebe K, Schalke B, Nix W, Gold R, Willcox N, Peterson P, Ströbel P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Centre Mannheim, University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Alexander.marx@umm.de

Thymomas are tumors of thymic epithelial cells. They associate more often than
any other human tumors with various autoimmune diseases; myasthenia gravis is the
commonest, occurring in 10-50% of thymoma patients, depending on the World Health
Organization-defined histologic subtype. Most thymomas generate many polyclonal
maturing T lymphocytes but in disorganized microenvironments Failure to induce
self-tolerance may be a key factor leading to the export of potentially
autoreactive CD4 progeny, thus predisposing to autoimmune diseases. Normally, the
master Autoimmune Regulator promotes expression of peripheral tissue-restricted
antigens such as insulin by medullary thymic epithelial cells and induction of
tolerance to them. The failure of approximately 95% of thymomas to express
autoimmune regulator is another feature potentially contributing to autoimmunity.

PMID: 20859117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Diabetes. 2011 Jan;60(1):336-44. doi: 10.2337/db10-0255. Epub 2010 Sep 28.

Both polymorphic variable number of tandem repeats and autoimmune regulator
modulate differential expression of insulin in human thymic epithelial cells.

Cai CQ(1), Zhang T, Breslin MB, Giraud M, Lan MS.

Author information: 
(1)The Research Institute for Children, Childrens Hospital, New Orleans,
Louisiana, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Polymorphic INS-VNTR plays an important role in regulating insulin
transcript expression in the human thymus that leads to either insulin
autoimmunity or tolerance. The molecular mechanisms underlying the INS-VNTR
haplotype-dependent insulin expression are still unclear. In this study, we
determined the mechanistic components underlying the differential insulin gene
expression in human thymic epithelial cells, which should have profound effects
on the insulin autoimmune tolerance induction.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A repetitive DNA region designated as a variable
number of tandem repeats (VNTR) is located upstream of the human insulin gene and
correlates with the incidence of type 1 diabetes. We generated six class I and
two class III VNTR constructs linked to the human insulin basal promoter or SV40 
heterologous promoter/enhancer and demonstrated that AIRE protein modulates the
insulin promoter activities differentially through binding to the VNTR region.
RESULTS: Here we show that in the presence of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE),
the class III VNTR haplotype is responsible for an average of three-fold higher
insulin expression than class I VNTR in thymic epithelial cells. In a protein-DNA
pull-down experiment, AIRE protein is capable of binding to VNTR class I and III 
probes. Further, the transcriptional activation of the INS-VNTR by AIRE requires 
the insulin basal promoter. The VNTR sequence loses its activation activity when 
linked to a heterologous promoter and/or enhancer.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate a type 1 diabetes predisposition encoded 
by the INS-VNTR locus and a critical function played by AIRE, which constitute a 
dual control mechanisms regulating quantitative expression of insulin in human
thymic epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3012191
PMID: 20876716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Immunol. 2010 Oct 15;185(8):4769-76. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002151. Epub 2010
Sep 22.

Lymphotoxin signals from positively selected thymocytes regulate the terminal
differentiation of medullary thymic epithelial cells.

White AJ(1), Nakamura K, Jenkinson WE, Saini M, Sinclair C, Seddon B, Narendran
P, Pfeffer K, Nitta T, Takahama Y, Caamano JH, Lane PJ, Jenkinson EJ, Anderson G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Immune Regulation, Institute for
Biomedical Research, Medical School, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston,
Birmingham, UK.

The thymic medulla represents a key site for the induction of T cell tolerance.
In particular, autoimmune regulator (Aire)-expressing medullary thymic epithelial
cells (mTECs) provide a spectrum of tissue-restricted Ags that, through both
direct presentation and cross-presentation by dendritic cells, purge the
developing T cell repertoire of autoimmune specificities. Despite this role, the 
mechanisms of Aire(+) mTEC development remain unclear, particularly those stages 
that occur post-Aire expression and represent mTEC terminal differentiation. In
this study, in mouse thymus, we analyze late-stage mTEC development in relation
to the timing and requirements for Aire and involucrin expression, the latter a
marker of terminally differentiated epithelium including Hassall's corpuscles. We
show that Aire expression and terminal differentiation within the mTEC lineage
are temporally separable events that are controlled by distinct mechanisms. We
find that whereas mature thymocytes are not essential for Aire(+) mTEC
development, use of an inducible ZAP70 transgenic mouse line--in which positive
selection can be temporally controlled--demonstrates that the emergence of
involucrin(+) mTECs critically depends upon the presence of mature single
positive thymocytes. Finally, although initial formation of Aire(+) mTECs depends
upon RANK signaling, continued mTEC development to the involucrin(+) stage maps
to activation of the LTa-LTßR axis by mature thymocytes. Collectively, our
results reveal further complexity in the mechanisms regulating thymus medulla
development and highlight the role of distinct TNFRs in initial and terminal
differentiation stages in mTECs.

PMCID: PMC3826119
PMID: 20861360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Autoimmun Rev. 2011 Jan;10(3):137-43. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2010.08.019. Epub
2010 Sep 17.

Recent insights into the role and molecular mechanisms of the autoimmune
regulator (AIRE) gene in autoimmunity.

Fierabracci A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratories, Children's Hospital Bambino Gesù, Piazza S. Onofrio, 4,
00165 Rome, Italy. fierabracci@opbg.net

Since many years immunologists have being tried to answer the tantalizing enigma 
of immunological tolerance. Complex mechanisms in both thymus (central tolerance)
and peripheral lymphoid organs (peripheral tolerance) underly lymphocyte
tolerance and its maintenance. The genesis of autoimmunity involves environmental
and genetic mechanisms, both contributing to the disruption and deregulation of
central and peripheral tolerance, allowing autoreactive pathogenetic T and B-cell
clones arising. Among genetic factors the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene is one
of the best candidates to understand the complex scenario of autoimmunity.
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 is a rare autosomal recessive
disease caused by mutations in the AIRE gene. Therefore, the disorder has
certainly been a powerful model to address the question concerning how a tolerant
state is achieved or maintained and to explore how it has gone lost in the
context of autoimmunity. AIRE has been proposed to function as a 'non classical' 
transcription factor, strongly implicated in the regulation of organ-specific
antigen expression in thymic epithelial cells and in the imposition of T cell
tolerance, thus regulating the negative selection of autoreactive T cell clones. 
A plethora of proposal have been suggested for AIRE's potential mechanism of
action, thus regulating the negative selection of autoreactive T cells. In this
review recent discoveries are presented into the role and molecular mechanisms of
the AIRE protein in APECED and other autoimmune diseases.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20850570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Autoimmun. 2010 Dec;35(4):351-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2010.07.008.

Regulatory T cell defect in APECED patients is associated with loss of naive
FOXP3(+) precursors and impaired activated population.

Laakso SM(1), Laurinolli TT, Rossi LH, Lehtoviita A, Sairanen H, Perheentupa J,
Kekäläinen E, Arstila TP.

Author information: 
(1)Haartman Institute, Department of Immunology, PB21, 00014 University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

The pathogenetic mechanisms of organ-specific autoimmune diseases remain obscured
by the complexity of the genetic and environmental factors participating in the
breakdown of tolerance. A unique opportunity to study the pathogenesis of human
autoimmunity is provided by autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal 
dystrophy (APECED), a rare inherited autoimmune disease caused by mutations in
Autoimmune Regulator (AIRE) gene. Loss of AIRE function disrupts the deletion of 
autoreactive T cells and impairs the suppressive function of regulatory T (Treg) 
cells. Here we show by multiparameter flow cytometry that in healthy controls the
peripheral naive Treg cell subset forms a slowly dividing, persistent reservoir
of recent thymic emigrants (RTEs). In APECED patients the RTE Treg cells show
accelerated turnover and shift to the activated pool and the RTE reservoir is
depleted. Moreover, the activated Treg cell population in the patients expresses 
significantly less Forkhead box protein P3 (FOXP3) than in the healthy controls, 
consistent with the impairment of peripheral activation. Our results indicate
that in addition to their thymic effects, loss-of-function mutations in AIRE
disrupt the peripheral homeostasis and activation of Treg cells. This may
synergize with failed negative selection to cause APECED.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20805020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Nature. 2010 Aug 19;466(7309):978-82. doi: 10.1038/nature09269.

Microenvironmental reprogramming of thymic epithelial cells to skin multipotent
stem cells.

Bonfanti P(1), Claudinot S, Amici AW, Farley A, Blackburn CC, Barrandon Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Dynamics, School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2010 Oct 8;7(4):419-20.

The thymus develops from the third pharyngeal pouch of the anterior gut and
provides the necessary environment for thymopoiesis (the process by which
thymocytes differentiate into mature T lymphocytes) and the establishment and
maintenance of self-tolerance. It contains thymic epithelial cells (TECs) that
form a complex three-dimensional network organized in cortical and medullary
compartments, the organization of which is notably different from simple or
stratified epithelia. TECs have an essential role in the generation of
self-tolerant thymocytes through expression of the autoimmune regulator Aire, but
the mechanisms involved in the specification and maintenance of TECs remain
unclear. Despite the different embryological origins of thymus and skin
(endodermal and ectodermal, respectively), some cells of the thymic medulla
express stratified-epithelium markers, interpreted as promiscuous gene
expression. Here we show that the thymus of the rat contains a population of
clonogenic TECs that can be extensively cultured while conserving the capacity to
integrate in a thymic epithelial network and to express major histocompatibility 
complex class II (MHC II) molecules and Aire. These cells can irreversibly adopt 
the fate of hair follicle multipotent stem cells when exposed to an inductive
skin microenvironment; this change in fate is correlated with robust changes in
gene expression. Hence, microenvironmental cues are sufficient here to re-direct 
epithelial cell fate, allowing crossing of primitive germ layer boundaries and an
increase in potency.

PMID: 20725041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010 Nov;73(5):630-6. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2010.03862.x.

AIRE gene mutations and autoantibodies to interferon omega in patients with
chronic hypoparathyroidism without APECED.

Cervato S(1), Morlin L, Albergoni MP, Masiero S, Greggio N, Meossi C, Chen S, del
Pilar Larosa M, Furmaniak J, Rees Smith B, Alimohammadi M, Kämpe O, Valenzise M, 
Betterle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences Blood Transfusion Center, Azienda 
Ospedaliera-Università di Padova, Padova, Italy.

Comment in
    Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2011 Apr;74(4):532-3.

OBJECTIVE: To assess autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene mutations, class II HLA
haplotypes, and organ- or non-organ-specific autoantibodies in patients with
chronic hypoparathyroidism (CH) without associated Addison's disease (AD) or
chronic candidiasis (CC).
DESIGN, PATIENTS AND MEASUREMENTS: Twenty-four patients who had CH without AD or 
CC were included in the study. AIRE gene mutations in all 14 exons were studied
using PCR in 24 patients, 105 healthy controls and 15 first-degree relatives of
CH patients with AIRE mutations. Human leucocyte antigens (HLA) were determined
for all 24 patients and 105 healthy controls. Autoantibodies to a range of
antigens including NACHT leucine-rich-repeat protein-5 (NALP5) and interferon
omega (IFN<U+03C9>) were tested in all 24 patients.
RESULTS: AIRE gene mutations were found in 6 of 24 (25%) patients, all females,
and this was significantly higher (P < 0·001) compared with AIRE mutations found 
in healthy controls (2/105). Three patients (12·5%) had homozygous AIRE mutations
characteristic of Autoimmune-Poly-Endocrinopathy-Candidiasis-Ectodermal-Dystrophy
and all three were also positive for IFN<U+03C9>-autoantibodies. Three patients (12·5%) 
had heterozygous AIRE mutations; two of these were novel mutations. One of the
patients with heterozygous AIRE mutations was positive for both NACHT
leucine-rich-repeat protein 5 and IFN<U+03C9> autoantibodies. Heterozygous AIRE
mutations were found in 10 of 15 first-degree relatives of CH patients with AIRE 
mutations, although none was affected by CH. Class II HLA haplotypes were not
statistically different in patients with CH compared to healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of AIRE gene mutations together with serum autoantibody
profile should be helpful in the assessment of patients with CH, in particular
young women with associated autoimmune diseases.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 20718774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Am J Pathol. 2010 Sep;177(3):1333-43. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.100227. Epub 2010 
Aug 9.

Interleukin-1 as a phenotypic immunomodulator in keratinizing squamous metaplasia
of the ocular surface in Sjögren's syndrome.

Chen YT(1), Nikulina K, Lazarev S, Bahrami AF, Noble LB, Gallup M, McNamara NA.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, Francis I. Proctor Foundation, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Chronic inflammation of the ocular surface in Sjögren's syndrome (SS) is
associated with a vision-threatening, phenotypic change of the ocular surface,
which converts from a nonkeratinized, stratified squamous epithelium to a
nonsecretory, keratinized epithelium. This pathological process is known as
squamous metaplasia. Based on a significant correlation between ocular surface
interleukin (IL)-1beta expression and squamous metaplasia in patients with SS, we
investigated the role of IL-1 in the pathogenesis of squamous metaplasia in an
animal model that mimics the clinical characteristics of SS. Using
autoimmune-regulator (aire)-deficient mice, we assessed lacrimal gland and ocular
surface immunopathology by quantifying the infiltration of major
histocompatibility complex class II(+) (I-A(d+)) dendritic cells and CD4(+) T
cells. We examined squamous metaplasia using a biomarker of keratinization, small
proline-rich protein 1B. We used lissamine green staining as a readout for ocular
surface epitheliopathy and Alcian blue/periodic acid-Schiff histochemical
analysis to characterize goblet cell muco-glycoconjugates. Within 8 weeks, the
eyes of aire-deficient mice were pathologically keratinized with significant
epithelial damage and altered mucin glycosylation. Although knockdown of IL-1
receptor 1 did not attenuate lymphocytic infiltration of the lacrimal gland or
eye, it significantly reduced ocular surface keratinization, epitheliopathy, and 
muco-glycoconjugate acidification. These data demonstrate a phenotypic modulation
role for IL-1 in the pathogenesis of squamous metaplasia and suggest that IL-1
receptor 1-targeted therapies may be beneficial for treating ocular surface
disease associated with SS.

PMCID: PMC2928966
PMID: 20696775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Diabetes. 2010 Oct;59(10):2579-87. doi: 10.2337/db10-0476. Epub 2010 Aug 3.

Insulin transactivator MafA regulates intrathymic expression of insulin and
affects susceptibility to type 1 diabetes.

Noso S(1), Kataoka K, Kawabata Y, Babaya N, Hiromine Y, Yamaji K, Fujisawa T,
Aramata S, Kudo T, Takahashi S, Ikegami H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Diabetes, Kinki University School
of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Tissue-specific self-antigens are ectopically expressed within the
thymus and play an important role in the induction of central tolerance. Insulin 
is expressed in both pancreatic islets and the thymus and is considered to be the
primary antigen for type 1 diabetes. Here, we report the role of the insulin
transactivator MafA in the expression of insulin in the thymus and susceptibility
to type 1 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The expression profiles of transcriptional factors
(Pdx1, NeuroD, Mafa, and Aire) in pancreatic islets and the thymus were examined 
in nonobese diabetic (NOD) and control mice. Thymic Ins2 expression and serum
autoantibodies were examined in Mafa knockout mice. Luciferase reporter assay was
performed for newly identified polymorphisms of mouse Mafa and human MAFA. A
case-control study was applied for human MAFA polymorphisms.
RESULTS: Mafa, Ins2, and Aire expression was detected in the thymus. Mafa
expression was lower in NOD thymus than in the control and was correlated with
Ins2 expression. Targeted disruption of MafA reduced thymic Ins2 expression and
induced autoantibodies against pancreatic islets. Functional polymorphisms of
MafA were newly identified in NOD mice and humans, and polymorphisms of human
MAFA were associated with susceptibility to type 1 diabetes but not to autoimmune
thyroid disease.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that functional polymorphisms of MafA are
associated with reduced expression of insulin in the thymus and susceptibility to
type 1 diabetes in the NOD mouse as well as human type 1 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3279543
PMID: 20682694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Curr Opin Immunol. 2010 Aug;22(4):467-74. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2010.06.009. Epub
2010 Jul 30.

Inborn errors of mucocutaneous immunity to Candida albicans in humans: a role for
IL-17 cytokines?

Puel A(1), Picard C, Cypowyj S, Lilic D, Abel L, Casanova JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, Inserm
U980, University Paris Descartes, Necker Medical School, Paris, France, EU.
anne.puel@inserm.fr

The various clinical manifestations of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC)
often result from acquired T-cell immunodeficiencies. More rarely, CMC results
from inborn errors of immunity, the recent dissection of which has shed light on 
the molecular mechanisms of mucocutaneous immunity to Candida albicans. CMC may
accompany various other infectious diseases in patients with almost any broad and
profound T-cell primary immunodeficiency. By contrast, CMC is one of the few key 
infections in patients with autosomal dominant hyper IgE syndrome (mutations in
STAT3), and in rare patients with autosomal recessive predisposition to
mucocutaneous and invasive fungal infections (mutation in CARD9). In patients
with mutations in STAT3 and CARD9, the development of IL-17-producing T cells is 
impaired. Moreover, CMC is the principal, if not only, infection in patients with
autosomal recessive autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome-I (mutations in AIRE).
Patients with this condition have high titers of neutralizing autoantibodies
(auto-Abs) against the IL-17 cytokines IL-17A, IL-17F, and IL-22. Collectively,
these data suggest that human IL-17A, IL-17F, and IL-22 are essential for
mucocutaneous immunity to C. albicans. They also suggest that the distinct
syndrome of isolated CMC, without auto-immunity or other infections, may be
caused by inborn errors of IL-17 immunity.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3770911
PMID: 20674321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Aug 17;107(33):14709-14. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1009209107. Epub 2010 Jul 28.

T-cell regulation by casitas B-lineage lymphoma (Cblb) is a critical failsafe
against autoimmune disease due to autoimmune regulator (Aire) deficiency.

Teh CE(1), Daley SR, Enders A, Goodnow CC.

Author information: 
(1)Immune Tolerance and Signalling Laboratory, Department of Immunology, John
Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian National University, Canberra 0200,
Australia.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 (APS1) results from homozygous Aire
mutations that cripple thymic deletion of organ-specific T cells. The clinical
course in man and mouse is characterized by high variability both in the latent
period before onset of autoimmune disease and in the specific organs affected,
but the reasons for this are unknown. Here we test the hypothesis that the latent
period reflects the failsafe action of discrete postthymic mechanisms for
imposing self-tolerance in peripheral T cells. Aire-deficient mice were crossed
with mice of a uniform major histocompatibility complex (MHC) haplotype and
genetic background carrying specific genetic defects in one of four distinct
peripheral tolerance mechanisms: activation-induced cell death (Fasl(gld/gld)),
anergy and requirement for CD28 costimulation (Cblb(-/-)), inhibition of ICOS and
T(FH) cells (Rc3h1(san/san)), or decreased numbers of Foxp3(+) T regulatory cells
(Card11(unm/unm)). Cblb-deficiency was unique among these four in precipitating
rapid clinical autoimmune disease when combined with Aire-deficiency, resulting
in autoimmune exocrine pancreatitis with median age of survival of only 25 d.
Massive lymphocytic infiltration selectively destroyed most of the exocrine
acinar cells of the pancreas and submandibular salivary gland, and CD4(+) and
CD8(+) subsets were necessary and sufficient to transfer the disease. Intrinsic
regulation of peripheral T cells by CBL-B thus serves a uniquely critical role as
a failsafe against clinical onset of autoimmune disease in AIRE deficiency, and
multiple peripheral tolerance mechanisms may need to fail before onset of
clinical autoimmunity to many organs.

PMCID: PMC2930471
PMID: 20668237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jul 20;107(29):13016-21. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1004436107. Epub 2010 Jul 6.

Global relevance of Aire binding to hypomethylated lysine-4 of histone-3.

Koh AS(1), Kingston RE, Benoist C, Mathis D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Aire promotes the ectopic expression of a repertoire of peripheral-tissue
antigens (PTAs) in thymic medullary epithelial cells (MECs) to mediate deletional
tolerance and thereby prevent autoimmunity. Binding of hypomethylated histone 3
(H3)-tails by Aire's plant homeodomain (PHD) finger is essential for Aire
function in cultured cell models, prompting speculation that Aire-PHD:H3-tail
interactions underlie targeting of Aire to weakly transcribed loci. To evaluate
the role of Aire's PHD finger in MECs on a global scale in vivo, we complemented 
Aire-deficient mice with a mutant of Aire that inhibits its binding to
hypomethylated H3K4 residues. Although the range of Aire-targeted genes was
largely unaffected in these mice, the D299A mutation caused a global dampening of
Aire's transcriptional impact, resulting in an autoimmune disease similar in
profile to that of their Aire-deficient counterparts. To test whether a low H3K4 
methylation state is sufficient for Aire targeting, we overexpressed an
H3K4-specific demethylase in an Aire-dependent cultured cell system, and
determined its capacity to extend Aire's transcriptional footprint. The range and
magnitude of Aire-regulated genes was largely unaffected, the only genes
additionally induced by Aire in this context being those already accessed for
repression. In short, Aire's H3-binding module is necessary for Aire-mediated
regulation of gene expression and central tolerance induction, but this influence
is unlikely to reflect a targeting mechanism solely based on the recognition of
hypomethylated H3K4 residues.

PMCID: PMC2919944
PMID: 20615959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Pharm World Sci. 2010 Aug;32(4):496-502. doi: 10.1007/s11096-010-9396-7. Epub
2010 Jun 17.

Pattern of use of emergency oral contraception among Portuguese women.

Fontes E(1), Guerreiro J, Costa T, Miranda A.

Author information: 
(1)Farmácia Mirense, R General Trindade 1697, 2485-134 Mira de Aire, Portugal.
ecfontes@mail.telepac.pt

OBJECTIVE: This study describes the purchasers' profile and characterizes the
pattern of use of emergency oral contraception among pharmacy users.
SETTING: The study was carried out in 455 Portuguese pharmacies.
METHOD: A cross-sectional study was undertaken in which pharmacists selected the 
first six purchasers of emergency oral contraception between May and June of
2006. Only user-purchasers were eligible to answer the questions about emergency 
oral contraception use. Participants completed a questionnaire on
sociodemographic data and variables concerning contraceptive methods (including
the emergency oral contraceptive acquired, the source of information about the
availability of this emergency contraceptive method, prior use of emergency oral 
contraception, the frequency of use in the current cycle, the frequency of use in
the preceding year, the time elapsed between unprotected sexual intercourse and
the acquisition of emergency oral contraception, the reason for use and the
regular method of contraception used). Although these drugs are available outside
pharmacies--in some shops and supermarkets--their pattern of use was only
assessed among pharmacy users. Descriptive statistics were used to characterize
data.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Prevalence of correct use, which was defined as the
proportion of user-purchasers who acquired emergency oral contraception up to 72 
h after unprotected sexual intercourse and had never used it in the current
cycle.
RESULTS: The sample comprised 1466 user-purchasers (72.6%) and 552 purchasers for
another person's use (27.4%). Levonorgestrel-only contraceptives represented
96.1% of the emergency oral contraception acquired. User-purchasers aged between 
18 and 30 represented 65.2% and 42.3% had attended secondary school. The majority
of them (79.5%) were using a regular method of contraception and 62.6% were
first-time users of emergency oral contraception. In 59.0% of the situations the 
reason for use was failure of the contraceptive used.
CONCLUSION: Emergency oral contraception was used correctly by 96.9% of
user-purchasers.

PMID: 20556657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Sci Total Environ. 2010 Sep 1;408(19):4239-50. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2010.05.016. Epub 2010 Jun 12.

Predicting phosphorus concentrations in British rivers resulting from the
introduction of improved phosphorus removal from sewage effluent.

Bowes MJ(1), Neal C, Jarvie HP, Smith JT, Davies HN.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Maclean Building, Crowmarsh Gifford,
Wallingford, Oxfordshire, OX10 8BB, UK. mibo@ceh.ac.uk

Phosphorus (P) concentration and flow data gathered during the 1990s for a range 
of British rivers were used to determine the relative contributions of point and 
diffuse inputs to the total P load, using the Load Apportionment Model (LAM).
Heavily urbanised catchments were dominated by sewage inputs, but the majority of
the study catchments received most of their annual phosphorus load from diffuse
sources. Despite this, almost 80% of the study sites were dominated by point
source inputs for the majority of the year, particularly during summer periods
when eutrophication risk is greatest. This highlights the need to reduce sewage P
inputs to improve the ecological status of British rivers. These modelled source 
apportionment estimates were validated against land-use data and boron load (a
chemical marker for sewage). The LAM was applied to river flow data in subsequent
years, to give predicted P concentrations (assuming no change in P source
inputs), and these estimates were compared with observed concentration data. This
showed that there had been significant reductions in P concentration in the River
Thames, Aire and Ouse in the period 1999 to 2002, which were attributable to the 
introduction of P stripping at sewage treatment works (STW). The model was then
used to forecast P concentrations resulting from the introduction of P removal at
STW to a 2 or 1mgl(-1) consent limit. For the urbanised rivers in this study, the
introduction of phosphorus stripping to a 1mgl(-1) consent level at all STW in
the catchment would not reduce P concentrations in the rivers to potentially
limiting concentrations. Therefore, further sewage P stripping will be required
to comply with the Water Framework Directive. Diffuse P inputs may also need to
be reduced before some of the highly nutrient-enriched rivers achieve good
ecological status.

Crown Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20547413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Scand J Immunol. 2010 Jun;71(6):459-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2010.02397.x.

Flow cytometry study of blood cell subtypes reflects autoimmune and inflammatory 
processes in autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I.

Wolff AS(1), Oftedal BE, Kisand K, Ersvaer E, Lima K, Husebye ES.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
Anette.boe@med.uib.no

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I (APS I) is a recessive disorder caused
by mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. AIRE is expressed in
medullary epithelial cells where it activates transcription of organ-specific
proteins in thymus, thereby regulating autoimmunity. Patients with APS I have, in
addition to autoimmune manifestations in endocrine organs, also often ectodermal 
dystrophies and chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. The aim of this study was to
characterize immune cell subpopulations in patients with APS I and their close
relatives. Extensive blood mononuclear cell immunophenotyping was carried out on 
19 patients with APS I, 18 first grade relatives and corresponding sex- and
age-matched healthy controls using flow cytometry. We found a significant
relative reduction in T helper cells coexpressing CCR6 and CXCR3 in patients with
APS I compared to controls (mean = 4.10% versus 5.94% respectively, P = 0.035).
The pools of CD16(+) monocytes and regulatory T cells (Tregs) were also lower in 
patients compared with healthy individuals (mean = 15.75% versus 26.78%, P =
0.028 and mean = 4.12% versus 6.73%, P = 0.029, respectively). This is the first 
report describing reduced numbers of CCR6(+)CXCR3(+) T helper cells and CD16(+)
monocytes in patients with APS I We further confirm previous findings of reduced 
numbers of Tregs in these patients.

PMID: 20500699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Blood. 2010 Aug 26;116(8):1263-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-02-267583. Epub 2010
May 20.

Hypomorphic Rag mutations can cause destructive midline granulomatous disease.

De Ravin SS(1), Cowen EW, Zarember KA, Whiting-Theobald NL, Kuhns DB, Sandler NG,
Douek DC, Pittaluga S, Poliani PL, Lee YN, Notarangelo LD, Wang L, Alt FW, Kang
EM, Milner JD, Niemela JE, Fontana-Penn M, Sinal SH, Malech HL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
sderavin@niaid.nih.gov

Destructive midline granulomatous disease characterized by necrotizing granulomas
of the head and neck is most commonly caused by Wegener granulomatosis, natural
killer/T-cell lymphomas, cocaine abuse, or infections. An adolescent patient with
myasthenia gravis treated with thymectomy subsequently developed extensive
granulomatous destruction of midface structures, palate, nasal septum, airways,
and epiglottis. His lymphocyte numbers, total immunoglobulin G level, and T-cell 
receptor (TCR) repertoire appeared normal. Sequencing of Recombination activating
gene-1 (Rag1) showed compound heterozygous Rag1 mutations; a novel deletion with 
no recombinase activity and a missense mutation resulting in 50% Rag activity.
His thymus was dysplastic and, although not depleted of T cells, showed a notable
absence of autoimmune regulator (AIRE) and Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells. This
distinct Rag-deficient phenotype characterized by immune dysregulation with
granulomatous hyperinflammation and autoimmunity, with relatively normal T and B 
lymphocyte numbers and a diverse TCR repertoire expands the spectrum of
presentation in Rag deficiency. This study was registered at
www.clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT00128973.

PMCID: PMC2938237
PMID: 20489056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Immunol. 2010 Jun 15;184(12):6865-73. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903609. Epub 2010 
May 7.

Diversity of TCRs on natural Foxp3+ T cells in mice lacking Aire expression.

Daniely D(1), Kern J, Cebula A, Ignatowicz L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Medullary thymic epithelial cells expressing the Aire gene play a critical role
in the induction of tolerance to tissue-specific Ags (TSAs). It was postulated
that recognition of Aire-controlled TSAs by immature thymocytes results in the
selection of natural CD4+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) and enriches this
repertoire in self-reactive receptors, contributing to its vast diversity. In
this study, we compared the TCRs on individual Tregs in Aire+ and Aire- mice
expressing a miniature TCR repertoire (TCRmini) along with GFP driven by the
Foxp3 promoter (Foxp3GFP). The Treg TCR repertoires in Aire+ and Aire-
TCRminiFoxp3GFP mice were similar and more diverse than their repertoires on CD4+
Foxp3- thymocytes. Further, TCRs found on potentially self-reactive T cells, with
an activated phenotype (CD4+Foxp3-CD62Llow) in Aire- TCRminiFoxp3GFP mice, appear
distinct from TCRs found on Tregs in Aire+ TCRminiFoxp3GFP mice. Lastly, we found
no evidence that TSAs presented by medullary thymic epithelial cells in
Aire+TCRmini mice are often recognized as agonists by Treg-derived TCR hybridomas
or CD4+CD25+ thymocytes, containing both natural Tregs and precursors. Thus,
positive selection and self-reactivity of the global Treg repertoire are not
controlled by Aire-dependent TSAs.

PMCID: PMC3885241
PMID: 20483761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Epigenetics. 2010 Jul 1;5(5):381-5. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Missing links between histones and RNA Pol II arising from SAND?

Carles CC(1), Fletcher JC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire Végétale, Université Joseph Fourier,
Grenoble UMR5168, CNRS-CEA-INRA1200-UJF CEA, Grenoble, France.

Correct deployment of developmental programs and maintenance of cell fates in
eukaryotes rely on the timely activation or repression of gene expression. These 
processes depend to a large extent on modifications of chromatin structure that
modulate the access of transcription factors to target DNA. In particular,
Polycomb group (PcG) and trithorax group (trxG) chromatin remodeling complexes
play key roles in depositing repressive and active histone marks, respectively,
to maintain stable expression of developmental target genes. Yet despite enormous
insights into both chromatin modification and transcription, the molecular
mechanisms through which these two key processes influence each other are still
quite nebulous. Recent independent studies from plant and human model systems
have potentially uncovered a common ground for coordinating chromatin remodeling 
and transcriptional events. In this review, we discuss the function of the SAND
domain proteins ULTRAPETALA1 (ULT1) and Aire as molecular links between chromatin
remodelers and transcription effectors.

PMID: 20458168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Horm Res Paediatr. 2010;74(4):275-84. doi: 10.1159/000297714. Epub 2010 May 7.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 in north-western France: AIRE gene
mutation specificities and severe forms needing immunosuppressive therapies.

Proust-Lemoine E(1), Saugier-Véber P, Lefranc D, Dubucquoi S, Ryndak A, Buob D,
Lalau JD, Desailloud R, Weill J, Prin L, Lefebvre H, Wémeau JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Hôpital Huriez, Lille, France.
e.proustlemoine@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS1) has been poorly
evaluated in France. We focused on the north-western part of the country to
describe clinical phenotypes, especially severe forms of the disease, and AIRE
gene mutations.
METHODS: Clinical and immunological data were collected, and pathological
mutations were identified by DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: Nineteen patients were identified with APS1. Clinical manifestations
varied greatly, showing 1-10 components. Mucocutaneous candidiasis, adrenal
failure, hypoparathyroidism, alopecia and other severe infections were the most
frequent components. Four patients had severe forms, needing immunosuppressive
therapy: 2 for hepatitis; 1 for severe malabsorption, and 1 for a T cell large
granular lymphocytic leukemia. These therapies were very effective but caused
general discomfort. One patient died of septicemia. Four different AIRE gene
mutations were identified, and a 13-bp deletion in exon 8 (c.967-979del13) was
the most prevalent. There was at least one allele correlating with this mutation 
and alopecia occurrence (p = 0.003). No novel mutation was detected.
CONCLUSION: APS1 appears to be rare in north-western France. We identified 4
cases with a severe form needing immunosuppressive therapy. The AIRE gene
mutations are more like those found in north-western Europe than those found in
Finland.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20453472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2010 Aug;10(4):461-72. doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2010.04.005. Epub
2010 Apr 29.

Thymic self-antigens for the design of a negative/tolerogenic self-vaccination
against type 1 diabetes.

Geenen V(1), Mottet M, Dardenne O, Kermani H, Martens H, Francois JM, Galleni M, 
Hober D, Rahmouni S, Moutschen M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Liege Center of Immunology (CIL), Laboratory of
Immunoendocrinology, Institute of Pathology CHU-B23, B-4000 Liege-Sart Tilman,
Belgium. vgeenen@ulg.ac.be

Before being able to react against infectious nonself-antigens, the immune system
has to be educated in the recognition and tolerance of neuroendocrine proteins
and this critical process takes place only in the thymus. The development of the 
autoimmune diabetogenic response results from a thymus dysfunction in programing 
central self-tolerance to pancreatic insulin-secreting islet beta cells, leading 
to the breakdown of immune homeostasis with an enrichment of islet beta-cell
reactive effector T cells and a deficiency of beta-cell specific natural
regulatory T cells (nTregs) in the peripheral T-lymphocyte repertoire.
Insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF-2) is the dominant member of the insulin family
expressed during fetal life by the thymic epithelium under the control of the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene/protein. The very low degree of insulin gene
transcription in normal murine and human thymus explains why the insulin protein 
is poorly tolerogenic as demonstrated in many studies, including the failure of
all clinical trials that have attempted immune tolerance to islet beta cells via 
various methods of insulin administration. On the basis of the close homology and
crosstolerance between insulin, the primary T1D autoantigen, and IGF-2, the
dominant self-antigen of the insulin family, a novel type of vaccination,
so-called 'negative/tolerogenic self-vaccination', is currently being developed
for the prevention and cure of T1D. If this approach were found to be effective
for reprograming immunological tolerance in T1D, it could pave the way for the
design of other self-vaccines against autoimmune endocrine diseases, as well as
other organ-specific autoimmune diseases.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20434402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Mol Cell Biochem. 2010 Sep;342(1-2):21-8. doi: 10.1007/s11010-010-0464-z. Epub
2010 Apr 23.

Age-related deregulation of Aire and peripheral tissue antigen genes in the
thymic stroma of non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice is associated with autoimmune type
1 diabetes mellitus (DM-1).

Fornari TA(1), Donate PB, Macedo C, Marques MM, Magalhães DA, Passos GA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunogenetics Group, Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine of
Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo (USP), 3900 Via Bandeirantes, Ribeirão
Preto, SP, Brazil.

Gene expression of peripheral tissue antigens (PTAs) in stromal medullary thymic 
epithelial cells (mTECs) is a key process to the negative selection of
autoreactive thymocytes. This phenomenon was termed "promiscuous gene expression"
(PGE), which is partially controlled by the Aire gene. Nevertheless, reasons for 
the correlation of Aire and PTAs with the emergence of autoimmune diseases are
largely unknown, though it may be a result of a chronological effect. Although
the effect of Aire mutations in pathogenic autoimmunity is well know, it could
not be a unique cause for autoimmunity. Independently of mutations, temporal
deregulation of Aire expression may imbalance Aire-dependent PTAs and/or wide
PGE. This deregulation may be an early warning sign for autoimmune diseases as it
guarantees autoantigen representation in the thymus. To assess this hypothesis,
we studied the expression levels of Aire, Aire-dependent (Ins2) and
Aire-independent (Gad67 and Col2a1) PTAs using real-time-PCR of the thymic
stromal cells of NOD mice during the development of autoimmune type 1 diabetes
mellitus (DM-1). Wide PGE was studied by microarrays in which the PTA genes were 
identified through parallel CD80(+) mTEC 3.10 cell line expression profiling. The
results show that Aire gene was down-regulated in young pre-autoimmune
(pre-diabetic) NOD mice. PGE and specific PTA genes were down-regulated in adult 
autoimmune diabetic animals. These findings represent evidence indicating that
chronological deregulation of genes important to negative selection may be
associated with the development of an autoimmune disease (DM-1) in mice.

PMID: 20414703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2010 Apr;30(2):145-8. doi:
10.1007/s11596-010-0202-5. Epub 2010 Apr 21.

Upregulation of phagocytic clearance of apoptotic cells by autoimmune regulator.

Shi L(1), Hu L, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China.
liangshi_7@126.com

To investigate the effect of autoimmune regulator (AIRE) on phagocytic clearance 
of apoptotic cells, a recombinant expression vector containing full-length human 
AIRE cDNA was transfected into 16HBE cells. After incubation with transfected
16HBE cells, engulfment of apoptotic HL-60 cells induced by camptothecin was
detected by myeloperoxidase (MPO) staining. The change in the expression of Rac 1
in transfected 16HBE cells was determined by RT-PCR and Western blotting. The
results showed that the phagocytosis percentage of the experimental group, the
mock transfection group and the negative control group (non-apoptotic cells) was 
(25.50 + or - 3.67)%, (6.25 + or - 1.58)% and (1.0 + or - 0.67)%, respectively.
Moreover, the expressions of Rac 1 mRNA and protein were up-regulated in
AIRE-transfected 16HBE cells, suggesting that AIRE may function as a regulator in
the phagocytic clearance of apoptotic cells by promoting the expression of Rac 1.

PMID: 20407862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Horm Res Paediatr. 2010;73(6):449-57. doi: 10.1159/000313585. Epub 2010 Apr 20.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 in Russian patients: clinical variants
and autoimmune regulator mutations.

Orlova EM(1), Bukina AM, Kuznetsova ES, Kareva MA, Zakharova EU, Peterkova VA,
Dedov II.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Research Centre, Institute of Paediatric Endocrinology, Moscow, 
Russia. elizaveta.orlova @ mail.ru

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS-1) (OMIM 240300) is a
rare autosomal recessive disorder associated with three major manifestations:
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, and adrenal insufficiency.
There are, however, multiple minor components of APS-1 that induce significant
phenotype variability. Subsequently, the diagnosis of APS-1 during early stages
is often challenging.
AIM: We aimed to provide clinical and mutational data for a large number of APS-1
patients in the Russian population.
METHODS: We analyzed clinical variations and component prevalence in APS-1
patients. DNA screening for autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene mutations was
performed in established APS-1 patients and in patients with the single
components of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, adrenal
insufficiency, or alopecia.
RESULTS: We identified 46 patients from 42 families with APS-1. Eighteen
different components were present in the patients, including very rare conditions
- bone dysplasia and retinitis pigmentosa. We identified 10 different mutations, 
3 of which were novel (M1T, E298K, c1053_1060del). The common Finnish mutation,
R257X, was the most frequent in our population, present in 64/92 (70%) of the
alleles.
CONCLUSION: We found that the R257X AIRE mutation is common in Russian APS-1
patients. The majority of children with hypoparathyroidism and chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis were carriers of the AIRE mutations.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20407228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Exp Med. 2010 May 10;207(5):963-71. doi: 10.1084/jem.20092144. Epub 2010 Apr
19.

Biphasic Aire expression in early embryos and in medullary thymic epithelial
cells before end-stage terminal differentiation.

Nishikawa Y(1), Hirota F, Yano M, Kitajima H, Miyazaki J, Kawamoto H, Mouri Y,
Matsumoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, University of
Tokushima, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

The roles of autoimmune regulator (Aire)-expressing medullary thymic epithelial
cells (mTECs) in the organization of the thymic microenvironment for establishing
self-tolerance are enigmatic. We sought to monitor the production and maintenance
of Aire-expressing mTECs by a fate-mapping strategy in which bacterial artificial
chromosome transgenic (Tg) mice expressing Cre recombinase under the control of
the Aire regulatory element were crossed with a GFP reporter strain. We found
that, in addition to its well recognized expression within mature mTECs, Aire was
expressed in the early embryo before emergence of the three germ cell layers.
This observation may help to explain the development of ectodermal dystrophy
often seen in patients with AIRE deficiency. With the use of one Tg line in which
Cre recombinase expression was confined to mTECs, we found that Aire(+)CD80(high)
mTECs further progressed to an Aire(-)CD80(intermediate) stage, suggesting that
Aire expression is not constitutive from after its induction until cell death but
instead is down-regulated at the beginning of terminal differentiation. We also
demonstrated that many mTECs of Aire-expressing lineage are in close contact with
thymic dendritic cells. This close proximity may contribute to transfer of
tissue-restricted self-antigens expressed by mTECs to professional
antigen-presenting cells.

PMCID: PMC2867289
PMID: 20404099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Autoimmunity. 2010 Aug;43(5-6):413-27. doi: 10.3109/08916930903555935.

Thymoma and paraneoplastic myasthenia gravis.

Marx A(1), Willcox N, Leite MI, Chuang WY, Schalke B, Nix W, Ströbel P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Centre Mannheim, University of
Heidelberg, D-68135 Mannheim, Germany. alexander.marx@umm.de

Paraneoplastic autoimmune diseases associate occasionally with small cell lung
cancers and gynecologic tumors. However, myasthenia gravis (MG) occurs in at
least 30% of all patients with thymomas (usually present at MG diagnosis). These 
epithelial neoplasms almost always have numerous admixed maturing polyclonal T
cells (thymocytes). This thymopoiesis-and export of mature CD4(+)T
cells-particularly associates with MG, though there are rare/puzzling exceptions 
in apparently pure epithelial WHO type A thymomas. Other features potentially
leading to inefficient self-tolerance induction include defective epithelial
expression of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene and/or of major
histocompatibility complex class II molecules in thymomas, absence of myoid
cells, failure to generate FOXP3(+) regulatory T cells, and genetic polymorphisms
affecting T-cell signaling. However, the strong focus on MG/neuromuscular targets
remains unexplained and suggests some biased autoantigen expression, T-cell
selection, or autoimmunization within thymomas. There must be further clues in
the intriguing serological and cellular parallels in some patients with
late-onset MG but without thymomas-and in others with AIRE mutations-and in the
contrasts with early-onset MG, as discussed here.

PMID: 20380583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Sci Transl Med. 2009 Dec 2;1(9):9ra20. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3000284.

Identification of an autoantigen demonstrates a link between interstitial lung
disease and a defect in central tolerance.

Shum AK(1), DeVoss J, Tan CL, Hou Y, Johannes K, O'Gorman CS, Jones KD, Sochett
EB, Fong L, Anderson MS.

Author information: 
(1)1Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Interstitial lung disease (ILD) is a common manifestation of systemic
autoimmunity characterized by progressive inflammation or scarring of the lungs. 
Patients who develop these complications can exhibit significantly impaired gas
exchange that may result in hypoxemia, pulmonary hypertension, and even death.
Unfortunately, little is understood about how these diseases arise, including the
role of specific defects in immune tolerance. Another key question is whether
autoimmune responses targeting the lung parenchyma are critical to ILD
pathogenesis, including that of isolated idiopathic forms. We show that a
specific defect in central tolerance brought about by mutations in the autoimmune
regulator gene (Aire) leads to an autoreactive T cell response to a lung antigen 
named vomeromodulin and the development of ILD. We found that a human patient and
mice with defects in Aire develop similar lung pathology, demonstrating that the 
AIRE-deficient model of autoimmunity is a suitable translational system in which 
to unravel fundamental mechanisms of ILD pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2856693
PMID: 20368189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Clin Immunol. 2010 Jul;136(1):96-104. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2010.03.002. Epub 2010 
Apr 2.

The role of AIRE polymorphisms in melanoma.

Conteduca G(1), Ferrera F, Pastorino L, Fenoglio D, Negrini S, Sormani MP,
Indiveri F, Scarrà GB, Filaci G.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence for Biomedical Research, University of Genoa, Italy.

Polymorphisms of AIRE, a transcription factor that up-regulates intrathymic
expression of tissue-specific antigens including melanoma-associated antigens
(MAAs), may variably affect the selection of MAAs-specific thymocytes, generating
T-cell repertoires protecting or predisposing individuals to melanoma. We found
that AIRE single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs1055311, rs1800520 and
rs1800522 were significantly more frequent in healthy subjects than in melanoma
patients, independently from sex, age and stages of melanoma. The presence of
these SNPs was associated with increased frequency of two T-cell clonotypes
specific for MAGE-1 linking their protective effect to selection/expansion of
MAA-specific T cells. Interestingly, mRNA transcribed on the rs1800520 SNP showed
increased free energy than the wild type suggesting that its reduced stability
may be responsible for the different activity of the polymorphic AIRE molecule.
This finding may contribute at identifying subjects with increased risk of
developing melanoma or patients with melanoma that may take benefit from
immunotherapy.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20363194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2010 May;6(5):270-7. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2010.40. Epub 2010
Mar 23.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndromes.

Michels AW(1), Gottlieb PA.

Author information: 
(1)Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, University of Colorado Denver,
1775 Aurora Court, MS B140, PO Box 6511, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

The autoimmune polyglandular syndromes-a group of syndromes comprising a
combination of endocrine and nonendocrine autoimmune diseases-differ in their
component diseases and in the immunologic features of their pathogenesis. One of 
the three main syndromes, type 1 autoimmune polyglandular syndrome (APS-1), has a
unique pathogenic mechanism owing to mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE)
gene, which results in the loss of central tolerance-a process by which
developing T cells with potential reactivity for self-antigens are eliminated
during early differentiation in the thymus. Patients with IPEX (immune
dysfunction, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked) syndrome harbor mutations
in the forkhead box P3 (FOXP3) gene in regulatory T cells, which leads to severe 
autoimmunity and immune deficiency. Although both of these disorders are rare,
their well-defined mechanisms of disease provide a basis for the understanding of
the more common condition, APS-2. In this syndrome, alleles of human leukocyte
antigens (HLAs) determine the targeting of specific tissues by autoreactive T
cells, which leads to organ-specific autoimmunity as a result of this loss of
tolerance. Non-HLA genes also contribute to autoimmunity in APS-2 and, depending 
on the polymorphism, potentially predispose to a loss of tolerance or influence
which organ is specifically targeted. This Review discusses the genetic basis of 
APS-1, APS-2 and IPEX syndrome, with an emphasis on the mechanisms of
autoimmunity and presents currently available therapies to treat their underlying
autoimmune disorders.

PMID: 20309000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Exp Med. 2010 Apr 12;207(4):681-8. doi: 10.1084/jem.20092465. Epub 2010 Mar 22.

Lymph node-resident lymphatic endothelial cells mediate peripheral tolerance via 
Aire-independent direct antigen presentation.

Cohen JN(1), Guidi CJ, Tewalt EF, Qiao H, Rouhani SJ, Ruddell A, Farr AG, Tung
KS, Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Carter Immunology Center, University of
Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2010 May;10(5):290.

Peripheral immune tolerance is generally thought to result from
cross-presentation of tissue-derived proteins by quiescent tissue-resident
dendritic cells to self-reactive T cells that have escaped thymic negative
selection, leading to anergy or deletion. Recently, we and others have implicated
the lymph node (LN) stroma in mediating CD8 T cell peripheral tolerance. We
demonstrate that LN-resident lymphatic endothelial cells express multiple
peripheral tissue antigens (PTAs) independent of the autoimmune regulator (Aire).
They directly present an epitope derived from one of these, the
melanocyte-specific protein tyrosinase, to tyrosinase-specific CD8 T cells,
leading to their deletion. We also show that other LN stromal subpopulations
express distinct PTAs by mechanisms that vary in their Aire dependence. These
results establish lymphatic endothelial cells, and potentially other LN-resident 
cells, as systemic mediators of peripheral immune tolerance.

PMCID: PMC2856027
PMID: 20308365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2010 May;62(5):864-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2009.06.061. Epub
2010 Mar 20.

Oral mucous squamous cell carcinoma-an anticipated consequence of autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED).

Böckle BC(1), Wilhelm M, Müller H, Götsch C, Sepp NT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Innsbruck Medical University, Anichstrasse 35,
A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria. barbara.boeckle@i-med.ac.at

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in the AIRE gene. We report the
case of a female patient with a 967-979del13 mutation in the AIRE gene. Her
medical history included autoimmune hypoparathyroidism, Addison disease, and
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. At the age of 40, she developed multiple white
verrucous plaques on the oral mucosa. Histologically, the lesions appeared as
moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinomas. The patient subsequently
developed multiple local recurrences and therefore required repeated surgery.
Notably, a higher incidence rate of oral and esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
has been observed in this syndrome. However, the critical pathogenetic pathways
implicated in squamous cell carcinoma development in APECED are far from being
well understood.

Copyright 2009 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Mosby, Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 20304522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Immunol. 2010 Apr 15;184(8):4236-46. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902434. Epub 2010
Mar 17.

An autoimmune response to odorant binding protein 1a is associated with dry eye
in the Aire-deficient mouse.

DeVoss JJ(1), LeClair NP, Hou Y, Grewal NK, Johannes KP, Lu W, Yang T, Meagher C,
Fong L, Strauss EC, Anderson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California-San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA.

Sjögren's Syndrome (SS) is a human autoimmune disease characterized by
immune-mediated destruction of the lacrimal and salivary glands. In this study,
we show that the Aire-deficient mouse represents a new tool to investigate
autoimmune dacryoadenitis and keratoconjunctivitis sicca, features of SS.
Previous work in the Aire-deficient mouse suggested a role for alpha-fodrin, a
ubiquitous Ag, in the disease process. Using an unbiased biochemical approach,
however, we have identified a novel lacrimal gland autoantigen, odorant binding
protein 1a, targeted by the autoimmune response. This novel autoantigen is
expressed in the thymus in an Aire-dependent manner. The results from our study
suggest that defects in central tolerance may contribute to SS and provide a new 
and clinically relevant model to investigate the pathogenic mechanisms in
lacrimal gland autoimmunity and associated ocular surface sequelae.

PMCID: PMC2851482
PMID: 20237294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Hepatology. 2010 May;51(5):1789-98. doi: 10.1002/hep.23536.

Forkhead box p3+ regulatory T cell underlies male resistance to experimental type
2 autoimmune hepatitis.

Lapierre P(1), Béland K, Martin C, Alvarez F Jr, Alvarez F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and NutritionUniversité de Montréal, 
Canada.

Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), like many autoimmune diseases, is most prevalent in
young women. The immunological basis of this age and sex susceptibility bias was 
investigated in a murine model of AIH. Xenoimmunization of 7-week-old female
C57BL/6 mice resulted in more severe AIH with higher levels of liver
inflammation, serum alanine aminotransferase, specific T-cell cytotoxicity, and
autoantibody than younger and older females. Vaccinated males developed minimal
liver inflammation and higher percentages of CD4(+)CD25(+)FoxP3(+) regulatory T
cell in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, spleen, and liver than females.
Regulatory T cells (Tregs) were virtually absent in liver-lymphocytes infiltrates
of females. Castration of C57BL/6 mice, with or without 17beta-estradiol
supplementation, did not modify susceptibility in males, nor Treg numbers,
suggesting minimal contribution of testosterone and estradiol to autoimmune
hepatitis (AIH) susceptibility. Xenoimmunized Aire(+/0) mouse displayed similar
AIH susceptibility, sex bias, and Tregs numbers as C57BL/6 mice, suggesting that 
susceptibility in females is not the result of less stringent thymic central
tolerance. Autoreactive B cell response against
formiminotransferase-cyclodeaminase correlated with disease activity, possibly
linking B-cell autoreactivity and AIH pathogenesis.CONCLUSION: Peripheral
tolerance and development of regulatory T cells after self-mimicking antigen
exposure, and not sexual hormone nor central tolerance, are the main factors for 
susceptibility to AIH in females.

PMID: 20232291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Stem Cells Dev. 2010 Nov;19(11):1735-43. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0466. Epub 2010
Sep 13.

Differentiation of pharyngeal endoderm from mouse embryonic stem cell.

Hidaka K(1), Nitta T, Sugawa R, Shirai M, Schwartz RJ, Amagai T, Nitta S,
Takahama Y, Morisaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, National Cardiovascular Center Research Institute,
Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Embryonic stem cells are considered to be a good in vitro tool to study the
induction of various cell types including cardiomyocytes; however, induction of
the pharyngeal endoderm (PE), the underlying heart-forming region, in vivo has
been scarcely reported. In the present study, we found that many PE-related
genes, such as Paxl, Pax9, Sixl, and Tbxl, were up-regulated in
cardiomyocyte-rich embryoid bodies (EBs). The third pouch-related genes including
Hoxa3, Foxn1, and Aire, which are crucial for thymus development and function,
were also detected in later stages. Nkx2.5, a cardiac transcription factor gene, 
is known to be transiently expressed in the PE. By crossing Nkx2.5-Cre mice with 
Cre-dependent EGFP reporter mice, we found that Nkx2.5(+) lineage exclusively
contributed to thymic epithelial cell development, followed by thymus
development. Gene expression analysis using Nkx2.5-EGFP ES cells also revealed
that PE-related mRNAs were specifically enriched in the transiently appearing
E-cadherin(+)Nkx2.5(+) cell fraction. Interestingly, the EB-derived cells were
found capable of supporting T-cell differentiation to CD4 or CD8 double-positive 
cells in a reaggregation organ culture in vitro. Our results suggest that EBs
contain cells that resemble third pharyngeal pouch endoderm and confer a
thymus-like microenvironment.

PMID: 20230268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Apr 2;394(2):418-23. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.03.042. Epub 2010 Mar 10.

Aire regulates the expression of differentiation-associated genes and
self-renewal of embryonic stem cells.

Gu B(1), Zhang J, Chen Q, Tao B, Wang W, Zhou Y, Chen L, Liu Y, Zhang M.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Cell Biology and Genetics, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang
University, 388 Yuhangtang Road, Hangzhou, China.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) are pluripotent stem cells from early embryos. It has
been well recognized that ESC genomes are maintained in a globally
transcriptional hyperactive state, which genetically poised ESCs to the high
differentiation potential. However, the transcription factors regulating the
global transcription activities in ESCs are not well defined. We show here that
mouse and human ESCs express two transcription factors, Aire and Deaf1.
Previously known to function in the thymus stromal cells and peripheral lymphoid 
organs respectively, Aire and Deaf1 help regulate the ectopic expression of
diverse tissue-specific antigens to establish self-immune tolerance.
Differentiation of ESCs greatly reduced Aire and Deaf1 expression, in a pattern
similar to the pluripotent factors, Oct4 and Nanog. Knockdown of Aire in mouse
ESCs resulted in significantly decreased clone-forming efficiency as well as
attenuated cell cycle, suggesting Aire plays a role in ESC self-renewal. In
addition, some differentiation-associated genes that are sporadically expressed
in ESCs were reduced in expression upon Aire knockdown. These results suggest
that transcription factors such as Aire and Deaf1, which exert global
transcriptional regulatory functions, may play important roles in self-renewal of
ESCs and maintaining ESC in a transcriptionally hyperactive state.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2885885
PMID: 20226168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Proteome Res. 2010 May 7;9(5):2600-9. doi: 10.1021/pr100044d.

Increased apoptosis after autoimmune regulator expression in epithelial cells
revealed by a combined quantitative proteomics approach.

Colomé N(1), Collado J, Bech-Serra JJ, Liiv I, Antón LC, Peterson P, Canals F,
Jaraquemada D, Alvarez I.

Author information: 
(1)Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
autosomal recessive autoimmune disease, affecting many endocrine tissues. APECED 
is associated to the lack of function of a single gene called AutoImmune
REgulator (AIRE). Aire knockout mice develop various autoimmune disorders
affecting different organs, indicating that Aire is a key gene in the control of 
organ-specific autoimmune diseases. AIRE is mainly expressed by medullary thymic 
epithelial cells (mTECs), and its absence results in the loss of tolerance
against tissue restricted antigens (TRAs). Aire induces the transcription of
genes encoding for TRAs in mTECs. In this report, the analysis of AIRE's effect
on the cellular proteome was approached by the combination of two quantitative
proteomics techniques, 2D-DIGE and ICPL, using an AIRE-transfected and
nontransfected epithelial cell line. The results showed increased levels of
several chaperones, (HSC70, HSP27 and tubulin-specific chaperone A) in
AIRE-expressing cells, while various cytoskeleton interacting proteins, that is, 
transgelin, caldesmon, tropomyosin alpha-1 chain, myosin regulatory light
polypeptide 9, and myosin-9, were decreased. Furthermore, some apoptosis-related 
proteins were differentially expressed. Data were confirmed by Western blot and
flow cytometry analysis. Apoptosis assays with annexin V and etoposide
demonstrated that AIRE-positive cells suffer more spontaneous apoptosis and are
less resistant to apoptosis induction.

PMID: 20218732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 23;285(17):13012-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.037747. Epub
2010 Feb 25.

DAXX is a new AIRE-interacting protein.

Meloni A(1), Fiorillo E, Corda D, Incani F, Serra ML, Contini A, Cao A, Rosatelli
MC.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, Università degli Studi di Cagliari, 09121 Cagliari, Italy.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2010 Jun 25;285(26):20421. Meloni, Allesandra [corrected to Meloni, 
Alessandra].

The AIRE protein plays a remarkable role as a regulator of central tolerance by
controlling the promiscuous expression of tissue-specific antigens in thymic
medullary epithelial cells. Defects in the AIRE gene cause the autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy, a rare disease frequent in
Iranian Jews, Finns, and Sardinian population. To this day, the precise function 
of the AIRE protein in regulating transcription and its interacting proteins has 
yet to be entirely clarified. The knowledge of novel AIRE interactors and their
precise role will improve our knowledge of its biological activity and address
some of the foremost autoimmunity-related questions. In this study, we have used 
a yeast two-hybrid system to identify AIRE-interacting proteins. This approach
led us to the discovery of a new AIRE-interacting protein called DAXX. The
protein is known to be a multifunctional adaptor with functions both in apoptosis
and in transcription regulation pathways. The interaction between AIRE and DAXX
has been validated by in vivo coimmunoprecipitation analysis and colocalization
study in mammalian cells. The interaction has been further confirmed by showing
in transactivation assays that DAXX exerts a strong repressive role on the
transcriptional activity of AIRE.

PMCID: PMC2857146
PMID: 20185822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. N Engl J Med. 2010 Feb 25;362(8):764-6. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc0909510.

Acquired autoimmune polyglandular syndrome, thymoma, and an AIRE defect.

Cheng MH, Fan U, Grewal N, Barnes M, Mehta A, Taylor S, Husebye ES, Murphy EJ,
Anderson MS.

PMCID: PMC3462012
PMID: 20181983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 8;5(2):e9062. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009062.

DKK1 mediated inhibition of Wnt signaling in postnatal mice leads to loss of TEC 
progenitors and thymic degeneration.

Osada M(1), Jardine L, Misir R, Andl T, Millar SE, Pezzano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The City College of New York, New York, New York,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Thymic epithelial cell (TEC) microenvironments are essential for the 
recruitment of T cell precursors from the bone marrow, as well as the subsequent 
expansion and selection of thymocytes resulting in a mature self-tolerant T cell 
repertoire. The molecular mechanisms, which control both the initial development 
and subsequent maintenance of these critical microenvironments, are poorly
defined. Wnt signaling has been shown to be important to the development of
several epithelial tissues and organs. Regulation of Wnt signaling has also been 
shown to impact both early thymocyte and thymic epithelial development. However, 
early blocks in thymic organogenesis or death of the mice have prevented analysis
of a role of canonical Wnt signaling in the maintenance of TECs in the postnatal 
thymus.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we demonstrate that tetracycline-regulated
expression of the canonical Wnt inhibitor DKK1 in TECs localized in both the
cortex and medulla of adult mice, results in rapid thymic degeneration
characterized by a loss of DeltaNP63(+) Foxn1(+) and Aire(+) TECs, loss of K5K8DP
TECs thought to represent or contain an immature TEC progenitor, decreased TEC
proliferation and the development of cystic structures, similar to an aged
thymus. Removal of DKK1 from DKK1-involuted mice results in full recovery,
suggesting that canonical Wnt signaling is required for the differentiation or
proliferation of TEC populations needed for maintenance of properly organized
adult thymic epithelial microenvironments.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Taken together, the results of this study demonstrate
that canonical Wnt signaling within TECs is required for the maintenance of
epithelial microenvironments in the postnatal thymus, possibly through effects on
TEC progenitor/stem cell populations. Downstream targets of Wnt signaling, which 
are responsible for maintenance of these TEC progenitors may provide useful
targets for therapies aimed at counteracting age associated thymic involution or 
the premature thymic degeneration associated with cancer therapy and bone marrow 
transplants.

PMCID: PMC2817005
PMID: 20161711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Feb;27(1):18-22. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2010.01.004.

[Autoimmune regulator gene mutations in a Chinese family with autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy syndrome type I].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu C(1), Shi Y, Yin H, Li H, Fan S, Wu S, Yuan P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, the First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University,
Taiyuan, Shanxi, 030001 P.R.China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the mutation of the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE) in a 
Chinese family with autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type I (APS-I).
METHODS: The AIRE gene mutations were detected using PCR and direct DNA
sequencing. Restriction enzyme analysis was used to confirm the mutations and
bioinformatic methods were used to predict the possible impact of the mutations
on the structure and function of the AIRE protein.
RESULTS: A compound heterozygous mutation of A19T/R257X was detected in the
proband. Her father had the A19T mutation in exon 1, but this mutation was not
detected in 100 unrelated healthy individuals. Her mother had the R257X mutation 
in exon 6.
CONCLUSION: This is the first report about AIRE mutations in Chinese APS-I
kindred. The A19T mutation identified in this study has not been reported in the 
human gene mutation database (HGMD); the R257X has not been reported in Asians.

PMID: 20140861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Exp Med. 2010 Feb 15;207(2):299-308. doi: 10.1084/jem.20091669. Epub 2010 Feb
1.

Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis in APECED or thymoma patients correlates with
autoimmunity to Th17-associated cytokines.

Kisand K(1), Bøe Wolff AS, Podkrajsek KT, Tserel L, Link M, Kisand KV, Ersvaer E,
Perheentupa J, Erichsen MM, Bratanic N, Meloni A, Cetani F, Perniola R,
Ergun-Longmire B, Maclaren N, Krohn KJ, Pura M, Schalke B, Ströbel P, Leite MI,
Battelino T, Husebye ES, Peterson P, Willcox N, Meager A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Group, Institute of General and Molecular Pathology,
University of Tartu, 50411 Tartu, Estonia. kai.kisand@ut.ee

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2010 Feb 15;207(2):264-5.

Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) is frequently associated with T cell
immunodeficiencies. Specifically, the proinflammatory IL-17A-producing Th17
subset is implicated in protection against fungi at epithelial surfaces. In
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED, or
autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome 1), CMC is often the first sign, but the
underlying immunodeficiency is a long-standing puzzle. In contrast, the
subsequent endocrine features are clearly autoimmune, resulting from defects in
thymic self-tolerance induction caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator
(AIRE). We report severely reduced IL-17F and IL-22 responses to both Candida
albicans antigens and polyclonal stimulation in APECED patients with CMC.
Surprisingly, these reductions are strongly associated with neutralizing
autoantibodies to IL-17F and IL-22, whereas responses were normal and
autoantibodies infrequent in APECED patients without CMC. Our multicenter survey 
revealed neutralizing autoantibodies against IL-17A (41%), IL-17F (75%), and/ or 
IL-22 (91%) in >150 APECED patients, especially those with CMC. We independently 
found autoantibodies against these Th17-produced cytokines in rare thymoma
patients with CMC. The autoantibodies preceded the CMC in all informative cases. 
We conclude that IL-22 and IL-17F are key natural defenders against CMC and that 
the immunodeficiency underlying CMC in both patient groups has an autoimmune
basis.

PMCID: PMC2822605
PMID: 20123959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2009 Dec;7(2):15-28.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidosis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED)--a
diagnostic and therapeutic challenge.

Jääskeläinen J(1), Perheentupa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kuopio University and University Hospital, Kuopio,
Finland. jarmo.jaaskelainen@kuh.fi

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy - candidosis - ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), also 
known as autoimmune polyendocrine/polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS1), is a rare
disease caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene pair
resulting in absence of active AIRE protein, which is essential for both central 
and peripheral self-tolerance. The phenotype is widely variable. Apart from the
classical triad of mucocutaneous candidosis, hypoparathyroidism and adrenal
failure, several other components, some of which are potentially
life-threatening, may develop. Due to the unpredictable clinical course, the
patients need regular follow-up by a clinician familiar with the disease.
Diagnosis is often possible by clinical diagnostic criteria, but in many cases
the early clinical picture does not bring it to mind. A novel tool, search for
autoantibodies against interferon-omega, enables proof or exclusion of APECED
with more certainty than gene analysis. It is highly specific and sensitive for
APECED if thymoma and myasthenia gravis are excluded.

PMID: 20118890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Am J Pathol. 2010 Mar;176(3):1104-12. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090956. Epub 2010 
Jan 21.

Human peripheral lymphoid tissues contain autoimmune regulator-expressing
dendritic cells.

Poliani PL(1), Kisand K, Marrella V, Ravanini M, Notarangelo LD, Villa A,
Peterson P, Facchetti F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Brescia, P.le Spedali Civili 1, 25123, 
Brescia, Italy.

Erratum in
    Am J Pathol. 2010 May;176(5):2581.

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) modulates the expression of tissue-restricted
antigens (TSAs) and promotes central tolerance in the thymus. However, few
autoreactive T cells escape negative selection and reach the periphery, where
peripheral tolerance is required to avoid autoimmunity. Murine lymph nodes (LNs) 
have been shown to contain "stromal" cells expressing AIRE and TSAs. Here we
report the occurrence of AIRE-expressing cells in human peripheral lymphoid
tissues, including LNs, tonsils, and gut-associated lymphoid tissue, with the
exception of the spleen. Notably, AIRE+ cells are absent in fetal LNs and, in
postnatal life, they are more numerous in abdominal than in superficial LNs, thus
suggesting that their development in periphery may depend on instructive signals 
from microenvironment and antigen challenge. Extrathymic AIRE+ cells show a
dendritic morphology, consistently express human leukocyte antigen-DR (HLADR) and
fascin, and are largely positive for CD11c and S100 and for the dendritic
cell-activation markers CD40, CD83, DC-LAMP/CD208, and CCR7. Lymphoid,
myelomonocytic, mesenchymal, and epithelial cell lineage markers are negative.
The HLADRhigh/AIRE+ cell fraction isolated from mesenteric LNs expressed TSAs
(insulin, CYP17A1, and CYP21A2), as well as molecules associated with tolerogenic
functions, such as interleukin-10 and indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase. Data indicate 
that AIRE+ cells in human peripheral lymphoid tissues correspond to a subset of
activated interdigitating dendritic cells expressing TSAs and the tolerogenic
molecules indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase and interleukin-10, suggestive of a
potential tolerogenic function.

PMCID: PMC2832133
PMID: 20093495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Cell. 2010 Jan 8;140(1):123-35. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.12.030.

Aire's partners in the molecular control of immunological tolerance.

Abramson J(1), Giraud M, Benoist C, Mathis D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2010 Jan 8;140(1):24-6.

Aire induces the expression of a battery of peripheral-tissue self-antigens
(PTAs) in thymic stromal cells, promoting the clonal deletion of differentiating 
T cells that recognize them. Just how Aire targets and induces PTA transcripts
remains largely undefined. Screening via Aire-targeted coimmunoprecipitation
followed by mass spectrometry, and validating by multiple RNAi-mediated knockdown
approaches, we identified a large set of proteins that associate with Aire. They 
fall into four major functional classes: nuclear transport, chromatin
binding/structure, transcription and pre-mRNA processing. One set of Aire
interactions centered on DNA protein kinase and a group of proteins it partners
with to resolve DNA double-stranded breaks or promote transcriptional elongation.
Another set of interactions was focused on the pre-mRNA splicing and maturation
machinery, potentially explaining the markedly more effective processing of PTA
transcripts in the presence of Aire. These findings suggest a model to explain
Aire's widespread targeting and induction of weakly transcribed chromatin
regions.

PMID: 20085707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Cell. 2010 Jan 8;140(1):24-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.12.036.

Aire, master of many trades.

Kyewski B(1), Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Immunology, Tumor Immunology Program, German Cancer 
Research Center, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. b.kyewski@dkfz.de

Comment on
    Cell. 2010 Jan 8;140(1):123-35.

In thymic epithelial cells, the protein Aire (autoimmune regulator) induces the
ectopic expression of hundreds of peripheral tissue antigens, thus enlarging the 
repertoire of antigens available for the induction of central T cell tolerance.
By analyzing Aire's interacting partners, Abramson et al. (2010) shed new light
on this unorthodox form of gene expression.

PMID: 20085700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Apr;38(7):2168-76. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp1204. Epub 2010
Jan 7.

Estimating the proportion of microarray probes expressed in an RNA sample.

Shi W(1), de Graaf CA, Kinkel SA, Achtman AH, Baldwin T, Schofield L, Scott HS,
Hilton DJ, Smyth GK.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC 3052, 
Australia.

A fundamental question in microarray analysis is the estimation of the number of 
expressed probes in different RNA samples. Negative control probes available in
the latest microarray platforms, such as Illumina whole genome expression
BeadChips, provide a unique opportunity to estimate the number of expressed
probes without setting a threshold. A novel algorithm was proposed in this study 
to estimate the number of expressed probes in an RNA sample by utilizing these
negative controls to measure background noise. The performance of the algorithm
was demonstrated by comparing different generations of Illumina BeadChips,
comparing the set of probes targeting well-characterized RefSeq NM transcripts
with other probes on the array and comparing pure samples with heterogenous
samples. Furthermore, hematopoietic stem cells were found to have a larger
transcriptome than progenitor cells. Aire knockout medullary thymic epithelial
cells were shown to have significantly less expressed probes than matched
wild-type cells.

PMCID: PMC2853118
PMID: 20056656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Genes Dev. 2009 Dec 1;23(23):2723-8. doi: 10.1101/gad.1812609.

The SAND domain protein ULTRAPETALA1 acts as a trithorax group factor to regulate
cell fate in plants.

Carles CC(1), Fletcher JC.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Gene Expression Center, United States Department of
Agriculture/University of California at Berkeley, Albany, California 94710, USA.

During development, trithorax group (trxG) chromatin remodeling complexes
counteract repression by Polycomb group (PcG) complexes to sustain active
expression of key regulatory genes. Although PcG complexes are well characterized
in plants, little is known about trxG activities. Here we demonstrate that the
Arabidopsis SAND (Sp100, AIRE-1, NucP41/75, DEAF-1) domain protein ULTRAPETALA1
(ULT1) functions as a trxG factor that counteracts the PcG-repressive activity of
CURLY LEAF. In floral stem cells, ULT1 protein associates directly with the
master homeotic locus AGAMOUS, inducing its expression by regulating its histone 
methylation status. Our analysis introduces a novel mechanism that mediates
epigenetic switches controlling post-embryonic stem cell fates in plants.

PMCID: PMC2788324
PMID: 19952107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Mar;40(3):849-58. doi: 10.1002/eji.200939918.

Diversity and clonotypic composition of influenza-specific CD8+ TCR repertoires
remain unaltered in the absence of Aire.

Kedzierska K(1), Valkenburg SA, Guillonneau C, Hubert FX, Cukalac T, Curtis JM,
Stambas J, Scott HS, Kedzierski L, Venturi V, Davenport MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia. kkedz@unimelb.edu.au

TCR repertoire diversity is important for the protective efficacy of CD8(+) T
cells, limiting viral escape and cross-reactivity between unrelated epitopes. The
exact mechanism for selection of restricted versus diverse TCR repertoires is far
from clear, although one thought is that the epitopes resembling self-peptides
might select a limited array of TCR due to the deletion of autoreactive TCR. The 
molecule Aire promotes the expression of tissue-specific Ag on thymic medullary
epithelial cells and the deletion of autoreactive cells, and in the absence of
Aire autoreactive cells persist. However, the contribution of Aire-dependent
peptides to the selection of the Ag-specific TCR repertoire remains unknown. In
this study, we dissect restricted (D(b)NP(366)%(+)CD8(+)) and diverse
(D(b)PA(224)%(+)CD8(+), K(d)NP(147)%(+)CD8(+)) TCR repertoires responding to
three influenza-derived peptides in Aire-deficient mice on both B6 and BALB/c
backgrounds. Our study shows that the number, qualitative characteristics and TCR
repertoires of all influenza-specific, D(b)NP(366)%(+)CD8(+),
D(b)PA(224)%(+)CD8(+) and K(d)NP(147)%(+)CD8(+) T cells are not significantly
altered in the absence of Aire. This provides the first demonstration that the
selection of an Ag-specific T-cell repertoire is not significantly perturbed in
the absence of Aire.

PMID: 19950188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Transplantation. 2009 Aug 15;88(3 Suppl):S8-13. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e3181af653c.

Immunological senescence and thymic function in transplantation.

Pujol-Borrell R(1), Herrero-Mata MJ, Palou E, Armengol MP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology for Research and Application to Diagnosis (LIRAD),
Banc de Sang i Teixits (Blood and Tissue Bank), Institut d'Investigació en
Ciències de la Salut Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Barcelona, Catalonia,
Spain. rpujolb@servet.uab.es

In the field of organ transplantation, the state of thymic function has not been 
a major concern but data from bone marrow transplantation studies have unravel
the persistence of some thymopoiesis in the adult and, more importantly, the
possibility of reinducing it. Given the central role of the thymus in tolerance, 
these facts have stimulated the interest in the biology of the thymus in humans. 
Contemporarily, basic research has provided new tools, if imperfect, to monitor
thymic function, that is, T-cell receptor excision circles, markers for
lymphocytes recently emigrated from the thymus and new imaging techniques. The
deployment of these new tools is already changing some paradigms and has now
established that re-enactment of thymic activity in the course of bone marrow
transplantation or in patients with human immunodeficiency virus on highly active
anti-retroviral therapy is beneficial and that can be achieved in the adult.
Clinical trials using thymopoiesis-stimulating factors are underway. On the other
hand, the discovery that the thymus contains a broad representation of
self-antigens and that this depends on the expression of the product of the gene 
AIRE by the medullary thymic epithelial cells opens the possibility of
manipulating central tolerance. Current protocols inducing microchimerism to
generate tolerance to solid organ grafts suggest that this could be a feasible
therapeutic goal. Therefore, there are many signs indicating that a period of
translational research applying the principles of thymic biology and central
tolerance to transplantation has already started.

PMID: 19667967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Vet J. 2011 Feb;187(2):212-6. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2009.10.012.

Examination of candidate genes for hypoadrenocorticism in Nova Scotia Duck
Tolling Retrievers.

Hughes AM(1), Bannasch DL, Kellett K, Oberbauer AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Inherited hypoadrenocorticism occurs in some dog breeds including the Nova Scotia
Duck Tolling Retriever (NSDTR) and is thought to be due to an immune attack on
the adrenal glands. The genetic cause of this disorder in dogs has not been
identified; however, many genes have been associated with hypoadrenocorticism and
other immune-mediated conditions in humans including AIRE, BAFF, Casp10, CD28,
CTLA-4, FASL, PTPN22, and TNFRSF6B. Microsatellite marker loci were analysed for 
linkage with the disease phenotype in a pedigree of NSDTRs and excluded all genes
examined, the exception being CTLA-4, which was neither excluded nor shown to be 
associated by this analysis. Thus, genes associated with hypoadrenocorticism in
humans were not linked with the condition in the dog. Further examination is
necessary to identify the genetic cause of inherited hypoadrenocorticism in dogs 
and this may reveal a novel gene not yet implicated with immune-mediated disease.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19931476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Immunol. 2009 Dec 15;183(12):7682-91. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0804133.

Autoimmune regulator deficiency results in decreased expression of CCR4 and CCR7 
ligands and in delayed migration of CD4+ thymocytes.

Laan M(1), Kisand K, Kont V, Möll K, Tserel L, Scott HS, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Group, Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, Tartu
University, Tartu, Estonia.

Autoimmune regulator (Aire) has been viewed as a central player in the induction 
of tolerance. This study examines whether Aire can modulate the production of the
thymic chemokines involved in corticomedullary migration and thus play a role in 
intrathymic thymocyte migration and maturation. Aire deficiency resulted in
reduced gene expression and protein levels of the CCR4 and CCR7 ligands in whole 
thymi of mice, as determined by quantitative PCR analysis and ELISA. The
expression of the CCR4 ligands coincided with Aire expression in the CD80(high)
medullary thymic epithelial cells, whereas the expression of the CCR7 ligands was
detected in other cell populations. Also, the expression pattern of the CCR4 and 
CCR7 ligands follows that of Aire during postnatal but not during embryonic
development. In vitro, overexpression of Aire resulted in an up-regulation of
selected CCR4 and CCR7 ligands, which induced selective migration of
double-positive and single-positive CD4(+) cells. In vivo, Aire deficiency
resulted in a diminished emigration of mature CD4(+) T cells from the thymi of
5-day-old mice. In conclusion, Aire regulates the production of CCR4 and CCR7
ligands in medullary thymic epithelial cells and alters the coordinated
maturation and migration of thymocytes. These results suggest a novel mechanism
behind the Aire-dependent induction of central tolerance.

PMCID: PMC2795747
PMID: 19923453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Feb;40(2):530-8. doi: 10.1002/eji.200939605.

Spatial (Tbata) expression in mature medullary thymic epithelial cells.

Saade M(1), Irla M, Yammine M, Boulanger N, Victorero G, Vincentelli R, Penninger
JM, Holländer GA, Chauvet S, Nguyen C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U928, Technologies Avancées pour le Génome et la Clinique, Université
de la Méditerranée, Parc Scientifique de Luminy, Marseille Cedex, France.

The Spatial gene is expressed in highly polarized cell types such as testis germ 
cells, brain neurons and thymic epithelial cells (TEC). Its expression was
documented in testis and brain but poorly characterized in thymus. Here, we
characterize for the first time Spatial-expressing TEC throughout ontogeny and
adult mouse thymus. Spatial is expressed in thymic-fated domain by embryonic day 
E10.5 and persists in subcapsular, cortical, medullary epithelial cells and in
MTS24(+) progenitor TEC. Using mouse strains in which thymocyte development is
blocked at various stages, we show that Spatial expression is independent of
thymocyte-derived signals during thymus organogenesis. Analyses on purified
thymic cell subsets show that Spatial short isoforms are expressed in cortical
TEC (cTEC) and mature medullary TEC (mTEC). Spatial long isoforms were detected
in the same TEC population. Spatial presents a nuclear distribution specific to
mature mTEC expressing UEA1 and Aire. Aire- and RANKL-deficient mice revealed
that Spatial expression is drastically reduced in the thymus of these mutants.
These findings reveal a critical function of Aire in regulating Spatial
expression, which is compatible with promiscuous Spatial gene expression.

PMID: 19918778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Anat Histol Embryol. 2010 Feb;39(1):7-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0264.2009.00969.x. 
Epub 2009 Oct 28.

The excurrent ducts of the testis of the emu (Dromaius novaehollandiae) and
ostrich (Struthio camelus): Microstereology of the epididymis and
immunohistochemistry of its cytoskeletal systems.

Ozegbe PC(1), Kimaro W, Madekurozwa MC, Soley JT, Aire TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy & Physiology, University of Pretoria,
Onderstepoort, South Africa.

The volumetric proportion of the various ducts of the epididymis of the emu and
ostrich and the immunohistochemistry of actin microfilaments, as well as
cytokeratin, desmin and vimentin intermediate filaments, were studied in the
various ducts of the epididymis of the emu and ostrich. The volumetric
proportions of various ducts, which are remarkably different from those of
members of the Galloanserae monophyly, are as follows: the rete testis, 5.2 +/-
1.4% for the emu and 2.4 +/- 1.8% for the ostrich; efferent ducts, 14.2 +/- 2.3% 
(emu) and 11.8 +/- 1.8% (ostrich); epididymal duct unit, 25.8 +/- 5.8% (emu) and 
26.1 +/- 4.1% (ostrich) and connective tissue and its content, 54.7 +/- 5.8%
(emu) and 60.0 +/- 4.9% (ostrich). Unlike in mammals and members of the
Galloanserae monophyly, only vimentin was immunohistochemically demonstrated in
the rete testis epithelium of the emu, and none of the cytoskeletal protein
elements in the ostrich rete testis. The epithelium of the efferent ducts of the 
emu co-expressed actin, cytokeratin and desmin in the non-ciliated type I cells, 
and vimentin in the ciliated cell component. The ostrich demonstrated only
cytokeratin in this epithelium. The ratite epididymal duct unit is different from
that of mammals in lacking actin (only weaky expression in the ostrich), desmin
and cytokeratin, and a moderate/strong immunoexpression of vimentin in the basal 
cells and basal parts of the NC type III cell in the epididymal duct unit.
Immunoexpression of the microfilaments and intermediate filaments varied between 
the two ratite birds, as has been demonstrated previously in birds of the
Galloanserae monophyly, and in mammals.

PMID: 19874278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010 May;72(5):641-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2009.03740.x. Epub 2009 Oct 26.

Novel sequence variation of AIRE and detection of interferon-omega antibodies in 
early infancy.

Tóth B(1), Wolff AS, Halász Z, Tar A, Szüts P, Ilyés I, Erdos M, Szegedi G,
Husebye ES, Zeher M, Maródi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious and Pediatric Immunology, University of Debrecen,
Medical and Health Science Center, Debrecen, Hungary.

Comment in
    Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2011 Apr;74(4):532-3.

OBJECTIVE: Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I (APS I) is a rare primary
immunodeficiency disorder characterized by chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis,
multi-organ autoimmunity and ectodermal dysplasia. Autoantibodies to parathyroid 
and adrenal glands and type I interferons (IFN) are hallmarks of APS I, which
results from mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. We wished to
study clinical, immunological and genetic features of APS I in Hungarian
patients, and to correlate anti-IFN-omega serum concentration with APS I and
other multi-organ autoimmune diseases.
DESIGN: Detailed analysis of patients with APS I and multi-organ autoimmune
diseases.
PATIENTS: Seven patients with APS I and 11 patients with multi-organ autoimmune
diseases were studied.
MEASUREMENTS: Mutational analysis was performed by bidirectional sequencing of
AIRE. Antibodies against IFN-omega and endocrine organ-specific autoantigens were
studied with radioimmunoassay. RFLP was performed by digestion of DNA with Hin6I 
restriction enzyme.
RESULTS: AIRE sequence analysis revealed homozygous c.769C>T mutations in three
patients and compound heterozygous sequence variants (c.769C>T/c.44_66dup26bp;
c.769C>T/c.965_977del13bp; c.769C>T/c.1344delC) in four patients with APS I. All 
the six live patients tested had markedly elevated IFN-omega antibodies, which
were not found in heterozygous siblings or parents. One of the identified
patients was negative for antibodies against IFN-omega at 6 weeks of age, but
became positive at 7 months. At age 1, he is still without symptoms of the
disease. In contrast to patients with APS I, no AIRE mutation or elevation of
IFN-omega antibodies were detected in patients with multi-organ autoimmune
diseases.
CONCLUSION: This is the first overview of patients diagnosed with APS I in
Hungary. A novel c.1344delC mutation in AIRE was detected. Anti-IFN-omega
antibodies seem to appear very early in life and are helpful to differentiate APS
I from other multi-organ autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 19863576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. BMC Dev Biol. 2009 Oct 22;9:54. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-9-54.

Smad4-dependent pathways control basement membrane deposition and endodermal cell
migration at early stages of mouse development.

Costello I(1), Biondi CA, Taylor JM, Bikoff EK, Robertson EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
Ita.Costello@path.ox.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Smad4 mutant embryos arrest shortly after implantation and display a 
characteristic shortened proximodistal axis, a significantly reduced epiblast, as
well as a thickened visceral endoderm layer. Conditional rescue experiments
demonstrate that bypassing the primary requirement for Smad4 in the
extra-embryonic endoderm allows the epiblast to gastrulate. Smad4-independent
TGF-beta signals are thus sufficient to promote mesoderm formation and
patterning. To further analyse essential Smad4 activities contributed by the
extra-embryonic tissues, and characterise Smad4 dependent pathways in the early
embryo, here we performed transcriptional profiling of Smad4 null embryonic stem 
(ES) cells and day 4 embryoid bodies (EBs).
RESULTS: Transcripts from wild-type versus Smad4 null ES cells and day 4 EBs were
analysed using Illumina arrays. In addition to several known TGF-beta/BMP target 
genes, we identified numerous Smad4-dependent transcripts that are mis-expressed 
in the mutants. As expected, mesodermal cell markers were dramatically
down-regulated. We also observed an increase in non-canonical potency markers
(Pramel7, Tbx3, Zscan4), germ cell markers (Aire, Tuba3a, Dnmt3l) as well as
early endoderm markers (Dpp4, H19, Dcn). Additionally, expression of the
extracellular matrix (ECM) remodelling enzymes Mmp14 and Mmp9 was decreased in
Smad4 mutant ES and EB populations. These changes, in combination with increased 
levels of laminin alpha1, cause excessive basement membrane deposition.
Similarly, in the context of the Smad4 null E6.5 embryos we observed an expanded 
basement membrane (BM) associated with the thickened endoderm layer.
CONCLUSION: Smad4 functional loss results in a dramatic shift in gene expression 
patterns and in the endodermal cell lineage causes an excess deposition of, or an
inability to breakdown and remodel, the underlying BM layer. These structural
abnormalities probably disrupt reciprocal signalling between the epiblast and
overlying visceral endoderm required for gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC2773778
PMID: 19849841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Dec;9(6):489-95. doi:
10.1097/ACI.0b013e3283327e5c.

Thymus microenvironment in human primary immunodeficiency diseases.

Poliani PL(1), Vermi W, Facchetti F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Severe combined immunodeficiencies represent a heterogeneous
group of genetic disorders affecting genes of both early and late steps in
lymphocytes development, a process tightly controlled by thymic epithelial cells.
Detailed analysis of thymic morphology aids to the assessment of the severity of 
the immune disorder and may be critical to the understanding of the role of the
genetic defects in the pathophysiology of these diseases. In this review, we
highlight recent advancements in the characterization of the thymic
microenvironment in primary immunodeficiencies.
RECENT FINDINGS: Crosstalk between thymocytes and thymic epithelial cells is
essential to preserve thymic architecture and function, and therefore to promote 
T-cell maturation and development of self-tolerance. Early severe defects in
T-cell development result in profound abnormalities of thymic epithelial cells
differentiation with loss of AIRE expression and severe reduction of thymic
dendritic and T-regulatory cells. Differently, later defects in T-cell
development that are permissive for normal thymocytes development allow
cortico-medullary differentiation with partially preserved AIRE expression and
dendritic/T-regulatory cells distribution. Hypomorphic mutations in the same
genes partially permissive to T-cell development may result in a more complex
phenotype with immunodysreactivity and peculiar thymic alterations.
SUMMARY: Although the molecular and genetic bases of primary immunodeficiencies
directly aid to both diagnosis and management of the patients, the detailed
analysis of thymic morphology critically contributes to unveil the
pathophysiology of these diseases.

PMID: 19841578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Dec;94(12):4749-56. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-1080. Epub
2009 Oct 16.

Activating autoantibodies against the calcium-sensing receptor detected in two
patients with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1.

Kemp EH(1), Gavalas NG, Krohn KJ, Brown EM, Watson PF, Weetman AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Metabolism, School of Medicine, University of Sheffield,
Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Glossop Road, Sheffield S10 2JF, United Kingdom.
e.h.kemp@sheffield.ac.uk

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Dec;94(12):4655-7.

CONTEXT: Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS1) is an autosomal
recessive disorder caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene.
Hypoparathyroidism occurs in 80% of patients with APS1 and has been suggested to 
result from an autoimmune reaction against the calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) in
parathyroid cells. Anti-CaSR binding antibodies have previously been detected in 
patients with APS1.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine whether anti-CaSR antibodies
present in APS1 patients could modulate the response of the CaSR to stimulation
by Ca(2+).
RESULTS: The results indicated that two of the 14 APS1 patients included in the
study had anti-CaSR antibodies that stimulated the receptor. These antibodies
were detected by their ability to increase both Ca(2+)-dependent extracellular
signal-regulated kinase phosphorylation and inositol phosphate accumulation in
human embryonic kidney 293 cells expressing the CaSR.
CONCLUSION: An important implication of the present results is that although the 
majority of APS1 patients do not have CaSR-stimulating antibodies, there may be a
small but substantial minority of patients in whom the hypoparathyroid state is
the result of functional suppression of the parathyroid glands rather than their 
irreversible destruction.

PMCID: PMC2795648
PMID: 19837919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Curr Opin Immunol. 2009 Dec;21(6):582-9. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2009.08.007. Epub
2009 Oct 14.

AIRE in the thymus and beyond.

Gardner JM(1), Fletcher AL, Anderson MS, Turley SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center and the Department of Medicine, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA 94143-0540, USA.

The maintenance of immunologic self-tolerance requires the coordination of
multiple complementary systems. Studies of the Autoimmune Regulator (Aire) gene
have revealed that Aire promotes self-tolerance partly by inducing the
transcription of a wide array of tissue-specific antigens (TSAs), particularly in
the thymus. The importance of Aire is highlighted by the fact that patients and
mice defective in Aire expression develop a multi-organ autoimmune syndrome. In
this review we discuss recent progress in our understanding of Aire's control of 
immune tolerance at the cellular and molecular levels, and also address the
potential importance of Aire expression both in the thymus and in the peripheral 
lymphoid organs. The detection of both Aire and TSA expression by cell
populations outside of the thymus raises the possibility that such expression may
play a relevant role in the maintenance of self-tolerance.

PMCID: PMC2787634
PMID: 19833494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Immunol Invest. 2009;38(3-4):255-67.

The proinflammatory cytokine TNF-alpha -308 AA genotype is associated with
polyglandular autoimmunity.

Dittmar M(1), Kaczmarczyk A, Bischofs C, Kahaly GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Gutenberg University Hospital, Mainz, Germany.

Data regarding polymorphisms of immunoregulatory genes in polyglandular
autoimmunity (PGA) are lacking. We have analyzed whether the polymorphism of the 
proinflammatory cytokine gene TNF-alpha; -308 and mutations of the autoimmune
regulator (AIRE) gene were associated with PGA in adults. Sixty-seven patients
with PGA and 209 healthy controls were genotyped by multiplex minisequencing with
capillary electrophoresis on an ABI PRISM-310 genetic analyzer. HLA DRB1 typing
was performed using polymerase-chain-reaction-amplified DNA hybridized with
sequence-specific-oligonucleotide probes (PCR-SSO). The TNF-alpha; -308*A allele 
occurred more frequently in patients (0.269) than in controls (0.163, P = 0.008, 
P(c) = 0.016). Also, TNF-alpha; -308*A carriers were more frequent in patients
than controls (47.8% vs. 31.1%, OR = 1.89, 95%CI = 1.19-3.00). The frequency of
the AA genotype was increased in PGA (P = 0.014, P(c) = 0.042). PGA patients with
autoimmune thyroid disease and the TNF-alpha; -308 AA genotype showed the highest
prevalence of thyroid autoantibodies (TPO, P = 0.04; Tg, P = 0.003). HLA-DRB1*03 
and TNF-alpha; -308*A alleles were strongly associated in patients with PGA
(87.5%, P(c) < 0.00001). The AIRE R257X and 13bpdel mutations were not observed
in patients with PGA. The association of TNF-alpha; -308*A with PGA might be
directly or indirectly due to the association with HLA-DRB1*03.

PMID: 19811436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Clin Genet. 2009 Nov;76(5):441-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2009.01280.x. Epub
2009 Oct 6.

Two novel AIRE mutations in autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal 
dystrophy (APECED) among Indians.

Zaidi G(1), Sahu RP, Zhang L, George G, Bhavani N, Shah N, Bhatia V, Bhansali A, 
Jevalikar G, Jayakumar RV, Eisenbarth GS, Bhatia E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, Lucknow, India.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
recessive disorder resulting from mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE)
gene. There is no information on AIRE mutations in Indians. In a cross-sectional 
study, nine patients (eight families), from four referral hospitals in India,
were studied for AIRE mutations by direct sequencing. We screened for new
mutations in 150 controls by allele-specific PCR. The patients had 1-7 known
components of APECED. Three patients had unusual manifestations: presentation
with type 1 diabetes; chronic sinusitis and otitis media; and facial dysmorphism.
All patients carried homozygous, probably recessive, AIRE mutations. Two
unrelated patients from a small in-bred community (Vanika Vaisya) in south India 
carried an unreported missense mutation, p.V80G, in the N-terminal caspase
recruitment domain. Another unique mutation, p.C302X, resulting in a truncated
protein with deletion of both zinc-finger domains, was detected in a patient from
Gujarat. Neither mutation was detected in controls. Other mutations, previously
described in Caucasians, were: 13 base pair deletion (p.C322fsX372) in 4 (38%),
and Finn-major (p.R257X) and p.R139X (Sardinian) mutation in one subject each. In
conclusion, in this first series of APECED in Indians, we detected AIRE mutations
previously reported in Caucasians, as well as unique mutations. Of these, p.V80G 
is possibly an ancestral mutation in an in-bred community.

PMID: 19807739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Oct;124(4):793-800. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2009.06.048.
Epub 2009 Sep 19.

Reduced central tolerance in Omenn syndrome leads to immature self-reactive
oligoclonal T cells.

Somech R(1), Simon AJ, Lev A, Dalal I, Spirer Z, Goldstein I, Nagar M, Amariglio 
N, Rechavi G, Roifman CM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer and Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel. rsomech@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Omenn syndrome (OS) is characterized by a peculiar severe T-cell
immune deficiency associated with autoimmunelike manifestations. Dysregulations
of the central and peripheral immune tolerance, mediated by the protein
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) and regulatory T cells, respectively, were proposed
as possible mechanisms of this aberrant inflammatory process.
OBJECTIVE: We studied mechanisms of central and peripheral tolerance in patients 
with OS and also examined the gene expression profile associated with OS
features.
METHODS: T-cell receptor diversity, DNA rearrangement, and the expression of AIRE
and forkhead box P3 mRNA as well as the expression of regulatory T cells in cells
obtained from patients with OS were studied. Characterization of gene expression 
in these cells was carried out by using the TaqMan Low-Density Array.
RESULTS: Transcript expression of peripheral blood AIRE but not forkhead box P3
was reduced in patients with OS. The expression of natural killer T and
regulatory T cells was normal, although the latter showed an abnormal
CD4-negative population. Patients with OS have oligoclonal T cells with limited
DNA recombination activity, including the presence of early but not late T-cell
maturation events, regardless of the genetic defect underlying the syndrome. The 
transcriptional profile associated with OS features reveals significant changes
in 25.5% of the tested genes compared with normal control.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that T-cell oligoclonal expansion in OS emanates
from an incomplete block before the maturation stage of negative selection, which
may explain escape of autoreactive T cells from the thymus. Dysregulated genes in
patients with OS are closely involved with self-tolerance and autoimmunity.

PMID: 19767069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Clin Genet. 2009 Nov;76(5):431-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2009.01278.x. Epub
2009 Sep 15.

Novel and recurrent mutations in the AIRE gene of autoimmune polyendocrinopathy
syndrome type 1 (APS1) patients.

Faiyaz-Ul-Haque M(1), Bin-Abbas B, Al-Abdullatif A, Abdullah Abalkhail H,
Toulimat M, Al-Gazlan S, Almutawa AM, Al-Sagheir A, Peltekova I, Al-Dayel F,
Zaidi SH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, 
King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
MFHaque@Kfshrc.edu.sa

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 (APS1) is characterized by the
presence of at least two out of three clinical features, which include Addison's 
disease, hypoparathyroidism, and chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. This disorder
is caused by mutations in the AIRE (autoimmune regulator) gene. While several
AIRE mutations have been described in APS1 patients of various ethnic origins,
the genetic cause of APS1 in Arab patients requires further investigation. This
study describes seven Arab families, in which 18 patients had APS1. In addition
to the cardinal features of APS1, some patients exhibited alopecia, diabetes
mellitus, nephrocalcinosis and other phenotypes associated with APS1. DNA
sequencing of the AIRE gene of patients from this study identified four novel and
one recurrent mutation. These mutations likely result in loss of AIRE function in
the patients. In addition, it was noted that the non-pathogenic c.834C> G
mutation (rs1800520, encoding for p.Ser278Arg) occurs with high incidence in the 
AIRE gene of Arab individuals. Furthermore, this investigation demonstrates
inflammation of the hair follicles in APS1 patients with alopecia universalis. We
conclude that Arab APS1 patients carry novel and recurrent mutations in the AIRE 
gene.

PMID: 19758376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Dec 15;18(24):4699-710. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp433. Epub 2009
Sep 10.

AIRE activated tissue specific genes have histone modifications associated with
inactive chromatin.

Org T(1), Rebane A, Kisand K, Laan M, Haljasorg U, Andreson R, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Institute of General and Molecular
Pathology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia.

The Autoimmune Regulator (AIRE) protein is expressed in thymic medullary
epithelial cells, where it promotes the ectopic expression of tissue-restricted
antigens needed for efficient negative selection of developing thymocytes.
Mutations in AIRE cause APECED syndrome, which is characterized by a breakdown of
self-tolerance. The molecular mechanism by which AIRE increases the expression of
a variety of different genes remains unknown. Here, we studied AIRE-regulated
genes using whole genome expression analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation.
We show that AIRE preferentially activates genes that are tissue-specific and
characterized by low levels of initial expression in stably transfected HEK293
cell model and mouse thymic medullary epithelial cells. In addition, the
AIRE-regulated genes lack active chromatin marks, such as histone H3
trimethylation (H3K4me3) and acetylation (AcH3), on their promoters. We also show
that during activation by AIRE, the target genes acquire histone H3 modifications
associated with transcription and RNA polymerase II. In conclusion, our data show
that AIRE is able to promote ectopic gene expression from chromatin associated
with histone modifications characteristic to inactive genes.

PMCID: PMC2778368
PMID: 19744957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Immunol Cell Biol. 2010 Jan;88(1):50-6. doi: 10.1038/icb.2009.55. Epub 2009 Sep
1.

Ultrastructure of medullary thymic epithelial cells of autoimmune regulator
(Aire)-deficient mice.

Milicevic Z(1), Milicevic NM, Laan M, Peterson P, Kisand K, Scott HS, Westermann 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Histology and Embryology, University of
Beograd, Beograd, Serbia.

The significance of the autoimmune regulator (Aire) transcription regulator in
establishing central tolerance has recently been elucidated in great detail.
Still, the role of Aire in medullary thymic epithelial cell (mTEC) physiology is 
not fully understood. To shed more light on this issue, we studied the
ultrastructure of mTECs in Aire-deficient thymus. We show that all types of mTECs
show ultrastructural signs of activation and increased intracellular traffic,
which suggests that in the absence of Aire their physiology is impaired. Type 6
'large' mTECs are fully developed in Aire-deficient mice and more frequent than
in the normal thymus. The frequency of type 5 'undifferentiated' mTECs is also
increased. Collectively, our results suggest that the role of Aire in the
physiology of mTECs could be more profound and not restricted only to the
presentation of self-tissue-restricted antigens and/or apoptosis of end-stage
fully mature cell types.

PMID: 19721455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Mol Immunol. 2009 Oct;46(16):3240-4. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.08.002. Epub 2009
Aug 31.

Evidence for a network transcriptional control of promiscuous gene expression in 
medullary thymic epithelial cells.

Macedo C(1), Evangelista AF, Magalhães DA, Fornari TA, Linhares LL, Junta CM,
Silva GL, Sakamoto-Hojo ET, Donadi EA, Savino W, Passos GA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunogenetics Group, Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine of
Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo (USP), Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

The expression of peripheral tissue antigens (PTAs) in the thymus by medullary
thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) is essential for the central self-tolerance in
the generation of the T cell repertoire. Due to heterogeneity of autoantigen
representation, this phenomenon has been termed promiscuous gene expression
(PGE), in which the autoimmune regulator (Aire) gene plays a key role as a
transcription factor in part of these genes. Here we used a microarray strategy
to access PGE in cultured murine CD80(+) 3.10 mTEC line. Hierarchical clustering 
of the data allowed observation that PTA genes were differentially expressed
being possible to found their respective induced or repressed mRNAs. To further
investigate the control of PGE, we tested the hypothesis that genes involved in
this phenomenon might also be modulated by transcriptional network. We then
reconstructed such network based on the microarray expression data, featuring the
guanylate cyclase 2d (Gucy2d) gene as a main node. In such condition, we
established 167 positive and negative interactions with downstream PTA genes.
Silencing Aire by RNA interference, Gucy2d while down regulated established a
larger number (355) of interactions with PTA genes. T- and G-boxes corresponding 
to AIRE protein binding sites located upstream to ATG codon of Gucy2d supports
this effect. These findings provide evidence that Aire plays a role in
association with Gucy2d, which is connected to several PTA genes and establishes 
a cascade-like transcriptional control of promiscuous gene expression in mTEC
cells.

PMID: 19720399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Nov;39(11):2969-72. doi: 10.1002/eji.200939628.

Why Aire? Compensating for late bloomers.

Cohn M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Conceptual Immunology Group, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA. cohn@salk.edu

The question under analysis in this commentary is, what was the evolutionary
selection pressure that necessitated the ectopic expression of a subset of
peripheral self-antigens in the thymus and by peripheral APC? The suggestion is
that antigen expression is delayed until after the immune system is responsive.

PMCID: PMC2869625
PMID: 19688745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. EMBO J. 2009 Sep 16;28(18):2812-24. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.212. Epub 2009 Aug
13.

Thymus-specific deletion of insulin induces autoimmune diabetes.

Fan Y(1), Rudert WA, Grupillo M, He J, Sisino G, Trucco M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunogenetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Rangos Research Center, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15201, USA.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2009 Sep 16;28(18):2687-8.

Insulin expression in the thymus has been implicated in regulating the negative
selection of autoreactive T cells and in mediating the central immune tolerance
towards pancreatic beta-cells. To further explore the function of this ectopic
insulin expression, we knocked out the mouse Ins2 gene specifically in the
Aire-expressing medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs), without affecting its 
expression in the beta-cells. When further crossed to the Ins1 knockout
background, both male and female pups (designated as ID-TEC mice for
insulin-deleted mTEC) developed diabetes spontaneously around 3 weeks after
birth. beta-cell-specific autoimmune destruction was observed, as well as
islet-specific T cell infiltration. The presence of insulin-specific effector T
cells was shown using ELISPOT assays and adoptive T cell transfer experiments.
Results from thymus transplantation experiments proved further that depletion of 
Ins2 expression in mTECs was sufficient to break central tolerance and induce
anti-insulin autoimmunity. Our observations may explain the rare cases of type 1 
diabetes onset in very young children carrying diabetes-resistant HLA class II
alleles. ID-TEC mice could serve as a new model for studying this pathology.

PMCID: PMC2750011
PMID: 19680229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Semin Liver Dis. 2009 Aug;29(3):307-14. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1233535. Epub 2009
Aug 12.

The autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy or autoimmune 
polyglandular syndrome type 1.

Lankisch TO(1), Jaeckel E, Strassburg CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover
Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndromes are rare autoimmune endocrinopathies that are 
associated with nonendocrine autoimmunopathies. Autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), also named
autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS-1), is distinguished from
autoimmune polyglandular syndrome 2 (APS-2). Major disease components of APECED
are adrenal insufficiency, hypoparathyroidism, and candidiasis. The diagnosis is 
established by the presence of two out of the three components. Minor clinical
features include autoimmune hepatitis, which occurs in up to 20% of APECED
patients, and ranges from a mild to a fulminant course. The disease mostly
affects juvenile patients from Sardegna, Italy, Finland, and Iran (Iranian Jews),
but it also occurs in other ethnic groups. The AIRE gene responsible for APECED
is expressed in cells involved in induction and maintenance of immune tolerance. 
Genetic alterations of the single gene are associated with APECED. Because a
specific therapy is not currently available, treatment consists of hormone
replacement and caring for clinical symptoms.

Copyright Thieme Medical Publishers.

PMID: 19676003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Immunol. 2009 Sep 1;183(5):3229-36. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0804277. Epub 2009
Aug 10.

Novel reporter mouse reveals constitutive and inflammatory expression of IFN-beta
in vivo.

Lienenklaus S(1), Cornitescu M, Zietara N, Lyszkiewicz M, Gekara N, Jablónska J, 
Edenhofer F, Rajewsky K, Bruder D, Hafner M, Staeheli P, Weiss S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig,
Germany. stl@gbf.de

Type I IFN is a major player in innate and adaptive immune responses. Besides, it
is involved in organogenesis and tumor development. Generally, IFN responses are 
amplified by an autocrine loop with IFN-beta as the priming cytokine. However,
due to the lack of sensitive detection systems, where and how type I IFN is
produced in vivo is still poorly understood. In this study, we describe a
luciferase reporter mouse, which allows tracking of IFN-beta gene induction in
vivo. Using this reporter mouse, we reveal strong tissue-specific induction of
IFN-beta following infection with influenza or La Crosse virus. Importantly, this
reporter mouse also allowed us to visualize that IFN-beta is expressed
constitutively in several tissues. As suggested before, low amounts of
constitutively produced IFN might maintain immune cells in an activated state
ready for a timely response to pathogens. Interestingly, thymic epithelial cells 
were the major source of IFN-beta under noninflammatory conditions. This
relatively high constitutive expression was controlled by the NF Aire and might
influence induction of tolerance or T cell development.

PMID: 19667093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Autoimmun. 2010 Feb;34(1):66-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2009.07.002. Epub 2009 Aug
3.

AIRE deficiency leads to impaired iNKT cell development.

Lindh E(1), Rosmaraki E, Berg L, Brauner H, Karlsson MC, Peltonen L, Höglund P,
Winqvist O.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Department of Medicine, Clinical Allergy Research Unit,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Autoimmune Polyendocrine Syndrome type I (APS I) is caused by mutations in the
Autoimmune Regulator gene (AIRE), and results in the immunological destruction of
endocrine organs. Herein we have characterized the CD1d-restricted invariant NKT 
cells (iNKT) and NK cells in APS I patients and Aire(-/-) mice, two cell
populations known to play a role in the regulation of autoimmune disease. We show
that the frequency of circulating iNKT cells is reduced in APS I patients
compared to healthy controls. In accordance with this, iNKT cells are
significantly reduced in the thymus and peripheral organs of Aire(-/-) mice. Bone
marrow transfer from wild type donors into lethally irradiated Aire(-/-)
recipients led to a decreased iNKT cell population in the liver, suggesting an
impaired development of iNKT cells in the absence of Aire expression in
radio-resistant cells. In contrast to the iNKT cells, both conventional NK cells 
and thymus-derived NK cells were unaffected by Aire deficiency and differentiated
normally in Aire(-/-) mice. Our results show that expression of Aire in
radio-resistant cells is important for the development of iNKT cells, whereas NK 
cell development and function does not depend on Aire.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19651488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Microbes Infect. 2009 Oct;11(12):928-34. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2009.07.003. Epub 
2009 Jul 15.

The role of autoimmune regulator (Aire) in the development of the immune system.

Matsumoto M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, University of
Tokushima, 3-18-15 Kuramoto, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.
mitsuru@ier.tokushima-u.ac.jp

AIRE is the gene responsible for a rather rare hereditary type of autoimmune
disease. The mechanism underlying the autoimmune pathogenesis caused by AIRE
deficiency is a focus of intense research because it could provide clues to the
fundamental question of how the immune system discriminates between self and
non-self within the thymic microenvironment.

PMID: 19615461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Diabetologia. 2009 Oct;52(10):2151-8. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1448-y. Epub 2009
Jul 16.

Regulation of insulin gene expression by cytokines and cell-cell interactions in 
mouse medullary thymic epithelial cells.

Levi D(1), Polychronakos C.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Genetics, the Research Institute of the McGill University Health
Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The expression of tissue-specific self-antigens in the thymus is
essential for self-tolerance. Genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes
correlates inversely with thymic insulin expression and, in mice, lowered levels 
of this expression result in T cell responses against insulin. This study was
undertaken to examine whether thymic insulin expression is regulated by the same 
metabolic stimuli as in beta cells or by different inputs, possibly of an immune 
nature.
METHODS: Ins2 mRNA changes in mouse thymus were evaluated in vivo, following
intraperitoneal glucose injection. We also examined the effect of a high glucose 
concentration on Ins2 mRNA in clones of insulin-expressing medullary thymus
epithelial cell lines (mTECs). The same in vitro system was used to evaluate the 
effect of IFN-gamma and cell-to-cell contact with thymocytes in co-culture.
RESULTS: Ins2 mRNA was significantly increased in the pancreas following a
glucose load, but remained unchanged in the thymus. Furthermore, stimulation of
insulin-expressing mTECs in vitro with IFN-gamma, a cytokine involved in T cell
negative selection, decreased levels of insulin expression even though expression
of Aire was increased. Last, co-culture of mTECs with thymocytes resulted in an
upregulation of both Aire and insulin expression.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We conclude that regulation of insulin transcription 
in the thymus is not dependent on metabolic stimuli but it may, instead, be under
the control of cytokines and cell-to-cell interactions with lymphoid cells. That 
this regulation is not always coordinated with that of Aire, a non-specific
master switch, suggests insulin-specific mechanisms.

PMID: 19609502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Clin Invest. 2009 Jul;119(7):2031-41. doi: 10.1172/JCI38332.

An aberrant prostate antigen-specific immune response causes prostatitis in mice 
and is associated with chronic prostatitis in humans.

Hou Y(1), DeVoss J, Dao V, Kwek S, Simko JP, McNeel DG, Anderson MS, Fong L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Chronic prostatitis is a common disease of unclear etiology and has no specific
treatment. Mice deficient in the expression of the autoimmune regulator (Aire)
gene, which are defective in thymic expression of self antigens and central
tolerance, develop spontaneous prostatitis. In this study, we found that
Aire-deficient mice developed spontaneous B and T cell immune responses to a
prostate autoantigen, seminal vesicle secretory protein 2 (SVS2), which we
believe to be novel. We show that thymic expression of this self antigen was Aire
dependent. Moreover, prostatitis was induced in WT mice through immunization with
SVS2, demonstrating that immunity to SVS2 was sufficient to induce prostatitis.
The clinical relevance of this antigen was highlighted by our observation that
patients with chronic prostatitis possessed specific autoantibodies against the
human SVS2-like seminal vesicle protein semenogelin. These results provide direct
evidence that spontaneous chronic prostatitis is an autoimmune disease and is
regulated by both central and peripheral tolerance. Moreover, SVS2 and
semenogelin are among the relevant autoantigens in mice and humans, respectively.

PMCID: PMC2701875
PMID: 19603556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Immunol. 2009 Jul 15;183(2):823-31. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900225. Epub 2009
Jun 29.

Ablation and regeneration of tolerance-inducing medullary thymic epithelial cells
after cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide, and dexamethasone treatment.

Fletcher AL(1), Lowen TE, Sakkal S, Reiseger JJ, Hammett MV, Seach N, Scott HS,
Boyd RL, Chidgey AP.

Author information: 
(1)Immune Regeneration Laboratory, Monash University, Clayton, Australia.

Immunosuppressive drugs and cytotoxic chemotherapy agents are designed to kill or
suppress autoreactive, alloaggressive, or hyperinflammatory T cells, or
disseminated malignancies. However, they also cause severe immunological side
effects ranging from interrupted thymopoiesis and general immunodeficiency to,
paradoxically, autoimmunity. Consistent with the cross-talk between thymocytes
and stromal cells, we now show that these common therapeutic agents have major
effects on murine thymic epithelial cells (TEC), crucially required to rebuild
immunity posttreatment. We show that the immunosuppressant cyclosporine A, which 
has been linked to a thymus-dependent autoimmune syndrome in some patients,
causes extensive loss of autoimmune regulator (Aire(+)) tolerance-inducing MHC
class II(high) medullary TEC (mTEC(high)). Post-cyclosporine A, Aire expression
was restored within 7 days. Full recovery of the mTEC(high) subset occurred
within 10 days and was linked to a decrease in a relatively resistant MHC class
II(low) mTEC subset (mTEC(low)), consistent with a previously described
precursor-product relationship. Cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone caused more
extensive ablation of thymocytes and stromal cells but again severely depleted
tolerance-inducing mTEC(high). Together, these data show that Aire(+) mTECs are
highly sensitive to damage and that mTEC regeneration follows a conserved pattern
regardless of the treatment regimen used.

PMID: 19564346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Ann Hum Genet. 2009 Jul;73(Pt 4):422-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2009.00525.x.

Identifying putative promoter regions of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome genes by means
of phylogenetic footprinting.

Stanescu H(1), Wolfsberg TG, Moreland RT, Ayub MH, Erickson E, Westbroek W,
Huizing M, Gahl WA, Helip-Wooley A.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Human Biochemical Genetics, Medical Genetics Branch, National Human
Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

HPS is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by oculocutaneous albinism
and prolonged bleeding. Eight human genes are described resulting in the HPS
subtypes 1-8. Certain HPS proteins combine to form Biogenesis of Lysosome-related
Organelles Complexes (BLOCs), thought to function in the formation of
intracellular vesicles such as melanosomes, platelet dense bodies, and lytic
granules. Specifically, BLOC-2 contains the HPS3, HPS5 and HPS6 proteins. We used
phylogenetic footprinting to identify conserved regions in the upstream sequences
of HPS3, HPS5 and HPS6. These conserved regions were verified to have in vitro
transcription activation activity using luciferase reporter assays. Transcription
factor binding site analyses of the regions identified 52 putative sites shared
by all three genes. When analysis was limited to the conserved footprints, seven 
binding sites were found shared among all three genes: Pax-5, AIRE, CACD, ZF5,
Zic1, E2F and Churchill. The HPS3 conserved upstream region was sequenced in four
patients with decreased fibroblast HPS3 RNA levels and only one HPS3 mutation in 
the coding exons and surrounding exon/intron boundaries; no mutation was found.
These findings illustrate the power of phylogenetic footprinting for identifying 
potential regulatory regions in non-coding sequences and define the first
putative promoter elements for any HPS genes.

PMCID: PMC2730976
PMID: 19523149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Exp Med. 2009 Jun 8;206(6):1245-52. doi: 10.1084/jem.20090300. Epub 2009 Jun 1.

Neonatal tolerance revisited: a perinatal window for Aire control of
autoimmunity.

Guerau-de-Arellano M(1), Martinic M, Benoist C, Mathis D.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

There has long been conceptual and experimental support for, but also challenges 
to, the notion that the initial period of the immune system's development is
particularly important for the establishment of tolerance to self. The display of
self-antigens by thymic epithelial cells is key to inducing tolerance in the T
lymphocyte compartment, a process enhanced by the Aire transcription factor.
Using a doxycycline-regulated transgene to target Aire expression to the thymic
epithelium, complementing the Aire knockout in a temporally controlled manner, we
find that Aire is essential in the perinatal period to prevent the multiorgan
autoimmunity that is typical of Aire deficiency. Surprisingly, Aire could be shut
down soon thereafter and remain off for long periods, with few deleterious
consequences. The lymphopenic state present in neonates was a factor in this
dichotomy because inducing lymphopenia during Aire turnoff in adults recreated
the disease, which, conversely, could be ameliorated by supplementing neonates
with adult lymphocytes. In short, Aire expression during the perinatal period is 
both necessary and sufficient to induce long-lasting tolerance and avoid
autoimmunity. Aire-controlled mechanisms of central tolerance are largely
dispensable in the adult, as a previously tolerized T cell pool can buffer newly 
generated autoreactive T cells that might emerge.

PMCID: PMC2715060
PMID: 19487417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Jun;60(6):1683-93. doi: 10.1002/art.24501.

Autoimmune regulator controls T cell help for pathogenetic autoantibody
production in collagen-induced arthritis.

Campbell IK(1), Kinkel SA, Drake SF, van Nieuwenhuijze A, Hubert FX, Tarlinton
DM, Heath WR, Scott HS, Wicks IP.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Autoimmune regulator (Aire) promotes the ectopic expression of
tissue-restricted antigens in medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs), leading 
to negative selection of autoreactive T cells. This study was undertaken to
determine whether loss of central tolerance renders Aire-deficient (Aire-/-) mice
more susceptible to the induction of autoimmune arthritis.
METHODS: Medullary TECs were isolated from Aire-/- and wild-type C57BL/6 mice for
gene expression analysis. Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) was elicited by
injection of chick type II collagen (CII) in adjuvant. Cellular and humoral
immune responses to CII were evaluated. Chimeric mice were created by
reconstituting lymphocyte-deficient mice with either Aire-/- or wild-type CD4 T
cells and wild-type B cells.
RESULTS: Wild-type, but not Aire-/-, mTECs expressed the CII gene Col2a1. Aire-/-
mice developed more rapid and severe CIA, showing elevated serum anti-CII IgG
levels, with earlier switching to arthritogenic IgG subclasses. No evidence was
found of enhanced T cell responsiveness to CII in Aire-/- mice; however, Aire-/- 
CD4 T cells were more efficient at stimulating wild-type B cells to produce
anti-CII IgG following immunization of chimeric mice with CII.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that Aire-dependent expression of CII occurs in
mTECs, implying that there is central tolerance to self antigens found in
articular cartilage. Reduced central tolerance to CII in Aire-/- mice manifests
as increased CD4 T cell help to B cells for cross-reactive autoantibody
production and enhanced CIA. Aire and central tolerance help prevent
cross-reactive autoimmune responses to CII initiated by environmental stimuli and
limit spontaneous autoimmunity.

PMID: 19479827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Menopause Int. 2009 Jun;15(2):72-5. doi: 10.1258/mi.2009.009020.

Aetiology of premature ovarian failure.

Vujovic S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Endocrinology, Clinical Center of Serbia, Dr Subotica 13, 11000
Belgrade, Serbia. vujovics@EUnet.rs

Premature ovarian failure (POF) is the occurrence of hypergonadotropic
hypoestrogenic amenorrhoea in women under the age of 40 years. POF is idiopathic 
in 74-90% of cases but can be familial (4-33%) or sporadic. The known causes are:
genetic aberrations; autoimmune ovarian damage; iatrogenic following surgery,
radiotherapy or chemotherapy; environmental factors (viruses, toxins, etc.); and 
metabolic (galactosaemia, 17 OH deficiency, etc.) Genetic aberrations could
involve the X chromosome (monosomy, trisomy or translocations) or be autosomal.
Genetic mechanisms include reduced gene dosage and non-specific chromosome effect
impairing meiosis, decreasing the pool of primordial follicles and increasing
atresia due to apoptosis or failure of follicle maturation. The genes for POF-1
are localized to Xq 21.3-Xq27 and for POF-2 to Xq13.3-21.1. The FMR1 gene is
responsible for the fragile X syndrome. It occurs due to CGG expansion of more
than 55 repeats at the 5'UTR (Xq 27.3), which is associated with gene silence
resulting in mental retardation in males, and POF in female carriers. Autoimmune 
ovarian damage is caused by the alteration of T-cell subsets and T-cell-mediated 
injury, increase of autoantibody producing B-cells and a low number of effector
suppressor/cytotoxic lymphocyte and a decrease of number and activity of natural 
killer cells. POF can be associated with other non-endocrine and endocrine
diseases. The mutations of AIRE gene are responsible for polyendocrinopathies
(APS I-III). As the cause of POF is unknown in the majority of cases and the
number of women with POF is increasing, the primary goal of scientific groups
worldwide should be focused on the study of the aetiology of POF.

PMID: 19465673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Structure. 2009 May 13;17(5):670-9. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2009.02.017.

Structure and site-specific recognition of histone H3 by the PHD finger of human 
autoimmune regulator.

Chakravarty S(1), Zeng L, Zhou MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York University, One Gustave L Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Human autoimmune regulator (AIRE) functions to control thymic expression of
tissue-specific antigens via sequence-specific histone H3 recognition by its
plant homeodomain (PHD) finger. Mutations in the AIRE PHD finger have been linked
to autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). Here 
we report the three-dimensional solution structure of the first PHD finger of
human AIRE bound to a histone H3 peptide. The structure reveals a detailed
network of interactions between the protein and the amino-terminal residues of
histone H3, and particularly key electrostatic interactions of a conserved
aspartic acid 297 in AIRE with the unmodified lysine 4 of histone H3 (H3K4). NMR 
binding study with H3 peptides carrying known posttranslational modifications
flanking H3K4 confirms that transcriptional regulation by AIRE through its
interactions with histone H3 is confined to the first N-terminal eight residues
in H3. Our study offers a molecular explanation for the APECED mutations and
helps define a subclass of the PHD finger family proteins that recognize histone 
H3 in a sequence-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC2923636
PMID: 19446523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Br J Ophthalmol. 2009 Sep;93(9):1260-4. doi: 10.1136/bjo.2008.153700. Epub 2009
May 7.

Spontaneous T cell mediated keratoconjunctivitis in Aire-deficient mice.

Yeh S(1), de Paiva CS, Hwang CS, Trinca K, Lingappan A, Rafati JK, Farley WJ, Li 
DQ, Pflugfelder SC.

Author information: 
(1)Ocular Surface Center, Cullen Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Patients with autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candiasis-ectodermal
dystrophy (APECED) develop severe keratoconjunctivitis, corneal scarring and
visual loss, but the precise pathogenesis is unknown. This study evaluated the
ocular surface immune cell environment, conjunctival goblet cell density and
response to desiccating environmental stress of the autoimmune regulatory (Aire) 
gene knockout murine model of APECED.
METHODS: Aire-deficient and wild type (WT) mice were subjected to desiccating
stress from a drafty, low-humidity environment and pharmacological inhibition of 
tear secretion for 5 days. Immune cell populations (CD4(+), CD8(+), CD11b(+),
CD45(+)) and goblet cell density were measured in ocular surface tissues and
meibomian glands, and compared with baseline values.
RESULTS: Greater CD4(+) T cell populations were observed in the conjunctival
epithelium of Aire-deficient mice (p<0.001) compared with WT. Aire-deficient mice
also had greater numbers of CD4(+), CD8(+), and CD11b(+) cells in the peripheral 
cornea at baseline and following desiccating stress. The meibomian glands of
Aire-deficient mice demonstrated greater CD4(+), CD8(+), CD45(+) and CD11b(+)
cells at baseline (p<0.001) and following desiccating stress. Conjunctival goblet
cell density was lower at baseline and following desiccating stress in
Aire-deficient compared with WT mice (p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Aire-deficiency leads to infiltration of CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells on
the ocular surface and meibomian glands, which is accompanied by goblet cell
loss. Desiccating stress promotes this proinflammatory milieu. Immune-mediated
mechanisms play a role in the severe blepharitis and keratoconjunctivitis in the 
murine model of APECED.

PMCID: PMC3586820
PMID: 19429577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2009 Jun;9(3):336-40. doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2009.04.005. Epub 
2009 May 8.

Autoimmune disorders of the neuromuscular junction.

Lang B(1), Vincent A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neurology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.
blang@hammer.imm.ox.ac.uk

The neuromuscular junction lies beyond the protection of the blood-brain barrier 
and is particularly vulnerable to antibody-mediated attack. In myasthenia gravis,
the expression of acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) in the thymus is under the
control of the autoimmune regulator protein (AIRE), and polymorphisms in the AChR
correlate with early onset of disease. In some 'AChR seronegative' patients,
thymic abnormalities associated with complement-activating antibodies binding
only clustered AChRs have been demonstrated, and in others anti-muscle-specific
kinase (MuSK) antibodies that show pathogenic effects in vivo. In Guillain-Barré 
syndrome, newly described antibodies bind to complex gangliosides. General
immunosuppression is still the main treatment, but novel treatments that reduce
complement-mediated damage or inhibit the binding of pathogenic antibodies are
beginning to look promising.

PMID: 19428298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Blood. 2009 Jul 2;114(1):105-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-211029. Epub 2009 May 
4.

Early defects in human T-cell development severely affect distribution and
maturation of thymic stromal cells: possible implications for the pathophysiology
of Omenn syndrome.

Poliani PL(1), Facchetti F, Ravanini M, Gennery AR, Villa A, Roifman CM,
Notarangelo LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

Thymocytes and thymic epithelial cell (TEC) cross-talk is crucial to preserve
thymic architecture and function, including maturation of TECs and dendritic
cells, and induction of mechanisms of central tolerance. We have analyzed thymic 
maturation and organization in 9 infants with various genetic defects leading to 
complete or partial block in T-cell development. Profound abnormalities of TEC
differentiation (with lack of AIRE expression) and severe reduction of thymic
dendritic cells were identified in patients with T-negative severe combined
immunodeficiency, reticular dysgenesis, and Omenn syndrome. The latter also
showed virtual absence of thymic Foxp3(+) T cells. In contrast, an IL2RG-R222C
hypomorphic mutation permissive for T-cell development allowed for TEC
maturation, AIRE expression, and Foxp3(+) T cells. Our data provide evidence that
severe defects of thymopoiesis impinge on TEC homeostasis and may affect
deletional and nondeletional mechanisms of central tolerance, thus favoring
immune dysreactive manifestations, as in Omenn syndrome.

PMCID: PMC2710940
PMID: 19414857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Eur J Endocrinol. 2009 Jul;161(1):11-20. doi: 10.1530/EJE-09-0044. Epub 2009 May 
1.

Polyglandular autoimmune syndromes.

Kahaly GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Gutenberg University Medical Centre, Mainz 55101,
Germany. kahaly@ukmainz.de

The polyglandular autoimmune syndromes (PAS) comprise a wide spectrum of
autoimmune disorders and are divided into a very rare juvenile (PAS type I) and a
relatively common adult type with (PAS II) or without adrenal failure (PAS III). 
First clinical manifestation of PAS I usually occurs in childhood, whereas PAS II
mostly occurs during the third and fourth decades. PAS I is caused by mutations
in the autoimmune regulatory (AIRE) gene on chromosome 21 and is inherited in an 
autosomal recessive manner. Mutations in the AIRE gene result in defect proteins 
which cause autoimmune destruction of target organs by disturbing the
immunological tolerance of the patients. Genetic testing may identify patients
with PAS I, but not those with PAS II/III. For PAS II/III, susceptibility genes
are known which increase the risk for developing autoimmune disorders, but must
not be causative. These are certain HLA genes, the cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen
gene, and the protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 22 gene on
chromosomes 6, 2 and 1 respectively. Actual diagnosis of PAS involves serological
measurement of organ-specific autoantibodies and subsequent functional testing.
Management of patients with PAS including their family relatives is best
performed in centres with special expertise in autoimmune endocrine disorders.

PMID: 19411300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Arch Oral Biol. 2009 Jul;54(7):658-65. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2009.03.009.
Epub 2009 Apr 24.

Clinical and microstructural aberrations of enamel of deciduous and permanent
teeth in patients with autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal
dystrophy.

Pavlic A(1), Waltimo-Sirén J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric and Preventive Dentistry, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ljubljana, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. alenka.pavlic@mf.uni-lj.si

OBJECTIVE: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED) causes multiple endocrine deficiencies, oral candidiasis and different
forms of ectodermal dystrophy including enamel hypoplasia, documented in
permanent teeth. Our purpose was to examine dental aberrations associated with
APECED, including possible manifestations in primary teeth.
DESIGN: We studied clinically, radiographically, and by scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) teeth of children belonging to two APECED families with
different mutations in the AIRE gene.
RESULTS: In addition to enamel defects in the permanent teeth we observed
hypoplastic pits and hypomaturated patches in the deciduous teeth with underlying
changes in the prismatic ultrastructure. The enamel of the permanent molars
exhibited a layered arrangement with included whirl-like formations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings confirm that APECED causes enamel defects that are
individually but chronologically distributed, and can alter enamel development
early enough to affect deciduous teeth.

PMID: 19393987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mol Vis. 2009;15:563-76. Epub 2009 Mar 23.

Immune profile of squamous metaplasia development in autoimmune
regulator-deficient dry eye.

Chen YT(1), Li S, Nikulina K, Porco T, Gallup M, McNamara N.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, Francis I. Proctor Foundation, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

PURPOSE: Squamous metaplasia of the ocular surface epithelium in severe Sjögren
syndrome (SS) dry eye has been implicated to be associated with chronic
engagement of immune-mediated inflammation. While the detailed immunopathological
mechanism underlying keratinization of the ocular muco-epithelium in this setting
remains unclear, mice deficient in the autoimmune regulator gene (Aire)
demonstrate SS-like pathological changes in the exocrine organs and ocular
surface including squamous metaplasia. Using this murine model, we sought to
determine the specific immune events that predict squamous metaplasia of the
cornea in Aire deficiency.
METHODS: Lissamine green staining, goblet cell density, and corneal small
proline-rich protein 1B (SPRR1B) were compared in Aire-sufficient and -deficient 
mice at 4, 8, and 16 weeks of age. Corneal, limbal and conjunctival infiltration 
of CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells as well as CD11c(+) and MHC class II (I-A(d+))
dendritic cells (DCs) were examined at the same time points. Ordinary least
squares regression was used to model SPRR1B's relationship with lissamine green
staining, goblet cell density, and immune cell infiltration.
RESULTS: Lissamine green staining was present in Aire-deficient mice by four
weeks of age and increased over time. Compared to Aire-sufficient controls,
conjunctival goblet cell density (GCD) decreased and corneal SPRR1B increased in 
Aire-deficient mice with significant differences noted at both 8 and 16 weeks.
Immune-mediated CD4(+) T cell infiltration of the conjunctiva and limbus peaked
at eight weeks and then decreased. In contrast, corneal T cell infiltration
continued to increase over time, reaching a maximum cell number at 16 weeks.
CD11c(+) myeloid-derived DCs were found in the conjunctiva and limbus at all time
points. As the mice aged, there was a notable increase in corneal CD11c(+) cell
counts. Interestingly, the dynamic of activated MHC class II(+) DCs was nearly
identical to that of CD4(+) T cells, peaking first in the limbus at eight weeks
with maximum infiltration of the cornea by 16 weeks. Regression analysis showed
that squamous metaplasia biomarker, SPRR1B, is strongly related to the lissamine 
green staining of the ocular surface. Corneal infiltration of activated DCs was
most prognostic of corneal SPRR1B expression while the presence of precursor DCs,
activated DCs, and CD4(+) T cells in the limbus were also significant predictors 
of SPRR1B.
CONCLUSIONS: Aire-deficient mice represent a useful model to study Sjögren-like
autoimmune-mediated ocular surface disease. Results of the current study suggest 
that squamous cell precursor protein, SPRR1B, provides an important readout to
evaluate ocular surface damage and specific events related to immune-mediated
inflammation. Results also define an appropriate time frame for interventional
studies to develop more effective therapies for keratinizing ocular surface
disease.

PMCID: PMC2660375
PMID: 19365590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2009 Jun;38(2):273-88, vii. doi:
10.1016/j.ecl.2009.01.011.

Clearing the AIRE: on the pathophysiological basis of the autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy syndrome type-1.

Shikama N(1), Nusspaumer G, Holländer GA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pediatric Immunology, Department of Biomedicine, University of
Basel and The University Children's Hospital (UKBB), Basel, Switzerland.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type-1 clinically manifests as the triad of
hypoparathyroidism, primary adrenocortical insufficiency, and chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis. Mutations in the gene that encodes the autoimmune
regulator protein, AIRE, have been identified as the cause of the autoimmune
polyendocrine syndrome type-1. The loss of immunologic tolerance to
tissue-restricted antigens consequent to an absence of AIRE expression in the
thymus results in the thymic export of autoreactive T cells that initiate
autoimmunity. In this article, we discuss the role of AIRE in autoimmune
polyendocrine syndrome type-1 and identify issues that still need to be addressed
to fully understand the molecular pathophysiology of this complex syndrome.

PMID: 19328411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2009 Apr;48(4):498-500. doi:
10.1097/MPG.0b013e31818550de.

AIRE gene analysis in children with autoimmune hepatitis type I or II.

Lankisch TO(1), Mourier O, Sokal EM, Habes D, Lacaille F, Bridoux-Henno L,
Hermeziu B, Lenaerts C, Strassburg CP, Jacquemin E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

The present report describes AIRE gene analysis in 25 children with autoimmune
hepatitis type I or II. The heterozygous transversion c.961C > G (p.Ser278Arg)
located in exon 7 was identified in 4 patients with autoimmune hepatitis type I, 
and mostly in those presenting with a positive family history for autoimmune
diseases. In this subgroup of patients, the allelic frequency of this polymorphic
variant was at least 3-fold higher than in healthy controls. These results
suggest that heterozygous AIRE gene mutation may represent a genetic
predisposition to childhood autoimmune hepatitis type I.

PMID: 19322061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Annu Rev Immunol. 2009;27:287-312. doi: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.25.022106.141532.

Aire.

Mathis D(1), Benoist C.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin Diabetes Center; Department
of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital; Harvard Medical School; and the
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.
cbdm@joslin.harvard.edu

Mutations in the transcriptional regulator, Aire, cause APECED, a polyglandular
autoimmune disease with monogenic transmission. Animal models of APECED have
revealed that Aire plays an important role in T cell tolerance induction in the
thymus, mainly by promoting ectopic expression of a large repertoire of
transcripts encoding proteins normally restricted to differentiated organs
residing in the periphery. The absence of Aire results in impaired clonal
deletion of self-reactive thymocytes, which escape into the periphery and attack 
a variety of organs. In addition, Aire is a proapoptotic factor, expressed at the
final maturation stage of thymic medullary epithelial cells, a function that may 
promote cross-presentation of the antigens encoded by Aire-induced transcripts in
these cells. Transcriptional regulation by Aire is unusual in being very broad,
context-dependent, probabilistic, and noisy. Structure/function analyses and
identification of its interaction partners suggest that Aire may impact
transcription at several levels, including nucleosome displacement during
elongation and transcript splicing or other aspects of maturation.

PMID: 19302042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



61. J Immunol. 2008 Apr 15;180(8):5384-92.

The lymphotoxin pathway regulates Aire-independent expression of ectopic genes
and chemokines in thymic stromal cells.

Seach N(1), Ueno T, Fletcher AL, Lowen T, Mattesich M, Engwerda CR, Scott HS,
Ware CF, Chidgey AP, Gray DH, Boyd RL.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Immunology and Stem Cell Laboratories, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

Medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTEC) play an important and unique role in
central tolerance, expressing tissue-restricted Ags (TRA) which delete thymocytes
autoreactive to peripheral organs. Since deficiencies in this cell type or
activity can lead to devastating autoimmune diseases, it is important to
understand the factors which regulate mTEC differentiation and function.
Lymphotoxin (LT) ligands and the LTbetaR have been recently shown to be important
regulators of mTEC biology; however, the precise role of this pathway in the
thymus is not clear. In this study, we have investigated the impact of this
signaling pathway in greater detail, focusing not only on mTEC but also on other 
thymic stromal cell subsets. LTbetaR expression was found in all TEC subsets, but
the highest levels were detected in MTS-15(+) thymic fibroblasts. Rather than
directing the expression of the autoimmune regulator Aire in mTEC, we found
LTbetaR signals were important for TRA expression in a distinct population of
mTEC characterized by low levels of MHC class II (mTEC(low)), as well as
maintenance of MTS-15(+) fibroblasts. In addition, thymic stromal cell subsets
from LT-deficient mice exhibit defects in chemokine production similar to that
found in peripheral lymphoid organs of Lta(-/-) and Ltbr(-/-) mice. Thus, we
propose a broader role for LTalpha1beta2-LTbetaR signaling in the maintenance of 
the thymic microenvironments, specifically by regulating TRA and chemokine
expression in mTEC(low) for efficient induction of central tolerance.

PMCID: PMC2760078
PMID: 18390720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Immunol Invest. 2008;37(3):203-14. doi: 10.1080/08820130801967841.

Autoimmune regulator initiates the expression of promiscuous genes in thymic
epithelial cells.

Chen J(1), Yang W, Yu C, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Norman Bethune Medical College of JiLin University, 
Chang Chun, China.

The expression of peripheral antigens in the thymus, known as promiscuous gene
expression, has been implicated in T cell tolerance and autoimmunity. Here we
identified thymic epithelial cells (TECs) as the main cell type that expresses a 
diverse range of tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs). The TECs of a common
autoimmune (non-obese diabetic [NOD]) mouse model express much lower levels of an
autoimmune regulator (Aire) and TRAs than normal (Balb/c) TECs. Transfection of
an Aire plasmid led to increased levels of TRA expression in cultured TECs from
Balb/c and NOD mice; an increase that was enhanced by the presence of thymocytes.
These data show that Aire initiates promiscuous gene expression in TECs, and that
this function might be under thymocyte control.

PMID: 18389440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Apr;38(4):942-7. doi: 10.1002/eji.200738052.

Sequential phases in the development of Aire-expressing medullary thymic
epithelial cells involve distinct cellular input.

White AJ(1), Withers DR, Parnell SM, Scott HS, Finke D, Lane PJ, Jenkinson EJ,
Anderson G.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Immune Regulation, Institute for Biomedical Research,
University of Birmingham Medical School, Birmingham, UK.

Intrathymic deletion of immature thymocytes that express self-reactive TCR
specificities is essential in the generation of self tolerance. Medullary thymic 
epithelial cells (mTEC) expressing the transcriptional regulator Aire play a key 
role in this process by regulating expression of tissue-restricted antigens to
ensure tolerance to peripheral tissues. Here, we have analysed the cellular and
molecular requirements for the initial appearance of Aire+ mTEC in the embryonic 
thymus, in addition to their persistence in the adult thymus. Analysis of thymic 
ontogeny shows that the emergence of embryonic Aire+ mTEC occurs prior to the
appearance of mature thymocytes, and depends upon lymphoid tissue inducer cells
expressing retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor gamma. In the adult
thymus, we show that Aire+ mTEC develop in the absence of thymocyte positive and 
negative selection and CD40 signalling, but are present at reduced frequency.
Collectively these data support a model where the initial differentiation of
Aire+ mTEC involves receptor activator of NF-kappaB (RANK)-RANKL interactions
with lymphoid tissue inducer cells, with subsequent mTEC turnover and/or survival
involving CD40-mediated signalling following interactions with mature CD4+
thymocytes that express CD40L.

PMID: 18350550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Autoimmunity. 2008 Mar;41(2):133-9. doi: 10.1080/08916930701773941.

Expression of AIRE in thymocytes and peripheral lymphocytes.

Suzuki E(1), Kobayashi Y, Kawano O, Endo K, Haneda H, Yukiue H, Sasaki H, Yano M,
Maeda M, Fujii Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Nagoya City University Medical School, Nagoya,
Japan.

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is a transcription factor expressed in the thymic
medullary epithelial cells (MECs). MECs have been suggested to contribute to
tolerance induction by presenting tissue specific antigens to T cells that react 
to these antigens. AIRE expression in cells other than MECs has not been studied 
extensively. Here we report four-color flow cytometric and quantitative real-time
PCR studies on the expression of AIRE in the lymphoid cells in the thymus and
periphery. In the thymus AIRE was expressed in B cells and CD4+CD8+ double
positive cells at a low level. In the peripheral blood AIRE was expressed in B
cells but not in T cells, and also expressed in CD14+ dendritic cells
(DCs)/macrophages and granulocytes at higher levels. AIRE mRNA was expressed
higher in B cells than in T cells. Further study is warranted to define the
functional role of the AIRE expressed in the lymphoid cells.

PMID: 18324482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. N Engl J Med. 2008 Mar 6;358(10):1018-28. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0706487.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 and NALP5, a parathyroid autoantigen.

Alimohammadi M(1), Björklund P, Hallgren A, Pöntynen N, Szinnai G, Shikama N,
Keller MP, Ekwall O, Kinkel SA, Husebye ES, Gustafsson J, Rorsman F, Peltonen L, 
Betterle C, Perheentupa J, Akerström G, Westin G, Scott HS, Holländer GA, Kämpe
O.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Comment in
    Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Oct;4(10):544-5.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1) is a multiorgan
autoimmune disorder caused by mutations in AIRE, the autoimmune regulator gene.
Though recent studies concerning AIRE deficiency have begun to elucidate the
molecular pathogenesis of organ-specific autoimmunity in patients with APS-1, the
autoantigen responsible for hypoparathyroidism, a hallmark of APS-1 and its most 
common autoimmune endocrinopathy, has not yet been identified.
METHODS: We performed immunoscreening of a human parathyroid complementary DNA
library, using serum samples from patients with APS-1 and hypoparathyroidism, to 
identify patients with reactivity to the NACHT leucine-rich-repeat protein 5
(NALP5). Subsequently, serum samples from 87 patients with APS-1 and 293
controls, including patients with other autoimmune disorders, were used to
determine the frequency and specificity of autoantibodies against NALP5. In
addition, the expression of NALP5 was investigated in various tissues.
RESULTS: NALP5-specific autoantibodies were detected in 49% of the patients with 
APS-1 and hypoparathyroidism but were absent in all patients with APS-1 but
without hypoparathyroidism, in all patients with other autoimmune endocrine
disorders, and in all healthy controls. NALP5 was predominantly expressed in the 
cytoplasm of parathyroid chief cells.
CONCLUSIONS: NALP5 appears to be a tissue-specific autoantigen involved in
hypoparathyroidism in patients with APS-1. Autoantibodies against NALP5 appear to
be highly specific and may be diagnostic for this prominent component of APS-1.

Copyright 2008 Massachusetts Medical Society.

PMID: 18322283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Immunol. 2008 Mar 15;180(6):3824-32.

A specific anti-Aire antibody reveals aire expression is restricted to medullary 
thymic epithelial cells and not expressed in periphery.

Hubert FX(1), Kinkel SA, Webster KE, Cannon P, Crewther PE, Proeitto AI, Wu L,
Heath WR, Scott HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Medicine, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
hubert@wehi.edu.au

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy is an autoimmune
disorder caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene AIRE. We examined
the expression of Aire in different organs (thymus, spleen, and lymph nodes) in
C57BL/6 mice, using a novel rat mAb, specific for murine Aire. Using flow
cytometry, directly fluorochrome-labeled mAb revealed Aire expression in a rare
thymic cellular subset that was CD45(-), expressed low levels of Ly51, and was
high for MHC-II and EpCam. This subset also expressed a specific pattern of
costimulatory molecules, including CD40, CD80, and PD-L1. Immunohistochemical
analysis revealed that Aire(+) cells were specifically localized to the thymus
or, more precisely, to the cortico-medulla junction and medulla, correlating with
the site of negative selection. Although in agreement with previous studies, low 
levels of Aire mRNA was detected in all dendritic cell subtypes however lacZ
staining, immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry failed to detect Aire protein. 
At a cellular level, Aire was expressed in perinuclear speckles within the
nucleus. This report provides the first detailed analysis of Aire protein
expression, highlighting the precise location at both the tissue and cellular
level.

PMID: 18322189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Presse Med. 2008 Jul-Aug;37(7-8):1158-71. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2007.11.015. Epub
2008 Feb 25.

[Apeced syndrome or autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome Type 1].

[Article in French]

Proust-Lemoine E(1), Wémeau JL.

Author information: 
(1)Clinique endocrinologique Marc Linquette, CHRU de Lille, F-59037 Lille Cedex, 
France. e-proust-lemoine@chru-lille.fr

Apeced syndrome is a rare disease, with autosomal recessive transmission and
associated with mutations of the AIRE gene, which is involved in central and
peripheral immune tolerance mechanisms. Its diagnosis is classically based on the
combination of any two of the following three major criteria: chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism and autoimmune chronic
adrenocortical insufficiency (Addison disease). One single criterion is
sufficient to diagnosis a sibling of a patient already diagnosed. Because of its 
great phenotypic variability, some atypical or oligosymptomatic forms may not be 
recognized. In the presence of one of the three major criteria, it is thus
important to look for other clinical manifestations--digestive, cutaneous
(including keratinized appendages) and ophthalmological (until then considered
minor). In these atypical forms, the diagnosis depends on molecular genetics.
Prognosis is influenced by different factors that may be genetic (AIRE mutations,
HLA), hormonal (sex) or environmental (infections). Potentially fatal disease
(hepatitis or severe malabsorption) requires immunosuppressant therapy. Before
beginning this aggressive treatment, underlying infectious foci, especially of
candidiasis, must be sought and treated to prevent the development of extremely
serious systemic infections in this context. A workup for splenic atrophy is also
recommended.

PMID: 18296018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. EMBO Rep. 2008 Apr;9(4):370-6. doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.2008.11. Epub 2008 Feb 22.

The autoimmune regulator PHD finger binds to non-methylated histone H3K4 to
activate gene expression.

Org T(1), Chignola F, Hetényi C, Gaetani M, Rebane A, Liiv I, Maran U, Mollica L,
Bottomley MJ, Musco G, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu 50411, Estonia.

Mutations in the gene autoimmune regulator (AIRE) cause autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy. AIRE is expressed in thymic 
medullary epithelial cells, where it promotes the expression of tissue-restricted
antigens. By the combined use of biochemical and biophysical methods, we show
that AIRE selectively interacts with histone H3 through its first plant
homeodomain (PHD) finger (AIRE-PHD1) and preferentially binds to non-methylated
H3K4 (H3K4me0). Accordingly, in vivo AIRE binds to and activates promoters
containing low levels of H3K4me3 in human embryonic kidney 293 cells. We conclude
that AIRE-PHD1 is an important member of a newly identified class of PHD fingers 
that specifically recognize H3K4me0, thus providing a new link between the status
of histone modifications and the regulation of tissue-restricted antigen
expression in thymus.

PMCID: PMC2261226
PMID: 18292755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Eur J Pediatr. 2008 Nov;167(11):1283-8. doi: 10.1007/s00431-008-0668-3. Epub 2008
Feb 15.

Sicilian family with autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal
dystrophy (APECED) and lethal lung disease in one of the affected brothers.

De Luca F(1), Valenzise M, Alaggio R, Arrigo T, Crisafulli G, Salzano G, Cervato 
S, Mariniello B, Lazzarotto F, Betterle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Messina, Via Consolare Valeria,
Messina, Italy. filippo.deluca@unime.it

INTRODUCTION: We report the clinical and immunological features of the autoimmune
regulator gene (AIRE) in two Sicilian brothers with autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). They were compound 
heterozygotes with R203X/R257X. Both had oral candidiasis since the first year of
life and later developed hypoparathyroidism and Addison disease. The elder
brother had experienced recurrent lower respiratory infections since 5 years of
age and over the years developed severe obstructive lung disease with
bronchiectasis, which led to death at 18 years of age. Both brothers had
circulating autoantibodies against tryptophan hydroxylase and serotonin-producing
cells were absent in the duodenal mucosa. This was associated with intestinal
dysfunction in only the elder brother.
CONCLUSION: (1) In the first Sicilian family with APECED reported up to now we
found a heterozygous mutation that had been previously reported only once. (2) In
the older brother of this family we observed a severe and lethal lung disease;
this case adds to a growing literature describing this association between APECED
and respiratory illnesses. (3) Tryptophan hydroxylase antibodies might be
hypothesized to be the marker of an autoimmune gastrointestinal illness possibly 
associated with APECED.

PMID: 18274776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Integr Environ Assess Manag. 2008 Jan;4(1):15-23.

Consideration of exposure and species sensitivity of triclosan in the freshwater 
environment.

Capdevielle M(1), Van Egmond R, Whelan M, Versteeg D, Hofmann-Kamensky M, Inauen 
J, Cunningham V, Woltering D.

Author information: 
(1)Colgate-Palmolive, 909 River Road, Piscataway, New Jersey 08855, USA.
marie_capdevielle@colpal.com

Triclosan (TCS) is a broad-spectrum antimicrobial used in consumer products
including toothpaste and hand soap. After being used, TCS is washed or rinsed off
and residuals that are not biodegraded or otherwise removed during wastewater
treatment can enter the aquatic environment in wastewater effluents and sludges. 
The environmental exposure and toxicity of TCS has been the subject of various
scientific and regulatory discussions in recent years. There have been a number
of publications in the past 5 y reporting toxicity, fate and transport, and
in-stream monitoring data as well as predictions from aquatic risk assessments.
State-of-the-science probabilistic exposure models, including
Geography-referenced Regional Exposure Assessment Tool for European Rivers
(GREAT-ER) for European surface waters and Pharmaceutical Assessment and
Transport Evalutation (PhATE) for US surface waters, have been used to predict
in-stream concentrations (PECs). These models take into account spatial and
temporal variability in river flows and wastewater emissions based on empirically
derived estimates of chemical removal in wastewater treatment and in receiving
waters. These model simulations (based on realistic use levels of TCS) have been 
validated with river monitoring data in areas known to be receiving high
wastewater loads. The results suggest that 90th percentile (low flow) TCS
concentrations are less than 200 ng/L for the Aire-Calder catchment in the United
Kingdom and between 250 ng/L (with in-stream removal) and 850 ng/L (without
in-stream removal) for a range of US surface waters. To better identify the
aquatic risk of TCS, a species sensitivity distribution (SSD) was constructed
based on chronic toxicity values, either no observed effect concentrations
(NOECs) or various percentile adverse effect concentrations (EC10-25 values) for 
14 aquatic species including fish, invertebrates, macrophytes, and algae. The SSD
approach is believed to represent a more realistic threshold of effect than a
predicted no effect concentration (PNEC) based on the data from the single most
sensitive species tested. The log-logistic SSD was used to estimate a PNEC, based
on an HC5,50 (the concentration estimated to affect the survival, reproduction
and/or growth of 5% of species with a 50% confidence interval). The PNEC for TCS 
was 1,550 ng/L. Comparing the SSD-based PNEC with the PECs derived from GREATER
and PhATE modeling to simulate in-river conditions in Europe and the United
States, the PEC to PNEC ratios are less than unity suggesting risks to pelagic
species are low even under the highest likely exposures which would occur
immediately downstream of wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) discharge points.
In-stream sorption, biodegradation, and photodegradation will further reduce
pelagic exposures of TCS. Monitoring data in Europe and the United States
corroborate the modeled PEC estimates and reductions in TCS concentrations with
distance downstream of WWTP discharges. Environmental metabolites,
bioaccumulation, biochemical responses including endocrine-related effects, and
community level effects are far less well studied for this chemical but are
addressed in the discussion. The aquatic risk assessment for TCS should be
refined as additional information becomes available.

PMID: 18260205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2008 Sep;69(3):511-3. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2008.03206.x. Epub 2008 Jan 31.

Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome in a child during an accelerated
phase of a severe APECED phenotype due to an uncommon mutation of AIRE.

Capalbo D, Elefante A, Spagnuolo MI, Mazza C, Betterle C, Pignata C, Salerno M.

PMID: 18248641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cell Tissue Res. 2008 Apr;332(1):151-8. doi: 10.1007/s00441-007-0515-2. Epub 2008
Jan 31.

Morphological and immunohistochemical study of testicular capsule and peritubular
tissue of emu (Dromaius novaehollandiae) and ostrich (Struthio camelus).

Ozegbe PC(1), Aire TA, Madekurozwa MC, Soley JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Onderstepoort 0110, South Africa.

The testicular capsule and peritubular boundary tissue of the emu and ostrich, as
typical representatives of ratite birds, were studied in sexually mature and
active birds. The testicular capsule was much thicker (578.1+/-73.4 microm for
the free surface of the ostrich testis, and 176.2+/-57.5 microm for the emu) than
those of members of the Galloanserae. The cellular composition of both testicular
capsule and peritubular tissue was similar generally to that of members of the
previously studied Galloanserae and of mammals. The tunica albuginea of the
testicular capsule mainly comprised smooth-muscle-like or myoid cells mostly
running in one direction and occurring in one main mass. Unlike the Galloanserae,
the tunica albuginea contained more collagen fibres than smooth muscle cells,
especially in the ostrich. Peritubular tissue was similarly composed of
smooth-muscle-like cells distributed in several layers. Actin microfilaments and 
desmin and vimentin intermediate filaments were variably immunoexpressed in these
two tissue types in both birds, with a clear dichotomy in the peritubular tissue.
Thus, taken together with studies of some members of the Galloanserae, avian
testes clearly contain a morphological mechanism that is represented partly by
the smooth muscle cells of the testicular capsule and peritubular tissue for
transporting the testicular fluid, which is usually copious in birds, and its
cellular content from the testis into the excurrent duct system; this mechanism
is similar to that found in mammals.

PMID: 18236082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Immunogenetics. 2008 Feb;60(2):105-14. doi: 10.1007/s00251-007-0268-9. Epub 2008 
Jan 23.

Evolutionarily conserved and divergent regions of the autoimmune regulator (Aire)
gene: a comparative analysis.

Saltis M(1), Criscitiello MF, Ohta Y, Keefe M, Trede NS, Goitsuka R, Flajnik MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, 
MD 21201, USA.

During T cell differentiation, medullary thymic epithelial cells (MTEC) expose
developing T cells to tissue-specific antigens. MTEC expression of such
self-antigens requires the transcription factor autoimmune regulator (Aire). In
mammals, defects in aire result in multi-tissue, T cell-mediated autoimmunity.
Because the T cell receptor repertoire is randomly generated and extremely
diverse in all jawed vertebrates, it is likely that an aire-dependent T cell
tolerance mechanism also exists in nonmammalian vertebrates. We have isolated
aire genes from animals in all gnathostome classes except the cartilaginous fish 
by a combination of molecular techniques and scanning of expressed sequence tags 
and genomic databases. The deduced amino acid sequences of Aire were compared
among mouse, human, opossum, chicken, Xenopus, zebrafish, and pufferfish. The
first of two plant homeodomains (PHD) in human Aire and regions associated with
nuclear and cytoplasmic localization are evolutionarily conserved, while other
domains are either absent or divergent in one or more vertebrate classes.
Furthermore, the second zinc-binding domain previously named Aire PHD2 appears to
have greater sequence similarity with Ring finger domains than to PHD domains.
Point mutations in defective human aire genes are generally found in the most
evolutionarily conserved regions of the protein. These findings reveal a very
rapid evolution of certain regions of aire during vertebrate evolution and
support the existence of an aire-dependent mechanism of T cell tolerance dating
back at least to the emergence of bony fish.

PMID: 18214467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Immunol. 2008 Feb 1;180(3):1338-43.

Expression of Aire and the early wave of apoptosis in spermatogenesis.

Schaller CE(1), Wang CL, Beck-Engeser G, Goss L, Scott HS, Anderson MS, Wabl M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California-San
Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Expression of the autoimmune regulator (Aire) protein in mice and humans is
thought to be restricted to the medullary epithelial and monocyte-dendritic cells
of the thymus. There it mediates expression and presentation of a large variety
of proteins, including those that are peripheral organ-specific and are not
expressed by other thymocytes. In this way, self-reactive T lymphocytes that
would attack peripheral cells producing these proteins are confronted with the
self-Ags and, as a consequence, are deleted. In this study, we show that Aire
mRNA is also expressed in the testis--another tissue with promiscuous gene
expression. Aire protein, however, is expressed only sporadically in
spermatogonia and spermatocytes. Transcription of genes that are under Aire
control in the thymus is unaffected by Aire in the testis. However, in mice with 
a disrupted Aire gene, the scheduled apoptotic wave of germ cells, which is
necessary for normal mature spermatogenesis, is reduced, and sporadic apoptosis
in adults is increased. Because Rag-1 deficiency does not abolish the effect, the
adaptive immune system is not involved. We suggest that there is a link between
the scheduled and sporadic apoptotic processes and propose that scheduled
apoptosis provides a counterselection mechanism that keeps the germline stable.

PMID: 18209027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Genes Immun. 2008 Mar;9(2):130-6. doi: 10.1038/sj.gene.6364457. Epub 2008 Jan 17.

AIRE variations in Addison's disease and autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes
(APS): partial gene deletions contribute to APS I.

Bøe Wolff AS(1), Oftedal B, Johansson S, Bruland O, Løvås K, Meager A, Pedersen
C, Husebye ES, Knappskog PM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
Anette.boe@med.uib.no

Autoimmune Addison's disease (AAD) is often associated with other components in
autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes (APS). Whereas APS I is caused by mutations in
the AIRE gene, the susceptibility genes for AAD and APS II are unclear. In the
present study, we investigated whether polymorphisms or copy number variations in
the AIRE gene were associated with AAD and APS II. First, nine SNPs in the AIRE
gene were analyzed in 311 patients with AAD and APS II and 521 healthy controls, 
identifying no associated risk. Second, in a subgroup of 25 of these patients,
AIRE sequencing revealed three novel polymorphisms. Finally, the AIRE copy number
was determined by duplex quantitative PCR in 14 patients with APS I, 161 patients
with AAD and APS II and in 39 healthy subjects. In two Scandinavian APS I
patients previously reported to be homozygous for common AIRE mutations, we
identified large deletions of the AIRE gene covering at least exon 2 to exon 8.
We conclude that polymorphisms in the AIRE gene are not associated with AAD and
APS II. We further suggest that DNA analysis of the parents of patients found to 
be homozygous for mutations in AIRE, always should be performed.

PMID: 18200029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Tissue Antigens. 2008 Mar;71(3):206-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2007.00992.x.
Epub 2007 Jan 8.

Genetic analysis of autoimmune regulator haplotypes in alopecia areata.

Wengraf DA(1), McDonagh AJ, Lovewell TR, Vasilopoulos Y, Macdonald-Hull SP, Cork 
MJ, Messenger AG, Tazi-Ahnini R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, 
UK.

Alopecia areata is an immune-mediated disorder, occurring with the highest
observed frequency in the rare recessive autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) syndrome caused by
mutations of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene on chromosome 21q22.3. We have 
previously detected association between alopecia areata and a single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) in the AIRE gene in patients without APECED, and we now report
the findings of an extended examination of the association of alopecia areata
with haplotype analysis including six SNPs in the AIRE gene: C-103T, C4144G,
T5238C, G6528A, T7215C and T11787C. In Caucasian groups of 295 patients and 363
controls, we found strong association between the AIRE 7215C allele and AA [P =
3.8 x 10(-8), OR (95% CI): 2.69 (1.8-4.0)]. The previously reported association
between AA and the AIRE 4144G allele was no longer significant on correction for 
multiple testing. The AIRE haplotypes CCTGCT and CGTGCC showed a highly
significant association with AA [P = 6.05 x 10(-6), 9.47 (2.91-30.8) and P =
0.001, 3.51 (1.55-7.95), respectively]. To select the haplotypes most informative
for analysis, we tagged the polymorphisms using SNPTag software. Employing AIRE
C-103T, G6528A, T7215C and T11787C as tag SNPs, two haplotypes were associated
with AA; AIRE CGCT and AIRE CGCC [P = 3.84 x 10(-7), 11.40 (3.53-36.9) and P =
3.94 x 10(-4), 2.13 (1.39-3.24) respectively]. The AIRE risk haplotypes
identified in this study potentially account for a major component of the genetic
risk of developing alopecia areata.

PMID: 18194361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Clin Immunol. 2008 May;28 Suppl 1:S29-33. doi: 10.1007/s10875-007-9159-y. Epub 
2008 Jan 5.

Autoimmunity in severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID): lessons from patients
and experimental models.

Milner JD(1), Fasth A, Etzioni A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Autoimmunity is observed in many immunodeficiencies and is thought to be mediated
mainly by persistent infection. Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is the
most severe form of immunodeficiency and is also on occasion associated with
autoimmune phenomena, usually in the form of the Omenn's Syndrome phenotype.
Recent studies both in human and mice shed light into the pathogenesis of these
two seemingly different conditions occurring together. Central tolerance, which
is in charge of elimination of autoreactive T-cell clones, is defective in SCID
because of markedly reduced expression of Aire, a transcriptional regulator for
the expression of tissue-specific antigens in the thymus. Peripheral tolerance is
also markedly decreased in SCID because of several factors including the
expansion of T-cell clones as a consequence of the lymphopenia observed in these 
condition as well as a diminished number of T regulatory (FOXP3+)cells, allowing 
autoreactive T cells to proliferate and infiltrate various organs in the body of 
SCID. It is thus of no surprise when both central and peripheral tolerance are
impaired that autoimmunity can be observed in SCID.

PMID: 18193342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2008 Jan;49(1):34-41. doi: 10.1167/iovs.07-0685.

Small proline-rich protein 1B (SPRR1B) is a biomarker for squamous metaplasia in 
dry eye disease.

Li S(1), Nikulina K, DeVoss J, Wu AJ, Strauss EC, Anderson MS, McNamara NA.

Author information: 
(1)Francis I. Proctor Foundation, University of California-San Francisco, 513
Parnassus, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

PURPOSE: Squamous metaplasia occurs in ocular surface diseases like Sjögren's
syndrome (SS). It is a phenotypic change whereby epithelial cells initiate
synthesis of squamous cell-specific proteins such as small proline-rich protein
1B (SPRR1B) that result in pathologic keratin formation on the ocular surface.
The authors hypothesized that inflammation is a key inducer of pathologic
keratinization and that SPRR1B represents an analytical biomarker for the study
of the molecular mechanisms.
METHODS: Real-time quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry were used to
examine SPRR1B mRNA and protein in two different mouse models of dry eye and
patients with SS. Adoptive transfer of mature lymphocytes from mice lacking the
autoimmune regulator (aire) gene was performed to examine the role of
inflammation as an inducer of squamous metaplasia. SPRR1B expression in response 
to several cytokines was examined in vitro, whereas the expression of cytokines
IL1beta and IFNgamma was quantified in ocular tissues of aire-deficient mice and 
patients with SS.
RESULTS: SPRR1B was increased across the ocular surface of mice with both
desiccating stress and autoimmune-mediated, aqueous-deficient dry eye and in
patients with SS. Adoptive transfer of CD4(+) T cells from aire-deficient mice to
immunodeficient recipients caused advanced ocular surface keratinization.
IL1alpha, IL1beta, IL6, IFNgamma, and TNFalpha induced SPRR1B expression in vitro
and the local expression of IL1beta and IFNgamma was elevated in ocular tissues
of patients with SS and aire-deficient mice.
CONCLUSIONS: SPRR1B is a valid biomarker for the study of the molecular
mechanisms of squamous metaplasia. There is a definitive link between
inflammation and squamous metaplasia in autoimmune-mediated dry eye disease, with
IL1beta and IFNgamma likely acting as key participants.

PMCID: PMC2574421
PMID: 18172072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Immunol. 2008 Apr;45(7):1847-62.

Functional interaction of AIRE with PIAS1 in transcriptional regulation.

Ilmarinen T(1), Kangas H, Kytömaa T, Eskelin P, Saharinen J, Seeler JS,
Tanhuanpää K, Chan FY, Slattery RM, Alakurtti K, Palvimo JJ, Ulmanen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Biomedicum
Helsinki, Haartmaninkatu 8, 00290 Helsinki, Finland.

AIRE (autoimmune regulator) promotes the establishment of self-tolerance by
regulating gene expression in the thymus. Mutations in AIRE lead to an autoimmune
disease, APECED. Here we have identified PIAS proteins as novel AIRE interaction 
partners. Although PIAS proteins function as E3 SUMO ligases, AIRE is not
sumoylated. We expressed AIRE, wt PIAS1, and PIAS1 mutants with deleted SP-RING
domain or SUMO interaction motif (SIM) in different cell lines and demonstrate
that AIRE and PIAS1 localize to adjacent nuclear bodies (NBs). The expression of 
AIRE enhances the formation of PIAS1 NBs. The ability of PIAS1 to localize into
NBs and interconnect with AIRE is neither dependent on the SP-RING domain nor the
SIM. Further, we show that PIAS1 is able to attract AIRE into SUMO1-containing
complexes and that the process is dependent on the SIM of PIAS1. PIAS1 and AIRE
concurrently activate the human insulin promoter, a known target gene of AIRE,
and the SP-RING is required for this activation. Moreover, AIRE represses and
PIAS1 activates the CSTB promoter, used as a model for a housekeeping promoter,
and both the SP-RING and SIM are needed for its activation by PIAS1.
Collectively, our data suggest that AIRE and PIAS1 interact functionally to
regulate the activities of the target genes of AIRE.

PMID: 18083234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2007;7(6):441-8.

Estimating the cost effectiveness of ramipril used for specific clinical
indications: comparing the outcomes in four clinical trials with a common
economic model.

Grover SA(1), Coupal L, Lowensteyn I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Epidemiology and Biostatistics, The McGill
University Health Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
steven.grover@mcgill.ca

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Economic analyses of drug therapies are highly
dependent on the clinical indications for treatment. The cost effectiveness of
ramipril has been evaluated in numerous studies, usually based on the results of 
one specific clinical trial. We estimated the cost effectiveness of this drug
across a range of currently accepted therapeutic indications, using a single
health economic model and adjusted for quality of life, to compare the different 
outcomes observed in four clinical trials.
METHODS: The cardiovascular life expectancy model, a validated Markov model, was 
calibrated to accurately forecast the results of four trials including AIRE,
HOPE, Micro-HOPE, and REIN. We then extrapolated these results over the remaining
life expectancy of the patients enrolled in each study and adjusted for the
quality of life associated with the observed outcomes. The cost per
quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) was then calculated from the perspective of the
Canadian healthcare system incorporating the estimated direct healthcare costs
associated with treatments and outcomes.
RESULTS: After discounting all costs and outcomes 3% annually, the benefits
associated with ramipril ranged from 0.74 QALYs in the AIRE study to 1.22 QALYs
in Micro-HOPE. Treatment was estimated to be cost-saving for some patient groups,
such as those in REIN. The highest cost-effectiveness ratio was observed among
individuals enrolled in HOPE ($Can20 000 per QALY in 2002).
CONCLUSION: Treatment with ramipril appears to be economically attractive across 
a wide range of patient groups, including those with increased coronary risk
and/or diabetes mellitus (HOPE and Micro-HOPE), those with congestive heart
failure (AIRE), and those with non-diabetic nephropathy (REIN).

PMID: 18076211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Curr Opin Immunol. 2007 Dec;19(6):665-73. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

The role of E3 ligases in autoimmunity and the regulation of autoreactive T
cells.

Lin AE(1), Mak TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

The ubiquitination of proteins by E3 ligases has become an important regulatory
mechanism for a variety of immune functions, including the maintenance of self
tolerance and suppression of autoreactive T cell development. This review
highlights recent advances in our knowledge of the functions in this context of
known and potential E3 ligases, including autoimmune regulator (AIRE), TNF
receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), Casitas B cell lymphoma b (Cbl-b), gene
related to anergy in lymphocytes (GRAIL), Itch, and Roquin. We discuss how
disruptions to these molecules may contribute to the loss of T cell homeostasis
and the pathogenesis of autoimmunity. We also report on the implications of the
potential coordinated actions of these molecules for T cell anergy and regulatory
T cell (Treg) functions. The great diversity of E3 ligases and the growing list
of cellular processes in which ubiquitination plays a role make for an exciting
field of research. Findings emerging from these investigations may suggest ways
to exploit the therapeutic potential of manipulating ubiquitination, particularly
for autoimmune disorders.

PMID: 18036806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Jan;1783(1):74-83. Epub 2007 Oct 4.

DNA-PK contributes to the phosphorylation of AIRE: importance in transcriptional 
activity.

Liiv I(1), Rebane A, Org T, Saare M, Maslovskaja J, Kisand K, Juronen E, Valmu L,
Bottomley MJ, Kalkkinen N, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu 50411, Estonia.

The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) protein is a key mediator of the central
tolerance for tissue specific antigens and is involved in transcriptional control
of many antigens in thymic medullary epithelial cells (mTEC). Mutations in the
AIRE gene cause a rare disease named autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). Here we report
using GST pull-down assay, mass-spectrometry and co-immunoprecipitation that a
heterotrimeric complex of DNA-Dependent Protein Kinase (DNA-PK), consisting of
Ku70, Ku80 and DNA-PK catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs), is a novel interaction
partner for AIRE. In vitro phosphorylation assays show that the residues Thr68
and Ser156 are DNA-PK phosphorylation sites in AIRE. In addition, we demonstrate 
that DNA-PKcs is expressed in AIRE positive mTEC cell population and that
introduction of mutations into the AIRE phosphorylation sites decrease the
capacity of AIRE to activate transcription from reporter promoters. In
conclusion, our results suggest that phosphorylation of the AIRE protein at Thr68
and Ser156 by DNA-PK influences AIRE transactivation ability and might have
impact on other aspects of the functional regulation of the AIRE protein.

PMCID: PMC2225445
PMID: 17997173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Nov 13;104(46):18193-8. Epub 2007 Nov 8.

Danger-free autoimmune disease in Aire-deficient mice.

Gray DH(1), Gavanescu I, Benoist C, Mathis D.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin Diabetes Center, Department
of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02215, USA.

The danger theory of immune tolerance asserts that environmental factors hold
primacy over lymphocyte autoreactivity in initiating autoimmune disease. We
sought to test this contention using the Aire-deficient mouse model of the human 
disease, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy, a
multiorgan autoimmune disorder rooted in a lesion in thymic tolerance. Compound
screens stimulating a broad range of innate immune system pathways failed to show
any modulation of disease characteristics in Aire(-/-) mice on either the C57BL/6
or NOD genetic backgrounds. Furthermore, deficiency in the Toll-like receptor
adaptor Myd88 increased the lifespan of NOD.aire(-/-) mice but did not prevent
the initiation of autoimmunity. Finally, germ-free NOD.aire(-/-) mice exhibited
autoimmunity in all organs normally targeted in this model, indicating that
microbial conditioning is not required for activation of autoreactive T cells
relevant to this disease. Together, these data suggest that the stochastic
genesis of dangerous T cell clones can initiate autoimmune disease without the
need for environmental stimulation, underlining the importance of Aire-dependent 
thymic deletion.

PMCID: PMC2084319
PMID: 17991771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Nov 13;104(46):18175-80. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

Developmental pathway of CD4+CD8- medullary thymocytes during mouse ontogeny and 
its defect in Aire-/- mice.

Li J(1), Li Y, Yao JY, Jin R, Zhu MZ, Qian XP, Zhang J, Fu YX, Wu L, Zhang Y,
Chen WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Peking University Health Science Center, 38 Xue Yuan
Road, Beijing 100083, China.

The newly generated single-positive (SP) thymocytes undergo further maturation in
the thymic medulla before their emigration to the periphery. The present study
was undertaken to validate a developmental program we proposed for CD4SP
medullary thymocytes and to explore the mechanisms regulating this process.
During mouse ontogeny, the emergence of different subsets of CD4SP thymocytes
followed a strict temporal order from SP1 to SP4. Parallel to the transition in
surface phenotype, a steady increase in function was observed. As further
evidence, purified SP1 cells were able to sequentially give rise to SP2, SP3, and
SP4 cells in intrathymic adoptive transfer and in culture. Notably, the
development of CD4SP cells in the medulla seemed to be critically dependent on a 
functionally intact medullary epithelial cell compartment because Relb and Aire
deficiency were found to cause severe blockage at the transition from SP3 to SP4.
Taken together, this work establishes an ontogenetically and functionally
relevant maturation program for CD4SP thymocytes. Precise dissection of this
program should facilitate further inquiry into the molecular mechanisms governing
normal thymocyte development and its disturbance in pathological conditions.

PMCID: PMC2084316
PMID: 17984055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jan 18;283(3):1723-31. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

AIRE's CARD revealed, a new structure for central tolerance provokes
transcriptional plasticity.

Ferguson BJ(1), Alexander C, Rossi SW, Liiv I, Rebane A, Worth CL, Wong J, Laan
M, Peterson P, Jenkinson EJ, Anderson G, Scott HS, Cooke A, Rich T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Divisions of Immunology and Cellular Pathology,
University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Developing T cells encounter peripheral self-antigens in the thymus in order to
delete autoreactive clones. It is now known that the autoimmune regulator protein
(AIRE), which is expressed in thymic medullary epithelial cells, plays a key role
in regulating the thymic transcription of these peripheral tissue-specific
antigens. Mutations in the AIRE gene are associated with a severe multiorgan
autoimmune syndrome (APECED), and autoimmune reactivities are manifest in
AIRE-deficient mice. Functional AIRE protein is expressed as distinct nuclear
puncta, although no structural basis existed to explain their relevance to
disease. In addressing the cell biologic basis for APECED, we made the unexpected
discovery that an AIRE mutation hot spot lies in a caspase recruitment domain.
Combined homology modeling and in vitro data now show how APECED mutations
influence the activity of this transcriptional regulator. We also provide novel
in vivo evidence for AIRE's association with a global transcription cofactor,
which may underlie AIRE's focal, genome-wide, alteration of the transcriptome.

PMID: 17974569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2007 Nov;3(6):891-900. doi: 10.1586/1744666X.3.6.891.

Autoimmune regulator functions in autoimmunity control.

Matsumoto M(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Tokushima, Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for
Enzyme Research, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan. mitsuru@ier.tokushima-u.ac.jp

Mutation of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene is responsible for the
development of autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED), an organ-specific autoimmune disease with monogenic autosomal recessive
inheritance. AIRE is strongly expressed in thymic epithelial cells (TECs), and
its structural features suggest that it probably acts as a transcriptional
regulator. The role of Aire in the elimination of autoreactive T cells (i.e.,
negative selection) has been well demonstrated with the use of transgenic mouse
models, although how Aire regulates this process in TECs has yet to be
determined. Aire also regulates other features of autoimmunity, such as
target-organ specificity of autoimmune destruction, suggesting that an
understanding of the relationship between AIRE gene malfunction and the breakdown
of self-tolerance promises to help unravel the pathogenesis of not only APECED
but also other types of autoimmune diseases. Owing to this unique tolerogenic
function of Aire, the cellular origin and developmental process of
Aire-expressing TECs is now becoming an interesting field for intense research.

PMID: 20477138  [PubMed]


87. J Immunol. 2007 Nov 1;179(9):5693-700.

Lymphotoxin pathway and Aire influences on thymic medullary epithelial cells are 
unconnected.

Venanzi ES(1), Gray DH, Benoist C, Mathis D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin
Diabetes Center, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The lymphotoxin pathway is critical for the development and maintenance of
peripheral lymphoid organs. Mice with deficiencies in members of this pathway
lack lymph nodes and Peyer's patches and have abnormal spleen architecture. These
animals also develop autoantibodies to and lymphocytic infiltrates of multiple
organs, provoking speculation that the lymphotoxin pathway may play a role in
central tolerance induction. Indeed, a series of reports has claimed that
lymphotoxin signals control the expression of Aire, a transcriptional regulator
that is expressed in medullary epithelial cells of the thymus, mediates ectopic
transcription of genes encoding a variety of peripheral tissue Ags, and promotes 
clonal deletion of self-reactive thymocytes. However, one report argued that
lymphotoxin signals regulate the composition and organization of the thymus,
particularly of the medullary epithelial compartment. Herein, we resolve this
controversy in favor of the latter view. The expression and function of Aire were
unaffected in medullary epithelial cells of mice lacking either lymphotoxin beta 
receptor or the lymphotoxin alpha-chain, and there was minimal overlap between
the sets of genes controlled by Aire and lymphotoxin. Instead, both knockout
lines showed abnormal medullary epithelial cell organization, and the line
lacking the beta receptor had significantly fewer medullary epithelial cells. In 
short, the lymphotoxin pathway drives the developmental rather than selectional
properties of thymic stromal cells.

PMID: 17947641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(24):8815-23. Epub 2007 Oct 15.

AIRE recruits P-TEFb for transcriptional elongation of target genes in medullary 
thymic epithelial cells.

Oven I(1), Brdicková N, Kohoutek J, Vaupotic T, Narat M, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rosalind Russell Medical Research Center, University
of California-San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0703, USA.

AIRE is a transcriptional activator that directs the ectopic expression of many
tissue-specific genes in medullary thymic epithelial cells, which plays an
important role in the negative selection of autoreactive T cells. However, its
mechanism of action remains poorly understood. In this study, we found that AIRE 
regulates the step of elongation rather than initiation of RNA polymerase II. For
these effects, AIRE bound and recruited P-TEFb to target promoters in medullary
thymic epithelial cells. In these cells, AIRE activated the ectopic transcription
of insulin and salivary protein 1 genes. Indeed, by chromatin
immunoprecipitation, we found that RNA polymerase II was already engaged on these
promoters but was unable to elongate in the absence of AIRE. Moreover, the
genetic inactivation of cyclin T1 from P-TEFb abolished the transcription of
AIRE-responsive genes and led to lymphocytic infiltration of lacrimal and
salivary glands in the CycT1-/- mouse. Our findings reveal critical steps by
which AIRE regulates the transcription of genes that control central tolerance in
the thymus.

PMCID: PMC2169392
PMID: 17938200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Nat Rev Immunol. 2007 Oct;7(10):1.

Does the deficiency of Aire in mice really resemble human APECED?

Kekäläinen E, Miettinen A, Arstila TP.

Comment on
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2007 Aug;7(8):645-50.

PMID: 17932495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Immunol Lett. 2007 Nov 30;114(1):31-7. Epub 2007 Sep 29.

Graft-versus-host-like disease complicating thymoma: lack of AIRE expression as a
cause of non-hereditary autoimmunity?

Offerhaus GJ(1), Schipper ME, Lazenby AJ, Montgomery E, Morsink FH, Bende RJ,
Musler AR, van Lier RA, van Noesel CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Three patients with graft-versus-host-like enterocolonopathy are reported. Their 
history was remarkable for thymoma and other autoimmune manifestations such as
thrombocytopenia, red cell aplasia, interface dermatitis, Sjogren sialadenits,
vanishing bile ducts and rheumatoid arthritis. In all patients, microsatellite
analysis showed the autologous nature of the lymphocytes in the affected organs
ruling out GVHD. In search for mechanisms that could mediate loss of tolerance to
self-antigens we found in a panel of thymomas, including those of the three
patients, a complete lack of autoimmune regulator (AIRE) and minimal expression
of the transcription factor FOXP3 in the intra-tumoral T cells. AIRE is a
recently discovered transcription factor which plays a key role in the
maintenance of central tolerance and is mutated in the autosomal recessive
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome APS-1. Our observations indicate that
thymoma-related autoimmunity can potentially be elicited by an incomplete
deletion of 'self'-specific T cells in concert with an insufficient formation of 
natural Tregs.

PMID: 17928069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Rev Neurol. 2007 Oct 1-15;45(7):385-8.

[Prophylaxis of chronic daily headache with a simplified regimen of subcutaneous 
administration of botulinum toxin type A].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín-Araguz A(1), Garrido-Carrión A, Fernández-Armayor V.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Universidad
Complutense, Madrid, Spain. amartina@medynet.com

INTRODUCTION: Primary headaches are one of the most prevalent conditions in
neurology. Botulinum toxin type A (TBA) has been used for years as a prophylactic
measure for chronic daily headache (CDH) with varying infiltration regimens and
outcomes.
AIM: To demonstrate the speed, convenience and safety of a subcutaneous regimen
of TBA as a prophylactic for CDH, and also to determine how effective it is as a 
preventive therapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 843 patients were infiltrated subcutaneously
with 100 U of TBA (Botox) using a 'fixed dose-fixed site' technique in six
pericranial points in periods of at least three months. We evaluated the
reduction in the mean frequency of crises and days with headaches and the intake 
of analgesics, as well as the percentage of patients with a reduction of over 50%
in the mean frequency of headache crises.
RESULTS: Subcutaneous infiltration of TBA brought about a reduction of
78.91+/-6.81% in the frequency of monthly crises (p<0.001) and a reduction of
62.38+/-12.8% in the number of days per month with headache after three months'
infiltration. Reports from patients indicated that 92.8% of them had reduced the 
number of days with headache per month by at least 50%. Mean frequency and total 
intake of analgesics decreased from 21.48+/-2.47 to 1.96+/-1.27 (p<0.001) and
from 126.01+/-24.7 to 6.65+/-2.27 doses, respectively. There were few side
effects, none of which were severe.
CONCLUSION: Simplified subcutaneous infiltration of TBA is very effective,
convenient, fast and safe as a means of preventing CDH.

PMID: 17918102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Sep;1110:159-65.

Genetic dissection of autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 2: common origin of 
a spectrum of phenotypes.

Ballarini A(1), Lee-Kirsch MA.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Technische Universität Dresden,
Fetscherstr. 74, 01307 Dresden, Germany.

Autoimmune diseases constitute a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized
by the loss of immune tolerance to self-antigens. Despite their distinct clinical
picture, there is growing evidence that common molecular mechanisms may
contribute to the whole spectrum of autoimmune diseases. This theory is strongly 
supported by the existence of the autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes (APS). Thus,
the clinical diagnosis of APS1 is made in an individual who presents with at
least two out of three cardinal symptoms, namely autoimmune Addison's disease,
autoimmune hypoparathyroidism, and mucocutaneous candidiasis. APS1 is a rare
autosomal recessive syndrome caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator
(AIRE) gene. APS2, which occurs at a much higher frequency, is classically
defined as the coexistence of autoimmune Addison's disease, autoimmune thyroid
disease, and/or type 1 diabetes. In contrast to APS1, the precise modes of
inheritance and the genetic causes underlying APS2 remain unknown. Identification
of genetic factors predisposing to this syndrome may contribute to our
understanding of common mechanisms involved in autoimmunity.

PMID: 17911431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Exp Med. 2007 Oct 29;204(11):2521-8. Epub 2007 Oct 1.

Proliferative arrest and rapid turnover of thymic epithelial cells expressing
Aire.

Gray D(1), Abramson J, Benoist C, Mathis D.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin Diabetes Center, Department
of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02215, USA.

Expression of autoimmune regulator (Aire) by thymic medullary epithelial cells
(MECs) is critical for central tolerance of self. To explore the mechanism by
which such a rare cell population imposes tolerance on the large repertoire of
differentiating thymocytes, we examined the proliferation and turnover of Aire(+)
and Aire(-) MEC subsets through flow cytometric analysis of
5-bromo-2'deoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation. The Aire(+) MEC subset was almost
entirely postmitotic and derived from cycling Aire(-) precursors. Experiments
using reaggregate thymic organ cultures revealed the presence of such precursors 
among Aire(-) MECs expressing low levels of major histocompatibility complex
class II and CD80. The kinetics of BrdU decay showed the Aire(+) population to
have a high turnover. Aire did not have a direct impact on the division of MECs
in vitro or in vivo but, rather, induced their apoptosis. We argue that these
properties strongly favor a "terminal differentiation" model for Aire function in
MECs, placing strict temporal limits on the operation of any individual Aire(+)
MEC in central tolerance induction. We further speculate that the speedy
apoptosis of Aire-expressing MECs may be a mechanism to promote
cross-presentation of the array of peripheral-tissue antigens they produce.

PMCID: PMC2118482
PMID: 17908938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Eur J Pediatr. 2008 Aug;167(8):949-53. Epub 2007 Sep 21.

An 8-year-old boy with autoimmune hepatitis and Candida onychosis as the first
symptoms of autoimmune polyglandular syndrome (APS1): identification of a new
homozygous mutation in the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE).

Lintas C(1), Cappa M, Comparcola D, Nobili V, Fierabracci A.

Author information: 
(1)Autoimmunity and Organ Regeneration Laboratory, Children's Hospital Bambino
Gesù, 00165, Roma, Italy.

An 8-year-old boy presented in 1995 with a 2-year history of hypertransaminasemia
and hypergammaglobulinemia. Afterwards the patient displayed onychosis with a
positive culture test for Candida albicans (CA). Because of the persistence of
hypertransaminasemia, a percutaneous liver biopsy was performed showing 'low
grade chronic active autoimmune hepatitis' (AIH), positive for liver-kidney
microsomal autoantibodies and antibodies to the hepatic autoantigen cytochrome
P450-1A2. Immunosuppressive treatment was initiated. In 2003 he developed
Addison's disease resulting in the diagnosis of autoimmune polyendocrinopathy
candidiasis-ectodermal dysplasia (APECED) syndrome, also known as autoimmune
polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS1). Anti-17OH hydroxylase antibodies tested
negative, anti-21-OH hydroxylase autoantibodies were positive. Among the other
relevant organ- and non organ- specific autoantibodies, aromatic L-amino acid
decarboxylase (ADDC) autoantibodies and anti-tryptophan hydroxylase
autoantibodies were positive. The patient also presented polyuria and polydypsia 
with diabetes insipidus. Because of the presence of two diagnostic criteria of
APS1, mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE) were performed, which
revealed the presence of a novel mutation (c1314- 1326 del 13/insGT) in exon 11. 
In conclusion, the diagnosis of APECED should be suspected in any child with
minimal hypertransaminasemia, anti-microsomal autoantibodies and Candida albicans
onychosis.

PMID: 17891543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Methods Mol Biol. 2007;380:377-90.

Thymic involution: implications for self-tolerance.

Hakim FT(1), Gress RE.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Transplantation and Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD, USA.

The thymus contributes to the regulation of tolerance and the prevention of
autoimmunity at many levels. First, auto-reactive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells are
clonally deleted during negative selection in the thymus, establishing central
tolerance. The unique expression of the AIRE (autoimmune regulator) gene in
medullary thymic epithelial cells results in expression of a broad array of
tissue-specific antigens. Thymocytes bearing T-cell receptors that bind to these 
tissue-specific antigens are clonally deleted. This process removes self-reactive
T cells from the repertoire before T cells are exported to the periphery. Second,
CD4+CD25 bright regulatory T cells (Treg) develop in parallel with CD4+ and CD8+ 
effector T cells in the thymus. Unlike T effector cells, Treg fail to be deleted 
by exposure to tissue antigens during thymic maturation. After export to the
periphery, Treg cells play a critical role in the prevention of autoimmunity,
suppression of inflammatory responses, and the modulation of T-cell homeostasis. 
Finally, productive thymopoiesis, in and of itself, may be a factor deterring
autoimmunity, The thymus continuously generates stable, resting populations of
naive T cells that maintain the numbers and the diversity of the T-cell
repertoire. Under conditions of lymphopenia prolonged by inadequate thymopoiesis,
compensatory peripheral expansion of T cells occurs to maintain stable T-cell
levels. Under circumstances in which the repertoire is limited, Homeostatic
proliferation may increase the opportunity for T-cells reactive with self
antigens to expand, leading to autoimmune disorders. In all of these respects,
the thymus maintains immunologic tolerance to self. Given the importance of the
thymus in control of autoimmunity, the gradual age-dependent decline in thymic
cytoarchitecture and thymopoietic productivity may, therefore, contribute to the 
development of auto-reactivity and loss of self-tolerance.

PMID: 17876107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Pigment Cell Res. 2007 Oct;20(5):402-4.

Vitiligo-associated multiple autoimmune disease is not associated with genetic
variation in AIRE.

Jin Y, Bennett DC, Amadi-Myers A, Holland P, Riccardi SL, Gowan K, Fain PR,
Spritz RA.

PMID: 17850514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Clin Immunol. 2007 Nov;125(2):131-7. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

A robust immunoassay for anti-interferon autoantibodies that is highly specific
for patients with autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1.

Zhang L(1), Barker JM, Babu S, Su M, Stenerson M, Cheng M, Shum A, Zamir E,
Badolato R, Law A, Eisenbarth GS, Anderson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, University of Colorado Health
Sciences Center, Box B140 Building M20, 1775 N. Ursula Street, Aurora, CO
80045-6511, USA.

High titer antibodies to type 1 interferons have been recently reported as being 
highly specific for patients with autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS1)
in Finnish and Norwegian patients with mutations in the AIRE gene. Those studies 
employed a complex neutralization assay to define the type 1 interferon
autoantibodies. Here we have established a competitive europium time resolved
fluorescence assay for IFN-alpha autoantibodies and measured sera from subjects
with APS1, first degree relatives of APS1 patients, patients with Addison's
disease or Type 1 diabetes. The europium-based immunoassay utilizes plate bound
human IFN-alpha incubated with sera with or without competition with fluid phase 
IFN-alpha, followed by anti-IgG biotinylated antibody and detection with
streptavidin-europium. The index of IFN-alpha Ab was calculated as (CPS (Counts
per second) without competition-CPS with competition)/(CPS positive standard sera
without competition-CPS positive standard sera with competition). RESULTS are
reported for raw CPS and indices and are compared across the different
subjects.RESULTS: For normal controls (n=100) CPS without competition were
31,237+/-17,328 CPS while after subtracting the competition value, the results
were -6563+/-10,303 CPS. The initial APS1 patient (used to create the index as
1.0) gave 394,063 CPS without competition and a delta of 363,662+/-31,587 CPS
with competition. Scatchard plot analysis of this patient sample revealed a high 
avidity for IFN-alpha (K(d) of 0.5 nM). The CPS, delta, and index for 6/7 APS1
patients were strongly positive and 3 standard deviations or more above that of
the normal controls. Using a cut-off of 2 standard deviations above normal
controls, relatives of APS1 patients were negative for type I interferon
autoantibodies as were 71 patients with Addison's disease (non-APS1) and 141 Type
1 diabetes patients. This simple high throughput competitive europium time
resolved fluorescence assay had a sensitivity of > or =86% or greater and a
specificity of >99.5%.

PMCID: PMC2080870
PMID: 17825626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Reprod Biomed Online. 2007 Aug;15(2):227-35.

Candidate epigenetic biomarkers for non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of Down
syndrome.

Old RW(1), Crea F, Puszyk W, Hultén MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL,
UK. r.w.old@warwick.ac.uk

This report describes the first identification and characterization of three
chromosome-21-specific DNA sequences (and reference sequences from other
chromosomes) that are differentially methylated between peripheral blood and
placental tissue, with the aim of providing epigenetic biomarkers for quantifying
cell-free fetal DNA in maternal plasma. To select sequences to be screened for
differential methylation, three strategies were adopted: (i) investigating
promoters of highly differentially expressed genes; (ii) choosing 'random'
promoter regions; and (iii) choosing 'random' non-promoter regions. Over 200
pre-selected DNA sequences were screened using a methylation-specific restriction
enzyme assay. Differentially methylated sequences located at 21q22.3 (AIRE, SIM2 
and ERG genes), 1q32.1 (CD48 gene and FAIM3 gene), 2p14 (ARHGAP25 gene) and 12q24
(SELPLG gene) were identified. Bisulphite conversion confirmed that CpG sites
within the AIRE promoter region are highly differentially methylated, and
optimized methylation-specific primers for this region that are highly specific
for placental DNA were devised. Next, it was shown that the methylation status of
chorionic villus sample DNA from first trimester pregnancies matched the
hypermethylated state of term placenta. Thus there is no indication of a
difference in methylation status between early and term pregnancy for the
sequences tested. The identified sequences constitute candidate biomarkers for
non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome.

PMID: 17697502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Nature. 2007 Aug 23;448(7156):934-7. Epub 2007 Aug 8.

An IRF8-binding promoter variant and AIRE control CHRNA1 promiscuous expression
in thymus.

Giraud M(1), Taubert R, Vandiedonck C, Ke X, Lévi-Strauss M, Pagani F, Baralle
FE, Eymard B, Tranchant C, Gajdos P, Vincent A, Willcox N, Beeson D, Kyewski B,
Garchon HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U580, 75015 Paris, France.

Promiscuous expression of tissue-restricted auto-antigens in the thymus imposes
T-cell tolerance and provides protection from autoimmune diseases. Promiscuous
expression of a set of self-antigens occurs in medullary thymic epithelial cells 
and is partly controlled by the autoimmune regulator (AIRE), a nuclear protein
for which loss-of-function mutations cause the type 1 autoimmune polyendocrine
syndrome. However, additional factors must be involved in the regulation of this 
promiscuous expression. Here we describe a mechanism controlling thymic
transcription of a prototypic tissue-restricted human auto-antigen gene, CHRNA1. 
This gene encodes the alpha-subunit of the muscle acetylcholine receptor, which
is the main target of pathogenic auto-antibodies in autoimmune myasthenia gravis.
On re-sequencing the CHRNA1 gene, we identified a functional bi-allelic variant
in the promoter that is associated with early onset of disease in two independent
human populations (France and United Kingdom). We show that this variant prevents
binding of interferon regulatory factor 8 (IRF8) and abrogates CHRNA1 promoter
activity in thymic epithelial cells in vitro. Notably, both the CHRNA1 promoter
variant and AIRE modulate CHRNA1 messenger RNA levels in human medullary thymic
epithelial cells ex vivo and also in a transactivation assay. These findings
reveal a critical function of AIRE and the interferon signalling pathway in
regulating quantitative expression of this auto-antigen in the thymus, suggesting
that together they set the threshold for self-tolerance versus autoimmunity.

PMID: 17687331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Appl Opt. 2007 Aug 1;46(22):5110-8.

Estimating the cell density and invasive radius of three-dimensional glioblastoma
tumor spheroids grown in vitro.

Stein AM(1), Nowicki MO, Demuth T, Berens ME, Lawler SE, Chiocca EA, Sander LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, 2074 East Hall, 525 Church 
Street Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. amstein@umich.edu

To gain insight into brain tumor invasion, experiments are conducted on
multicellular tumor spheroids grown in collagen gel. Typically, a radius of
invasion is reported, which is obtained by human measurement. We present a
simple, heuristic algorithm for automated invasive radii estimation (AIRE) that
uses local fluctuations of the image intensity. We then derive an analytical
expression relating the image graininess to the cell density for a model imaging 
system. The result agrees with the experiment up to a multiplicative constant and
thus describes a novel method for estimating the cell density from bright-field
images.

PMID: 17676121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Immunol. 2008 Feb;45(3):805-9. Epub 2007 Aug 1.

Role of PHD fingers and COOH-terminal 30 amino acids in AIRE transactivation
activity.

Meloni A(1), Incani F, Corda D, Cao A, Rosatelli MC.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, Cagliari, Italy.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
autosomic autoimmune disease resulting from the defective function of a gene
codifying for a transcription factor named autoimmune regulation (AIRE). The AIRE
protein contains several domains among which two PHD fingers involved in the
transcriptional activation. We investigated the function of the two PHD finger
domains and the COOH terminal portion of AIRE by using several mutated constructs
transfected in mammalian cells and a luciferase reporter assay. The results
predict that the second PHD as well as the COOH terminal regions have marked
transactivational properties. The COOH terminal region contains the fourth LXXLL 
and the PXXPXP motifs which play a critical role in mediating the transactivation
capacity of the AIRE protein. Our study provides a definition of the role of the 
PHD fingers in transactivation and identifies a new transactivation domain of the
AIRE protein localized in the COOH terminal region.

PMID: 17675238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Curr Opin Immunol. 2007 Oct;19(5):510-5. Epub 2007 Jul 25.

Apoptosis during negative selection of autoreactive thymocytes.

Sohn SJ(1), Thompson J, Winoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology and Cancer Research Laboratory,
University of California, 465 LSA, Berkeley, CA 94720-3200, USA.

Recent investigations have solidified the importance of negative selection in
controlling autoimmunity. Loss of autoimmune regulator (AIRE), required for
thymic stromal-cell differentiation and thymic expression of peripheral antigens,
results in multi-organ autoimmunity. Mice with AIRE/Foxp3 double mutations suffer
from exacerbated autoimmunity when compared with mice with only one mutation,
supporting the important contributions of both central and peripheral tolerance. 
In thymocytes, Cbl is a negative regulator of thymocyte apoptosis while MINK, a
MEKK kinase, is required for negative selection. This is consistent with the
requirement of JNK, p38 and possibly ERK5 MAP kinases in thymocyte apoptosis.
ERK5 induces the Nur77 orphan steroid receptor family members. In cell lines,
Nur77 interaction with Bcl-2 turns Bcl-2 into a pro-apoptotic molecule. This and 
other possibilities will be discussed to explain the unresolved finding that
negative selection is defective in Bim(-/-) but is not efficiently blocked in
Bcl-2 transgenic mice.

PMID: 17656079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Nat Rev Immunol. 2007 Aug;7(8):645-50. Epub 2007 Jul 20.

A decade of AIRE.

Mathis D(1), Benoist C.

Author information: 
(1)The Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2007 Oct;7(10):1.

In 1997, the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene was identified as the locus
underlying susceptibility to the polyendocrine autoimmune disease known as
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). In the
intervening 10 years, it has become increasingly clear that this rare disorder
has provided us with an illuminative window on one of the most fundamental
processes of the immune system--the establishment and maintenance of self
tolerance.

PMID: 17641664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Anat Histol Embryol. 2007 Aug;36(4):255-62.

Macroscopic features of the arterial supply to the reproductive system of the
male ostrich (Struthio camelus).

Elias MZ(1), Aire TA, Soley JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Onderstepoort 0110, Pretoria, South Africa.

The macroscopic features of the arterial supply to the reproductive system of the
male ostrich was studied in 16 pre-pubertal and eight sexually mature and active 
birds. The left and right cranial renal arteries arise from the aorta, between
the cranial divisions of the kidneys. These vessels supply the cranial divisions 
of the kidneys, the testes, the epididymides and the cranial segments of the
ducti deferentia. Accessory testicular arteries which arise directly from the
aorta are present in 45.8% of the specimens. They supply the testes and cranial
parts of the ducti deferentia. They are variable in number and origin, and four
variants are identified. A cranial ureterodeferential branch originates from the 
cranial renal artery, supplies the cranial portion of the ductus deferens and
ureter, and runs caudally to anastomose with the middle renal artery. The sciatic
artery arises laterally from the aorta, just caudal to the acetabulum, and gives 
rise, ventrally, to a common trunk, the common renal artery, which divides into
the middle and caudal renal arteries. The middle renal artery gives rise to the
middle ureterodeferential branch which supplies the middle part of the ductus
deferens and ureter. A few centimetres caudal to the kidney, the aorta terminates
in three branches, namely, the left and right internal iliac arteries and the
median caudal artery. The internal iliac artery divides into the lateral caudal
artery and the pudendal artery; the latter gives off caudal ureterodeferential
branches that supply the caudal segments of the ductus deferens and ureter. In
addition, the pudendal artery gives off vessels that supply the cloaca, some of
which continue to the base of the phallus, where they form an arterial network.
In conclusion, the pattern of the blood supply to the reproductive organs of the 
male ostrich is, in general, similar to that of the domestic fowl and pigeon,
although there are a few highlighted distinctive features.

PMID: 17617101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Immunol. 2008 Jan;45(1):25-33. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

Modulation of Aire regulates the expression of tissue-restricted antigens.

Kont V(1), Laan M, Kisand K, Merits A, Scott HS, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology, Biomedicum, Tartu University, Ravila 19, 50411 Tartu,
Estonia.

Intrathymic expression of tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs) has been viewed as
the key element in the induction of central tolerance and recently, a central
role for the autoimmune regulator (Aire) has been suggested in this process. The 
aim of this study was to establish whether down or up-regulation of Aire leads to
alterations in TRA expression and whether this is limited to thymic epithelial
cells. This study also characterized whether TRAs follow Aire expression during
normal development, and whether thymic microenvironment plays a role in the
expression of Aire and TRAs. We did several in vivo and in vitro experiments to
manipulate Aire expression and measured expression of four TRAs (Trefoil
factor-3, Insulin-2, Major urinary protein-1 and Salivary protein-1) by real-time
RT-PCR. Aire had an allele dose-dependent effect on TRA expression in the
thymuses of mice from two strains, C57BL/6J and Balb/c, but had no effect on TRA 
expression in the lymph nodes. In the thymus, Aire and TRAs were both localized
in the medulla and were co-expressed during normal development and involution. In
the primary stromal cells as well as thymic epithelial cell line, the adenoviral 
over-expression of Aire resulted in an increase in TRA expression. By
manipulating in vitro organ-cultures we showed that thymic microenvironment plays
a dominant role in Aire expression whereas TRAs follow the same pattern. The data
underline a direct role for Aire in TRA expression and suggest that modulation of
Aire has a potential to control central tolerance and autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC1994210
PMID: 17599412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Clin Exp Immunol. 2007 Sep;149(3):504-12. Epub 2007 Jun 22.

Expression of autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE) and T regulatory cells in human
thymomas.

Scarpino S(1), Di Napoli A, Stoppacciaro A, Antonelli M, Pilozzi E, Chiarle R,
Palestro G, Marino M, Facciolo F, Rendina EA, Webster KE, Kinkel SA, Scott HS,
Ruco L.

Author information: 
(1)Dip. di Istopatologia ed Anatomia Patologica, Ospedale Sant'Andrea, II Facoltà
di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università 'La Sapienza', Rome, Italy.
stefania.scarpino@uniroma1.it

Expression of the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE) and the presence of
CD25(+)/forkhead box p3 (FoxP3)(+) T regulatory (T(reg)) cells were investigated 
in histologically normal adult thymi and in thymomas using immunohistochemistry
and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In the normal thymus 
staining for AIRE was detected in the nucleus of some epithelial-like cells
located in the medulla; in thymomas AIRE-positive cells were extremely rare and
could be detected only in the areas of medullary differentiation of two B1 type, 
organoid thymomas. RNA was extracted from 36 cases of thymoma and 21
non-neoplastic thymi obtained from 11 myasthenic (MG(+)) and 10 non-myasthenic
(MG(-)) patients. It was found that AIRE is 8.5-fold more expressed in
non-neoplastic thymi than in thymomas (P = 0.01), and that the amount of AIRE
transcripts present in the thymoma tissue are not influenced by the association
with MG, nor by the histological type. A possible involvement of AIRE in the
development of MG was suggested by the observation that medullary thymic
epithelial cells isolated from AIRE-deficient mice contain low levels of RNA
transcripts for CHRNA 1, a gene coding for acetylcholine receptor. Expression of 
human CHRNA 1 RNA was investigated in 34 human thymomas obtained from 20 MG(-)
patients and 14 MG(+) patients. No significant difference was found in the two
groups (thymoma MG(+), CHRNA1 = 0.013 +/- 0.03; thymoma MG-, CHRNA1 = 0.01 +/-
0.03). In normal and hyperplastic thymi CD25(+)/Foxp3(+) cells were located
mainly in the medulla, and their number was not influenced by the presence of MG.
Foxp3(+) and CD25(+) cells were significantly less numerous in thymomas. A
quantitative estimate of T(reg) cells revealed that the levels of Foxp3 RNA
detected in non-neoplastic thymi were significantly higher (P = 0.02) than those 
observed in 31 cases of thymomas. Our findings indicate that the tissue
microenvironment of thymomas is defective in the expression of relevant functions
that exert a crucial role in the negative selection of autoreactive lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC2219324
PMID: 17590173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Trends Immunol. 2007 Jul;28(7):321-7. Epub 2007 Jun 7.

What's new in the Aire?

Cheng MH(1), Shum AK, Anderson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA.

Unraveling the mechanisms underlying autoimmune disease remains a difficult
challenge. Recent lessons learned from the study of AIRE (autoimmune regulator), 
the gene responsible for the rare monogenic human syndrome APS-1, highlight the
power of genetics to reveal disease pathogenesis. With the discovery of AIRE,
central tolerance has re-emerged as a crucial check against autoimmunity.
Aire-mediated regulation of diverse self-antigens in the thymus serves as a
paradigm for the importance of promiscuous gene expression in the prevention of
autoimmune disease. Recent characterization of Aire-targeted antigens continues
to bear this out. Here, we review the current progress surrounding the role of
Aire in central tolerance from a molecular, genetic and developmental basis.

PMID: 17556019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Intern Med. 2007 Jun;261(6):605-10.

Recurrent herpes simplex virus infection in a patient with autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy associated with L29P and
IVS9-1G>C compound heterozygous autoimmune regulator gene mutations.

Nagafuchi S(1), Umene K, Yamanaka F, Oohashi S, Shindo M, Kurisaki H, Kudoh J,
Shimizu N, Hara T, Harada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science and Technology, School of Medicine, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan. nagafuchi@shs.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) has
characteristic clinical features with organ-specific autoimmune polyendocrine
diseases and candidiasis, caused by the mutations of autoimmune regulator (AIRE) 
gene. Although almost all patients are complicated with mucocutaneous
candidiasis, no apparent susceptibility to other infections has yet been
reported. We herein report that a patient with APECED suffered from recurrent
herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection after severe primary herpetic
stomatitis, associated with sequential HSV-1 isolates of the same genomic
profile, consistent with endogeneous recurrence. Thus, not only candidiasis but
also HSV infection should receive more attention in patients with APECED, with
treatment being administered accordingly.

PMID: 17547716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Immunol. 2007 Jun 1;178(11):7173-80.

The autoimmune regulator directly controls the expression of genes critical for
thymic epithelial function.

Ruan QG(1), Tung K, Eisenman D, Setiady Y, Eckenrode S, Yi B, Purohit S, Zheng
WP, Zhang Y, Peltonen L, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

The autoimmune regulator (Aire) gene plays an essential role in negative
selection of T cells and deletion of autoreactive T cells in the thymus. The
defect in thymic selection in Aire(-/-) mice was attributed to the repressed
expression of tissue-specific Ags in the thymic epithelial cells and defective Ag
presentation; however, the molecular mechanism underlying these functions has
been elusive. Using the chromatin immunoprecipitation technique, we demonstrate
here that Aire binds in vivo to specific DNA sequence motifs and directly
regulates thymic expression of genes important for thymic functions including
expression of autoantigens, cytokines, transcription factors, and
posttranslational modifiers. These results unambiguously established Aire as a
key transcriptional regulator of the immune system.

PMID: 17513766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Curr Pharm Des. 2007;13(13):1335-45.

Role of renin angiotensin system inhibitors in cardiovascular and renal
protection: a lesson from clinical trials.

Stojiljkovic L(1), Behnia R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Management, John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital
of Cook County, Chicago, IL 60612-5773, USA. ssilj@aol.com

Beneficial effects of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI) and
angiotensin type 1 receptor (AT1) blockers in patients with cardiovascular and
renal diseases have been clearly demonstrated in numerous large outcomes studies.
In patients with heart failure (HF), ACEI have been shown to reduce overall
mortality, mortality from cardiovascular causes, to increase life expectancy, as 
well as to preserve the renal function (CONSENSUS, SAVE, TRACE, AIRE, AIREX, CATS
trials). In addition, in the PROGRESS study ACEI substantially decreased the risk
of stroke and transient ischemic attacks in patients with cerebrovascular
disorders. The HOPE and EUROPA studies confirmed that long term therapy with ACEI
provides significant survival benefit in patients with broad range of
atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases. After these large and well designed
clinical studies, ACEI have become standard therapy for routine secondary
prevention in all patients with cardiovascular diseases, unless contraindicated. 
AT1 receptor blockers have been recently added to the cardiovascular therapeutic 
armamentarium. They are believed to provide additional protection by inhibition
of locally synthesized angiotensin II on the level of AT1 receptor. The ELITE II,
ValHeFT and CHARM studies have shown that AT1 receptor blockers are equally
effective as ACEI in reduction of mortality and morbidity in patients with HF.
Importantly, they may be used together with ACEI, or as alternative treatment in 
ACEI intolerant patients. Renal protection is another important effect of both
ACEI and AT1 blockers that has been confirmed in several large clinical trials.
The North American Microalbuminemia Study group and EUCLID group demonstrated
significant reduction in progression of diabetic nephropathy in patients with
insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) treated with ACEI. AT1 receptor
blockers are mainly studied in the non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus
(NIDDM) nephropathy. Four recent clinical trials (IRMA-2, DETAIL, RENAAL and
IDNT) examined the effect of AT1 receptor blockers in patients with NIDDM
nephropathy. These studies confirmed the beneficial effect of AT1 receptor
blockers in patients with NIDDM nephropathy that was extended beyond the blood
pressure reduction. Ongoing studies (ONTARGET, TRANSCEND and PROTECTION) should
provide us with additional insights about cardiovascular, renal and other
end-organ protective effects of these therapeutics.

PMID: 17506719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Exp Med. 2007 Jun 11;204(6):1267-72. Epub 2007 May 14.

RANK signals from CD4(+)3(-) inducer cells regulate development of
Aire-expressing epithelial cells in the thymic medulla.

Rossi SW(1), Kim MY, Leibbrandt A, Parnell SM, Jenkinson WE, Glanville SH,
McConnell FM, Scott HS, Penninger JM, Jenkinson EJ, Lane PJ, Anderson G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Immune Regulation, Institute for
Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham, B15 2TT Birmingham, UK.

Aire-expressing medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) play a key role in
preventing autoimmunity by expressing tissue-restricted antigens to help purge
the emerging T cell receptor repertoire of self-reactive specificities. Here we
demonstrate a novel role for a CD4(+)3(-) inducer cell population, previously
linked to development of organized secondary lymphoid structures and maintenance 
of T cell memory in the functional regulation of Aire-mediated promiscuous gene
expression in the thymus. CD4(+)3(-) cells are closely associated with mTECs in
adult thymus, and in fetal thymus their appearance is temporally linked with the 
appearance of Aire(+) mTECs. We show that RANKL signals from this cell promote
the maturation of RANK-expressing CD80(-)Aire(-) mTEC progenitors into
CD80(+)Aire(+) mTECs, and that transplantation of RANK-deficient thymic stroma
into immunodeficient hosts induces autoimmunity. Collectively, our data reveal
cellular and molecular mechanisms leading to the generation of Aire(+) mTECs and 
highlight a previously unrecognized role for CD4(+)3(-)RANKL(+) inducer cells in 
intrathymic self-tolerance.

PMCID: PMC2118623
PMID: 17502664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Ecology. 2007 Jan;88(1):188-99.

Shifts in positive and negative plant interactions along a grazing intensity
gradient.

Graff P(1), Aguiar MR, Chaneton EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cátedra de Ecología-IFEVA, Departamento de Recursos Naturales y Ambiente,
Facultad de Agronomía, Universidad de Buenos Aire/CONICET, Av. San Martin 4453,
Buenos Aires C1417DSE, Argentina. graff@ifeva.edu.ar

Isolating the single effects and net balance of negative and positive species
effects in complex interaction networks is a necessary step for understanding
community dynamics. Facilitation and competition have both been found to operate 
in harsh environments, but their relative strength may be predicted to change
along gradients of herbivory. Moreover, facilitation effects through habitat
amelioration and protection from herbivory may act together determining the
outcome of neighborhood plant-plant interactions. We tested the hypothesis that
grazing pressure alters the balance of positive and negative interactions between
palatable and unpalatable species by increasing the strength of positive indirect
effects mediated by associational resistance to herbivory. We conducted a
two-year factorial experiment in which distance (i.e., spatial association) from 
the nearest unpalatable neighbor (Stipa speciosa) and root competition were
manipulated for two palatable grasses (Poa ligularis and Bromus pictus), at three
levels of sheep grazing (none, moderate, and high) in a Patagonian steppe
community. We found that grazing shifted the effect of Stipa on both palatable
grasses, from negative (competition) in the absence of grazing to positive
(facilitation) under increasing herbivore pressure. In ungrazed sites,
belowground competition was the dominant interaction, as shown by a significant
reduction in performance of palatable grasses transplanted near to Stipa
tussocks. In grazed sites, biomass of palatable plants was greater near than far 
from Stipa regardless of competition treatment. Proximity to Stipa reduced the
amount of herbivory suffered by palatable grasses, an indirect effect that was
stronger under moderate than under intense grazing. Our results demonstrate that 
facilitation, resulting mainly from protection against herbivory, is the
overriding effect produced by unpalatable neighbors on palatable grasses in this 
rangeland community. This finding challenges the common view that abiotic stress 
amelioration should be the predominant type of facilitation in arid environments 
and highlights the role of herbivory in modulating complex neighborhood plant
interactions in grazing systems.

PMID: 17489467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Clin Invest. 2007 May;117(5):1260-9.

A hypomorphic R229Q Rag2 mouse mutant recapitulates human Omenn syndrome.

Marrella V(1), Poliani PL, Casati A, Rucci F, Frascoli L, Gougeon ML, Lemercier
B, Bosticardo M, Ravanini M, Battaglia M, Roncarolo MG, Cavazzana-Calvo M,
Facchetti F, Notarangelo LD, Vezzoni P, Grassi F, Villa A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Department, Istituto di Tecnologie Biomediche, CNR, Via Fratelli 
Cervi 93, Segrate, Milan 20090, Italy.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2007 May;117(5):1213-6.

Rag enzymes are the main players in V(D)J recombination, the process responsible 
for rearrangement of TCR and Ig genes. Hypomorphic Rag mutations in humans, which
maintain partial V(D)J activity, cause a peculiar SCID associated with
autoimmune-like manifestations, Omenn syndrome (OS). Although a deficient ability
to sustain thymopoiesis and to produce a diverse T and B cell repertoire explains
the increased susceptibility to severe infections, the molecular and cellular
mechanisms underlying the spectrum of clinical and immunological features of OS
remain poorly defined. In order to better define the molecular and cellular
pathophysiology of OS, we generated a knockin murine model carrying the Rag2
R229Q mutation previously described in several patients with OS and leaky forms
of SCID. These Rag2(R229Q/R229Q) mice showed oligoclonal T cells, absence of
circulating B cells, and peripheral eosinophilia. In addition, activated T cells 
infiltrated gut and skin, causing diarrhea, alopecia, and, in some cases, severe 
erythrodermia. These findings were associated with reduced thymic expression of
Aire and markedly reduced numbers of naturally occurring Tregs and NKT
lymphocytes. In conclusion, Rag2(R229Q/R229Q) mice mimicked most symptoms of
human OS; our findings support the notion that impaired immune tolerance and
defective immune regulation are involved in the pathophysiology of OS.

PMCID: PMC1857243
PMID: 17476358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2007 Jun;17(3):193-200. Epub 2007 Apr 26.

Lessons on immune tolerance from the monogenic disease APS1.

DeVoss JJ(1), Anderson MS.

Author information: 
(1)University of California San Francisco Diabetes Center, HSW1102, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0540, USA. jdevoss@diabetes.ucsf.edu

Autoimmunity is a complex disease process that results from a breakdown in the
ability of the immune system to discriminate self from non-self. One approach to 
unraveling how autoimmunity occurs is to study monogenic diseases, for which a
single gene defect is responsible. Recent work on the monogenic autoimmune
disease 'autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1' (APS1) and on the causal gene 
of this disorder--autoimmune regulator (AIRE)--is providing new lessons on how
immune tolerance is maintained.

PMID: 17466510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Acta Biomed. 2007;78 Suppl 1:248-54.

Pituitary autoantibodies in autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal 
dystrophy (APECED).

O'Dwyer DT(1), McElduff P, Peterson P, Perheentupa J, Crock PA.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Endocrinology Unit, John Hunter Children's Hospital, New South
Wales, Australia.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is an
autosomal recessive disease due to mutations in the AIRE (AutoImmune REgulator)
gene. The role of pituitary autoimmunity in APECED is not known. We determined
the prevalence of pituitary autoantibodies in a cohort of 67 Finnish patients
with APECED from 217 serum samples collected over 26 years by one investigator.
Overall, autoantibodies to the 49 kDa cytosolic autoantigen, human pituitary
enolase were detected in 39 of the 67 patients (58%). On their first sample, 25
patients had autoantibodies compared to 5 of 68 controls (chi-square, 1df=17.11, 
p< 0.001; OR=7.32), but subsequently 14 patients seroconverted between 10 and 53 
years of age. Once seropositive, all but two of the patients maintained their
positive autoantibody status, even over many years. In the current study all but 
7 of the 19 patients known to have high titre anti-candidal enolase antibodies
had developed autoantibodies directed against human pituitary enolase. Other
pituitary autoantibody reactivities were detected against cytosolic proteins of
molecular weights 40-, 45-, 60- and 105 kDa in 15%, 16%, 12% and 3% of patients
respectively. Autoantibodies to pituitary enolase are markers of neuroendocrine
autoimmunity but seem not to be associated with clinical hypopituitarism in
APECED patients.

PMID: 17465338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Anat. 2007 Jun;210(6):731-40. Epub 2007 May 23.

The testicular capsule and peritubular tissue of birds: morphometry, histology,
ultrastructure and immunohistochemistry.

Aire TA(1), Ozegbe PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy & Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University 
of Pretoria, South Africa. taire@sgu.edu

The testicular capsule was studied histologically, morphometrically,
ultrastructurally and immunohistochemically in the Japanese quail, domestic fowl,
turkey and duck (all members of the Galloanserae). The testicular capsule was,
relative to mammals, thin, being 81.5 +/- 13.7 microm in the quail, 91.7 +/- 6.2 
microm in the domestic fowl, 104.5 +/- 29.8 microm in the turkey and 91.8 +/-
18.9 microm in the duck. The orchido-epididymal border (hilus) of the capsule was
much thicker than elsewhere in all birds (from 233.7 +/- 50.7 microm in the duck 
to 550.0 +/- 147.3 microm thick in the turkey). The testicular capsule, other
than the tunica serosa and tunica vasculosa, comprised, in the main, smooth
muscle-like or myoid cells running mainly in one direction, and disposed in one
main mass. Peritubular tissue was similarly composed of smooth muscle-like cells 
disposed in several layers. Actin and desmin intermediate filaments were
immunolocalized in the inner cellular layers of the capsule in the quail,
domestic fowl and duck, but uniformly in the turkey. Vimentin intermediate
filament immunoreaction in the capsule was moderately and uniformly positive in
the testicular capsule of only the quail. Actin and desmin, but not vimentin
(except very faintly in the turkey) or cytokeratin, were immunolocalized in the
peritubular tissue of all birds. The results therefore establish, or complement, 
some previous observations that these birds have contractile cells in their
testicular capsule and peritubular tissue, whose function probably includes the
transport of testicular fluid into the excurrent duct system.

PMCID: PMC2375754
PMID: 17451470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2007 Sep;77 Suppl 1:S110-5. Epub 2007 Apr 19.

Functional evaluation of the type 1 diabetes (T1D) susceptibility candidate
genes.

Park Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Bioengineering, Hanyang University
Hospital, Seoul 471-020, Korea. parkys@hanyang.ac.kr

Progress has been made in investigating the genetic factors involved in type 1
diabetes (T1D) development for the past few years. While Linkage disequilibrium
(LD) mapping has been useful for both the confirmation and fine-mapping of
susceptibility intervals, as well as identification of etiological mutations,
identification of specific disease genes has been a challenge and limited to
known candidate genes. The overall risk for T1D from the HLA DR and DQ molecules 
(IDDM1) is determined by combinations of polymorphic alleles. Functional studies 
indicate that the susceptible and protective HLA-DR and -DQ bind and present
non-overlapping peptides. Although consistent linkage evidence was reported for
the susceptibility intervals IDDM2, IDDM5 and IDDM12, evidence for most other
intervals varies in different data sets. The variable number of tandem repeats at
the 5' end of the insulin gene (IDDM2) regulates insulin expression in the
thymus. Studies on IDDM5 have led to the discovery of a novel polymorphism 163
A-->G (M55V) in SUMO4 gene, which was found to be associated with T1D patients
with Asian origin. Functionally SUMO4 conjugates to IkBalpha and negatively
regulates NFkB transcriptional pathway. The M55V substitution reduces the
sumoylation activity of the V55 variant, which resulted in higher NFkB dependent 
transcriptional activity. The polymorphisms of the cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen
4 gene (CTLA4, IDDM12) encoding a regulatory molecule in the immune system
associate with T1D and autoimmune thyroid diseases (ATD). The 3' untranslated
region of this gene determines the level of soluble CTLA-4. Genetic mapping of
variants conferring a small disease risk can identify pathways in complex
disorders, as evidenced by quantitative alterations of candidate genes
contributing to autoimmune tissue destruction. Moreover, the identification of
two transcription factors that, when mutated, are responsible for severe
autoimmune disease is leading to a better understanding of T cell tolerance. Both
AIRE and Foxp3, identified initially via their association with genetically
manipulated mice, are involved in tolerance induction in humans. Although
mutations in these genes may cause rare but serious diseases, it is likely that
other transcription factors will contribute to the genetic load that predisposes 
certain individuals to disease.

PMID: 17448564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Orv Hetil. 2007 Apr 8;148 Suppl 1:7-11.

[On the way to understand the mechanism of immune tolerance].

[Article in Hungarian]

Gergely J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eötvös Loránd Tudományegyetem, Immunológiai Tanszék, Budapest.
janos.gergely@freemail.hu

This introductory paper deals with mechanisms playing important role in the
development of immunological tolerance. Discusses the problems of "immunological 
self" and "non-self", the importance of the roles of AIRE gene products, as well 
as the role of dendritic cells and regulatory T-cells (T-reg cells) in immune
tolerance and autoimmunity.

PMID: 17430786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Med Invest. 2007 Feb;54(1-2):54-64.

Target-organ specificity of autoimmunity is modified by thymic stroma and bone
marrow-derived cells.

Han H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, The
University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan.

Physical contact between thymocytes and the thymic stroma is essential for the
establishment of self-tolerance, and Aire in thymic epithelial cells plays an
important role in this action. As expected, the autoimmune phenotypes of
Aire-deficient mice are thymic stroma-dependent. Interestingly, the spectrum of
the organs involved differs depending on the genetic background of
non-autoimmune-prone mouse strains. Furthermore, deficiency of Aire in an
autoimmune-prone strain of NOD also modifies target-cell specificity in the
pancreas. In order to clarify the factors that regulate target-organ specificity 
in Aire-dependent autoimmunity, I have generated both thymic and bone-marrow
chimeras, making it possible to evaluate the contribution of thymic stroma and
bone-marrow-derived cells to this pathogenic process. The findings suggested that
the genetic background of bone-marrow-derived cells contributes to the
strain-dependent target-organ specificity of non-autoimmune-prone strains.
Furthermore, in a study using NOD mice with a fixed genetic background, thymic
stromal cells but not bone-marrow-derived cells were found to be relevant to the 
Aire-dependent alteration of target-cell specificity in the pancreas. These
results clearly underscore the significance of immunological and/or genetic
complexity that underlies Aire-deficiency monogenic disease together with
critical dialogue between thymic stroma and bone-marrow-derived cells in the
organized thymic microenvironment.

PMID: 17380015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Nat Immunol. 2007 Apr;8(4):333-4.

Foxp3 and Aire in thymus-generated Treg cells: a link in self-tolerance.

Nomura T, Sakaguchi S.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2007 Apr;8(4):351-8.
    Nat Immunol. 2007 Apr;8(4):359-68.

PMID: 17375092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Immunol Cell Biol. 2007 Jun;85(4):338-42. Epub 2007 Mar 20.

Tracing the action of IL-2 in tolerance to islet-specific antigen.

Liston A(1), Siggs OM, Goodnow CC.

Author information: 
(1)Immunogenomics Laboratory, John Curtin School of Medical Research and The
Australian Phenomics Facility, The Australian National University, Canberra 2601,
Australia. liston@u.washington.edu

Genetic variants of interleukin 2 (IL-2) and its receptor are associated with
murine and human susceptibility to Type 1 diabetes, yet the role of IL-2 in
controlling pancreatic islet-reactive T cells is unknown. Here, we develop a
model where IL-2 deficiency precipitates a breakdown of self-tolerance and
progression to diabetes, and its action upon diabetogenic islet-specific CD4 T
cells can be tracked. We find that IL-2 is not required for Aire-dependent thymic
clonal deletion of high-avidity diabetogenic clones, but is essential for thymic 
formation of islet-specific Foxp3-expressing CD4 T cells. The absence of IL-2
results in the expansion of low-avidity Foxp3(-) islet-reactive CD4 T cells. The 
mechanism by which IL-2 prevents diabetes is therefore through the establishment 
of a repertoire of islet-reactive Foxp3(+) T cells within the thymus, and
limitation of the peripheral activation of low-avidity islet-reactive T cells
that normally escape thymic negative selection.

PMID: 17372610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Immunol. 2007 Apr 1;178(7):4276-83.

Limited peripheral T cell anergy predisposes to retinal autoimmunity.

Lambe T(1), Leung JC, Ferry H, Bouriez-Jones T, Makinen K, Crockford TL, Jiang
HR, Nickerson JM, Peltonen L, Forrester JV, Cornall RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Building of Molecular Physiology, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, UK.

Autoimmune uveoretinitis accounts for at least 10% of worldwide blindness, yet it
is unclear why tolerance to retinal Ags is so fragile and, particularly, to what 
extent this might be due to defects in peripheral tolerance. To address this
issue, we generated double-transgenic mice expressing hen egg lysozyme, under the
retinal interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding promoter, and a hen egg
lysozyme-specific CD4(+) TCR transgene. In this manner, we have tracked
autoreactive CD4(+) T cells from their development in the thymus to their
involvement in uveoretinitis and compared tolerogenic mechanisms induced in a
variety of organs to the same self-Ag. Our findings show that central tolerance
to retinal and pancreatic Ags is qualitatively similar and equally dependent on
the transcriptional regulator protein AIRE. However, the lack of Ag presentation 
in the eye-draining lymph nodes results in a failure to induce high levels of T
cell anergy. Under these circumstances, despite considerable central deletion,
low levels of retinal-specific autoreactive CD4(+) T cells can induce severe
autoimmune disease. The relative lack of anergy induction by retinal Ags, in
contrast to the same Ag in other organs, helps to explain the unique
susceptibility of the eye to spontaneous and experimentally induced autoimmune
disease.

PMID: 17371984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Chemosphere. 2007 Jul;68(7):1232-44. Epub 2007 Mar 26.

Mass balance modelling of contaminants in river basins: application of the
flexible matrix approach.

Warren C(1), Mackay D, Whelan M, Fox K.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Environmental Modelling Centre, Trent University, Peterborough, Ont.,
Canada K9J 7B8.

It is useful to have available a variety of catchment-scale water quality models 
that range in complexity, spatial resolution and data requirements. In a previous
paper [Warren, C., Mackay, D., Whelan, M., Fox, K., 2005. Mass balance modelling 
of contaminants in river basins: a flexible matrix approach. Chemosphere 61,
1458-1467] a series of simple to intermediately complex mass balance models was
presented which can be used for tiered exposure assessments in river basins. The 
connectivity of the segments is expressed using a matrix that permits flexibility
in application, enabling the model to be re-segmented and applied to different
catchments as required. In this paper, the intermediate models, QWASI matrix-rate
constant (QMX-R) and QWASI matrix-fugacity (QMX-F) are used to estimate
concentrations of linear alkylbenzene sulfonates (LAS) in the rivers Aire and
Calder, UK, and of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in the Fraser River
basin, Canada. The results compare satisfactorily with monitoring data,
suggesting that these QWASI-based models for exposure and risk assessment may be 
applicable under data-limited conditions. The use of QWASI-based models for
regulatory purposes in an evaluative river system is also discussed with
reference to assessments of para-dichlorobenzene (pDCB), trichloroethylene (TCE),
bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) and toluene. It is shown that multi-media
QWASI model predictions can be usefully depicted graphically on chemical space
diagrams and used to highlight regions in which advection, partitioning to
sediments and volatilization may be important determinants of chemical fate in
river systems.

PMID: 17368505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Mar 13;104(11):4583-7. Epub 2007 Mar 6.

Loss of Aire-dependent thymic expression of a peripheral tissue antigen renders
it a target of autoimmunity.

Gavanescu I(1), Kessler B, Ploegh H, Benoist C, Mathis D.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin Diabetes Center, Department
of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 44 Binney Street, Boston, MA 02215,
USA.

Both humans and mice with a mutation in the autoimmune regulator (aire) gene
develop multiorgan autoimmune disease. Aire was shown to exert its critical
function in medullary epithelial cells of the thymus by promoting ectopic
expression of peripheral tissue antigens. It was hypothesized that the widespread
autoimmunity of Aire-deficient individuals reflects a lack of tolerance induction
to the repertoire of peripheral tissue antigens expressed in the thymus of normal
individuals. Here, we substantiate this hypothesis by identifying Mucin 6 as a
stomach-specific antigen targeted by autoantibodies in gastritis-prone mice
lacking thymic expression of aire and demonstrate that transcription of the Mucin
6 gene in thymic medullary epithelial cells is indeed Aire-dependent.

PMCID: PMC1838644
PMID: 17360567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Pathol. 2007 Apr;211(5):563-71.

Deficiency of the autoimmune regulator AIRE in thymomas is insufficient to elicit
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 (APS-1).

Ströbel P(1), Murumägi A, Klein R, Luster M, Lahti M, Krohn K, Schalke B, Nix W, 
Gold R, Rieckmann P, Toyka K, Burek C, Rosenwald A, Müller-Hermelink HK,
Pujoll-Borrell R, Meager A, Willcox N, Peterson P, Marx A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Centre Mannheim, University of
Heidelberg, Germany. philipp.stroebel@path.ma.uni-heidelberg.de

Thymomas are thymic epithelial neoplasms, associated with a variety of autoimmune
disorders (especially myasthenia gravis), that apparently result from aberrant
intra-tumourous thymopoiesis and export of inefficiently tolerized T-cells to the
periphery. The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) drives the expression of self-antigens
in the thymic medulla and plays an essential role in 'central' tolerance in both 
humans and mice. However, while inactivating AIRE mutations result in the
'autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1' (APS-1), its major features are
not well reproduced in AIRE-knock-out mice. Therefore, alternative human disease 
scenarios with concomitant AIRE deficiency may be valuable tools to test
conclusions drawn from mouse models. Here we show, in a large series, that
approximately 95% of thymoma patients are 'chimeric'; expression of AIRE and
major AIRE-related autoantigens (eg insulin) were undetectable in their tumours
but maintained in their remnant thymic tissue and lymph nodes. Notably, despite
the AIRE-deficient thymopoiesis in thymomas, disorders and autoantibodies typical
of APS-1 were distinctly uncommon in these patients. The one striking similarity 
was in the recently observed neutralizing anti-type I interferon (IFN)
antibodies, which are found at diagnosis in 100% of patients with APS-1 and in
approximately 60% of patients with thymomas, as we show here. We conclude that
APS-1 type autoantigens must be protected from autoimmunity by mechanisms that do
not extend to the muscle autoantigens so frequently targeted in thymoma patients 
but so rarely recognized in APS-1. Thus our findings argue strongly for a
tolerogenic function of AIRE beyond its role in negative T-cell selection in
human thymopoiesis, and/or for specific autoimmunization against muscle in
thymomas.

Copyright (c) 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published
by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 17334980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Mar;37(3):838-48.

Highly variable expression of tissue-restricted self-antigens in human thymus:
implications for self-tolerance and autoimmunity.

Taubert R(1), Schwendemann J, Kyewski B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Immunology, Tumor Immunology Program, German Cancer 
Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2007 Mar;37(3):598-601.

Induction of T cell tolerance in the thymus (central tolerance) is essential for 
preventing organ-specific autoimmunity. This apparent paradox is in part
explained by promiscuous expression of numerous tissue-restricted self-antigens
(TRA) in medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTEC), which is highly conserved
between mice and man. In animal models, the threshold of central tolerance
towards such TRA is surprisingly sensitive towards minor shifts in antigen
expression levels and this might also be the case in humans. To precisely assess 
the inter-individual variability of TRA expression in man, we determined the
level of transcription of several auto-antigens in purified human mTEC and
subsets thereof by quantitative RT-PCR. We detected two expression patterns:
first, high variability (>20-fold) correlated with autoimmune regulator (Aire)
expression and mTEC differentiation, and secondly, non-correlated low
variability. Importantly, our approach revealed a significantly higher
Aire-correlated insulin transcription in mTEC of carriers of the protective
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus locus 2 haplotype compared to the
non-protective haplotype. The considerable, yet selective variability in thymic
expression levels of target auto-antigen expression might constitute a hitherto
underestimated risk factor for the susceptibility of autoimmune diseases in man.

PMID: 17323415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Mar;37(3):598-601.

Aire-ing self antigen variability and tolerance.

Holmdahl R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Inflammation Research, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
rikard.holmdahl@med.lu.se

Comment on
    Eur J Immunol. 2007 Mar;37(3):838-48.

Positional cloning of the underlying genes for the rare syndrome autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy candidadiasis extrodermal dystrophy (APECED) opened a new
venue of research on the role of central tolerance in autoimmunity. The
associated autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE), was found to be expressed in
medullary thymus epithelial cells (mTEC) in both man and mice, and to control
promiscuous expression of sets of self antigens. The lack of AIRE in both mice
and man led to the development of a quite specific, but also an inter-individual 
variable, set of autoimmune and infectious diseases. An article in this issue of 
the European Journal of Immunology demonstrates that several autoantigens
controlled by AIRE are variably expressed in different human individuals. Most
importantly it is shown that carriers of the type 1 diabetes (T1D) associated
locus IDDM2 show lower expression of insulin in mTEC, as controlled by AIRE. The 
genetic variability of autoantigen expression in the thymus thus seems to
determine the variable predisposition to autoimmunity.

PMID: 17323409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Nat Immunol. 2007 Apr;8(4):351-8. Epub 2007 Feb 25.

Selection of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells specific for self antigen expressed and
presented by Aire+ medullary thymic epithelial cells.

Aschenbrenner K(1), D'Cruz LM, Vollmann EH, Hinterberger M, Emmerich J, Swee LK, 
Rolink A, Klein L.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, 1030 Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2007 Apr;8(4):333-4.

The parameters specifying whether autoreactive CD4(+) thymocytes are deleted
(recessive tolerance) or differentiate into regulatory T cells (dominant
tolerance) remain unresolved. Dendritic cells directly delete thymocytes, partly 
through cross-presentation of peripheral antigens 'promiscuously' expressed in
medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) positive for the autoimmune regulator
Aire. It is unclear if and how mTECs themselves act as antigen-presenting cells
during tolerance induction. Here we found that an absence of major
histocompatibility class II molecules on mTECs resulted in fewer polyclonal
regulatory T cells. Furthermore, targeting of a model antigen to Aire(+) mTECs
led to the generation of specific regulatory T cells independently of antigen
transfer to dendritic cells. Thus, 'routing' of mTEC-derived self antigens may
determine whether specific thymocytes are deleted or enter the regulatory T cell 
lineage.

PMID: 17322887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Immunol. 2007 Mar 1;178(5):3007-15.

Aire-dependent alterations in medullary thymic epithelium indicate a role for
Aire in thymic epithelial differentiation.

Gillard GO(1), Dooley J, Erickson M, Peltonen L, Farr AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

The prevalent view of thymic epithelial differentiation and Aire activity holds
that Aire functions in terminally differentiated medullary thymic epithelial
cells (MTECs) to derepress the expression of structural tissue-restricted Ags,
including pancreatic endocrine hormones. An alternative view of these processes
has proposed that Aire functions to regulate the differentiation of immature
thymic epithelial cells, thereby affecting tissue-restricted Ag expression and
negative selection. In this study, we demonstrate that Aire impacts several
aspects of murine MTECs and provide support for this second model. Expression of 
transcription factors associated with developmental plasticity of progenitor
cells, Nanog, Oct4, and Sox2, by MTECs was Aire dependent. Similarly, the
transcription factors that regulate pancreatic development and the expression of 
pancreatic hormones are also expressed by wild-type MTECs in an Aire-dependent
manner. The altered transcriptional profiles in Aire-deficient MTECs were
accompanied by changes in the organization and composition of the medullary
epithelial compartment, including a reduction in the medullary compartment
defined by keratin (K) 14 expression, altered patterns of K5 and K8 expression,
and more prominent epithelial cysts. These findings implicate Aire in the
regulation of MTEC differentiation and the organization of the medullary thymic
compartment and are compatible with a role for Aire in thymic epithelium
differentiation.

PMID: 17312146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Nat Immunol. 2007 Mar;8(3):234-6.

Claudins provide a breath of fresh Aire.

Holländer GA.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2007 Mar;8(3):304-11.

PMID: 17304232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz). 2007 Jan-Feb;55(1):27-34.

Transcriptional regulation in thymic epithelial cells for the establishment of
self tolerance.

Matsumoto M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, University of
Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan. mitsuru@ier.tokushima-u.ac.jp

Thymic epithelial cells (TECs) play pivotal roles in the establishment of self
tolerance through critical dialogue with developing thymocytes. Unique actions of
two transcriptional regulators within TECs, NF-kappaB-inducing kinase (NIK) and
an autoimmune regulator (AIRE), for the establishment of self tolerance have
recently been highlighted by studies using a strain of mouse bearing a natural
mutation of the NIK gene (aly mice) and gene-targeted mice, respectively.
Previous studies have demonstrated essential roles of NIK downstream of the
lymphotoxin-beta receptor (LTbetaR), which is essential for the development of
secondary lymphoid organs; aly mice lack all lymph nodes and Peyer's patches
because of the defective LTbetaR signaling. Additional roles of NIK in thymic
organogenesis downstream of LTPR, mainly through the developmental regulation of 
TECs, have now emerged, although the corresponding ligand(s) for LTbetaR
participating in this action have not been fully characterized. In contrast,
AIRE, a gene responsible for the development of an organ-specific autoimmune
disease that demonstrates monogenic autosomal recessive inheritance, contributes 
to the establishment of self tolerance probably by controlling the expression of 
self antigens through yet undetermined molecular mechanisms. Thus, it is highly
likely that a group of genes control self tolerance within TECs through unique
and coordinated actions, and that an understanding of this process would help to 
unravel the pathogenesis of autoimmune disease.

PMID: 17277892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Nat Immunol. 2007 Mar;8(3):304-11. Epub 2007 Feb 4.

Medullary thymic epithelial cells expressing Aire represent a unique lineage
derived from cells expressing claudin.

Hamazaki Y(1), Fujita H, Kobayashi T, Choi Y, Scott HS, Matsumoto M, Minato N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2007 Mar;8(3):234-6.

The autoimmune regulator Aire is expressed in a small proportion of medullary
thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) and is crucial in the induction of central T cell
tolerance. The origin and development of Aire(+) mTECs, however, are not well
understood. Here we demonstrate that the tight-junction components claudin-3 and 
claudin-4 (Cld3,4) were 'preferentially' expressed in Aire(+) mTECs. In early
ontogeny, Cld3,4(hi) TECs derived from the most apical layer of the stratified
thymic anlage first expressed known mTEC markers such as UEA-1 ligand and MTS10. 
We provide evidence that such Cld3,4(hi) UEA-1(+) TECs represented the initial
progenitors specified for Aire(+) mTECs, whose development crucially required
NF-kappaB-inducing kinase and the adaptor molecule TRAF6. Our results suggest
that Aire(+) mTECs represent terminally differentiated cells in a unique lineage 
arising during thymic organogenesis.

PMID: 17277780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Environ Pollut. 2007 Jul;148(1):334-42. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

A new generic approach for estimating the concentrations of down-the-drain
chemicals at catchment and national scale.

Keller VD(1), Rees HG, Fox KK, Whelan MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Hydrological Risks and Resources, Maclean
Building, Crowmarsh Gifford, Wallingford, UK. vke@ceh.ac.uk

A new generic approach for estimating chemical concentrations in rivers at
catchment and national scales is presented. Domestic chemical loads in waste
water are estimated using gridded population data. River flows are estimated by
combining predicted runoff with topographically derived flow direction. Regional 
scale exposure is characterised by two summary statistics: PEC(works), the
average concentration immediately downstream of emission points, and, PEC(area), 
the catchment-average chemical concentration. The method was applied to boron at 
national (England and Wales) and catchment (Aire-Calder) scales. Predicted
concentrations were within 50% of measured mean values in the Aire-Calder
catchment and in agreement with results from the GREAT-ER model. The
concentration grids generated provide a picture of the spatial distribution of
expected chemical concentrations at various scales, and can be used to identify
areas of potentially high risk.

PMID: 17258364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Genome Biol. 2007;8(1):R12.

Impairment of organ-specific T cell negative selection by diabetes susceptibility
genes: genomic analysis by mRNA profiling.

Liston A(1), Hardy K, Pittelkow Y, Wilson SR, Makaroff LE, Fahrer AM, Goodnow CC.

Author information: 
(1)John Curtin School of Medical Research, The Australian National University,
Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia. liston@u.washington.edu

BACKGROUND: T cells in the thymus undergo opposing positive and negative
selection processes so that the only T cells entering circulation are those
bearing a T cell receptor (TCR) with a low affinity for self. The mechanism
differentiating negative from positive selection is poorly understood, despite
the fact that inherited defects in negative selection underlie organ-specific
autoimmune disease in AIRE-deficient people and the non-obese diabetic (NOD)
mouse strain
RESULTS: Here we use homogeneous populations of T cells undergoing either
positive or negative selection in vivo together with genome-wide transcription
profiling on microarrays to identify the gene expression differences underlying
negative selection to an Aire-dependent organ-specific antigen, including the
upregulation of a genomic cluster in the cytogenetic band 2F. Analysis of
defective negative selection in the autoimmune-prone NOD strain demonstrates a
global impairment in the induction of the negative selection response gene set,
but little difference in positive selection response genes. Combining expression 
differences with genetic linkage data, we identify differentially expressed
candidate genes, including Bim, Bnip3, Smox, Pdrg1, Id1, Pdcd1, Ly6c, Pdia3,
Trim30 and Trim12.
CONCLUSION: The data provide a molecular map of the negative selection response
in vivo and, by analysis of deviations from this pathway in the autoimmune
susceptible NOD strain, suggest that susceptibility arises from small expression 
differences in genes acting at multiple points in the pathway between the TCR and
cell death.

PMCID: PMC1839132
PMID: 17239257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Nov;19(11):1343-52.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) in the
Irish population.

Dominguez M(1), Crushell E, Ilmarinen T, McGovern E, Collins S, Chang B, Fleming 
P, Irvine AD, Brosnahan D, Ulmanen I, Murphy N, Costigan C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Our Lady's Hospital for Sick Children, Crumlin,
Dublin, Ireland.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the Irish prevalence of autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), the AIRE mutations 
involved and clinical features of this population.
METHODS: All patients were identified through paediatricians and endocrinologists
in Ireland. Patients were invited to attend a multidisciplinary clinic.
RESULTS: Thirty-one patients (2-56 years), 18 female, were identified from 19
families giving an Irish prevalence of 1:130,000. Twenty-six patients had
hypoparathyroidism, 21 had adrenal insufficiency (AI) and 10 of 16 had ovarian
failure. Three affected patients have died. Many with hypoparathyroidism were
resistant to 1-alpha-vitamin D. Two needed daily PTH injections.
Mineralocorticoid deficiency as the first manifestation of AI was common. Chronic
intra-oral candidiasis affected 25 patients and three had leukoplakia. Two had
keratoconjuntivitis. Of 22 with AIRE gene analysis, three different mutations
were identified, one of which is novel.
CONCLUSION: APECED is rare in Ireland. We saw a significant amount of
non-endocrine disease but no ectodermal dystrophy. AIRE gene analysis reassured
many siblings and identified individuals with APECED prior to any symptoms.

PMID: 17220063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jan 16;104(3):949-54. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

Pituitary autoantibodies in autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1.

Bensing S(1), Fetissov SO, Mulder J, Perheentupa J, Gustafsson J, Husebye ES,
Oscarson M, Ekwall O, Crock PA, Hökfelt T, Hulting AL, Kämpe O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76 Stockholm, Sweden. sophie.bensing@ki.se

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS1) is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. High titer 
autoantibodies (Aabs) toward intracellular enzymes are a hallmark for APS1 and
serve as diagnostic markers and predictors for disease manifestations. In this
study, we aimed to identify pituitary autoantigens in patients with APS1. A
pituitary cDNA expression library was screened with APS1 sera and a tudor domain 
containing protein 6 (TDRD6) cDNA clone was isolated. Positive immunoreactivity
against in vitro translated TDRD6 fragments was shown in 42/86 (49%) APS1
patients but not in patients with other autoimmune diseases or in healthy
controls. By using immunohistochemistry, sera from 3/6 APS1 patients with growth 
hormone (GH) deficiency showed immunostaining of a small number of guinea pig
anterior pituitary cells, and 40-50% of these cells were GH-positive. No such
immunostaining was seen with sera from healthy controls. The APS1 Aab-positive,
GH-negative cells may represent a novel subpopulation of anterior pituitary
cells. In addition, 4/6 patient sera showed staining of a fiber-plexus in the
pituitary intermediate lobe recognizing enzymes of monoamine and GABA synthesis. 
Thus, we have identified TDRD6 as a major autoantigen in APS1 patients and shown 
that several sera from GH-deficient patients stain specific cell populations and 
nerves in the pituitary gland.

PMCID: PMC1783420
PMID: 17215373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Immunol. 2007 Jan 15;178(2):1208-15.

A defect of regulatory T cells in patients with autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy.

Kekäläinen E(1), Tuovinen H, Joensuu J, Gylling M, Franssila R, Pöntynen N,
Talvensaari K, Perheentupa J, Miettinen A, Arstila TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, 00014
Helsinki, Finland.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), a
monogenic recessive disease characterized by autoimmunity against multiple
tissues, offers a unique possibility to study the breakdown of self-tolerance in 
humans. It is caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE), which 
encodes a transcriptional regulator. Work using Aire(-/-) mice suggests that Aire
induces ectopic expression of peripheral Ags and promotes their presentation in
the thymus. We have explored reasons for the difference between the comparatively
mild phenotype of Aire-deficient mice and human APECED patients. We provide
evidence that, unlike in the Aire(-/-) mice, in the patients a key mediator of
active tolerance, the CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T (Treg) cell subset is impaired. 
This was shown by significantly decreased expression of FOXP3 mRNA and protein,
decreased function, and alterations in TCR repertoire. Also, in the normal human 
thymus a concentric accumulation of AIRE(+) cells was seen around thymic
Hassall's corpuscles, suggesting that in the patients these cells may be involved
in the observed Treg cell failure. In Aire(-/-) mice the expression of FoxP3 was 
normal and even increased in target tissues in parallel with the lymphocyte
infiltration process. Our results suggest that a Treg cell defect is involved in 
the pathogenesis of APECED and emphasize the importance of active tolerance
mechanisms in preventing human autoimmunity.

PMID: 17202386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Nov;1088:284-96.

Thymus-dependent T cell tolerance of neuroendocrine functions: principles,
reflections, and implications for tolerogenic/negative self-vaccination.

Geenen V(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Liège, Center of Immunology, B-4000 Liège-Sart Tilman, Belgium. 
vgeenen@ulg.ac.be

Under the evolutionary pressure exerted by the emergence of adaptive immunity and
its inherent risk of horror autotoxicus, the thymus appeared some 500 million
years ago as a novel lymphoid structure able to prevent autoimmunity and to
orchestrate self-tolerance as a cornerstone in the physiology of the immune
system. Also, the thymus plays a prominent role in T cell education to
neuroendocrine principles. Some self-antigens (oxytocin, neurotensin,
insulin-like growth factor 2 [IGF-2]) have been selected to be predominantly
expressed in thymic epithelium and to be presented to thymus T cells for
educating them to tolerate other antigens related to them. In the insulin family,
IGF2 is dominantly transcribed in cortical (c) and medullary (m) thymic
epithelial cells (TECs), whereas the insulin gene (INS) is expressed at low level
by only a few subsets of mTECs. Intrathymic transcription of both IGF2 and INS is
under the control of the autoimmune regulator (Aire) gene. The highest
concentrations of IGF-2 in the thymus explain why this peptide is much more
tolerated than insulin, and why tolerance to IGF-2 is so difficult to break by
active immunization. The high level of tolerance to IGF-2 is correlated to the
development of a tolerogenic/regulatory profile when the sequence B11-25 of IGF-2
(homologous to the autoantigen insulin B9-23) is presented to DQ8+ type 1
diabetic patients. Since subcutaneous and oral insulin does not exert any
tolerogenic properties, IGF-2 and other thymus self-antigens related to type 1
diabetes (T1D) should be preferred to insulin for the design of novel specific
antigen-based preventive approaches against T1D.

PMID: 17192574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Microbiol Immunol. 2006;50(12):979-87.

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene is expressed in human activated CD4+ T-cells and
regulated by mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.

Nagafuchi S(1), Katsuta H, Koyanagi-Katsuta R, Yamasaki S, Inoue Y, Shimoda K,
Ikeda Y, Shindo M, Yoshida E, Matsuo T, Ohno Y, Kogawa K, Anzai K, Kurisaki H,
Kudoh J, Harada M, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science and Technology, School of Medicine, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan. nagafuchi@shs.kyushu-u.ac.jp

The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene is a gene responsible for autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy. Here we show that AIRE is
expressed in human peripheral CD4-positive T-cells, and most highly in
antigen-and interleukin 2-stimulated T (IL-2T) cells. Mitogen-activated protein
kinases (MAPKs), including MAPK kinase (MEK) 1/2 and p38 MAPK, were
phosphorylated in IL-2T cells and the expression of the AIRE gene was inhibited
by a specific p38 MAPK inhibitor (SB203580), thereby indicating that AIRE gene
expression is controlled by the MAPK pathway in IL-2T cells. These data suggested
the possible significance of the AIRE gene in the peripheral immune system.

PMID: 17179667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Acta Paediatr. 2006 Dec;95(12):1657-60.

Autoantibodies linked to autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I are prevalent
in Down syndrome.

Söderbergh A(1), Gustafsson J, Ekwall O, Hallgren A, Nilsson T, Kämpe O, Rorsman 
F, Annerén G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Patients with Down syndrome are prone to autoimmune diseases which
also occur in the recessive disease autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I (APS
I). Since this disease is caused by mutations in the gene AIRE on chromosome 21, 
one might speculate that altered expression of AIRE contributes to autoimmune
disease in Down syndrome.
AIM: To study the prevalence of 11 well-defined autoantibodies, five of which are
specific for APS I, associated with various manifestations of APS I in patients
with Down syndrome.
METHODS: Sera from 48 patients with Down syndrome were analysed. Autoantibodies
against 21-hydroxylase, 17alpha-hydroxylase, side-chain cleavage enzyme, aromatic
L-amino acid decarboxylase, cytochrome P4501A2, tyrosine hydroxylase, tryptophan 
hydroxylase, glutamic acid decarboxylase 65, tyrosine phosphatase IA-2 and
transglutaminase were analysed using an immunoprecipitation assay, and thyroid
peroxidase autoantibodies were measured using a haemagglutination assay.
RESULTS: Seven of 48 patients had elevated titres of autoantibodies: one against 
21-hydroxylase, three against aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase, one against
cytochrome P4501A2, one against glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 and one against
tyrosine phosphatase IA-2. None of the patients had clinical or laboratory signs 
of disease coupled to the respective autoantibody.
CONCLUSION: Four patients with Down syndrome had autoantibodies hitherto regarded
as unique for APS I, which may suggest a dysregulation of AIRE.

PMID: 17129978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Feb;92(2):595-603. Epub 2006 Nov 21.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 in Norway: phenotypic variation,
autoantibodies, and novel mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene.

Wolff AS(1), Erichsen MM, Meager A, Magitta NF, Myhre AG, Bollerslev J, Fougner
KJ, Lima K, Knappskog PM, Husebye ES.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

CONTEXT: The autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I (APS I) is a rare disease
that previously was difficult to diagnose. Autoantibody screening as well as
mutational analysis of the disease gene autoimmune regulator (AIRE) are important
diagnostic tools for this life-threatening syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to identify all patients with APS I in 
Norway and correlate their clinical features with their autoantibody profiles and
mutations in the AIRE gene.
PATIENTS: We identified 36 Norwegian patients from 24 families with APS I (20
males, 16 females) during a nationwide survey for patients with Addison's disease
and polyendocrine syndromes, seven of them only after their death.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Clinical data were collected from questionnaires and
patient records. AIRE mutations were determined by DNA sequencing. Most
autoantibodies were measured in RIAs against recombinant autoantigens, but
anti-type I interferon (IFN) antibodies were titrated in ELISA or antiviral
interferon neutralization assays.
RESULTS: The prevalence of APS I in Norway was estimated to be about 1:90,000.
Several patients exhibited a milder phenotype with few APS I disease components
and onset only in late adolescent or adulthood. The others showed about the same 
distribution of disease components as reported in Finnish patients. Eleven
different mutations were identified in the AIRE gene, six of these were novel,
i.e. c.22C>T (p.Arg8Cys), c.290T>C (p.Leu97Pro), c.402delC (p.Ser135GlnfsX12),
c.879 + 1G>A (p.IVS7 + 1G>A), c.1249dupC (p.Leu417ProfsX7), and c.1336T>G
(p.Cys446Gly). The 13-bp deletion in exon 8 (c.967-979del13) was the most
prevalent mutation, present in 23 of 48 (48%) of the alleles. The presence of
neutralizing autoantibodies against IFN-omega was the most specific marker of APS
I, being found in all but one Norwegian patient. Some other common APS
I-associated autoantibodies appeared de novo during long-term follow-up of
younger patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Norwegian patients with APS I clinically resemble those from Finland
and other European countries, but some have milder phenotypes. In total, six new 
mutations were identified in the Norwegian APS I patients. Anti-type I IFN
autoantibodies are easily detectable; their APS I specificity and persistently
high titers render them reliable markers of APS I, even in prodromal or atypical 
cases. Both the clinical features and the AIRE mutations are more diverse in the 
Norwegian population than previously thought.

PMID: 17118990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Exp Med. 2006 Nov 27;203(12):2727-35. Epub 2006 Nov 20.

Spontaneous autoimmunity prevented by thymic expression of a single self-antigen.

DeVoss J(1), Hou Y, Johannes K, Lu W, Liou GI, Rinn J, Chang H, Caspi RR, Fong L,
Anderson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center and Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Erratum in
    J Exp Med. 2007 Jan 22;204(1):203. Caspi, Rachel [corrected to Caspi, Rachel R].

The expression of self-antigen in the thymus is believed to be responsible for
the deletion of autoreactive T lymphocytes, a critical process in the maintenance
of unresponsiveness to self. The Autoimmune regulator (Aire) gene, which is
defective in the disorder autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1, has been
shown to promote the thymic expression of self-antigens. A clear link, however,
between specific thymic self-antigens and a single autoimmune phenotype in this
model has been lacking. We show that autoimmune eye disease in aire-deficient
mice develops as a result of loss of thymic expression of a single eye antigen,
interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein (IRBP). In addition, lack of IRBP
expression solely in the thymus, even in the presence of aire expression, is
sufficient to trigger spontaneous eye-specific autoimmunity. These results
suggest that failure of thymic expression of selective single self-antigens can
be sufficient to cause organ-specific autoimmune disease, even in otherwise
self-tolerant individuals.

PMCID: PMC2118158
PMID: 17116738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Clin Immunol. 2007 Jan;122(1):13-7. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

AIRE gene polymorphisms in systemic sclerosis associated with autoimmune
thyroiditis.

Ferrera F(1), Rizzi M, Sprecacenere B, Balestra P, Sessarego M, Di Carlo A,
Filaci G, Gabrielli A, Ravazzolo R, Indiveri F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Excellence for Biomedical Research, University of Genoa, Viale
Benedetto XV, 7 16132 Genoa, Italy. fferrera@unige.it

Mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene are responsible for autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). Systemic sclerosis 
(SSc) is a non-organ-specific autoimmune disease mainly characterized by
cutaneous involvement, that is frequently associated with other autoimmune
manifestations common to APECED. Nineteen SSc patients, 22 patients affected by
SSc associated with autoimmune thyroiditis, and 100 healthy controls were
analyzed. We identified 11 AIRE gene variants, one of which has never previously 
been described. Intronic polymorphism G11107A was significantly correlated to
SSc/thyroiditis. Data show that variants of the AIRE gene might be correlated to 
different clinical manifestations in SSc patients.

PMID: 17101293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Hum Reprod. 2007 Feb;22(2):457-67. Epub 2006 Oct 23.

Sex-specific promoters regulate Dnmt3L expression in mouse germ cells.

Shovlin TC(1), Bourc'his D, La Salle S, O'Doherty A, Trasler JM, Bestor TH, Walsh
CP.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cells and Epigenetics Research Group, Centre for Molecular Biosciences,
School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulster, Coleraine, UK.

BACKGROUND: Dnmt3L, a member of the DNA methyltransferase 3 family, lacks
enzymatic activity but is required for de-novo methylation of imprinted genes in 
oocytes and for transposon repression in male germ cells.
METHODS: We used northern blots, RT-PCR, 5' rapid amplification of complementary 
DNA (cDNA) ends (RACE), RNase H mapping, real-time/quantitative RT-PCR and in
situ hybridization to identify and characterize Dnmt3L transcripts produced
during germ cell development.
RESULTS: Mouse Dnmt3L uses three sex-specific promoters, not the single promoter 
previously thought. A promoter active in prospermatogonia drives transcription of
an mRNA encoding the full-length protein in perinatal testis, where de-novo
methylation occurs. Late pachytene spermatocytes activate a second promoter in
intron 9 of the Dnmt3L gene. After this stage, the predominant transcripts are
three truncated mRNAs, which appear to be non-coding. We could also detect
similar adult testis transcripts in humans. In the mouse ovary, an
oocyte-specific promoter located in an intron of the neighbouring autoimmune
regulator (Aire) gene produces a transcript with the full open reading frame
(ORF). This is the only Dnmt3L transcript found in growing oocytes and is absent 
in the oocytes of Dnmt3L-/- females.
CONCLUSIONS: Sex-specific promoters control Dnmt3L expression in the mouse germ
line, mirroring the situation at the Dnmt1 and Dnmt3A loci.

PMID: 17060371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Clin Invest. 2006 Nov;116(11):2964-71. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

NF-kappaB2 is required for the establishment of central tolerance through an
Aire-dependent pathway.

Zhu M(1), Chin RK, Christiansen PA, Lo JC, Liu X, Ware C, Siebenlist U, Fu YX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Committee on Immunology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

NF-kappaB2-deficient mice have impaired T and B cell responses. We found,
however, that in these mice there was severe infiltration of lymphocytes into
multiple organs and increased activity of autoantibodies to peripheral tissue
antigens in a manner similar to that of autoimmune regulator-deficient
(Aire-deficient) mice. We further demonstrated that NF-kappaB2 was required for
thymic Aire gene transcriptional regulation. The Nfkb2(-/-) thymus had distinct
cortical and medullar structures, but reduced Aire and target gene expression of 
peripheral tissue antigens. Engraftment of Nfkb2(-/-) thymic stroma to nude mice 
recapitulated the autoimmune phenotype of the native Nfkb2(-/-) mice, confirming 
a key defect in central tolerance. Lymphotoxin beta receptor (LTbetaR)
ligation-induced Aire gene expression was also largely abolished in the absence
of NF-kappaB2. Thus NF-kappaB2 downstream of LTbetaR plays an important role in
the regulation of central tolerance in an Aire-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC1592546
PMID: 17039258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Environ Pollut. 2007 May;147(1):194-202. Epub 2006 Oct 9.

What difference might sewage treatment performance make to endocrine disruption
in rivers?

Johnson AC(1), Williams RJ, Simpson P, Kanda R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Maclean Building, Benson Lane, Crowmarsh
Gifford, Wallingford, Oxfordshire, OX10 8BB, UK. ajo@ceh.ac.uk

An assessment of the steroid estrogen removing performance of 23 different sewage
treatment plants (STPs) was performed. The assessment relied on a model to
estimate influent concentrations, and completed questionnaires on the STP
treatment details from the relevant water companies. This information was
compared with observed effluent 17beta-estradiol (E2) and estrone (E1)
concentrations. The 10 biological filter plants (BFP) in the study performed
poorly with only 30% (SD 31) removal on average for E1. This reduced E1 removal
performance of the BFPs compared to all the other STP types in the survey was
statistically significant (p<0.001). Scenarios of all the STPs as activated
sludge types, and one as all BFP types were modelled using the GREAT-ER model set
up for the Aire/Calder catchment in the UK. This difference was shown to have an 
important effect on predicted river E1 concentrations and consequent risk
classifications.

PMID: 17030080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Clin Immunol. 2006 Dec;121(3):265-73. Epub 2006 Sep 18.

Defect internalization and tyrosine kinase activation in Aire deficient antigen
presenting cells exposed to Candida albicans antigens.

Brännström J(1), Hässler S, Peltonen L, Herrmann B, Winqvist O.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Department of Medicine, Unit of Clinical Allergy
Research L2:04, Karolinska Hospital, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.

Patients with Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I (APS I) present with
multiple endocrine failures due to organ-specific autoimmune disease, thought to 
be T-cell-mediated. Paradoxically, APS I patients suffer from chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis. The mutated gene has been identified as the Autoimmune
regulator (AIRE). Aire is expressed in medullary epithelial cells of the thymus
and in antigen presenting cells in the periphery. T cells from Aire deficient
mice and men displayed an enhanced proliferative response against Candida antigen
in vitro, suggesting that Aire deficient T cells are competent in recognizing
Candida albicans. In contrast, monocytes from APS I patients displayed a
decreased and delayed internalization of zymosan. Furthermore, Candida antigen
activated monocytes from APS I patients show decreased and altered phoshotyrosine
kinase activation. In conclusion, Aire deficient APCs have a defect receptor
mediated internalization of Candida which affects kinase activation, likely
altering the innate Candida immune response.

PMID: 16982213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Vet Parasitol. 2007 Jan 19;143(1):42-9. Epub 2006 Sep 14.

Ultrasonographic screening for cystic echinococcosis in sheep in Tunisia.

Lahmar S(1), Chéhida FB, Pétavy AF, Hammou A, Lahmar J, Ghannay A, Gharbi HA,
Sarciron ME.

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Laboratory, National Veterinary School, Sidi Thabet, Tunisia.

Sheep from the areas of Fondouk-Jeddid, Bir Mchergua and El Fahs, located in the 
Northeast of Tunisia, were examined by ultrasonography between 2001 and 2004 in
order to assess their infection with Echinococcus granulosus, the agent of
hydatid disease, and to evaluate this method as an efficient aire for hydatid
cysts. A total of 1039 sheep, aged between 1 and 14 years was examined. The
highest prevalence was found in sheep aged more than 8 years. The least infected 
animals were aged between 1 and 2 years. All hydatid cysts detected by ultrasound
were located in the liver. In all age-groups, the dead cysts were more numerous
than viable cysts. Eighteen positive sheep were autopsied and a comparison
between ultrasound and autopsy results was performed. The results showed a
prevalence of about 40% for the three areas. Ultrasonography allowed the cysts,
deep or superficial to localize in the central or left part in relation to the
caudal vena cava of the animals. Consequently, all the cysts were not detected
with this technique. This work shows that ultrasonography confirms the importance
of ovine hydatid cyst in Tunisia and that its use as a mass screening approach
for cystic echinococcosis in sheep could be helpful for the monitoring of this
disease in a hydatid control program without great stress for the animals.

PMID: 16973283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Clin Genet. 2006 Oct;70(4):348-54.

Molecular background of polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy
syndrome in a Polish population: novel AIRE mutations and an estimate of disease 
prevalence.

Stolarski B(1), Pronicka E, Korniszewski L, Pollak A, Kostrzewa G, Rowinska E,
Wlodarski P, Skórka A, Gremida M, Krajewski P, Ploski R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetology, Newborn Pathology and Birth Defects, Medical
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is an
autosomal-recessive autoimmune disease caused by autoimmune regulator gene
mutations. The aim of this study was to examine the mutation profile of Polish
APECED patients, determine the carrier rate of the most frequent mutation(s) and 
estimate disease prevalence. While studying 14 unrelated patients, we identified 
three novel mutations (c.1A>T, affecting the start codon; [IVS1 + 1G>C; IVS1 +
5delG], a complex mutation affecting splice site; c. 908G>C, p.R303P, a missense 
mutation in plant homeodomain (PHD) and three previously reported mutations
(c.769C>T, p.R257X; c.967_979del13bp, C322fsX372; c.931delT, p.C311fsX376).
Eleven patients had mutations on both chromosomes, whereas in three patients only
a single alteration with proven or likely pathogenic effect was detected. The
most frequent was the p.R257X mutation (71% of chromosomes); its carriage rate
was assessed in the background population. Analysis of 2008 samples showed eight 
heterozygotes, indicating the frequency of 0.40% (1:250) and the disease
prevalence - 1:129,000 (95% confidence interval: 1:555,000 to 1:30,000).
Comparison with an epidemiological estimate (1:619,000, derived for women)
suggested that in Poland, APECED is underdiagnosed. Among the patients, no
genotype/phenotype correlations were found, but we noted that women had earlier
onset of hypoparathyroidism (p < 0.02) and were younger at diagnosis (p < 0.05)
than men.

PMID: 16965330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Nat Med. 2006 Sep;12(9):1100.

The autoimmune regulator (Aire) controls iNKT cell development and maturation.

Mi QS, Deng ZB, Joshi SK, Wang ZZ, Zhou L, Eckenrode S, Joshi R, Ly D, Yi B,
Delovitch TL, She JX.

Retraction of
    Mi QS, Deng ZB, Joshi SK, Wang ZZ, Zhou L, Eckenrode S, Joshi R, Ly D, Yi B,
Delovitch TL, She JX. Nat Med. 2006 Jun;12(6):624-6.

PMID: 16960577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Chemosphere. 2007 Jan;66(4):757-66. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

Modeling the impact of direct phototransformation on predicted environmental
concentrations (PECs) of propranolol hydrochloride in UK and US rivers.

Robinson PF(1), Liu QT, Riddle AM, Murray-Smith R.

Author information: 
(1)AstraZeneca Global Safety Health and Environment, Brixham, Devon TQ5 8BA, UK.

There is currently uncertainty on the persistence of active pharmaceutical
ingredients (APIs) and on their depletion mechanisms in natural surface waters
such as rivers, and hence predictions of their fate are often poor. In this
study, a beta-adrenergic receptor, propranolol hydrochloride, was selected as a
model API to explore the relative significance of direct phototransformation as a
potential removal process of hydrophilic APIs in rivers. Phototransformation
kinetics of propranolol was measured under simulated solar irradiation in the
laboratory, which were then converted to the kinetics applicable in UK and US
rivers. The effects of light intensity, light penetration, river size and flow
were examined. The extrapolated phototransformation half-lives were applied in
the river catchment models of GREAT-ER and PhATE. Results demonstrated that
direct phototransformation significantly reduced the predicted environmental
concentrations of propranolol in the water phase. Predicted reductions of mean
concentrations in the River Aire (UK) were 27% in summer and 3% in winter; and
for the US rivers simulated, reductions were 28-68% in summer and 11-41% in
winter. The highest reductions were predicted for long rivers with low turbidity 
and low flow conditions.

PMID: 16959294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Diabetes. 2006 Sep;55(9):2595-601.

Isolation and characterization of proinsulin-producing medullary thymic
epithelial cell clones.

Palumbo MO(1), Levi D, Chentoufi AA, Polychronakos C.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University Health Center, Montreal Children's Hospital, Research
Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3H 1P3.

Proinsulin, like many tissue-specific antigens, is expressed by rare (1-3%) cells
of the thymus medullary stroma, presumably for the purpose of self-tolerance.
Levels of this expression are associated with type 1 diabetes susceptibility in
humans and in the NOD mouse. To further understand the mechanism of central
tolerance induction by these rare cells, we have isolated and cultured two
proinsulin-producing epithelial cell clones from murine thymus. These cells have 
a typical epithelial morphology and, by flow cytometry, a surface phenotype
representative of mature thymic medullary epithelial cells
(G8.8(+)/UEA-1(+)/DEC205(-)/CD45(-)/MHC II(+)). By RT-PCR, they express
predominantly Ins2 as opposed to Ins1, as does whole thymus. Expression of the
transcription factor Aire, implicated in enhancing promiscuous thymic expression 
of tissue-specific antigens, fell to very low levels after a few passages but
increased 20-fold upon exposure to an agonistic anti-lymphotoxin B antibody,
concurrent with 2.5-fold enhanced insulin expression. RNA of Pdx-1, Glut-2, and
Gck was detectable by RT-PCR in whole thymus but not in the clones, suggesting
thymic proinsulin expression is Pdx-1 independent and that Pdx-1, Glut-2, and Gck
are likely expressed in the thymus as antigens, not as regulatory molecules.

PMID: 16936209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Trends Genet. 2006 Nov;22(11):581-5. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Epistatic interactions: how strong in disease and evolution?

Azevedo L(1), Suriano G, van Asch B, Harding RM, Amorim A.

Author information: 
(1)IPATIMUP, Rua Dr Roberto Frias s/n, 4200-465 Porto, Portugal.
luisa.azevedo@ipatimup.pt

When the chimpanzee genome sequence was released, human deleterious alleles
associated with simple mendelian diseases were observed as wild-type alleles in
six genes (AIRE, MKKS, MLH1, MYOC, OTC and PRSS1). The absence of recognizable
phenotypic effects in chimpanzee, contrary to the clinical effect observed in
humans, is attributed to epistatic interactions (compensation) between
potentially deleterious and compensatory alleles. In this report we investigate
the possible evolutionary histories by which substitution of alternative variants
in these six genes either ameliorates or avoids pathological consequences.

PMID: 16911842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Immunology. 2006 Nov;119(3):369-75. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Onset of promiscuous gene expression in murine fetal thymus organ culture.

Sousa Cardoso R(1), Magalhães DA, Baião AM, Junta CM, Macedo C, Marques MM,
Sakamoto-Hojo ET, Donadi EA, Passos GA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunogenetics Group, Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

T-cell differentiation and induction of tolerance to self-antigens occurs mainly 
in the thymus. Thymic stromal cells, specifically medullary thymic epithelial
cells, express a diverse set of genes encoding parenchymal organ-specific
proteins. This phenomenon has been termed promiscuous gene expression (PGE) and
has been implicated in preventing organ-specific autoimmunity by inducing T-cell 
tolerance to self antigens. Early thymopoiesis and the critical factors involved 
in T-cell differentiation can be reproduced in vitro by murine fetal thymus organ
culture (FTOC), which mimics the natural thymic microenvironment. To evaluate the
occurrence of PGE in FTOC, gene expression profiling during in vitro thymic
development in BALB/c mice was performed using a set of nylon cDNA microarrays
containing 9216 sequences. The statistical analysis of the microarray data (sam
program) revealed the temporal repression and induction of 57 parenchymal and
seven lymphoid organ-specific genes. Most of the genes analysed are repressed
during early thymic development (15-17 days post-coitum). The expression of the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene at 16 days post-coitum marks the onset of PGE.
This precedes the induction of parenchymal organ genes during the late
developmental phase at 20 days post-coitum. The mechanism of T-cell tolerance
induction begins during fetal development and continues into adulthood. Our
findings are significant because they show a fine demarcation of PGE onset, which
plays a central role in induction of T-cell tolerance.

PMCID: PMC1819582
PMID: 16903901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Sep 22;348(2):768-74. Epub 2006 Jul 31.

Ets transcription factors regulate AIRE gene promoter.

Murumägi A(1), Silvennoinen O, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere and Tampere University 
Hospital, Tampere, Finland. ltasmu@uta.fi

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) directs the expression of self-antigens in thymus.
Defects in AIRE gene cause an organ-specific autoimmune disease called autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). AIRE protein is
mainly expressed in thymic medullary epithelial cells, thus implying a strict
control over its expression pattern. To date, only limited information is
available on mechanisms responsible for the regulation of AIRE gene. Here, we
show that Ets transcription factor family members Ets-1, Ets-2, and ESE-1 have
positive effect on AIRE transcription. Site-directed mutagenesis and transfection
studies revealed that two of the three Ets binding sites in AIRE promoter are
functional and this finding has been confirmed by the electrophoretic mobility
shift assay. The AIRE promoter activity could be stimulated by phorbol myristate 
acetate (PMA) and this activation was further enhanced by Ets transcription
factors. Our results demonstrate for the first time that AIRE gene is a
downstream target for the Ets family of transcription factors.

PMID: 16890195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Immunol Lett. 2006 Aug 15;106(2):172-9. Epub 2006 Jul 28.

Expression profiling of autoimmune regulator AIRE mRNA in a comprehensive set of 
human normal and neoplastic tissues.

Klamp T(1), Sahin U, Kyewski B, Schwendemann J, Dhaene K, Türeci O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Johannes-Gutenberg University Mainz,
Obere Zahlbacherstr 63, 55131 Mainz, Germany.

Defects in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene cause the monogenic autoimmune
disease autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 (APS-1), which is
characterized by a loss of self-tolerance to multiple organs. In concordance with
its role in immune tolerance, AIRE is strongly expressed in medullary thymic
epithelial cells (mTECs). Data on mechanisms controlling AIRE activation and the 
expression of this gene in other tissues are fragmentary and controversial. We
report here AIRE mRNA expression profiling of a large set of normal human tissues
and cells, tumor specimen and methylation deficient cell lines. On this broad
data basis we found that AIRE mRNA expression is confined to mTECs in thymus and 
to lymph node tissue and that DNA hypomethylation contributes to transcriptional 
control of this gene.

PMID: 16876259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Anat Embryol (Berl). 2006 Oct;211(5):559-65. Epub 2006 Jul 19.

The morphology of the efferent ducts of the testis of the ostrich, a primitive
bird.

Ozegbe PC(1), Aire TA, Soley JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Private Bag X04, Onderstepoort 0110, Republic of South
Africa.

The efferent duct of the ostrich consists of two segments, the proximal efferent 
duct (PED) and the distal efferent duct (DED) that are continuous, as in some
other birds. Both segments of the duct possess an epithelium comprising
non-ciliated and ciliated cells in varying proportions between the two segments. 
The non-ciliated cell (type I) of the PED contains a well-developed, subapical
endocytic apparatus of apical tubules and endocytic vacuoles, a solitary, large, 
heterogeneous lipid droplet, and numerous, oval, dense bodies in the supranuclear
region of the cell. Mitochondria tend to concentrate in the basal part of the
cell. Intercellular spaces between the non-ciliated cells are enlarged,
especially in the basal half of the epithelium. Together, these morphological
features confer on the PED an efficient fluid absorption capability. The DED
epithelium displays the type II non-ciliated cell whose poorly developed
subapical endocytic apparatus as well as the absence of dilated basal
intercellular spaces indicate its limited fluid absorptive capacity.

PMID: 16850342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Autoimmun. 2006 Sep;27(2):96-104. Epub 2006 Jul 3.

Aire deficient mice do not develop the same profile of tissue-specific
autoantibodies as APECED patients.

Pöntynen N(1), Miettinen A, Arstila TP, Kämpe O, Alimohammadi M, Vaarala O,
Peltonen L, Ulmanen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, 
Finland. nora.pontynen@helsinki.fi

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED, or APS1),
is a monogenic autoimmune disease caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator
(AIRE) gene. The three main components of APECED are chronic mucocuteaneous
candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism and adrenocortical insufficiency. However,
several additional endocrine or other autoimmune disease components, or
ectodermal dystrophies form the individually variable clinical picture of APECED.
An important feature of APECED is a spectrum of well-characterized circulating
autoantibodies, reacting against tissue-specific autoantigens. Aire deficient
mice develop some characteristics of APECED phenotype. In order to investigate
whether the Aire deficient mice produce autoantibodies similar to human APECED,
we studied the reactivity of Aire mouse sera against mouse homologues of 11 human
APECED antigens. None of the APECED antigens indicated elevated reactivity in the
Aire knock-out mouse sera, implying the absence of APECED associated
autoantibodies in Aire deficient mice. These findings were supported by the
failure of the autoantigens to activate mouse T-cells. Furthermore, Aire
knock-out mice did not express increased levels of anti-nuclear antibodies
compared to wt mice. This study indicates that spontaneous induction of
tissue-specific autoantibodies similar to APECED does not occur in the rodent
model suggesting differences in the immunopathogenic mechanisms between mice and 
men.

Copyright 2006 Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 16820279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Horm Res. 2006;66(3):132-41. Epub 2006 Jun 27.

Autoimmunity: basic mechanisms and implications in endocrine diseases. Part I.

Ballotti S(1), Chiarelli F, de Martino M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Anna Meyer Children's Hospital, University of
Florence, Florence, Italy.

Autoimmunity implies disturbances at several levels of the immune control.
Self-tolerance and discrimination between self and non-self synergize to avoid
the development of autoimmunity. Negative selection in the thymus, the
transcription factor AIRE, CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells, and dendritic cells
cooperate to produce and maintain tolerance. Cytokines modulate deriving immune
processes and influence the local micro-environment. Multiple mechanisms are
involved in tolerance breakdown: genetic factors (major histocompatibility
complex haplotypes, polymorphisms in the cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen gene and 
epigenetic alterations), environmental factors (mainly infections), impaired
apoptosis, and the emergence of autoreactive naive lymphocytes. These events may 
be involved in the pathogenesis of endocrine diseases at several levels.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16807508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Genomics. 2006 Oct;88(4):462-7. Epub 2006 Jun 27.

Across-tissue expression and evolution of genes controlled by the Aire
transcription factor.

Hughes AL(1), Friedman R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 
29208, USA. austin@biol.sc.edu

Aire (autoimmune regulatory protein) enhances expression of certain genes in
thymic medullary epithelial cells (MECs). Using publicly available data, we
examined expression patterns, across 82 distinct tissue types, of genes
previously identified as Aire-activated, Aire-repressed, and Aire-independent.
Consistent with the hypothesis that the effect of Aire in MECs is to increase
expression of tissue-specific genes, Aire-activated genes had a low overall level
of expression but a large range between the lowest and the highest levels of
expression in different tissues. By contrast, Aire-repressed genes tended to have
a high overall level of expression and less marked differences between the
highest and the lowest levels of expression. Nonetheless, the expression scores
of Aire-repressed genes showed broader ranges of values than those of
Aire-independent genes. Phylogenetic analyses of members of two gene families
that included two Aire-activated genes illustrated two contrasting patterns of
the relationship of Aire-activated genes within the same family. The two
Aire-activated members of the major urinary protein family arose through a recent
gene duplication (after the rat-mouse divergence), whereas the most recent common
ancestor of the two Aire-activated members of cytochrome p450 family 2 duplicated
prior to the radiation of the eutherian orders. In the latter family, the
Aire-activated Cyp2a4 gene and the Aire-independent Cyp2a5 gene arose through a
recent duplication, after the rat-mouse divergence. Thus the set of
Aire-activated genes is subject to change over evolutionary time and includes
genes of recent origin.

PMID: 16806803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. An Pediatr (Barc). 2006 Jun;64(6):583-7.

[AIRE gene mutation in polyglandular syndrome type 1].

[Article in Spanish]

Martínez López MM(1), González Casado I, Alvarez Doforno R, Delgado Cerviño E,
Gracia Bouthelier R.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Endocrinología Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Melchior
Fernández Almagro 16, 11B, 28029 Madrid, Spain. martinezlopezmm@hotmail.com

Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS-1) is an autosomal recessive
disorder characterized by chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, autoimmune
hypoparathyroidism, and primary adrenal insufficiency. It has recently been
associated with mutations of a single gene found on chromosome 21, designated
AutoImmune Regulator (AIRE). We report two patients with APS-1 referred to our
hospital for evaluation. The first patient was an 11-year-old girl with
hypoparathyroidism, infectious or immunological malabsorption, and autoimmune
hepatitis. Hypoparathyroidism associated with other processes with a probable
autoimmune origin suggested APS-1. Genetic study was performed revealing deletion
of 13 base pairs in exon 8 of the AIRE gene. The second patient was a 17-year-old
girl with autoimmune hepatitis, hypoparathyroidism, mucocutaneous candidiasis,
nail dystrophy, and obliterating bronchiolitis with a probable autoimmune origin.
We suspected APS-1 and genetic study was performed. The only finding was an AIRE 
gene polymorphism. In conclusion, the presence of a single disease criterion is
sufficient to suspect APS-1 and to indicate genetic study. Further studies are
required to confirm the involvement of other genes in the development of this
disease.

PMID: 16792967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Nature. 2006 Jun 22;441(7096):992-6.

Formation of a functional thymus initiated by a postnatal epithelial progenitor
cell.

Bleul CC(1), Corbeaux T, Reuter A, Fisch P, Mönting JS, Boehm T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Immunology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stuebeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Nature. 2006 Jun 22;441(7096):942-3.

The thymus is essential for the generation of self-tolerant effector and
regulatory T cells. Intrathymic T-cell development requires an intact stromal
microenvironment, of which thymic epithelial cells (TECs) constitute a major
part. For instance, cell-autonomous genetic defects of forkhead box N1 (Foxn1)
and autoimmune regulator (Aire) in thymic epithelial cells cause primary
immunodeficiency and autoimmunity, respectively. During development, the thymic
epithelial rudiment gives rise to two major compartments, the cortex and medulla.
Cortical TECs positively select T cells, whereas medullary TECs are involved in
negative selection of potentially autoreactive T cells. It has long been unclear 
whether these two morphologically and functionally distinct types of epithelial
cells arise from a common bi-potent progenitor cell and whether such progenitors 
are still present in the postnatal period. Here, using in vivo cell lineage
analysis in mice, we demonstrate the presence of a common progenitor of cortical 
and medullary TECs after birth. To probe the function of postnatal progenitors, a
conditional mutant allele of Foxn1 was reverted to wild-type function in single
epithelial cells in vivo. This led to the formation of small thymic lobules
containing both cortical and medullary areas that supported normal thymopoiesis. 
Thus, single epithelial progenitor cells can give rise to a complete and
functional thymic microenvironment, suggesting that cell-based therapies could be
developed for thymus disorders.

PMID: 16791198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Immunol. 2006 Jul 1;177(1):290-7.

Lymphotoxin pathway-directed, autoimmune regulator-independent central tolerance 
to arthritogenic collagen.

Chin RK(1), Zhu M, Christiansen PA, Liu W, Ware C, Peltonen L, Zhang X, Guo L,
Han S, Zheng B, Fu YX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Committee in Immunology, University of Chicago,
5841 S. Maryland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Ectopic expression of peripherally restricted Ags by medullary thymic epithelial 
cells (mTECs) is associated with negative selection. Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) 
is considered to be the master regulator of these Ags. We show in this study that
the ectopic expression of type II collagen (CII) in mTECs and the corresponding
central tolerance to CII are AIRE independent but lymphotoxin dependent. The
failure to properly express CII in mTECs of Lta(-/-) and Ltbr(-/-) mice leads to 
overt autoimmunity to CII and exquisite susceptibility to arthritis. These
findings define the existence of additional pathways of ectopic peripheral Ag
expression, parallel to and independent of AIRE, which may cover an extended
spectrum of peripheral Ags in the thymus.

PMID: 16785524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. PLoS Med. 2006 Jul;3(7):e289.

Anti-interferon autoantibodies in autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1.

Meager A(1), Visvalingam K, Peterson P, Möll K, Murumägi A, Krohn K, Eskelin P,
Perheentupa J, Husebye E, Kadota Y, Willcox N.

Author information: 
(1)Biotherapeutics, National Institute for Biological Standards and Control,
South Mimms, United Kingdom. ameager@nibsc.ac.uk

Comment in
    PLoS Med. 2006 Jul;3(7):e292.

BACKGROUND: The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene influences thymic self-tolerance
induction. In autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 (APS1; OMIM 240300), 
recessive AIRE mutations lead to autoimmunity targetting endocrine and other
epithelial tissues, although chronic candidiasis usually appears first.
Autoimmunity and chronic candidiasis can associate with thymomas as well.
Patients with these tumours frequently also have high titre immunoglobulin G
autoantibodies neutralising type I interferon (IFN)-alpha and IFN-omega, which
are secreted signalling proteins of the cytokine superfamily involved in both
innate and adaptive immunity.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We tested for serum autoantibodies to type I IFNs and other
immunoregulatory cytokines using specific binding and neutralisation assays.
Unexpectedly, in 60/60 Finnish and 16/16 Norwegian APS1 patients with both AIRE
alleles mutated, we found high titre neutralising immunoglobulin G autoantibodies
to most IFN-alpha subtypes and especially IFN-omega (60% homologous to
IFN-alpha)-mostly in the earliest samples. We found lower titres against IFN-beta
(30% homologous to IFN-alpha) in 23% of patients; two-thirds of these (from
Finland only) also had low titres against the distantly related "type III IFN"
(IFN-lambda1; alias interleukin-29). However, autoantibodies to the unrelated
type II IFN, IFN-gamma, and other immunoregulatory cytokines, such as
interleukin-10 and interleukin-12, were much rarer and did not neutralise.
Neutralising titres against type I IFNs averaged even higher in patients with
APS1 than in patients with thymomas. Anti-type I IFN autoantibodies preceded
overt candidiasis (and several of the autoimmune disorders) in the informative
patients, and persisted for decades thereafter. They were undetectable in
unaffected heterozygous relatives of APS1 probands (except for low titres against
IFN-lambda1), in APS2 patients, and in isolated cases of the endocrine diseases
most typical of APS1, so they appear to be APS1-specific. Looking for potentially
autoimmunising cell types, we found numerous IFN-alpha(+) antigen-presenting
cells-plus strong evidence of local IFN secretion-in the normal thymic medulla
(where AIRE expression is strongest), and also in normal germinal centres, where 
it could perpetuate these autoantibody responses once initiated. IFN-alpha2 and
IFN-alpha8 transcripts were also more abundant in antigen-presenting cells
cultured from an APS1 patient's blood than from age-matched healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: These apparently spontaneous autoantibody responses to IFNs,
particularly IFN-alpha and IFN-omega, segregate like a recessive trait; their
high "penetrance" is especially remarkable for such a variable condition. Their
apparent restriction to APS1 patients implies practical value in the clinic,
e.g., in diagnosing unusual or prodromal AIRE-mutant patients with only single
components of APS1, and possibly in prognosis if they prove to predict its onset.
These autoantibody responses also raise numerous questions, e.g., about the
rarity of other infections in APS1. Moreover, there must also be clues to
autoimmunising mechanisms/cell types in the hierarchy of preferences for
IFN-omega, IFN-alpha8, IFN-alpha2, and IFN-beta and IFN-lambda1.

PMCID: PMC1475653
PMID: 16784312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Tissue Antigens. 2006 Jul;68(1):58-61.

Investigation of the p.Ser278Arg polymorphism of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) 
gene in alopecia areata.

Pforr J(1), Blaumeiser B, Becker T, Freudenberg-Hua Y, Hanneken S, Eigelshoven S,
Cuyt I, De Weert J, Lambert J, Kruse R, Nöthen MM, Betz RC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

A recent study has suggested that the g.961C >G (p.Ser278Arg) variant of the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene contributes to susceptibility to alopecia areata
(AA). We attempted to replicate this finding using a case-control sample of
Belgian-German origin (273 patients and 283 controls). Despite adequate power,
our study results do not support a significant association of the risk allele in 
our AA patient sample. This remained the case when we stratified our sample
according to severity and family history of disease. Our study results do not
support the hypothesis that the g.961C >G (p.Ser278Arg) polymorphism of the AIRE 
gene is associated with an increased risk for AA.

PMID: 16774540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Nat Med. 2006 Jun;12(6):624-6. Epub 2006 May 28.

The autoimmune regulator (Aire) controls iNKT cell development and maturation.

Mi QS(1), Deng ZB, Joshi SK, Wang ZZ, Zhou L, Eckenrode S, Joshi R, Ly D, Yi B,
Delovitch TL, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Medical College of Georgia,
1120 15th Street, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA. qmi@mail.mcg.edu

Retraction in
    Mi QS, Deng ZB, Joshi SK, Wang ZZ, Zhou L, Eckenrode S, Joshi R, Ly D, Yi B,
Delovitch TL, She JX. Nat Med. 2006 Sep;12(9):1100.

Comment in
    NIH Guide Grants Contracts. 2009 Dec 4;:NOT-OD-10-021.

The mechanism underlying the autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type-1 (APS1) has 
been attributed to defective T-cell negative selection resulting from reduced
expression and presentation of autoantigens in thymic medullary epithelial cells 
(MECs). It has also been postulated that Aire is involved in development of
regulatory T cells, although supporting evidence is lacking. Here we show that
expression of Aire in MECs is required for development of iNKT cells, suggesting 
a role for iNKT cells in APS1.

PMID: 16732280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Blood. 2006 Sep 15;108(6):1941-8. Epub 2006 May 18.

Aire-deficient mice develop hematopoetic irregularities and marginal zone B-cell 
lymphoma.

Hässler S(1), Ramsey C, Karlsson MC, Larsson D, Herrmann B, Rozell B, Backheden
M, Peltonen L, Kämpe O, Winqvist O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science, Section of Clinical Bacteriology, Uppsala
University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I (APS I) is an inherited recessive
disorder with a progressive immunological destruction of many tissues including
the adrenal cortex, the parathyroid glands, and the gonads. APS I is caused by
mutations in the AIRE gene (autoimmune regulator), expressed in cells of the
thymus and spleen, suggesting a role in central and peripheral tolerance.
Aire(-/-) mice replicate the autoimmune features of APS I patients with the
presence of multiple autoantibodies and lymphocytic infiltrates in various
tissues, but young mice appear clinically healthy. We here report the
investigation of 15- to 24-month-old Aire(-/-) mice. We did not observe any
endocrinological abnormalities, nor did sera from these mice recognize known APS 
I autoantigens. Interestingly, however, there was a high frequency of marginal
zone B-cell lymphoma in Aire(-/-) mice and liver infiltrates of B cells,
suggesting chronic antigen exposure and exaggerated activation. Furthermore,
increased numbers of monocytes in blood were identified as well as augmented
numbers of metallophilic macrophages in the spleen. We propose that Aire, in
addition to its function in the thymus, also has a peripheral regulatory role by 
controlling the development of antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and marginal zone 
B-cell activation.

PMID: 16709926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Br J Dermatol. 2006 Jun;154(6):1088-93.

Dermatological manifestations of autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy syndrome.

Collins SM(1), Dominguez M, Ilmarinen T, Costigan C, Irvine AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Our Lady's Hospital for Sick Children,
Crumlin, Dublin 12, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy
syndrome (APECED; OMIM 240300) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder defined by 
a variable combination of endocrine failure, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
(CMC), and dystrophy of the dental enamel and nails. APECED is caused by
mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE). Alopecia areata (AA) and
vitiligo are diseases with autoimmune pathogeneses, and have been recognized as
part of the APECED complex. There are rare reports of other cutaneous
manifestations.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to delineate the dermatological features of APECED in an
Irish case series with emphasis on timing of their appearance and association
with disease severity. Furthermore, we looked for evidence of genotype: phenotype
correlation. Finally, we wanted to determine if the ectodermal changes described 
represent a primary ectodermal dysplasia or whether the ectodermal manifestations
are secondary phenomena.
METHODS: Irish patients with APECED were invited to attend a multidisciplinary
clinic (Dermatology, Endocrinology, Dentistry and Ophthalmology) held in Our
Lady's Hospital for Sick Children, Dublin. Clinical data were compiled from case 
notes and questionnaires. All patients had a detailed cutaneous examination.
Blood samples were obtained for mutational analysis.
RESULTS: Eighteen patients (seven males and 11 females) from 15 families were
interviewed and examined. The mean age at diagnosis was 6 years (range 8
months-18 years). All patients had evidence of CMC, 13 (72%) had candidal
onychomycosis or paronychia, six (33%) had AA and two had vitiligo. In the case
of two patients the diagnosis was made on recognition of dermatological
manifestations and confirmed by mutational analysis. Both patients developed
Addison's disease on follow-up. CMC was an early feature, often predating
diagnosis (10 of 18). AA and vitiligo presented later, and may reflect more
severe disease in these cases. There was no correlation between the AIRE
mutations identified on mutational analysis and the clinical presentation. We
found no evidence of an isolated nail dystrophy or features consistent with a
primary ectodermal dysplasia.
CONCLUSIONS: APECED is a rare but complex and potentially life-threatening
autoimmune disease. CMC is a common and early feature; diagnosis at this stage
may pre-empt life-threatening endocrinological crises. It is important for
dermatologists to be aware of this association as they are likely to be the
earliest clinicians who encounter these children. AA and vitiligo in our series
occurred in the setting of established disease. The term "ectodermal dystrophy"
is misleading as the ectodermal features described in our series and in the
literature are most likely to be secondary phenomena.

PMID: 16704638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Aug;91(8):2843-50. Epub 2006 May 9.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy.

Perheentupa J(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Hospital for Children and Adolescents, Helsinki University Hospital,
FIN-00029 Helsinki, Finland. jaakko.perheentupa@saunalahti.fi

CONTEXT: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy is known 
as a rare hereditary disease with classic triad of mucocutaneous candidiasis,
hypoparathyroidism, and adrenocortical failure, two of which, diagnostic dyad,
are required for the diagnosis. Evidently many patients suffer unrecognized
because the condition is more variable and complex.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to describe the variability of
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy for promoting
recognition and adequate follow-up of patients.
SETTING: The Finnish series of patients is the largest internationally.
PATIENTS: The study population was all 91 known Finnish patients.
RESULTS: Besides the classical triad, a dozen autoimmune endocrine and other
components occurred variably, several of them dangerous. The initial
manifestation appeared within the age range of 0.2-18 yr, mucocutaneous
candidiasis being part of it in 60% of the patients, hypoparathyroidism in 32%,
and adrenocortical failure in 5%. But 23% of the patients had one to six other
components before the diagnostic dyad: hepatitis, keratoconjunctivitis, chronic
diarrhea, periodic rash with fever. The dyad appeared 0.2-20 yr later. Prevalence
of most components increased with age, diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and
testicular failure becoming common toward middle age. Tubulointerstitial
nephritis occurred in 9% of the patients, apparent mineralocorticoid excess in
9%, asplenia in 19% of adults, and oral or esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in 
10% of patients older than 25 yr.
CONCLUSIONS: Any child or young adult with one of the many disease components
should be examined for others and consideration of AIRE mutation assay.

PMID: 16684821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Adv Immunol. 2006;89:321-70.

Immunodeficiencies with autoimmune consequences.

Notarangelo LD(1), Gambineri E, Badolato R.

Author information: 
(1)Angelo Nocivelli Institute for Molecular Medicine, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

Far from being mutually exclusive, immunodeficiency and autoimmunity may occur
simultaneously. During the last years, analysis of Autoimmune
Polyendocrinopathy--Candidiasis--Ectodermal Dystrophy (APECED) and
Immunodysregulation--Polyendocrinopathy--Enteropathy--X-linked (IPEX), two rare
monogenic forms of immunodeficiency associated with autoimmunity, has led to the 
identification of Auto Immune Regulator (AIRE) and Forkhead Box P3 (FOXP3),
essential transcriptional regulators, involved in central tolerance and
peripheral immune homeostasis, respectively. Characterization of the molecular
and cellular mechanisms involved in APECED, and recognition that AIRE expression 
is sustained by effective thymopoiesis, has recently allowed to define that the
autoimmunity of Omenn syndrome, a combined immunodeficiency due to defects of
V(D)J recombination, also results from defective expression of AIRE. The
implications of identification of the basis of autoimmunity in these rare forms
of immunodeficiency have important implications for a better understanding of
more common autoimmune disorders, and for development of novel therapeutic
approaches.

PMID: 16682278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Clin Invest. 2006 May;116(5):1292-301. Epub 2006 Apr 20.

Alteration of intra-pancreatic target-organ specificity by abrogation of Aire in 
NOD mice.

Niki S(1), Oshikawa K, Mouri Y, Hirota F, Matsushima A, Yano M, Han H, Bando Y,
Izumi K, Matsumoto M, Nakayama KI, Kuroda N, Matsumoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, University of
Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan.

Factors that determine the spectrum of target organs involved in autoimmune
destruction are poorly understood. Although loss of function of autoimmune
regulator (AIRE) in thymic epithelial cells is responsible for autoimmunity, the 
pathogenic roles of AIRE in regulating target-organ specificity remain elusive.
In order to gain insight into this issue, we have established NOD mice, an animal
model of type 1 diabetes caused by autoimmune attack against beta cell islets, in
which Aire has been abrogated. Remarkably, acinar cells rather than beta cell
islets were the major targets of autoimmune destruction in Aire-deficient NOD
mice, and this alteration of intra-pancreatic target-organ specificity was
associated with production of autoantibody against pancreas-specific protein
disulfide isomerase (PDIp), an antigen expressed predominantly by acinar cells.
Consistent with this pathological change, the animals were resistant to the
development of diabetes. The results suggest that Aire not only is critical for
the control of self-tolerance but is also a strong modifier of target-organ
specificity through regulation of T cell repertoire diversification. We also
demonstrated that transcriptional expression of PDIp was retained in the
Aire-deficient NOD thymus, further supporting the concept that Aire may regulate 
the survival of autoreactive T cells beyond transcriptional control of
self-protein expression in the thymus.

PMCID: PMC1440703
PMID: 16628255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Sci Total Environ. 2006 Jul 15;365(1-3):84-104. Epub 2006 Apr 19.

Chlorophyll-a in the rivers of eastern England.

Neal C(1), Hilton J, Wade AJ, Neal M, Wickham H.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology Wallingford, Maclean Building, Crowmarsh
Gifford, Wallingford, OXON, OX10 8BB, UK. cn@ceh.ac.uk

Chlorophyll-a concentration variations are described for two major river basins
in England, the Humber and the Thames and related to catchment characteristics
and nutrient concentrations across a range of rural, agricultural and
urban/industrial settings. For all the rivers there are strong seasonal
variations, with concentrations peaking in the spring and summer time when
biological activity is at its highest. However, there are large variations in the
magnitude of the seasonal effects across the rivers. For the spring-summer
low-flow periods, average concentrations of chlorophyll-a correlate with soluble 
reactive phosphorus (SRP). Chlorophyll-a is also correlated with particulate
nitrogen (PN), organic carbon (POC) and suspended sediments. However, the
strongest relationships are with catchment area and flow, where two straight line
relationships are observed. The results indicate the importance of residence
times for determining planktonic growth within the rivers. This is also indicated
by the lack of chlorophyll-a response to lowering of SRP concentrations in
several of the rivers in the area due to phosphorus stripping of effluents at
major sewage treatment works. A key control on chlorophyll-a concentration may be
the input of canal and reservoir waters during the growing period: this too
relates to issues of residence times. However, there may well be a complex series
of factors influencing residence time across the catchments due to features such 
as inhomogeneous flow within the catchments, a fractal distribution of stream
channels that leads to a distribution of residence times and differences in
planktonic inoculation sources. Industrial pollution on the Aire and Calder seems
to have affected the relationship of chlorophyll-a with PN and POC. The results
are discussed in relation to the Water Framework Directive.

PMID: 16626783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mayo Clin Proc. 2006 Apr;81(4):476-80.

Spanish cross-cultural adaptation and validation of the National Institutes of
Health Stroke Scale.

Domínguez R(1), Vila JF, Augustovski F, Irazola V, Castillo PR, Rotta Escalante
R, Brott TG, Meschia JF.

Author information: 
(1)University of Buenos Aires Hospital Sirio Libanés, Instituto Médico ENERI,
Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aire, Argentina.

OBJECTIVES: To adapt and validate a Spanish-language version (SV) of the National
Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) to facilitate its use in
Spanish-speaking contexts.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The methods recommended by the International Quality of
Life Assessment Project were followed. Two forward translations and 1 back
translation of the NIHSS were developed to ensure lingual and cultural
equivalence. A final revised SV-NIHSS was administered by 8 physicians to
patients with stroke in 3 clinics in Buenos Aires, Argentina, from September 2003
to December 2003.
RESULTS: The study included 102 patients (mean +/- SD age, 73.3+/-6.5 years; 56% 
women) with stroke (86% ischemic). The SV-NIHSS mean baseline score was
9.78+/-7.04. Interrater reliability was Independently evaluated for 98 patients, 
showing a high agreement: kappa, 0.77 to 0.99 for the 15 items; interrater
correlation coefficient, 0.991 (95% confidence Interval, 0.987-0.994). Intrarater
reliability was excellent: kappa, 0.86 to 1.00 for the 15 items; mean intrarater 
correlation coefficient, 0.994 (95% confidence interval, 0.991-0.996). Construct 
validity was also adequate; the SV-NIHSS had a negative correlation with baseline
Glasgow Coma Scale (Spearman coefficient = -0.574, P < .001) and with Barthel
index at 3 months (Spearman coefficient = -0.658, P < .001). Patients with
different Rankin scores at 3 months also had significantly different baseline
SV-NIHSS scores, from a mean of 4.29+/-2.21 for Rankin score of 0 to a mean of
29.40+/-3.97 for Rankin score of 6 (P < .001).
CONCLUSION: This study shows that a Spanish-language version of the NIHSS
developed with internationally recommended methods is reliable and valid when
applied in a Spanish-speaking setting.

PMID: 16610567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Clin Rheumatol. 2006 Apr;12(2):99-101.

Basic science for the clinician 37: Protecting against autoimmunity-tolerance:
mechanisms of negative selection in the thymus.

Sigal LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Bristol-Myers Squibb, J.3100, PO Box 4000, 
Princeton, NJ 08543-4000, USA. leonard.sigal@bms.com

As noted in previous articles in this series, tolerance, the ability of the
immune system to differentiate self from nonself and leave the former alone, is a
vital characteristic of a successful (and safe) immune system. With the detection
of the molecule called aire (autoimmune regulator), the mechanism whereby
autoreactive thymocytes encounter extrathymic proteins within the thymus and
therefore are deleted, is now far better understood; aire was the subject of a
prior article in this series. The absence of aire leads to autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy, proof that aire is the center of an amazing "filtering"
system. However, there are other mechanisms at work. Irregularities in expression
of other proteins such as hypoxia-induced factor-1 (HIF-1) and CTLA4, have been
implicated in autoimmune disease, the former in rheumatoid arthritis, the latter 
in autoimmune thyroid disease and lupus. Defects in intracellular factors
involved in transcription of key apoptotic proteins have also been implicated in 
the escape of autoreactive thymocytes from the thymus, leading to autoimmune and 
lymphoproliferative syndromes as well. Changes in the proteins that oversee
acetylation of histone lead to differential patterns of gene expression. At least
2 proteins involved in this process, HDAC and nur77, have been implicated in
changes in survival of thymocytes. Yet again, there are multiple layers at work
in the immune system; I have no idea how many more will be brought to light,
which are phylogenetically most ancient or which will prove the most clinically
relevant. For now, it is enough to bask in our new-found knowledge and know that 
the time from laboratory oddity, to animal model development, to therapeutic
and/or diagnostic applications grows shorter each year since the molecular
biologic revolution.

PMID: 16601548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Immunogenetics. 2006 Jun;58(5-6):331-8. Epub 2006 Mar 22.

Association analysis of the AIRE and insulin genes in Finnish type 1 diabetic
patients.

Turunen JA(1), Wessman M, Forsblom C, Kilpikari R, Parkkonen M, Pöntynen N,
Ilmarinen T, Ulmanen I, Peltonen L, Groop PH.

Author information: 
(1)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Folkhälsan Research Center, Biomedicum
Helsinki (C318b), University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 63, Haartmaninkatu 8, 00014,
Helsinki, Finland.

Mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene cause a recessive Mendelian
disorder autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 (APS-1 or autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy). APS-1 patients develop
multiorgan autoimmune diseases including type 1 diabetes (prevalence 12%). The
AIRE protein controls the central tolerance induction in the thymus by regulating
the expression levels of tissue-specific peripheral antigens, such as insulin. We
hypothesized that the insulin gene (INS) polymorphisms together with the AIRE
variations may predispose individuals to diabetes. The role of the AIRE gene was 
tested both independently and on the condition of the INS risk genotype in the
Finnish type 1 diabetes sample. A total of 733 type 1 diabetic cases and 735 age-
and sex-matched healthy controls were used in the analysis. Five common single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the AIRE gene were selected from the public
database (dbSNP). The -23HphI polymorphism was used as a surrogate marker for the
INS gene promoter repeat. The five genotyped SNPs in the AIRE gene showed no
evidence of association with type 1 diabetes. As expected, the INS gene
polymorphism -23HphI was significantly associated with susceptibility to type 1
diabetes (P=6.8 x 10(-12), chi(2) test). When the subclass of patients carrying
the homozygote genotype of the INS gene was used in the analysis, the AIRE
polymorphisms showed no association with the disease. In conclusion, the AIRE
gene does not seem to contribute to disease susceptibility in Finnish type 1
diabetic patients, whereas the insulin gene represents a notable risk factor for 
disease in this population.

PMID: 16552513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2006 Feb;29(1):8-15.

[Central tolerance and autoimmune diseases].

[Article in Japanese]

Nitta T(1), Takahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Immunology, Institute for Genome Research, University
of Tokushima.

Central tolerance is established by the repertoire selection of immature T
lymphocytes in the thymus, avoiding autoimmune responses to self-antigens.
Differential ligand-TCR interactions that result in positive and negative
selection initiate differential intracellular signals that, in turn, lead to the 
survival-or-death decision of immature thymocytes. TCR signal dysregulation due
to the mutation of ZAP-70 or defective apoptosis of autoreactive thymocytes due
to the deficiency of pro-apoptotic protein Bim impair tolerance and cause
autoimmunity. Thymic repertoire selection also induces the development of
CD25(+)CD4(+) regulatory T cells, which play important roles for maintaining
peripheral tolerance. Furthermore, the establishment of central tolerance
requires the development of thymic medulla that is mediated by the activation of 
NF-kappaB signaling pathway, promiscuous expression of tissue-specific
self-antigens by medullary epithelial cells that is regulated by AIRE, and
cortex-to-medulla migration of developing thymocytes that is regulated by
CCR7-mediated chemokine signals.

PMID: 16505598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Clin Rheumatol. 2006 Feb;12(1):44-6.

Basic science for the clinician 36: protecting against autoimmunity: tolerance
and aire, the immunologic shadow, and other mechanisms of negative selection in
the thymus.

Sigal LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Princeton, NJ
08543-4000, USA. leonard.sigal@bms.com

One of the miracles of immunology is tolerance, the ability of the immune system 
to differentiate self from nonself and leave the former alone. Autoreactive
thymocytes (the cells that would otherwise differentiate into mature
autoaggressive T cells) are deleted from the emerging immunologic repertoire
within the thymus; only a very small proportion of thymocytes survive the
thymus--perhaps 2% to 5% emerge to become mature T cells in the periphery, the
rest dying to assure tolerance. This apparent wastage somehow works to the
benefit of the developing animal and if the process works, all goes well for the 
maturing immune system. In some autoimmune syndromes, autoreactive thymocytes are
not eliminated within the thymus by either clonal deletion or activation-induced 
cell death; these then emerge to wreak their havoc. However, how does this
deletion happen? Recent research from a number of groups has (incredibly!)
identified expression of nonthymic, nonlymphoid proteins within the thymus
(casting of the "immunologic shadow of self"), and this is under the control of a
single protein: AIRE (autoimmune regulator). By allowing autoreactive thymocytes 
to encounter a broad spectrum of proteins from extrathymic organs, aire allows
deletion of these cells and the maintenance of tolerance. The absence of aire
leads to autoimmune polyendocrinopathy, proof that aire is the center of an
amazing "filtering" system. These and other molecular mechanisms underlying
tolerance are explored in this and the next paper in this series.

PMID: 16484883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Ir Med J. 2005 Nov-Dec;98(10):231-2, 234-5.

Asthma control and management: a patient's perspective.

Manning P(1), Greally P, Shanahan E.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Committee of Asthma Society of Ireland, 26 Mountjoy Square, Dublin 1. 
pjmanning@eircom.net

Irish asthma guidelines, published in 2000, are based on the Global Initiative
for Asthma (GINA) international asthma management guidelines and provide
recommendations for optimal asthma management and control. Using the same
methodology as employed in the Asthma Insights and Reality in Europe (AIRE)
survey, which assessed whether specific goals of asthma management based on GINA 
were being realised, 400 patients with current asthma in Ireland were interviewed
in the Asthma Insights and Reality in Ireland (AIRI) survey to determine their
healthcare utilisation, symptom severity, activity limitations and level of
asthma control. Of those surveyed, acute services were utilised by a significant 
number of respondents. Over the previous year, 27% had either an emergency visit 
to the hospital or their general practitioner (GP) and 7% were hospitalised for
asthma. In terms of asthma control, 19% experienced sleep disturbance at least
once a week, 29% missed work or school and 37% of respondents experienced
symptoms during physical activity over the previous 4-week period. Based on these
findings, the level of asthma control and asthma management in Ireland falls
short of recommended national and international asthma guidelines.

PMID: 16445140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Autoimmun Rev. 2006 Feb;5(2):145-7. Epub 2005 Sep 13.

Disruption of immunological tolerance: role of AIRE gene in autoimmunity.

Rizzi M(1), Ferrera F, Filaci G, Indiveri F.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence for Biomedical Research, University of Genoa, Italy.
rizzi.marta@libero.it

The mechanism underlying the generation of T and B autoreactive clones in
autoimmune diseases is still unknown. Among genetic factors implicated in
autoimmunity, Autoimmune Regulator gene (AIRE) is one of the candidates to better
understand the complex scenario of autoimmune manifestations. AIRE mutations are 
responsible for the development of autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis
ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) with monogenic autosomal recessive inheritance; it 
has been shown that AIRE regulates the negative selection of autoreactive T cells
clones, driving the transcription of tissue-specific antigens in thymic
epithelial cells. In various autoimmune manifestations correlated or not to
APECED, AIRE variants act in a semidominant manner, leading to a reduction in
AIRE protein amount per cell, and consequently to a marked decrease in ectopic
proteins expression in the thymus. The co-occurrence of autoimmune diseases in
the same individual has prompted several studies aimed to recognize shared
patho-physiological mechanisms; in this scenario small reductions in function
could explain the predisposition to autoimmunity in AIRE-heterozygous carriers of
missense mutations; further studies to investigate whether the AIRE gene is
involved in determining these autoimmune manifestations should be carried out.

PMID: 16431348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Autoimmun Rev. 2006 Feb;5(2):86-8. Epub 2005 Sep 21.

The different faces of shared autoimmunity.

Rodríguez-Reyna TS(1), Alarcón-Segovia D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias
Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Vasco de Quiroga 15, Col. Sección XVI,
Tlalpan, CP, 14000, Mexico City, Mexico. sofarodriguez@yahoo.com.mx

The concept of shared autoimmunity comprises various forms of disease: rheumatic 
diseases in several members of the same family, the coincidence of autoimmune
rheumatic with non-rheumatic diseases in relatives of patients, the presence of
autoantibodies in healthy relatives of autoimmune disease patients, and the
development of two or more autoimmune rheumatic diseases in one patient, the
so-called overlap syndromes. The genetic and environmental factors that lead to
these phenomena interact in a complex fashion and influence the distinct
phenotypic characteristics of each patient. In a previous case series, we
described 23 Mexican Mestizo patients with overlap syndromes. Interestingly,
rhupus tends to develop sequentially while sclerodermatomyositis tends to appear 
simultaneously. The clinical course of the other overlap syndromes is rather
aggressive, although clinical manifestations respond to standard treatment. The
second and/or third disease appears while the first one is still active, even
with adequate treatment. The distinct course of overlap syndromes may be
partially explained by the interplay of environmental factors with genes that
predispose to autoimmunity in general and to manifestations of specific diseases.
The analyses of genes that will help understand the pathophysiology of these
diseases include several MHC complex genes, cytokines, AIRE, and PDCD1 amongst
others.

PMID: 16431333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Eur J Immunol. 2006 Feb;36(2):305-17.

Increased antigen presenting cell-mediated T cell activation in mice and patients
without the autoimmune regulator.

Ramsey C(1), Hässler S, Marits P, Kämpe O, Surh CD, Peltonen L, Winqvist O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA.

Patients with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I (APS I)suffer from
endocrine and non-endocrine disorders due to mutations in the autoimmune
regulator gene (AIRE). Mouse Aire is expressed both in thymic medullary
epithelial cells and in peripheral antigen-presenting cells, suggesting a role in
both central and peripheral tolerance. We here report that Aire(-/-) dendritic
cells (DC) activate naive T cells more efficiently than do Aire(+/+) DC.
Expression array analyses of Aire(-/-) DC revealed differential regulation of 68 
transcripts, among which, the vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1)
transcript was up-regulated in Aire(-/-) DC. Concurrently, the expression of the 
VCAM-1 protein was up-regulated on both Aire(-/-) DC and monocytes from APS I
patients. Blocking the interaction of VCAM-1 prevented enhanced Aire(-/-) DC
stimulation of T cell hybridomas. We determined an increased number of DC in
spleen and lymph nodes and of monocytes in the blood from Aire(-/-) mice, and an 
increased number of blood monocytes in APS I patients. Our findings imply a role 
for Aire in peripheral DC regulation of T cell activation, and suggest that Aire 
participates in peripheral tolerance.

PMID: 16421949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. FEBS J. 2006 Jan;273(2):315-24.

The monopartite nuclear localization signal of autoimmune regulator mediates its 
nuclear import and interaction with multiple importin alpha molecules.

Ilmarinen T(1), Melén K, Kangas H, Julkunen I, Ulmanen I, Eskelin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, 
Finland. tanja.ilmarinen@ktl.fi

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is a transcriptional regulator involved in
establishing immunological self-tolerance. Mutations in the AIRE gene lead to the
development of the autosomal, recessively inherited, organ-specific autoimmune
disease, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED).
The AIRE protein is mainly localized in the cell nucleus where it is associated
with nuclear bodies. The N-terminal part of AIRE has been previously shown to
mediate nuclear localization of the protein. However, the functional nuclear
localization signal (NLS) and nuclear import mechanisms of AIRE have not been
identified. We show that, although the amino-acid sequence of AIRE contains a
potential bipartite NLS consisting of amino acids 110-114 and 131-133, only the
latter part constitutes a functional NLS. Furthermore, we show by in vitro
binding assays that AIRE interacts with multiple members of the nuclear transport
receptor importin alpha family, mainly alpha1, alpha3, and alpha5, and that these
interactions depend on the intactness of the Arg-Lys-rich NLS of AIRE. In
addition, we found that AIRE binds to the 'minor' NLS-binding site of importin
alpha3 and alpha5 proteins consisting of the C-terminal armadillo repeats 7-9.
Our findings strongly suggest that the nuclear import of AIRE is mediated by the 
classical importin alpha/beta pathway through binding to several importin alpha
family members.

PMID: 16403019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Endokrynol Pol. 2005 May-Jun;56(3):359-61.

[Genetic aspects of premature ovarian failure].

[Article in Polish]

Warenik-Szymankiewicz A(1), Slopien R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrine Gynaecology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
Poznan.

Among the causes of premature ovarian failure (POF) two groups of factors are
reported: factors which lead to decrease of follicular number and factors which
stimulate follicular atresia. In the first group genetic factors are the most
important whereas in the second: enzymatic autoimmunological, iatrogenic, toxins 
and infections are reported. In 1986 familiar POF on the background of long arm
of chromosome X deletion was reported. Other chromosomes which are important for 
normal ovarian function are: chromosome 21 (AIRE gene), chromosome 11 (gene of
beta FSH, ATM gene), chromosome 3 (gene responsible for BEPS syndrome) and
chromosome 2 (genes of FSH and LH receptors). In this review the role of these
genes and results of several epidemiological studies are reported.

PMID: 16350732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Neurologia. 2005 Dec;20(10):702-8.

[Myopathy with trabecular fibers associated with familiar autoimmune
polyglandular syndrome type 1].

[Article in Spanish]

Gazulla Abío J(1), Benavente Aguilar I, Ricoy Campo JR, Madero Barrajón P.

Author information: 
(1)Sección de Neurología, Hospital San Jorge, Huesca. josegazulla@wanadoo.es

An association between limb-girdle muscular dystrophy and autoimmune
polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS1), in three sisters born to consanguineous
parents, is presented. The components of APS1 in these patients were
hypoparathyroidism, autoimmune adrenal insufficiency, primary hypogonadism and
mucocutaneous candidiasis. A muscle biopsy performed on the first patient showed 
over 40 % of trabeculated fibers, suggesting the diagnosis of myopathy with
trabeculated fibers (MTF). Intracranial calcification was found in the second
patient; and epilepsy, and several other minor components of APS1, in the third; 
cataracts were found in the last two patients. The clinical manifestations and
inheritance of MTF and APS1 are reviewed. While recessive mutations in the AIRE
gene (21q22.3) cause APS1, genetic transmission of hereditary MTF has not been
investigated in depth. Mutations in CRYAA, a gene that shares the same locus as
AIRE, may cause recessive inheritance of cataracts. Thus, the proposal of this
article is that linkage of contiguous genes that includes the AIRE gene, might be
responsible for the association of both diseases in these three patients.
Additional involvement of CRYAA, that possibly causes cataracts in two of the
patients, might support this hypothesis, due to the proximity of this gene to
AIRE. The genes COL6A1 and COL6A2, localized in 21q22.3, are discarded as
transmitters of MTF in these cases, on clinical criteria. The authors wish to
draw attention to the association between limb-girdle muscular dystrophy and
APS1, since it has been very rarely reported in the medical literature.

PMID: 16317594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Int J Immunogenet. 2005 Dec;32(6):393-400.

Polymorphisms at +49A/G and CT60 sites in the 3' UTR of the CTLA-4 gene and
APECED-related AIRE gene mutations analysis in sporadic idiopathic
hypoparathyroidism.

Goswami R(1), Gupta N, Ray D, Rani R, Tomar N, Sarin R, Vupputuri MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi, India. gosravinder@hotmail.com

Autoimmune diseases such as Graves' disease and type 1 diabetes have been linked 
with +49A/G and CT60 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 3' UTR of the 
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) gene. Both these SNPs are functionally 
relevant and linked with T-lymphocyte activation. Hypoparathyroidism is seen in
70% of patients with autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal
dystrophy syndrome (APECED). Although calcium sensing receptor autoantibodies
(CaSRAb) and generalized activation of T lymphocytes are reported among patients 
with sporadic idiopathic hypoparathyroidism (SIH), CTLA-4 gene SNPs and
APECED-related autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene mutations have not been assessed 
in them. We studied lead CTLA-4 gene SNPs and APECED-related AIRE gene mutations 
in 73 patients with SIH and 114 healthy subjects. The CTLA-4 gene SNPs +49A/G in 
exon 1, CT60A/G in 3' UTR and -318C/T in the promoter region were genotyped by
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment-length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP)
using BstEII, NcoI and MseI endonucleases, respectively. The APECED-related AIRE 
gene mutations, which is R257X (Finn-major) in exon 6, 4-bp insertion and 13-bp
deletion in exon 8, and Iranian Jews population 'Y85C' mutation in exon 2, were
studied by PCR-RFLP (Taq-I), PCR and nucleotide sequencing, respectively. CaSRAb 
were studied by immunoblotting. The frequencies of CTLA-4 A/A(49), A/G(49) and
G/G(49) genotypes in the patients (47.9%, 38.4% and 13.7%) and controls (45.6%,
39.5% and 14.9%, respectively) and the frequencies of CT60 A/A, A/G, and G/G
genotypes in the patient (42.4%, 37.0% and 20.6%) and the control (38.6%, 40.4%
and 21.0%, respectively) groups were not significantly different. The frequencies
of various haplotypes including genetic loci +49A/G and CT60 and frequencies of G
alleles at these positions were comparable between patient and the control groups
and its presence did not correlate with clinical and biochemical indices of the
disease. None of the patients had APECED-related AIRE gene mutations. Lack of
significant difference in the pattern of CTLA-4 A/G(49) and/or CT60A/G genotypes 
and absence of common APECED syndrome-related AIRE gene mutations among patients 
and controls suggest that these sites do not play a role in the development of
the SIH.

PMID: 16313305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Mol Immunol. 2006 Feb;43(4):335-45. Epub 2005 Mar 23.

AIRE recruits multiple transcriptional components to specific genomic regions
through tethering to nuclear matrix.

Tao Y(1), Kupfer R, Stewart BJ, Williams-Skipp C, Crowell CK, Patel DD, Sain S,
Scheinman RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, 4200 East Ninth Ave. C-238, Denver, CO 80262,
USA.

Thymic selection requires that diverse self antigens be presented to developing
thymocytes by stromal cells. Consistent with this function, medullary thymic
epithelial cells have been shown to express a large number of genes, many of
which are tissue restricted. Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is a nuclear protein,
which has recently been identified as a regulator of this process, however, the
mechanism by which AIRE functions is not well understood. Here we use a
transrepression assay to demonstrate that AIRE interacts with multiple components
of the transcription complex including a novel interaction with the UBA domain
protein, GBDR1. When AIRE is expressed in cultured human thymic epithelial cells,
it tightly associates with nuclear matrix, suggesting that AIRE responsive genes 
may be localized to specific regions. Using a mathematical approach we have
re-analyzed an Affymetrix dataset identifying AIRE responsive genes and show that
they tend to localize to specific regions of the genome. Together, these data
suggest that AIRE regulates gene expression by recruiting components of the
transcription complex to specific regions of the genome via interactions with
nuclear matrix.

PMID: 16310047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Diabetes. 2005 Dec;54 Suppl 2:S4-10.

Characteristics of autoimmunity in type 1 diabetes and type 1.5 overlap with type
2 diabetes.

McDevitt HO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, and Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, 299 Campus Dr., D345, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
hughmcd@stanford.edu

This presentation is an overview of mechanisms for developing and maintaining
self-tolerance in mammalian organisms. Because this meeting is focused on type 1 
diabetes and its mechanisms, the discussion deals primarily with mechanisms of
T-cell tolerance, since type 1 diabetes in both effector and initiator phases is 
primarily a T-cell-mediated autoimmune disease. Emphasis is placed on more
recently discovered mechanisms of maintaining self-tolerance (autoimmune
regulator [AIRE]) and a new defect in T-cell negative selection. The emerging
picture is that of a polygenic disease with various combinations of different
alleles of many genes with important roles in the normal immune response or
normal immune responses.

PMID: 16306338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Clin Dev Immunol. 2005 Sep;12(3):211-6.

The development of mouse APECED models provides new insight into the role of AIRE
in immune regulation.

Pereira LE(1), Bostik P, Ansari AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta,
GA, USA.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy is a rare
recessive autoimmune disorder caused by a defect in a single gene called AIRE
(autoimmune regulator). Characteristics of this disease include a variable
combination of autoimmune endocrine tissue destruction, mucocutaneous candidiasis
and ectodermal dystrophies. The development of Aire-knockout mice has provided an
invaluable model for the study of this disease. The aim of this review is to
briefly highlight the strides made in APECED research using these transgenic
murine models, with a focus on known roles of Aire in autoimmunity. The findings 
thus far are compelling and prompt additional areas of study which are discussed.

PMCID: PMC2275420
PMID: 16295527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Placenta. 2006 Aug;27(8):899-911. Epub 2005 Nov 15.

Histo-morphology of the uterus and early placenta of the African buffalo
(Syncerus caffer) and comparative placentome morphology of the African buffalo
and cattle (Bos taurus).

Schmidt S(1), Gerber D, Soley JT, Aire TA, Boos A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. susanne@op.up.ac.za

Differences exist in reproductive physiology between African buffalo (Syncerus
caffer), cattle (Bos taurus) and water buffalo (Bubalus bubalis). The aim of this
study was to histo-morphologically compare the anatomy of non-pregnant and
pregnant uteri of buffalo and cattle. Two non-pregnant uteri and placentae of six
pregnant African buffalo were used. Early placentome formation (fetal crown rump 
length (CRL): 2-17.5 cm) in S. caffer and B. taurus was compared. The endometrium
of buffalo uteri comprises round to ovoid, dome-shaped and gland-free caruncles. 
A predominantly simple columnar epithelium of non-ciliated cells covers
caruncular tissue, while, additionally, ciliated cells occur in the epithelium of
the intercaruncular areas and within the simple columnar or pseudostratified
epithelium of the endometrial glands. During early gestation, multiple
placentomes develop. Unlike the placentomes in cattle at similar CRL, buffalo
placentomes do not develop a caruncular stalk. The sessile, dome-shaped buffalo
placentome has simple, slightly conical villi branching less than in cattle, thus
indicating different and less complex feto-maternal interdigitation than seen in 
the latter. A synepitheliochorial interhaemal barrier can be expected in the
buffalo placenta, as the occurrence and ultrastructure of trophoblast giant cells
resemble those described in cattle.

PMID: 16293303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Autoimmun. 2005;25 Suppl:49-55. Epub 2005 Nov 14.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 (APS1) and AIRE gene: new views on 
molecular basis of autoimmunity.

Peterson P(1), Peltonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Biomedicum, Ravila 19, Tartu 50411, 
Estonia. part.peterson@ut.ee

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 (APS1) is a monogenic autoimmune
syndrome, which is caused by defect in AIRE gene on chromosome 21. Several
autoimmune diseases occur in APS1 patients, often starting in first two decades
of life. A gene defective in APS1, autoimmune regulator (AIRE), encodes nuclear
protein involved in transcriptional processes. Recent findings in animal models
indicate a critical role for AIRE in regulation of self-antigen expression in
thymus. Identification of the AIRE gene, detailed characterization of molecular
pathogenesis of human APS1 as well as analyses of mouse models carrying targeted 
interruption of Aire gene have provided new views on our understanding of
molecular background of autoimmunity.

PMID: 16290093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Jan;91(1):192-5. Epub 2005 Nov 1.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy syndrome with
renal failure: impact of posttransplant immunosuppression on disease activity.

Ulinski T(1), Perrin L, Morris M, Houang M, Cabrol S, Grapin C, Chabbert-Buffet
N, Bensman A, Deschênes G, Giurgea I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Hôpital Trousseau, 75571 Paris Cedex 12,
France. tim.ulinski@trs.aphp.fr

CONTEXT: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) 
is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the gene AIRE
(autoimmune regulator). APECED affects mainly endocrine organs resulting in
hypoparathyroidism, adrenocortical failure, diabetes mellitus, hypogonadism, and 
hypothyroidism. Nonendocrine organ manifestations are autoimmune hepatitis,
vitiligo, pernicious anemia, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, and alopecia.
APECED's first manifestation generally is mucocutaneous candidiasis presumably
related to T cell dysfunction.
PATIENT: A 5-yr-old Iranian girl presented first with pernicious anemia, exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency, and nail candidiasis. She had renal dysfunction due to 
chronic interstitial nephritis (CIN), which progressed to end-stage renal
failure. She was transplanted 1 yr later. Common causes of CIN were excluded.
APECED was suspected first because she developed progressively
hypoparathyroidism, adrenocortical failure, glucose intolerance, and
hypothyroidism.
RESULTS: Genetic analysis revealed a large homozygous deletion
(g.424_2157del1734), spanning exons 2-4, in the AIRE gene. The predicted protein,
if it is produced, has only 44 amino acids (exon 1) in common with the wild-type 
protein. Immunosuppression after the first renal transplant included prednisone, 
azathioprine, and cyclosporine A. Multiple acute rejection episodes occurred.
Chronic rejection resulted in lost graft and she was retransplanted 2 yr later.
Surprisingly, all APECED-related symptoms including candidiasis and autoantibody 
levels decreased, presumably due to the reinforced immunosuppression (tacrolimus,
mycophenolate mofetil, prednisone).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of an APECED patient with CIN resulting in 
end-stage renal failure. Clinical and biological improvement was observed under
posttransplant multidrug immunosuppression including tacrolimus and mycophenolate
mofetil.

PMID: 16263818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Patient Educ Couns. 2005 Nov;59(2):182-5. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

What general practitioners and paediatricians think about their patients' asthma.

van den Berg NJ(1), of ten Have WH, Nagelkerke AF, Bindels PJ, van der Palen J,
van Aalderen WM.

Author information: 
(1)Flevohospital, Department of Paediatrics, Flevoziekenhuis, Hospitaalweg 1,
1315 RA Almere, The Netherlands. nvdberg@flevoziekenhuis.nl

The Asthma Insight and Reality in Europe (AIRE) study showed that the current
management and treatment of asthma in Europe falls short of the goals set in the 
GINA guidelines. Patient care may be negatively influenced by the physicians'
underestimation of their patients' disease state, and overestimation of their
patients' knowledge of asthma management. We interviewed 118 paediatricians and
152 general practitioners (response rate 70 and 86%, respectively) in order to
get an insight into the physicians view on his patients' asthma management. A
questionnaire containing similar items to those used in the AIRE study was used. 
Dutch physicians believe that the asthma of the majority of their patients is
well controlled and underestimate the prevalence of daytime symptoms. They
believe that their patients are aware of the differences between reliever
medication and maintenance medication and overestimate the number of patients in 
possession of a written action plan. Dutch paediatricians and general
practitioners underestimate the severity of their patients' disease state and
overestimate their patients' knowledge of disease management.

PMID: 16257623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Autoimmun. 2005 Dec;25(4):312-8. Epub 2005 Oct 24.

Insulin alleles and autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene expression both influence
insulin expression in the thymus.

Sabater L(1), Ferrer-Francesch X, Sospedra M, Caro P, Juan M, Pujol-Borrell R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology for Research Applied to Diagnosis (LIRAD), Blood and 
Tissue Bank, Institut d'Investigació en Ciències de la Salut Germans Trias i
Pujol, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Crtra. del Canyet s/n, 08916 
Badalona, Spain.

It is well established that the polymorphisms at the 5' of the insulin gene
(IDDM2) confers susceptibility to type 1 diabetes, probably by modifying the
level of insulin expression in the thymus that in turn influences immunological
tolerance to insulin as self-antigen. AIRE is a transcription regulator which
controls the expression of many peripheral antigens within the thymus, among them
insulin. Results presented here confirm that insulin gene copies from both
parental chromosomes are expressed in human thymus and that IDDM2 class III
protective alleles are indeed associated with a higher level of insulin message
expression. However, differences in insulin mRNA expression among different thymi
were far wider than those determined by the class I and class III insulin gene
alleles and maintained a clear correlation with AIRE expression. These results
confirm the effect of IDDM2 alleles on insulin expression in the thymus, but
suggest that the levels of AIRE may exert a stronger influence than IDDM2 alleles
themselves.

PMID: 16246524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Sci Total Environ. 2006 May 1;360(1-3):319-27. Epub 2005 Oct 19.

Estimating population served by sewage treatment works from readily available GIS
data.

Keller V(1), Fox K, Rees HG, Young AR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Maclean Building, Crowmarsh Gifford,
Wallingford, OX10 8BB, UK. vke@ceh.ac.uk

Environmental risk assessment of household chemicals at the catchment scale
requires an estimate of the load at individual Sewage Treatment Works (STWs).
This can be achieved based upon population served and market consumption data.
Although the population served is difficult to obtain, this paper shows that
reasonable estimates can be made using readily available spatially referenced
data. A new method is developed using STW data from the Exe and the Aire and
Calder catchments and validated using 193 STWs within the Environment Agency's
Anglian region. The estimated populations served were compared with available
estimates of Population Equivalents (PEs). The population estimates were broadly 
similar to PEs for small works but agreement was lower for larger plants. The
discrepancy for larger works is consistent with trade influent inclusion in the
PE. The method is suitable for application to both rural areas and large
urbanised areas, although the interpretation of corroborating data becomes
increasingly difficult in very large urban areas serving more than one STW.

PMID: 16242176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Clin Invest. 2005 Nov;115(11):3239-49. Epub 2005 Oct 13.

Human skin cells support thymus-independent T cell development.

Clark RA(1), Yamanaka K, Bai M, Dowgiert R, Kupper TS.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Skin Disease Research Center and Department of Dermatology, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Thymic tissue has previously been considered a requirement for the generation of 
a functional and diverse population of human T cells. We report that fibroblasts 
and keratinocytes from human skin arrayed on a synthetic 3-dimensional matrix
support the development of functional human T cells from hematopoietic precursor 
cells in the absence of thymic tissue. Newly generated T cells contained T cell
receptor excision circles, possessed a diverse T cell repertoire, and were
functionally mature and tolerant to self MHC, indicating successful completion of
positive and negative selection. Skin cell cultures expressed the AIRE, Foxn1,
and Hoxa3 transcription factors and a panel of autoantigens. Skin and bone marrow
biopsies can thus be used to generate de novo functional and diverse T cell
populations for potential therapeutic use in immunosuppressed patients.

PMCID: PMC1253623
PMID: 16224538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Sci Total Environ. 2006 May 1;360(1-3):290-304. Epub 2005 Oct 10.

Analysis of the QUESTOR water quality model using a Fourier amplitude sensitivity
test (FAST) for two UK rivers.

Deflandre A(1), Williams RJ, Elorza FJ, Mira J, Boorman DB.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Crowmarsh Gifford, Wallingford, OX10 8BB,
UK. amed@ceh.ac.uk

This paper presents the sensitivity analysis of a well-known in-stream water
quality model, QUESTOR (QUality Evaluation and Simulation TOol for River systems)
as applied to two rivers of contrasting land-use in the northeast of England: the
'rural' Ouse and the 'urban' Aire. The analysis employed a version of the Fourier
Amplitude Sensitivity Test (FAST) that quantifies the contribution of changes in 
individual parameters and combination of parameters to the variance of the model 
output (here the Nash-Sutcliffe) in an efficient way. The quantification of the
sensitivity of the model output to the parameters led to the identification of
the most influential parameters. Differences between the Aire and the Ouse were
found, reflecting their different water quality regime. Results highlighted the
importance of interactions between two, or more, parameters on the model output. 
It led to question the one-at-a-time calibration method currently applied with
QUESTOR and underlined the importance of including interactions between
parameters in sensitivity analyses. Comparison of the relative influence of
parameters versus input data showed contrasting results. In the urban system, the
inputs from discharges (sewage treatment works and industrial effluents) were
highly influential on model outputs and generally more important than the model
parameters. For the rural river, the tributary discharges were most influential, 
but only at a similar or a lower level than the model parameters.

PMID: 16219341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Curr Opin Immunol. 2005 Dec;17(6):570-6. Epub 2005 Oct 7.

Shaping the T cell repertoire to a bona fide autoantigen: lessons from autoimmune
gastritis.

van Driel IR(1), Read S, Zwar TD, Gleeson PA.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Bio21 Molecular
Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, 
Australia.

Murine autoimmune gastritis is one of the most well-defined organ-specific
autoimmune diseases. CD4(+) T cells, which mediate the disease, recognize the
highly abundant gastric H(+)/K(+) ATPase heterodimer. The H(+)/K(+) ATPase alpha 
subunit is also expressed in the thymus, in an aire-independent manner, whereas
the H(+)/K(+) ATPase beta subunit is absent from the thymus. Analysis of both
H(+)/K(+) ATPase-specific T cell receptor transgenic mice with different
affinities for the gastric antigen and mice deficient in the H(+)/K(+) ATPase
subunits has provided information on thymic and peripheral selection events. The 
H(+)/K(+) ATPase antigens play an important role in purging the repertoire of
gastritogenic T cells, and recent data have suggested that this tolerance
induction occurs primarily in the periphery. The gastritis system provides a
powerful approach to determine the impact of peripheral antigen presentation in
the target organ draining lymph node on tolerance and autoimmune disease.

PMID: 16214318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Sci Total Environ. 2006 May 1;360(1-3):98-108. Epub 2005 Oct 7.

River flow and associated transport of sediments and solutes through a highly
urbanised catchment, Bradford, West Yorkshire.

Old GH(1), Leeks GJ, Packman JC, Smith BP, Lewis S, Hewitt EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Maclean Building, Crowmarsh Gifford,
Wallingford, Oxon OX10 8BB, UK. gho@ceh.ac.uk

The hydrological characteristics of catchments become drastically modified in
response to urbanisation. The total contributions and dynamics of runoff,
suspended sediment and solutes may change significantly and have important
implications downstream where they may affect flooding, instream ecological
habitat, water quality and siltation of river channels and lakes. Although an
appreciation of the likely hydrological changes is crucial for effective
catchment management they are still poorly understood. In this paper we present
data from a network of river monitoring stations throughout the heavily urbanised
Bradford catchment, West Yorkshire. Sites are upstream, within and downstream of 
the highly urbanised central part of the catchment. Flow, turbidity (calibrated
to suspended sediment concentration) and specific conductance (surrogate for
solute concentration), logged at 15-min intervals, are presented for a 12-month
period (June 2000 to June 2001). The total amounts and dynamics of flow, solute
and suspended sediment transport were investigated. Estimated total flow and
suspended sediment transport for the monitoring period were found to be high in
response to the high total rainfall. Flow and sediment transport regimes were
extremely 'flashy' throughout the catchment and became increasingly flashy in a
downstream direction. Suspended sediment discharged from the Bradford
subcatchment makes an important contribution to downstream sediment transport on 
the river Aire at Beal. Data suggest that the urbanised part of the Bradford
catchment is extremely important in contributing solutes to the Beck (river).
Although flow and sediment are also contributed to the Bradford Beck in the
urbanised part of the catchment the data suggest that significant amounts may
enter the combined sewer system and bypass the river. Understanding the spatial
and temporal variations of flow and the transport of suspended sediment and
solutes in rivers in urbanized subcatchments is crucial to their effective
management and monitoring. Furthermore, this knowledge may be extremely important
to the management and monitoring of downstream rivers in large scale mixed
catchments.

PMID: 16214202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Oct 11;102(41):14735-40. Epub 2005 Oct 3.

How defects in central tolerance impinge on a deficiency in regulatory T cells.

Chen Z(1), Benoist C, Mathis D.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin Diabetes Center and
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Both central (thymic) and peripheral (nonthymic) mechanisms are important for the
induction and maintenance of T cell tolerance. Mice with a defect in Foxp3,
required for the generation and activity of CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells,
exhibit massive lymphoproliferation and severe inflammatory infiltration of
multiple organs, in particular the lungs, liver, and skin. We have explored how
this phenotype is influenced by an additional defect in central tolerance
induction, generated by either crossing in a null mutation of the Aire gene or
substituting the nonobese diabetic (NOD) genetic background. The double-deficient
mice had fulminant autoimmunity in very early life and a gravely shortened
lifespan vis-à-vis single-deficient littermates. They showed massive
lymphoproliferation and exacerbated inflammatory damage, particularly in the
lungs and liver. Yet, the range of affected sites was not noticeably extended,
and, surprisingly, many organs, or regions of organs, remained untouched,
suggesting additional important mechanisms to enforce immunological
self-tolerance.

PMCID: PMC1253589
PMID: 16203996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Exp Med. 2005 Sep 19;202(6):805-15.

Modifier loci condition autoimmunity provoked by Aire deficiency.

Jiang W(1), Anderson MS, Bronson R, Mathis D, Benoist C.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin Diabetes Center, Department
of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02215, USA.

Loss of function mutations in the autoimmune regulator (Aire) gene in autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy patients and mutant mice lead
to autoimmune manifestations that segregate as a monogenic trait, but with wide
variation in the spectrum of organs targeted. To investigate the cause of this
variability, the Aire knockout mutation was backcrossed to mice of diverse
genetic backgrounds. The background loci strongly influenced the pattern of
organs that were targeted (stomach, eye, pancreas, liver, ovary, thyroid, and
salivary gland) and the severity of the targeting (particularly strong on the
nonobese diabetic background, but very mild on the C57BL/6 background).
Autoantibodies mimicked the disease pattern, with oligoclonal reactivity to a few
antigens that varied between Aire-deficient strains. Congenic analysis and a
whole genome scan showed that autoimmunity to each organ had a distinctive
pattern of genetic control and identified several regions that controlled the
pattern of targeting, including the major histocompatibility complex and regions 
of Chr1 and Chr3 previously identified in controlling type 1 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2212943
PMID: 16172259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Horm Res. 2005;64(2):96-9. Epub 2005 Sep 13.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy presenting with
severe keratopathy in an Egyptian patient with a homozygous R139X mutation.

Tawfik S(1), Azim MA, Peterson P, Donaldson MD.

Author information: 
(1)Maadi Hospital, Cairo, Egypt.

OBJECTIVE: To report a patient with an unusual presentation of autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) and severe
keratopathy.
CASE HISTORY: An Egyptian male sustained an injury to the left eye at 13 years of
age and was found to have corneal damage which was attributed to the injury.
Subsequently, however, he continued to have sore eyes with photophobia. A year
later he became weak with pigmentation and episodes of collapse, and
investigation showed that he had Addison's disease together with mucocutaneous
candidiasis. At 15 years of age he developed carpo-pedal spasm and was found to
have hypoparathyroidism with intracranial calcification. At 20 years of age the
ophthalmic diagnosis was revised to keratopathy by which time the patient had
corneal opacity and problems with visual acuity, especially in the right eye.
Investigation at 22 years of age showed that he was homozygous for an R139X
mutation in the gene encoding the AIRE protein, a mutation which to date has only
been found in Sardinian patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Keratopathy can be an early and severe manifestation of APECED,
requiring expert ophthalmic care. Its presence should prompt a search for other
components of APECED, some of which are life-threatening.

Copyright 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16166780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Semin Liver Dis. 2005 Aug;25(3):239-50.

The etiopathogenesis of autoimmunity.

Mackay IR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia. ian.mackay@med.monash.edu.au

Acquisition by mammals of an adaptive immune system was an evolutionary leap, but
occurred at the cost of autoimmunity. The necessity for self-recognition was
appreciated in 1900, but autoimmune disease did not become a clinical reality
until the 1950s-still the perimeters are indistinct. Autoimmune responses
recapitulate the complex events of normal immune responses but cannot shut down. 
Immune tolerance is established during repertoire development centrally in thymus
or bone marrow by deletion of self-reactive immunocytes, and is supplemented
peripherally by regulatory T cells (Tregs). A startling discovery is the
autoimmune regulator AIRE gene that enables expression of organ-specific
autoantigens for intrathymic deletional tolerance of T cells. The origins,
activities, and markers of Tregs are under intensive investigation. Of genes
implicated in autoimmune, only few are characterized; contributions of
environment are similarly uncertain. Time-latency considerations implicate
stochastic factors or chance in the etiopathogenesis of autoimmunity, whether
they are somatic mutations or successive random gene-environment interactions.
Solutions to etiopathogenesis require novel experimental models and finely
designed gene-environment studies on human populations. Perhaps immunomodulatory 
therapies will effect cures before causes are fully understood.

PMID: 16143941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Hum Mutat. 2005 Oct;26(4):322-31.

Functional analysis of SAND mutations in AIRE supports dominant inheritance of
the G228W mutation.

Ilmarinen T(1), Eskelin P, Halonen M, Rüppell T, Kilpikari R, Torres GD, Kangas
H, Ulmanen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, 
Finland. tanja.ilmarinen@ktl.fi

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
disorder caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE) and
characterized by a variable combination of organ-specific autoimmune diseases.
Studies on AIRE-deficient mice suggest that AIRE is an important factor in the
establishment and maintenance of self-tolerance. The AIRE protein contains
several structural domains often found in transcriptional regulators and
functions as a transcriptional transactivator in vitro. To date, more than 50
patient mutations have been identified in the coding region of the AIRE gene. So 
far, APECED has been reported to be inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
However, in contrast to all other AIRE mutations, a novel mutation c.682T>G
(p.G228W) in the DNA-binding and/or multimerization domain SAND was recently
described to be inherited in a dominant fashion. We analyzed the effects of
mutant AIRE proteins containing the patient mutations c.682T>G (p.G228W) and
c.755C>T (p.P252L) located in the SAND domain on the properties of the wild-type 
AIRE in a heterozygous situation in vitro. In addition to the patient mutations, 
we analyzed the effects of a double mutation [c.727A>G;c.728A>C;c.739C>G;c740G>C]
(p.K243A;R247A) of positively charged amino acids in the SAND domain. Of the
mutants studied, only c.682T>G (p.G228W) mutant changed the subcellular
localization and in addition severely disrupted the transactivating capacity of
the wild-type AIRE. Our results indicate that the c.682T>G (p.G228W) mutant AIRE 
protein acts with a dominant negative effect by binding to the wild-type AIRE,
thus preventing the protein from forming the complexes needed for
transactivation.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16114041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Immunity. 2005 Aug;23(2):227-39.

The cellular mechanism of Aire control of T cell tolerance.

Anderson MS(1), Venanzi ES, Chen Z, Berzins SP, Benoist C, Mathis D.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin Diabetes Center, Department
of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2005 Aug;23(2):113-4.

Aire promotes the tolerization of thymocytes by inducing the expression of a
battery of peripheral-tissue antigens in thymic medullary epithelial cells. We
demonstrate that the cellular mechanism by which Aire exerts its
tolerance-promoting function is not primarily positive selection of regulatory T 
cells, but rather negative selection of T effector cells. Surprisingly,
supplementing its influence on the transcription of genes encoding
peripheral-tissue antigens, Aire somehow enhances the antigen-presentation
capability of medullary epithelial cells. Thus, this transcriptional control
element promotes central tolerance both by furnishing a specific thymic stromal
cell type with a repertoire of self antigens and by better arming such cells to
present these antigens to differentiating thymocytes. In Aire's absence,
autoimmunity and ultimately overt autoimmune disease develops.

PMID: 16111640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Immunity. 2005 Aug;23(2):113-4.

Central tolerance matters.

Goldrath AW(1), Hedrick SM.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 92093, USA.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2005 Aug;23(2):227-39.

In this issue of Immunity, Anderson et al. provide another clue to the riddle
that is Aire--why do human beings and mice lacking Aire develop diffuse and
pathogenic autoimmunity? They find that Aire influences central tolerance not
only by promoting the expression of peripheral self-proteins in thymic medullary 
epithelial cells (MECs) but also by furnishing these cells with the apparatus for
effective antigen presentation ().

PMID: 16111630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Anat Embryol (Berl). 2005 Aug;210(1):43-9. Epub 2005 Jul 21.

Short-term effects of carbendazim on the gross and microscopic features of the
testes of Japanese quails (Coturnix coturnix japonica).

Aire TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Private Bag X04, Onderstepoort, 0110, Republic of South
Africa. tom.aire@up.ac.za

Carbendazim, a metabolite of benomyl which is widely used as a fungicide, has
been found to cause testicular and epididymal damage in laboratory rats, mice and
hamsters. No studies of the effects of this chemical on the reproductive organs
of birds have been reported previously. This report is that of an investigation
on the response of the testis of the Japanese quail to experimental
administration of this chemical in sexually mature and active birds. A single
dose (400 mg/kg body weight) of carbendazim was administered orally to 20 quails 
that were sacrificed thereafter at 5 h, 3, 8 and 13 days post-exposure, at five
birds spatio-temporally. Five birds acted as control. Testis weights and
seminiferous tubular diameter as well as epithelial height decreased
significantly from 8 day post-exposure. Epithelial histology was remarkably
disrupted, and cessation of spermatogenesis occurred at 13 day
post-administration of the chemical. Degenerative changes were uniform in each
testis, and not patchy or multi-focal, as previously reported in the rat. The
observed histological changes in the testis, due to carbendazim, were capable of 
causing prolonged infertility in exposed birds.

PMID: 16034611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Novartis Found Symp. 2005;267:180-92; discussion 192-9.

Genetic lesions in thymic T cell clonal deletion and thresholds for autoimmunity.

Liston A(1), Goodnow CC.

Author information: 
(1)John Curtin School of Medical Research, The Australian Phenomics Facility, The
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia.

The cause of common polygenic autoimmune diseases is poorly understood because of
genetic and cellular complexity in humans and animals. We have investigated the
mechanisms of two genetic causes of organ-specific autoimmunity by tracking the
fate of high avidity organ-specific CD4 T cells using a transgenic mouse model.
Firstly, we have found that an Idd-associated duster of loci from the NOD strain 
causes a T cell intrinsic failure to delete during in vivo encounter with
high-avidity autoantigen, a trait distinguished by the failure to induce the
pro-apoptotic gene Bim. Secondly, we have found that inactivation of the
autoimmune regulator (Aire) gene reduces the level of thymic expression of
organ-specific genes, in a gene-dose dependent manner. In this paper we describe 
a model relating efficiency of thymic deletion and susceptibility to
autoimmunity. Using this model, subtle quantitative trait loci can have an
additive effect on each of the parameters of thymic deletion, and the result of
interaction between subtle modifications in the multiple parameters can result in
large changes in the susceptibility to autoimmunity.

PMID: 15999807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2005 Jun;66(3):207-15.

[Contribution of genetic testing after diagnosis of hypocalcemia].

[Article in French]

Lienhardt-Roussie A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pédiatrie, CHU Dupyutren, 87042 Limoges.
anne.lienhardt@chu-limoges.fr

Serum calcium is a fine-tuned biological value. In recent years, fundamental
research and study of molecular anomalies causing certain hereditary diseases of 
phosphocalcium metabolism have greatly contributed to our knowledge of the
factors involved in this regulation, from the embryogenesis of the parathyroid
glands to the assay value of serum calcium. Targeted research on these genetic
anomalies would be useful not only for the clinician, but also for the patient,
contributing to the etiological search, patient follow-up, and possibly to
antenatal diagnosis. The main genetic anomalies identified to date are: CaSR,
GNAS, AIRE, VDR, mitochondrial DNA, 22q11 deletion.

PMID: 15988381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Exp Med. 2005 Jul 4;202(1):33-45. Epub 2005 Jun 27.

Promiscuous gene expression in thymic epithelial cells is regulated at multiple
levels.

Derbinski J(1), Gäbler J, Brors B, Tierling S, Jonnakuty S, Hergenhahn M,
Peltonen L, Walter J, Kyewski B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Immunology, German Cancer Research Center, D-69120
Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2005 Jul 4;202(1):15-9.

The role of central tolerance induction has recently been revised after the
discovery of promiscuous expression of tissue-restricted self-antigens in the
thymus. The extent of tissue representation afforded by this mechanism and its
cellular and molecular regulation are barely defined. Here we show that medullary
thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) are specialized to express a highly diverse set
of genes representing essentially all tissues of the body. Most, but not all, of 
these genes are induced in functionally mature CD80(hi) mTECs. Although the
autoimmune regulator (Aire) is responsible for inducing a large portion of this
gene pool, numerous tissue-restricted genes are also up-regulated in mature mTECs
in the absence of Aire. Promiscuously expressed genes tend to colocalize in
clusters in the genome. Analysis of a particular gene locus revealed expression
of clustered genes to be contiguous within such a cluster and to encompass both
Aire-dependent and -independent genes. A role for epigenetic regulation is
furthermore implied by the selective loss of imprinting of the insulin-like
growth factor 2 gene in mTECs. Our data document a remarkable cellular and
molecular specialization of the thymic stroma in order to mimic the transcriptome
of multiple peripheral tissues and, thus, maximize the scope of central
self-tolerance.

PMCID: PMC2212909
PMID: 15983066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2005;293:43-71.

Thymic commitment of regulatory T cells is a pathway of TCR-dependent selection
that isolates repertoires undergoing positive or negative selection.

Coutinho A(1), Caramalho I, Seixas E, Demengeot J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Européen Associé au CNRS, Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras,
Portugal.

The seminal work of Le Douarin and colleagues (Ohki et al. 1987; Ohki et al.
1988; Salaun et al. 1990; Coutinho et al. 1993) first demonstrated that
peripheral tissue-specific tolerance is centrally established in the thymus, by
epithelial stromal cells (TEC). Subsequent experiments have shown that
TEC-tolerance is dominant and mediated by CD4 regulatory T cells (Treg) that are 
generated intrathymically by recognition of antigens expressed on TECs
(Modigliani et al. 1995; Modigliani et al. 1996a). From these and other
observations, in 1996 Modigliani and colleagues derived a general model for the
establishment and maintenance of natural tolerance (MM96) (Modigliani et al.
1996b), with two central propositions: (1) T cell receptor (TCR)-dependent
sorting of emergent repertoires generates TEC-specific Treg displaying the
highest TCR self-affinities below deletion thresholds, thus isolating repertoires
undergoing positive and negative selection; (2) Treg are intrathymically
committed (and activated) for a unique differentiative pathway with regulatory
effector functions. The model explained the embryonic/perinatal time window of
natural tolerance acquisition, by developmental programs determining (1) TCR
multireactivity, (2) the cellular composition in the thymic stroma (relative
abundance of epithelial vs hemopoietic cells), and (3) the dynamics of peripheral
lymphocyte pools, built by accumulation of recent thymic emigrants (RTE) that
remain recruitable to regulatory functions. We discuss here the MM96 in the light
of recent results demonstrating the promiscuous expression of tissue-specific
antigens by medullary TECs (Derbinski et al. 2001; Anderson et al. 2002; Gotter
et al. 2004) and indicating that Treg represent a unique differentiative pathway 
(Fontenot et al. 2003; Hori et al. 2003; Khattri et al. 2003), which is adopted
by CD4 T cells with high avidity for TEC-antigens (Bensinger et al. 2001; Jordan 
et al. 2001; Apostolou et al. 2002). In the likelihood that autoimmune diseases
(AID) result from Treg deficits, some of which might have a thymic origin, we
also speculate on therapeutic strategies aiming at selectively stimulating their 
de novo production or peripheral function, within recent findings on Treg
responses to inflammation (Caramalho et al. 2003; Lopes-Carvalho et al.,
submitted, Caramalho et al., submitted). In short, the MM96 argued that natural
tolerance is dominant, established and maintained by the activity of Treg, which 
are selected upon high-affinity recognition of self-ligands on TECs, and
committed intrathymically to a unique differentiative pathway geared to
anti-inflammatory and antiproliferative effector functions. By postulating the
intrathymic deletion of self-reactivities on hemopoietic stromal cells (THC),
together with the inability of peripheral resident lymphocytes to engage in the
regulatory pathway, the MM96 simultaneously explained the maintenance of
responsiveness to non-self in a context of suppression mediating dominant
self-tolerance. The major difficulty of the MM96 is related to the apparent
tissue specificity of Treg repertoires generated intrathymically. This difficulty
has now been principally solved by the work of Hanahan, Kyewski and others
(Jolicoeur et al. 1994; Derbinski et al. 2001; Anderson et al. 2002; Gotter et
al. 2004), demonstrating the selective expression of a variety of tissue-specific
antigens by TECs, in topological patterns that are compatible with the MM96, but 
difficult to conciliate with recessive tolerance models (Kappler et al. 1987;
Kisielow et al. 1988). While the developmentally regulated multireactivity of TCR
repertoires (Gavin and Bevan 1995), as well as the peripheral recruitment of Treg
among RTE (Modigliani et al. 1996a) might add to this process, it would seem that
the establishment of tissue-specific tolerance essentially stems from the
"promiscuous expression of tissue antigens" by TEC. The findings of AID resulting
from natural mutations (reviewed in Pitkanen and Peterson 2003) or the targeted
inactivation (Anderson et al. 2002; Ramsey et al. 2002) of the AIRE transcription
factor that regulates promiscuous gene expression on TECs support this
conclusion. The observations on the correlation of natural or forced expression
of the Foxp3 transcription factor in CD4 T cells with Treg phenotype and function
(Fontenot et al. 2003; Hori et al. 2003; Khattri et al. 2003) provided support
for the MM96 contention that Treg represent a unique differentiative pathway that
is naturally established inside the thymus. Furthermore, Caton and colleagues
(Jordan et al. 2001), as well as several other groups (Bensinger et al. 2001;
Apostolou et al. 2002), have provided direct evidence for our postulate that Treg
are selected among differentiating CD4 T cells with high affinity for ligands
expressed on TECs (Modigliani et al. 1996b). Finally, the demonstration by
Caramalho et al. that Treg express innate immunity receptors (Caramalho et al.
2003) and respond to pro-inflammatory signals and products of inflammation
(Caramalho et al., submitted) brought about a new understanding on the peripheral
regulation of Treg function. Together with the observation that Treg also respond
to ongoing activities of "naïve/effector" T cells--possibly through the IL-2
produced in these conditions--these findings explain the participation of Treg in
all immune responses (Onizuka et al. 1999; Shimizu et al. 1999; Annacker et al.
2001; Curotto de Lafaille et al. 2001; Almeida et al. 2002; Shevach 2002; Bach
and Francois Bach 2003; Wood and Sakaguchi 2003; Mittrucker and Kaufmann 2004;
Sakaguchi 2004), beyond their fundamental role in ensuring self-tolerance (e.g., 
Modigliani et al. 1996a; Shevach 2000; Hori et al. 2003; Sakaguchi 2004; Thompson
and Powrie 2004). Thus, anti-inflammatory and anti-proliferative Treg are
amplified by signals that promote or mediate inflammation and proliferation,
accounting for the quality control of responses (Coutinho et al. 2001). In turn, 
such natural regulation of Treg by immune responses to non-self may well explain 
the alarming epidemiology of allergic and AID in wealthy societies (Wills-Karp et
al. 2001; Bach 2002; Yazdanbakhsh et al. 2002), where a variety of childhood
infections have become rare or absent. Thus, it is plausible that Treg were
evolutionarily set by a given density of infectious agents in the environment.
With hindsight, it is not too surprising that natural Treg performance falls once
hygiene, vaccination, and antibiotics suddenly (i.e., 100 years) plunged
infectious density to below some critical physiological threshold. As the immune 
system is not adapted to modern clean conditions of postnatal development,
clinical immunologists must now deal with frequent Treg deficiencies (allergies
and AID) for which they have no curative or rational treatments. It is essential,
therefore, that basic immunologists concentrate on strategies to selectively
stimulate the production, survival, and activity of this set of lymphocytes that 
is instrumental in preventing immune pathology. We have argued that the culprit
of this inability of basic research to solve major clinical problems has been the
self-righteousness of recessive tolerance champions, from Ehrlich to some of our 
contemporaries. It is ironical, however, that none of us--including the heretic
opponents of horror autotoxicus--had understood that self-tolerance, or its
robustness at least, is in part determined by the frequency and intensity of the 
responses to non-self. In the evolution of ideas on immunological tolerance, the 
time might be ripe for some kinds of synthesis. First, conventional theory
reduced self-tolerance to negative selection and microbial defense to positive
selection, while the MM96 solution was the precise opposite: positive selection
of autoreactivities for self-tolerance (Treg) and negative selection (of Treg)
for ridding responses. In contrast, it would now appear that positive and
negative selection of autoreactive T cells are both necessary to establish either
self-tolerance or competence to eliminate microbes, two processes that actually
reinforce each other in the maintenance of self-integrity. Second, V-region
recognition has generally been held responsible for specific discrimination
between what should be either tolerated or eliminated from the organism. In
contrast again, it would now seem that both processes of self-tolerance and
microbial defense (self/non-self discrimination) also operate on the basis of
evolutionarily ancient, germ-line-encoded innate, nonspecific receptors
(Medzhitov and Janeway 2000) capable of a coarse level of self/non-self
discrimination (Coutinho 1975). It could thus be interesting to revisit notions
of cooperativity between V-regions and such mitogen receptors, both in single
cell functions (Coutinho et al. 1974) and in the system's evolution (Coutinho
1975, 1980) as well. After all, major transitions in evolution were cooperative
(Maynard-Smith and Szathmary 1995).

PMID: 15981475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Aug 5;333(3):944-53.

Cooperative activation of transcription by autoimmune regulator AIRE and CBP.

Pitkänen J(1), Rebane A, Rowell J, Murumägi A, Ströbel P, Möll K, Saare M,
Heikkilä J, Doucas V, Marx A, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere and Tampere University 
Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is a transcriptional regulator that is believed to
control the expression of tissue-specific genes in the thymus. Mutated AIRE is
responsible for onset of the hereditary autoimmune disease APECED. AIRE is able
to form nuclear bodies (NBs) and interacts with the ubiquitous transcriptional
coactivator CBP. In this paper, we show that CBP and AIRE synergistically
activate transcription on different promoter reporters whereas AIRE gene mutation
R257X, found in APECED patients, interferes with this coactivation effect.
Furthermore, the overexpression of AIRE and CBP collaboratively enhance
endogenous IFNbeta mRNA expression. The immunohistochemical studies suggest that 
CBP, depending on the balance of nuclear proteins, is a component of AIRE NBs. We
also show that AIRE NBs are devoid of active chromatin and, therefore, not sites 
of transcription. In addition, we demonstrate by 3D analyses that AIRE and CBP,
when colocalizing, are located spatially differently within AIRE NBs. In
conclusion, our data suggest that AIRE activates transcription of the target
genes, i.e., autoantigens in collaboration with CBP and that this activation
occurs outside of AIRE NBs.

PMID: 15964547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Sep 10;309(1):220-8.

Transcription factor single-minded 2 (SIM2) is ubiquitinated by the
RING-IBR-RING-type E3 ubiquitin ligases.

Okui M(1), Yamaki A, Takayanagi A, Kudoh J, Shimizu N, Shimizu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Human single-minded 2 (SIM2) is a member of the basic
helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH/PAS) family of transcription factors and is
associated with the etiology of Down syndrome phenotype. Here, we examined a
possibility of the post-translational modification of SIM2 protein by
transfecting various expression constructs followed by the analysis with
immunoprecipitation and Western blotting. In fact, transient expression of SIM2
cDNA in HEK293 cells revealed poly-ubiquitination of SIM2 protein. In the stable 
transfectants, a proteasome inhibitor MG132 protected the poly-ubiquitinated SIM2
protein from degradation. Furthermore, in the cells co-transfected with SIM2 and 
each of four different E3 ubiquitin ligases, SIM2 was immunoprecipitated with the
RING-IBR-RING-type E3 ubiquitin ligases, Parkin and HHARI, but it was not
immunoprecipitated with other E3 ligases, such as one RING-type Siah-1 and the
PHD type AIRE. A series of deletion constructs revealed that Parkin actually
binds to SIM2 with the IBR (294-377)-RING2 (378-465) domains and that the sites
for poly-ubiquitination of SIM2 reside within the PAS1-PAS2 region (aa 141-289). 
We postulated that transcription factor SIM2 and E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin may
interact each other to play an important physiological role in the brain
development which is controlled by ubiquitination.

PMID: 15963499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Internist (Berl). 2005 Jul;46(7):750-8.

[Autoimmune polyglandular syndromes].

[Article in German]

Lankisch TO(1), Jaeckel E, Strassburg CP, Manns MP.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Gastroenterologie, Hepatologie und Endokrinologie, Medizinische 
Hochschule Hannover.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndromes are rare autoimmune endocrinopathies, which
can be also associated with non endocrine autoimmune diseases. The autoimmune
polyglandular syndrome type I (autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis
ectodermal dystrophy; APECED) is distinguished from autoimmune polyglandular
syndrome type 2 (APS-2). Main symptoms of APECED are adrenal insufficiency,
hypoparathyroidism and candidiasis. The diagnosis is established when two out of 
three of these symptoms are present. APECED is associated with mutations of the
autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE) and predominantly affects juvenile patients with
a family background from Sardinia, Finland and Iranian Jews. The APS-2 is not
AIRE associated. It is characterized by the presence of autoimmune thyroid
disease, adrenal insufficiency and/or diabetes mellitus type I. APS-2 is more
common than APECED and mainly affects adult women without any preference of a
certain ethnic group. Therapy consists of hormone replacement therapy and
treatment of clinical symptoms. In some APECED patients immunosuppressive therapy
seems to be promising.

PMID: 15947901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Reprod Health Matters. 2004 Nov;12(24 Suppl):39-46.

With everything exposed: cruelty in post-abortion care in Rosario, Argentina.

Steele C(1), Chiarotti S.

Author information: 
(1)International Women's Health Coalition, New York, NY, USA. Csteele7@aol.com

At the suggestion of a social worker who witnessed abusive post-abortion care at 
a public hospital in Rosario, Argentina, two human rights NGOs collaborated to
investigate women's experiences seeking treatment for abortion complications at
area public hospitals. During the year-long enquiry, more than 300 women took
part. Role play was successfully used to surmount women's initial reluctance to
reveal pervasive discriminatory and humiliating mistreatment. Thirty-one women
later gave personal testimonies about their experiences, which were contained in 
the report of the research and later dramatised in a public meeting and video.
The report, Con Todo al Aire (With Everything Exposed), was disseminated widely, 
including to the media, and a formal complaint was made to the local Ombudsman,
who called for high-level action to resolve the problems. Initial denial by some 
health professionals that there was a serious problem was replaced by critical
self-assessment within the provincial government, hospitals and medical and
nursing schools, who made commitments to reform hospital practices and the
medical school curriculum. Women participants also gained an understanding of
their right to appropriate and humane health care. The findings from Rosario are 
not isolated. They are now being shored with activists and researchers in other
provinces of Argentina and other countries.

PMID: 15938156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Foot Ankle Int. 2005 May;26(5):359-64.

Evaluation of results of endoscopic gastrocnemius recession.

Trevino S(1), Gibbs M, Panchbhavi V.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Medical Branch, Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation,
Galveston, Texas 77555-0165, USA.

BACKGROUND: Gastrocnemius recession is traditionally done as an open procedure.
The aim of this retrospective study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of
gastrocnemius recession performed endoscopically.
METHODS: The procedure was done in 28 patients (17 men and 11 women), ranging in 
age from 16 to 72 years (average 47.57, SD 13.86) between January, 2001, and
September, 2003. In three patients, the procedure was done bilaterally. Followup 
ranged from 4 to 36 months (average 22.00, SD 11.84). The procedure was done
through a single medial or lateral portal using the 3M Agee Carpal Tunnel Release
System (Micro Aire Surgical Instruments, Charlottesville, VA).
RESULTS: The initial incision for portal entry was at the wrong level in two of
31 procedures (6.5%), requiring a second incision. The recession could not be
accomplished in one of 31 procedures (3.2%), so an open technique was used to
complete transection of the gastrocnemius aponeurosis. One patient had a
superficial wound infection (3.2%). There was no incidence of sural nerve or
Achilles tendon damage. Analysis of results from a modified Olerud and Molander
score using a paired student t-test revealed statistically significant
improvement (p < or = 0.05) in pain, stiffness, swelling, and overall average
score after the procedure.
CONCLUSION: The results of endoscopic gastrocnemius recession using the Agee
Carpal Tunnel Release System have been encouraging, with limited morbidity. The
technique proved both feasible and safe in this study.

PMID: 15913518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Rev Esp Salud Publica. 2005 Mar-Apr;79(2):145-57.

[Impact of extreme temperatures on public health].

[Article in Spanish]

Díaz Jiménez J(1), Linares Gil C, García Herrera R.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisica del Aire, Facultad de Ciencias Físicas, Universidad
Complutense de Madrid. julio.diaz@uam.es

The extremely high temperatures recorded in Central Europe and in the northern
and eastern of Spain during the summer of 2003 revealed the major impact that
high temperatures have on public health. The excessively high death rates and
hospital admissions related to these extreme temperatures have led to alert and
prevention plans having been set out in our country in 2004 for the purpose of
minimizing these effects. Fortunately, the temperatures recorded in 2004, which
were much lower than in 2003, have not served to evaluate these plans in their
full scope but have indeed served to detect some lacks which will progressively
be corrected in the future. This article analyzes the mainly major impacts mainly
of heat waves and also of cold waves. The socioeconomic factors having a bearing 
on these excessively high death rates and the measures set out which must be
taken into account in the prevention plans. Particular stress is placed on the
need of expediting the recording of disease and death rates in Spain and in the
policies necessary for minimizing the impact on health of the extreme temperature
events.

PMID: 15913051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Immunol Lett. 2005 Jun 15;99(1):130-5. Epub 2005 Feb 24.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway controls autoimmune regulator (AIRE)
gene expression in granulo-monocyte colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-stimulated
myelomonocytic leukemia OTC-4 cells.

Nagafuchi S(1), Katsuta H, Ohno Y, Inoue Y, Shimoda K, Kogawa K, Ikeda Y,
Koyanagi-Katsuta R, Yamasaki S, Tominaga H, Tamiya S, Umemura T, Otsuka T,
Miyamoto T, Otsuka T, Harada M, Kudoh J, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Diabetes, Department of Health
Sciences, School of Medicine, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku,
Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. nagafuchi@shs.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene is a responsible gene for the rare autosomal
recessive autoimmune disease: autoimmune-polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis
ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). Although it has been reported that AIRE is
expressed in the thymic epithelial cells and monocyte-dendritic cell lineage, the
regulatory mechanisms of AIRE gene expression have as yet been poorly understood.
Here we show that the expression of AIRE gene was induced in granulo-monocyte
colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-stimulated myelomonocytic leukemia OTC-4
cells. In GM-CSF-stimulated OTC-4 cells, stat5 was not phosphorylated, while
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), including MAPK kinase (MEK) 1/2 and
p38 MAPK, were phosphorylated, indicating activation of MAPK pathway. In
addition, the expression of AIRE gene was inhibited by specific p38 MAPK
inhibitor (SB203580), whereas the expression was rather enhanced by the MEK1/2
inhibitor (U0126), suggesting that AIRE gene expression is regulated by
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.

PMID: 15894121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Aug;90(8):4930-5. Epub 2005 May 10.

Autoimmune regulator-1 messenger ribonucleic acid analysis in a novel intronic
mutation and two additional novel AIRE gene mutations in a cohort of autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy patients.

Podkrajsek KT(1), Bratanic N, Krzisnik C, Battelino T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, University Children's Hospital, Ljubljana, Vrazov
trg 1, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.

CONTEXT: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) 
is a rare autosomal recessive disease associated with mutations in the AIRE gene.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to investigate clinical and mutational
characteristics of 12 Slovenian patients from 10 families with APECED.
METHODS: Direct sequencing, restriction fragment length polymorphism, and
amplification refractory mutation system analyses were used to identify AIRE gene
mutations. Autoimmune regulator (AIRE)-1 mRNA analysis was used to confirm
pathogenicity of the intronic mutation.
RESULTS: The prevalence of APECED in Slovenian population was estimated to be 1
in 43,000, which is significantly higher compared with the neighboring
populations. Three novel mutations were identified among six different mutations 
detected in the AIRE gene. The first novel mutation was an intronic mutation
(653-7_-5delCTC) affecting proper splicing by using a nearby new acceptor splice 
site as demonstrated by AIRE-1 mRNA analyses. The second and third novel
mutations were frame-shift mutations located in exon 5 (540delG) and exon 9
(1064-1068dupCCCGG), both leading to premature truncation of the AIRE protein.
The Finnish R257X mutation was the most frequent AIRE gene mutation in Slovenian 
patients with APECED (16 of 24 alleles).
CONCLUSIONS: Three novel AIRE gene mutations were identified. For the first time,
a novel intronic mutation was investigated on the mRNA level in APECED. This
could be particularly important for APECED patients where no or only heterozygous
mutation on the genomic DNA level is detected.

PMID: 15886230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 May 17;102(20):7233-8. Epub 2005 May 9.

Chromosomal clustering of genes controlled by the aire transcription factor.

Johnnidis JB(1), Venanzi ES, Taxman DJ, Ting JP, Benoist CO, Mathis DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin Diabetes Center, USA.

Autoimmune regulator (aire) is a transcription factor that controls the
self-reactivity of the T cell repertoire. Although previous results indicate that
it exerts this function in part by promoting ectopic expression of a battery of
peripheral-tissue antigens in epithelial cells of the thymic medulla, recent data
argue for additional roles in negative selection of thymocytes by medullary
cells. As one approach to exploring such roles, we performed computational
analyses of microarray data on medullary RNA transcripts from aire-deficient
versus wild-type mice, focusing on the genomic localization of aire-controlled
genes. Our results highlight this molecule's transcriptional activating and
silencing roles and reveal a significant degree of clustering of its target
genes. On a local scale, aire-regulated clusters appeared punctate, with
aire-controlled and aire-independent genes often being interspersed. This pattern
suggests that aire's action may not be a simple reflection of the wide action of 
a chromatin remodeling enzyme. Analysis of the identity of certain of the
clustered genes was evocative of aire's potential roles in antigen presentation
and the coordination of intrathymic cell migration: for example, major
histocompatibility complex class I and class II gene products and certain
chemokine genes are targets of aire-regulated transcription.

PMCID: PMC1129145
PMID: 15883360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Immunol Rev. 2005 Apr;204:156-64.

AIRE and APECED: molecular insights into an autoimmune disease.

Villaseñor J(1), Benoist C, Mathis D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin
Diabetes Center, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02215, USA.

Mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) protein are the causative factor in 
development of the human disease autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). In mice, the
absence of the analogous protein aire influences ectopic expression of peripheral
tissue antigens in thymic medullary epithelial cells (MECs), resulting in the
development of an autoimmune disorder similar to APECED and establishing
aire/AIRE as an important player in the induction of central tolerance. However, 
the molecular mechanism of AIRE's function, in particular its ability to
specifically control the expression of peripheral tissue antigens in MECs, is
still unclear. Here, we review current evidence relating to the molecular
mechanism of AIRE.

PMID: 15790357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2004 Dec;17(102):625-8.

[Autoimmune multiglandular syndrome type I--a case study].

[Article in Polish]

Dunajska K(1), Szymczak J.

Author information: 
(1)Zaklad Promocji Zdrowia i Higieny Akademii Wychowania Fizycznego we Wroclawiu.
dunajska@mp.pl

We have described a case of a rare autoimmune disease, called autoimmune
polyglandular syndrome type I (APS type I), in a 44-year-old woman. APS type I is
an autosomal recessively inherited disorder, connected with mutations in AIRE
(autoimmune regulator) gene. Subsequently, autoantibodies directed towards
tissue-specific enzymes are produced, which causes destruction of multiple
tissues and organs, first of all--endocrine glands. In the described woman,
primary hypoparathyroidism occurred in childhood. Addison disease, chronic
candidiasis of the nails and vitiligo developed in adolescence. Before she was
30, a premature ovarian failure, and axilla and pubis alopecia occurred. The last
recognized disorders were cholelithiasis and candidiasis of oesophagus. The late 
diagnosis resulted in numerous complications of the disease and the patient's
life quality impairment.

PMID: 15771137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Hum Mutat. 2005 Mar;25(3):319.

Two novel mutations of the AIRE protein affecting its homodimerization
properties.

Meloni A(1), Fiorillo E, Corda D, Perniola R, Cao A, Rosatelli MC.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, National Research Council,
Cagliari, Italy.

We report two novel mutations, c.230T>C (p.F77S) and c.64_69del (p.V22_D23del)
within the HSR domain of the AIRE protein in two patients of Italian descent
affected by APECED. Both mutations were found in the compound heterozygous state 
respectively with c.994+5G>T and c.232T>A (p.W78R). With the two-hybrid assay in 
the yeast system we found that constructs containing the two mutations fail to
interact with the wild-type protein. These findings indicate that both mutations 
negatively affected the homodimerization properties of the AIRE protein, thereby 
leading to a defective function.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15712268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Immunol. 2005 Feb 15;174(4):1862-70.

Development of autoimmunity against transcriptionally unrepressed target antigen 
in the thymus of Aire-deficient mice.

Kuroda N(1), Mitani T, Takeda N, Ishimaru N, Arakaki R, Hayashi Y, Bando Y, Izumi
K, Takahashi T, Nomura T, Sakaguchi S, Ueno T, Takahama Y, Uchida D, Sun S,
Kajiura F, Mouri Y, Han H, Matsushima A, Yamada G, Matsumoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, University of
Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan.

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene mutation is responsible for the development of
organ-specific autoimmune disease with monogenic autosomal recessive inheritance.
Although Aire has been considered to regulate the elimination of autoreactive T
cells through transcriptional control of tissue-specific Ags in thymic epithelial
cells, other mechanisms of AIRE-dependent tolerance remain to be investigated. We
have established Aire-deficient mice and examined the mechanisms underlying the
breakdown of self-tolerance. The production and/or function of immunoregulatory T
cells were retained in the Aire-deficient mice. The mice developed Sjogren's
syndrome-like pathologic changes in the exocrine organs, and this was associated 
with autoimmunity against a ubiquitous protein, alpha-fodrin. Remarkably,
transcriptional expression of alpha-fodrin was retained in the Aire-deficient
thymus. These results suggest that Aire regulates the survival of autoreactive T 
cells beyond transcriptional control of self-protein expression in the thymus, at
least against this ubiquitous protein. Rather, Aire may regulate the processing
and/or presentation of self-proteins so that the maturing T cells can recognize
the self-Ags in a form capable of efficiently triggering autoreactive T cells.
With the use of inbred Aire-deficient mouse strains, we also demonstrate the
presence of some additional factor(s) that determine the target-organ specificity
of the autoimmune disease caused by Aire deficiency.

PMID: 15699112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Clin Invest. 2005 Mar;115(3):728-32.

AIRE deficiency in thymus of 2 patients with Omenn syndrome.

Cavadini P(1), Vermi W, Facchetti F, Fontana S, Nagafuchi S, Mazzolari E, Sediva 
A, Marrella V, Villa A, Fischer A, Notarangelo LD, Badolato R.

Author information: 
(1)1Istituto di Medicina Molecolare Angelo Nocivelli, Clinica Pediatrica,
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

Omenn syndrome is a severe primary immunodeficiency with putative autoimmune
manifestations of the skin and gastrointestinal tract. The disease is caused by
hypomorphic mutations in recombination-activating genes that impair but do not
abolish the process of VDJ recombination, leading to the generation of
autoreactive T cells with a highly restricted receptor repertoire. Loss of
central tolerance in genetically determined autoimmune diseases, e.g., autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy, is associated with defective
expression by medullary thymic epithelial cells of AIRE, the transcription
activator that induces thymic expression of tissue-specific antigens. Analysis of
AIRE expression in the thymi of 2 Omenn syndrome patients and 1 SCID patient, by 
real-time RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry, demonstrated a profound reduction in
the levels of AIRE mRNA and protein in patients as compared with a normal control
subject. Lack of AIRE was associated with normal or even increased levels of
keratin and lymphotoxin-beta receptor mRNAs, while mRNAs of the self-antigens
insulin, cytochrome P450 1a2, and fatty acid-binding protein were undetectable in
thymi from immunodeficiency patients. These results demonstrate that deficiency
of AIRE expression is observed in severe immunodeficiencies characterized by
abnormal T cell development and suggest that in Omenn syndrome, the few residual 
T cell clones that develop may escape negative selection and thereafter expand in
the periphery, causing massive autoimmune reactions.

PMCID: PMC546458
PMID: 15696198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Feb 18;327(3):939-44.

Mapping DNA-binding domains of the autoimmune regulator protein.

Purohit S(1), Kumar PG, Laloraya M, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Medical College of Georgia,
CA4095, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

The human autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene encodes a putative DNA-binding
protein, which is mutated in patients affected by the autoimmune polyglandular
syndrome type 1 or autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal
dystrophy. We have recently reported that AIRE can bind to two different DNA
sequence motifs, suggesting the existence of at least two DNA-binding domains in 
the AIRE protein. By expressing a series of recombinant AIRE protein fragments,
we demonstrate here that the two well-known plant homeodomains (PHD) domains in
AIRE can bind to the ATTGGTTA sequence motif. The first ATTGGTTA-binding domain
is mapped to amino acids 299-355 and the second ATTGGTTA-binding domain to amino 
acids 434-475. Furthermore, the SAND domain of AIRE is shown to bind to TTATTA
motif. Results presented herein show that the residues at position 189-196 of
AIRE (QRAVAMSS) are required for its binding to the TTATTA motif. The required
sequence for DNA binding in the SAND domain of AIRE is remarkably different from 
other SAND-containing proteins such as Sp-100b and NUDR. Data presented in this
paper indicate that the two PHD domains contained in AIRE, in addition to the
SAND domain, can bind to specific DNA sequence motifs.

PMID: 15649436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2004 Dec;4(6):491-6.

AIRE and immunological tolerance: insights from the study of autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy candidiasis and ectodermal dystrophy.

Notarangelo LD(1), Mazza C, Forino C, Mazzolari E, Buzi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Angelo Nocivelli Institute of Molecular Medicine,
Children's Hospital, University of Brescia, 25123 Brescia, Italy.
notarang@med.unibs.it

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To review the clinical and molecular features of autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy candidiasis and ectodermal dystrophy and discuss recent
advances in the function of the AIRE protein. We will summarize how AIRE
contributes to immunological tolerance, and thus to the prevention of
autoimmunity.
RECENT FINDINGS: The organization of a well-structured thymic microenvironment
and the interaction between nascent thymocytes and thymic epithelial cells have
been shown to be essential for AIRE expression. AIRE is involved in the
expression of ectopic proteins by medullary thymic epithelial cells. This allows 
the establishment of central tolerance and contributes to the prevention of
organ-specific autoimmunity, as shown by findings in patients with autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy candidiasis and ectodermal dystrophy (a disease caused by AIRE
gene mutations) and in aire (-/-) mice.
SUMMARY: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis and ectodermal dystrophy
represents a unique model to investigate the cellular and molecular mechanisms
that govern central tolerance and help prevent autoimmunity. Recent findings
indicate that the compartmentalization of AIRE and interaction with other
proteins are involved in this mechanism. The disturbance of AIRE expression may
also be responsible for autoimmune manifestations in disorders with disrupted
thymic structure other than autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis and
ectodermal dystrophy alone.

PMID: 15640689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol. 2005;14(1):17-21. doi: 10.1297/cpe.14.17. Epub 2005 Feb 
14.

Absence of Heterozygous K83E and R257X Mutations of the AIRE-1 Gene in 46
Children with Type 1 Diabetes and 44 Children with Graves' Disease.

Iwama S(1), Ikezaki A(1), Matsuoka H(1), Hoshi M(2), Sato H(3), Miyamoto S(3),
Sugihara S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo Women's Medical University Daini Hospital,
Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Matsudo Municipal Hospital, Matsudo,
Japan. (3)Chiba Children's Hospital, Chiba, Japan.

Type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM) and Graves' disease are autoimmune diseases, and a 
number of genetic factors, including HLA and CTLA-4 genes, have been reported to 
contribute to their etiology. The gene responsible for autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy- candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) has been cloned and
named the autoimmune regulator-1 (AIRE-1) gene. AIRE-1 protein is thought to be a
transcription regulatory protein and to have a role in the maintenance of
immunological tolerance. The aim of this study was to determine whether
heterozygous AIRE-1 gene mutations are associated with childhood-onset type 1
diabetes and Graves' disease in the Japanese population. We investigated 46
children with type 1 DM (29 females and 17 males; age at the time of diagnosis,
0.5-16 yr) and 44 children with Graves' disease (34 females and 10 males; age at 
the time of diagnosis, 3-16 yr) for the presence of the K83E mutation in exon 2
and the R257X mutation in exon 6 of the AIRE-1 gene. The alleles were identified 
by polymerase chain reaction of genomic DNA and restriction fragment-length
polymorphism analysis (PCR-RFLP) with endonuclease TaqI. Since no patients with
type 1 DM or Graves' disease were found to carry the K83E or the R257X
heterozygous mutation, we concluded that neither the K83E nor the R257X
heterozygous mutation in the AIRE-1 gene seem to be the cause of the more common 
isolated endocrinopathies, i.e., type 1 diabetes mellitus and Graves' disease, in
Japanese children.

PMCID: PMC4004927
PMID: 24790305  [PubMed]


228. Joint Bone Spine. 2004 Nov;71(6):511-7.

Novel concepts and treatments for autoimmune disease: ten focal points.

Sibilia J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de Rhumatologie-CHU Hautepierre Université Louis Pasteur 1, avenue
Molière 67098 Strasbourg, France. jean.sibilia@wanadoo.fr

Understanding the development of autoimmunity is a crucial step toward improving 
the management, not only of autoimmune diseases, but also of tumors and primary
immunodeficiency syndromes. The rapid expansion of knowledge on autoimmunity is
fueling the development of a novel approach known as targeted immunotherapy. The 
present review will concentrate on ten areas where major advances have been
achieved: 1) early regulation of B-cell mediated autoimmunity; 2) thymic
regulation of tolerance to tissue-restricted antigens via the transcription
factor AIRE; 3) role for a population of regulatory T cells (CD4+ CD25+ Tregs)
with unique effects; 4) major role for dendritic cells in the development of
autoimmunity in conditions such as lupus; 5) role for T cells in autoimmune
diseases; 6) role for T cells in rheumatoid arthritis, with new data from a
murine model of spontaneous arthritis related to a ZAP-70 mutation; 7) role for
the environment via innate immunity, in particular mediated by the toll-like
receptors (TLR); identification of new autoantigens with the description of
sense-antisense peptides (e.g., proteinase 3-complementary proteinase 3); the
immunosenescence concept, which suggests that some autoimmune diseases may be
related to premature aging of the immune system; 10) identification of new
immunotherapy targets, including costimulation pathway molecules (CD28, CTLA4),
original activation systems (BAFF/BLyS), and receptors such as TLRs. These
exciting insights into the pathogenic mechanisms underlying immune dysfunction
will play a key role in advancing the field of immunorheumatology.

PMID: 15589431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Immunity. 2004 Dec;21(6):817-30.

Generalized resistance to thymic deletion in the NOD mouse; a polygenic trait
characterized by defective induction of Bim.

Liston A(1), Lesage S, Gray DH, O'Reilly LA, Strasser A, Fahrer AM, Boyd RL,
Wilson J, Baxter AG, Gallo EM, Crabtree GR, Peng K, Wilson SR, Goodnow CC.

Author information: 
(1)Immunogenomics Laboratory, John Curtin School of Medical Research and The
Australian Phenomics Facility, The Australian National University, Canberra,
2601, Australia.

The cause of common polygenic autoimmune diseases is not understood because of
genetic and cellular complexity. Here, we pinpoint the action of a subset of
autoimmune susceptibility loci in the NOD mouse strain linked to D1mit181,
D2mit490, D7mit101, and D15mit229, which cause a generalized resistance to thymic
deletion in vivo that applies equally to Aire-induced organ-specific gene
products in the thymic medulla and to systemic antigens expressed at high levels 
throughout the thymus and affects CD4(+), CD4(+)8(+), and CD4(+)25(+) thymocytes.
Resistance to thymic deletion does not reflect a general deficit in TCR signaling
to calcineurin- or ERK-induced genes, imbalance in constitutive regulators of
apoptosis, nor excessive signaling to prosurvival genes but is distinguished by
failure to induce the proapoptotic gene and protein, Bim, during in vivo
encounter with high-avidity autoantigen. These findings establish defects in
thymic deletion and Bim induction as a key mechanism in the pathogenesis of
autoimmunity.

PMID: 15589170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Curr Opin Immunol. 2004 Dec;16(6):746-52.

Aire: an update.

Su MA(1), Anderson MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco, Box 0540, 513
Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Aire (autoimmune regulator), the gene responsible for the clinical disorder
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type I, has recently been identified as an
important mediator of central tolerance. Aire upregulates the transcription of
certain organ-specific self-antigens in medullary thymic epithelial cells, and
has a role in the negative selection of organ-specific thymocytes. However, the
molecular mechanisms by which Aire functions in these processes are still not
well understood. Structural characteristics and biochemical data suggest that
Aire might have a direct role in nuclear transcription and that it can function
as an ubiquitin ligase. Although these molecular details await further
characterization, the association of Aire with the prevention of autoimmunity
highlights the importance of thymic mechanisms in the maintenance of tolerance.

PMID: 15511668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Curr Opin Immunol. 2004 Dec;16(6):741-5.

Regulating self-tolerance by deregulating gene expression.

Gotter J(1), Kyewski B.

Author information: 
(1)Tumour Immunology Program, Division of Developmental Immunology, German Cancer
Research Centre (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Intrathymic expression of peripheral auto-antigens, termed promiscuous gene
expression, extends the scope of central T-cell tolerance to peripheral organs
and proves essential for the induction and maintenance of self-tolerance. The
purification of antigen-presenting cells has been instrumental in identifying
promiscuous gene expression as an inherent property of medullary epithelial
cells. The pool of promiscuously expressed genes might encompass up to 10% of the
whole genome. The remarkable diversity of this gene pool implies a complex mode
of regulation, which cannot be solely explained by the action of a single factor,
such as the transcriptional autoimmune regulator AIRE. Co-localization of
promiscuously expressed genes in clusters also suggests epigenetic mechanisms
(e.g. DNA methylation) to account for this unorthodox gene expression pattern.
The identification of the molecular components controlling the expression of
tissue-restricted genes in the thymus promises to add valuable new insights into 
the complex genetic regulation underlying most autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 15511667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Exp Med. 2004 Oct 18;200(8):1015-26.

Gene dosage--limiting role of Aire in thymic expression, clonal deletion, and
organ-specific autoimmunity.

Liston A(1), Gray DH, Lesage S, Fletcher AL, Wilson J, Webster KE, Scott HS, Boyd
RL, Peltonen L, Goodnow CC.

Author information: 
(1)John Curtin School of Medical Research, The Australian Phenomics Facility, The
Australian National University, Canberra 2601, Australia.

Inactivation of the autoimmune regulator (Aire) gene causes a rare recessive
disorder, autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome 1 (APS1), but it is not known if
Aire-dependent tolerance mechanisms are susceptible to the quantitative genetic
changes thought to underlie more common autoimmune diseases. In mice with a
targeted mutation, complete loss of Aire abolished expression of an insulin
promoter transgene in thymic epithelium, but had no effect in pancreatic islets
or the testes. Loss of one copy of Aire diminished thymic expression of the
endogenous insulin gene and the transgene, resulting in a 300% increase in
islet-reactive CD4 T cells escaping thymic deletion in T cell receptor transgenic
mice, and dramatically increased progression to diabetes. Thymic deletion induced
by antigen under control of the thyroglobulin promoter was abolished in Aire
homozygotes and less efficient in heterozygotes, providing an explanation for
thyroid autoimmunity in APS1. In contrast, Aire deficiency had no effect on
thymic deletion to antigen controlled by a systemic H-2K promoter. The
sensitivity of Aire-dependent thymic deletion to small reductions in function
makes this pathway a prime candidate for more subtle autoimmune quantitative
trait loci, and suggests that methods to increase Aire activity would be a potent
strategy to lower the incidence of organ-specific autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC2211852
PMID: 15492124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Immunol. 2004 Nov;41(12):1185-98.

Autoimmune regulator induced changes in the gene expression profile of human
monocyte-dendritic cell-lineage.

Sillanpää N(1), Magureanu CG, Murumägi A, Reinikainen A, West A, Manninen A,
Lahti M, Ranki A, Saksela K, Krohn K, Lahesmaa R, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Medical Technology, Tampere University
Hospital, University of Tampere, Finnmedi-1, Biokatu 6, Tampere 33014, Finland.
sillann@cs.tut.fi

The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is a transcriptional regulator expressed in the
thymic medullary epithelial cells and in the cells of the monocyte-dendritic
lineage both in the thymus and in the secondary lymphoid organs. Mutations in the
AIRE gene cause autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED), a recessively inherited disease characterized by loss of immunological 
self-tolerance to multiple endocrine organs. Recent mouse knockout studies
suggest that AIRE is responsible for ectopic expression of peripheral
self-antigens in the thymus. In the present study, we detected an increased level
of endogenous AIRE expression during the differentiation process of the human
monocyte derived dendritic cells (MoDCs). We subsequently identified candidates
for AIRE-regulated genes by using cDNA microarray technology to analyse the
changes in the gene expression profile brought about by overexpressing the AIRE
protein in the monocytic U937 cells. The changes observed resembled those
previously reported to occur during the maturation of DCs, including
up-regulation of the CCL22, CD25, ICAM-1 and RelB genes. In contrast, increased
expression of the steroidogenic enzymes P450c17, P450c21 and P450scc, the major
autoantigens in APECED, was not found either in our cell model or in the
dendritic cell cultures. We also identified the ERK signal transduction pathway
as a candidate for mediating the signal that results in the altered expression
profile. Our findings suggest that the role of AIRE in the DCs differs from its
function in the thymus.

PMID: 15482854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Ecotoxicology. 2004 Jul;13(5):423-36.

The use of direct toxicity assessment in the assessment and control of complex
effluents in the UK: a demonstration programme.

Tinsley D(1), Wharfe J, Campbell D, Chown P, Taylor D, Upton J, Taylor C.

Author information: 
(1)Environment Agency, National Centre for Ecotoxicology and Hazardous
Substances, Evenlode House, Howbery Park, Wallingford, Oxon. OX10 8BD, UK.
derek.tinsley@environment-agency.gov.uk

This paper outlines the background, objectives, methodology, findings, outputs
and recommendations from the Direct Toxicity Assessment (DTA) Demonstration
Programme. This was a trial of a suite of bioassay methods and a seven-step
protocol designed to deliver water quality improvements in catchments with
well-defined water quality problems, where ecotoxicity from effluents was a
contributing factor. The trial was run as a collaborative venture between the
environmental regulators and water and manufacturing industries in the UK and was
conducted at three project sites: -a reach of the river Aire near the city of
Bradford in Yorkshire; -a reach of the River Esk near the town of Langholm on the
border between Scotland and England; and -the lower Tees estuary on the
north-east coast of England. The outcomes of each project are summarised in this 
paper. The learning points delivered by the programme were used to make
recommendations to the regulators on how best to use bioassays for the assessment
and control of complex effluents in the UK. Guidance was provided on how to carry
out the bioassays and on how to use the data generated for regulatory
decision-making. The programme also demonstrated how the regulators and the
regulated can successfully work together to tackle environmental issues and
deliver effective and workable solutions.

PMID: 15462134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Eur J Immunol. 2004 Nov;34(11):3126-34.

Expression of tissue-specific autoantigens in the hematopoietic cells leads to
activation-induced cell death of autoreactive T cells in the secondary lymphoid
organs.

Zheng X(1), Yin L, Liu Y, Zheng P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Immunology, Department of Pathology and Comprehensive
Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Many tissue-specific antigens are expressed in specialized cells called
peripheral antigen-expressing cells (PAE) in the thymus and can induce central
tolerance. While thymic medullary epithelial cells are the prototypic PAE that
express peripheral antigens via an aire-dependent mechanism, some studies also
describe bone marrow (BM)-derived dendritic cells (DC) and macrophages as PAE in 
both the thymus and secondary lymphoid organs. However, the role of these cells
in development of tolerance to tissue-specific antigens has not been elucidated. 
Here we use BM radiation chimeric mice to study the existence of hematopoietic
PAE and their contribution to tolerance to tissue-specific antigens. Our results 
reveal that BM-derived PAE exist in both central and secondary lymphoid organs
and that the expression of peripheral antigens in the BM-derived cells does not
correlate with aire expression. Using double-transgenic mice expressing TCR
specific for a model antigen expressed under the control of a prostate-specific
promoter, we show that expression of self antigen in PAE of non-hematopoietic
origin is both necessary and sufficient to induce clonal deletion. Surprisingly, 
while BM-derived PAE fail to induce clonal deletion, they do cause the
activation-induced cell death of autoreactive cells in the secondary lymphoid
organs. Thus, BM-derived PAE have a distinct function in the maintenance of
tolerance to tissue-specific antigens.

PMID: 15368272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Eur J Epidemiol. 2004;19(6):567-76.

Air pollution and respiratory status in asthmatic children: hints for a locally
based preventive strategy. AIRE study.

Ranzi A(1), Gambini M, Spattini A, Galassi C, Sesti D, Bedeschi M, Messori A,
Baroni A, Cavagni G, Lauriola P.

Author information: 
(1)Arpa Emilia-Romagna, Area di Epidemiologia Ambientale, Italy.
aranzi@mo.arpa.emr.it

Respiratory health effects of short-term exposure to ambient air pollution have
been examined in 120 'asthma-like' school-aged children in some areas of
Emilia-Romagna (urban-industrial and rural area). They kept a daily diary,
through 12 weeks, for respiratory symptoms, PEF measurements, drug consumption
and daily activity. The average daily concentrations of air pollutants in the
same period (TSP, NO2, CO, PM2.5) were higher in the industrial than the rural
area. Asthma was diagnosed in 77% of cases, 85% of subjects took medical
treatments for respiratory disease in the last year and 90% used medicine for
respiratory diseases. Significantly lower variations in PEF, between morning and 
evening, were observed in the rural area, considering only the asthmatic or cough
subsets of children. Symptom prevalence was higher in the urban-industrial area
than the rural area; the most frequent symptoms were cough, phlegm and stuffed
nose. The two area populations are homogeneous in individual features, family
susceptibility, passive smoking exposure and atopy. The differences observed in
the frequency of daily reported symptoms could be attributed to external
situations like the different reported exposures to pollutants. Although most
analyses revealed non-significant associations, panel analysis showed a
significant statistical risk for the cough and phlegm group by an increase of 10 
microg of TSP (RR 1.0017, 95% CI: 1.0002-1.0033) in the entire group. In the
urban-industrial panel we observed a significant association between cough and
phlegm together and PM2.5 (RR 1.0044, 95% CI: 1.0011-1.0077). The results of this
investigation should be used in orienting local political decisions.

PMID: 15330130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Bioinform Comput Biol. 2003 Jul;1(2):289-306.

Exploring alternative transcript structure in the human genome using blocks and
InterPro.

Loraine AE(1), Helt GA, Cline MS, Siani-Rose MA.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Department, Affymetrix, 6550 Vallejo St, Emeryville, CA 94530
USA. ann_loraine@affymetrix.com

Understanding how alternative splicing affects gene function is an important
challenge facing modern-day molecular biology. Using homology-based, protein
sequence analysis methods, it should be possible to investigate how transcript
diversity impacts protein function. To test this, high-quality exon-intron
structures were deduced for over 8000 human genes, including over 1300 (17
percent) that produce multiple transcript variants. A data mining technique
(DiffMotif) was developed to identify genes in which transcript variation
coincides with changes in conserved motifs between variants. Applying this
method, we found that 30 percent of the multi-variant genes in our test set
exhibited a differential profile of conserved InterPro and/or BLOCKS motifs
across different mRNA variants. To investigate these, a visualization tool
(ProtAnnot) that displays amino acid motifs in the context of genomic sequence
was developed. Using this tool, genes revealed by the DiffMotif method were
analyzed, and when possible, hypotheses regarding the potential role of
alternative transcript structure in modulating gene function were developed.
Examples of these, including: MEOX1, a homeobox-containing protein; AIRE,
involved in auto-immune disease; PLAT, tissue type plasminogen activator; and
CD79b, a component of the B-cell receptor complex, are presented. These results
demonstrate that amino acid motif databases like BLOCKS and InterPro are useful
tools for investigating how alternative transcript structure affects gene
function.

PMID: 15290774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Eur J Pediatr. 2004 Oct;163(10):604-11.

Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis and primary hypothyroidism in two families.

Myhre AG(1), Stray-Pedersen A, Spangen S, Eide E, Veimo D, Knappskog PM,
Abrahamsen TG, Husebye ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Akershus University Hospital, Nordbyhagen, Norway. 
anne.myhre@med.uib.no

We describe the clinical and immunological features of two families with chronic 
mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) and primary hypothyroidism. Family A includes
three siblings with both candidiasis and hypothyroidism and four individuals with
hypothyroidism only. Family B includes four members with candidiasis, of whom one
(a male child) also had hypothyroidism. All individuals affected with CMC had
suffered from oral candidiasis and onychomycosis since infancy. Facial seborrhoic
dermatitis, general folliculitis and scaling blepharitis were main
manifestations. Hypothyroidism became evident during childhood. No thyroid
antibodies were present in the affected siblings in family A, while the male in
family B with hypothyroidism had antibodies against thyroid peroxidase at
diagnosis. Immunological evaluation revealed intra-individual variations in serum
immunoglobulin levels, lymphocyte subsets and proliferative responses, but there 
were no consistent abnormalities. Vaccine responses were normal. AIRE gene region
microsatellite markers did not segregate with disease nor were autoantibodies
typical for autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 detected in the
families.CONCLUSION: The link between hypothyroidism and chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis remains to be identified.

PMID: 15290270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Lakartidningen. 2004 Jun 10;101(24):2096-8, 2101-3.

[APS I--a severe autoimmune disease with endocrine and non-endocrine symptoms].

[Article in Swedish]

Gustafsson J(1), Alimohammadi M, Ekwall O, Gebre-Medhin G, Halldin-Stenlid M,
Hedstrand H, Landgren E, Nilsson T, Rorsman F, Sköldberg F, Winqvist O, Kämpe O.

Author information: 
(1)Institutionen för kvinnors och barns hälsa, Akademiska barnsjukhuset, Uppsala,
Sweden. jan.gustafsson@kbh.uu.se

Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type I (APS I) is an autosomal recessive
disorder characterized by a combination of autoimmune manifestations affecting
endocrine and non-endocrine organs. APS I usually presents in childhood. The
three most common manifestations are chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis,
hypoparathyroidism and Addison's disease. At least two of these must be present
to fulfill the diagnostic criteria of this syndrome. The spectrum of other
associated diseases includes gonadal insufficiency, alopecia, vitiligo and
chronic active hepatitis. APS I is caused by a mutation in the AIRE-gene
(autoimmune regulator) located on chromosome 21. Analysis of specific
autoantibodies against intracellular enzymes, particularly enzymes in the
synthesis of steroids and neurotransmittors, can be used in the diagnosis of APS 
I and to predict different manifestations of the disease.

PMID: 15282984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Rev Med Interne. 2004 Aug;25(8):562-72.

[Thymus function and autoimmunity].

[Article in French]

Puissant B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'immunologie, hôpital Rangueil, 1, avenue Jean-Poulhès, TSA
50032, 31059 Toulouse 9, France. puissant.b@chu-toulouse.fr

PURPOSE: Thymus is the site of T-cell development and is essential for the
induction of self-tolerance, by deletion of autoreactive T lymphocytes (negative 
selection) and by generation of regulatory T cells. Defect of the selection
mechanism of both types of lymphocytes lead to autoimmune diseases.
CURRENT KNOWLEDGE AND KEY POINTS: Elimination of potentially self-reactive T
cells in the thymus requires the intrathymic expression of ubiquitous and
"tissue-specific" antigens. Some thymic antigen expressions are dependent on AIRE
expression. Mutations in the AIRE gene that are associated with the absence of
autoantigen expression in the thymus, defects in the peptide presentation or in
apoptosis can allow autoreactive T cells to escape negative selection, and are
associated with autoimmune diseases. Recent data are now available concerning the
thymic selection of autoreactive regulatory T cells. The Foxp3 gene was recently 
shown to be predominantly expressed in regulatory T cells and could be a more
specific marker of regulatory T cells than phenotypic markers.
FUTURE PROSPECTS AND PROJECTS: Animal models show that regulatory T cells
injection or intrathymic inoculation of antigen lead to immunological tolerance
in autoimmunity and transplantation. These novel strategies could be used in
human.

PMID: 15276288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jun;17(6):917-21.

Novel compound heterozygous AIRE mutations in a Japanese patient with APECED.

Sato U(1), Horikawa R, Katsumata N, Asakura Y, Kitanaka S, Tanaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, National
Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder defined by the presence of two of three conditions, 
namely, Addison's disease, hypoparathyroidism, and mucocutaneous candidiasis.
APECED is caused by alteration in a single gene, named the autoimmune regulator
(AIRE) gene. We report AIRE gene mutations in a Japanese female with APECED. The 
patient is a 22-year-old Japanese female who was diagnosed with Addison's
disease, hypoparathyroidism, and mucocutaneous candidiasis at age 8 years.
Sequence analysis of the AIRE gene revealed novel compound heterozygous
mutations. One was 1471 delCinsTT in exon 11 (GenBank accession no. AB006682),
which leads to a frameshift and premature truncation of a 502 amino acid protein.
The other was a G-->A transition at IVS11+1. Her mother was heterozygous for 1471
delCinsTT and was normal homozygous for IVS11+1. We found novel compound
heterozygous mutations in the AIRE gene of a Japanese female with APECED.

PMID: 15270412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Acta Med Croatica. 2004;58(2):129-34.

[ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor antagonists in acute coronary
syndrome].

[Article in Croatian]

Milicic D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Odjel za koronarnu intenzivnu skrb i aritmije, Klinika za bolesti srca i
krvnih zila, Klinicki bolnicki centar Zagreb, Kispaticeva ul. 12 10000 Zagreb,
Hrvatska.

Angiotensin II (AT II) is a final product of the renin-anglotensin-aldosterone
system (RAS) and presents one of the most influential factors in the pathogenesis
of atherosclerosis, acute coronary syndrome, myocardial dysfunction and heart
failure. ACE-inhibitors (ACEI), beside beta adrenergic blockers, are a
cornerstone of the current chronic heart failure (CHF) treatment. Evidence based 
medicine has not yet proved any significant beneficial effects of ACEI in
patients with unstable angina pectoris (UAP), although according to the SoLVD
study testing the possible effects of ACEI in patients with significant left
ventricular dysfunction and/or CHF, there was a significant hospitalization rate 
reduction as well as less transformation of UAP to myocardial infarction in
patients treated with ACEI. In the GISSI 3, ISIS 4 and CCS studies, ACEI was
given within the first 24 hours and continued for 4-6 weeks. According to pooled 
results, ACE inhibitor could save 11/1000 patients with ST-elevation myocardial
infarction (STEMI) and only 1/1000 patients with non ST-elevation myocardial
infarction (NSTEMI). In the SAVE, AIRE and TRACE studies, ACEI was started later,
i.e. 3-16 days after acute myocardial infarction and continued for several years.
ACEI therapy resulted in a significantly lower mortality during the first year,
and an even 20% relative reduction in the total mortality during the 4-year
follow up. The effects of ACEI were even more prominent in more severe myocardial
dysfunction, as it was well known that they could slow or stop unfavorable
myocardial remodeling. Conclusively, ACEI should be given as early as possible to
all patients with acute myocardial infarction, if no contraindications. The HOPE 
study showed efficacy of ACEI in the primary prevention of ischemic heart disease
in high risk individuals, and the EUROPA study showed a favorable effect of ACEI 
in the secondary prevention of ischemic heart disease in low risk patients.
According to these findings, ACEI should be given permenantly following
myocardial infarction. These findings suggest the need of a permanent treatment
with ACEI in patients having sustaned myocardial infarction. Angiotensin-1
receptor antagonists (AT-1 antagonists) are a newer generation of neurohormonal
antagonists, which block the effects of AT II produced not only through a
classic, ACE-dependent pathway but also via alternative pathways (non
ACE-dependent) and selectively bind to AT-1 receptors for AT II. Therefore, they 
have some theoretical advances in comparison with ACEI. There are 2 relevant
studies elucidating their possible role in treating patients with or
post-myocardial infarction. The OPTIMAAL study did not prove losartan to be
better than an ACEI (captopril), while the VALIANT study showed that the effects 
of valsartan vs. captopril were statistically nonsignificantly different.
Furthermore, there is no sense to combine AT-1 antagonist and ACEI, while a
combination of AT-1 antagonist and a beta blocker is justified. In other words,
AT-1 antagonist (the class effect is disputable) should be given to patients with
acute myocardial infarction or to post-myocardial infarction patients who cannot 
take ACEI.

PMID: 15208798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Hepatol. 2004 Jun;40(6):904-9.

Linkage disequilibrium between HLA class II region and autoimmune hepatitis in
pediatric patients.

Djilali-Saiah I(1), Renous R, Caillat-Zucman S, Debray D, Alvarez F.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Division, Hôpital Sainte-Justine, 3175, Côte
Sainte-Catherine, Montreal, Que., Canada. isaiah@justine.umontreal.ca

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Susceptibility HLA class II alleles associated with autoimmune
hepatitis (AIH) were only described in case-control studies.
METHODS: The transmission/disequilibrium test was used in 50 simplex families
with AIH, to determine if affected offspring received the disease-associated
allele more frequently than its alternate. HLA-DRB1 and DQB1 allele genotyping
and autoimmune regulator (AIRE) polymorphisms located in exons 6, 8 and 10 were
investigated by PCR-based methods.
RESULTS: HLA-DRB1*03 allele was significantly transmitted from heterozygous
parent to affected offspring (81.5%) with type 1 AIH compared to random expected 
frequency (50.0%; P=0.004) or to unaffected offspring (42.8%; P=0.03).
HLA-DRB1*1301 allele showed an excess transmission to affected children (100%)
than expected frequency (P<0.0001) or unaffected offspring (P=0.001). The
transmission of DQB1*201 or DQB1*0603 alleles showed significant deviation in
patients compared to random frequencies: (84.8%; P<0.0001 for DQB1*0201 or 100%; 
P<0.0001 for DQB1*0603). HLA-DQB1*0201 showed a strong association with type 2
AIH in children (100.0%, P=0.0005).
CONCLUSIONS: HLA-DRB1 gene is the major genetic determinant in HLA class II
region for children with type 1 AIH. Type 2 AIH is associated with the
HLA-DQB1gene. Finally, AIRE gene abnormality does not contribute to the
development of isolated AIH.

PMID: 15158329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Clin Lab Med. 2004 Mar;24(1):305-17.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 and the autoimmune regulator.

Ruan QG(1), She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine, Medical College of Georgia,
1120 15th Street, Augusta, GA 30912-2400, USA.

The autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type I (APSI) is an auto-somal recessive
disorder that is characterized by chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, multiple
autoimmune endocrinopathies, and ectodermal dystrophies. The gene that is
responsible for APSI has been identified as autoimmune regulator (AIRE). More
than 50 different mutations have been discovered in patients who have APSI and
the defects include nonsense and missense mutations, small insertions and
deletions that lead to frameshift, and splice site mutations. The 545-amino acid 
protein that is encoded by AIRE contains several structural motifs that are
suggestive of a transcriptional regulator. We provide an overview of the clinical
and genetic features ofAPSI as well as the structure and functions of the AIRE
protein.

PMID: 15157567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 6;279(32):33984-91. Epub 2004 May 17.

Subcellular expression of autoimmune regulator is organized in a spatiotemporal
manner.

Akiyoshi H(1), Hatakeyama S, Pitkänen J, Mouri Y, Doucas V, Kudoh J, Tsurugaya K,
Uchida D, Matsushima A, Oshikawa K, Nakayama KI, Shimizu N, Peterson P, Matsumoto
M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, University of
Tokushima, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is responsible for the development of organ-specific 
autoimmune disease in a monogenic fashion. Rare and low levels of tissue
expression together with the lack of AIRE-expressing cell lines have hampered a
detailed analysis of the molecular dynamics of AIRE. Here we have established
cell lines stably transfected with AIRE and studied the regulatory mechanisms for
its subcellular expression. We found that nuclear body (NB) formation by AIRE was
dependent on the cell cycle. Biochemical fractionation revealed that a
significant proportion of AIRE is associated with the nuclear matrix, which
directs the functional domains of chromatin to provide sites for gene regulation.
Upon proteasome inhibition, AIRE NBs were increased with concomitant reduced
expression in the cytoplasm, suggesting that subcellular targeting of AIRE is
regulated by a ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. We also found that AIRE NBs compete 
for cAMP-response element-binding protein-binding protein/p300, a common
coactivator of transcription, with the promyelocytic leukemia gene product. These
results suggest that the transcriptional regulating activities of AIRE within a
cell are controlled and organized in a spatiotemporal manner.

PMID: 15150263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jun 11;318(4):935-40.

Aire downregulates multiple molecules that have contradicting immune-enhancing
and immune-suppressive functions.

Sato K(1), Sato U, Tateishi S, Kubo K, Horikawa R, Mimura T, Yamamoto K, Kanda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine and
Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655,
Japan. satok.cell@tmd.ac.jp

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a
systemic disease with autoimmune characteristics caused by mutations in a single 
gene called AIRE. Although a defect in negative selection has been emphasized for
the pathogenesis of the autoimmune symptoms on the basis of studies of
Aire-targeted mice, the function of the gene in the peripheral immune system and 
the cause of immunodeficiency noted in the disease have not been clarified yet.
In this study, we demonstrated using murine Aire transfectants that Aire
downregulates IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra), which is important for immune
suppression, and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules, which
are critical for acquired immunity. It was surprising to learn that Aire, which
has been supposed to positively regulate transcription, downregulates multiple
molecules. This downregulation of IL-1Ra and MHC class II molecules seems to be
caused by the competition for transcriptional coactivator, CREB-binding protein
(CBP), and may explain part of the contradictory (i.e., both autoimmune and
immunodeficient) nature of APECED.

PMID: 15147962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Eur J Immunogenet. 2004 Apr;31(2):83-6.

No significant association between mutations in exons 6 and 8 of the autoimmune
regulator (AIRE) gene and inflammatory bowel disease.

Török HP(1), Tonenchi L, Glas J, Schiemann U, Folwaczny C.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Policlinic, University Hospital Immenstadt, Munich, Germany.

Various autoantibodies have been described in patients with inflammatory bowel
disease. The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) functions as a transcription factor in
cells responsible for the induction and maintenance of immunological tolerance.
In contrast to classic autoimmune disorders, polymorphisms of the AIRE gene are
not associated with inflammatory bowel disease, despite the presence of
disease-specific autoantibodies.

PMID: 15086348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Orv Hetil. 2004 Feb 29;145(9):461-5.

[Preventive therapy with ACE inhibitors for coronary patients].

[Article in Hungarian]

Keltai M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Semmelweis Egyetem, Altalános Orvostudományi Kar, Kardiológiai Tanszék,
Budapest. keltai@kardio.hu

The results of the major clinical outcome trials related to the potential
antiatherosclerotic effects of the angiotensin convertase (ACE) inhibitors are
reviewed after the recently published EUROPA trial results. In the postinfarction
clinical situation mortality reduction was revealed in the ISIS-4 (captopril),
GISSI-3 (lisinopril), AIRE (ramipril), TRACE (trandolapril), CONSENSUS
(enalapril), SAVE (captopril) and in the SOLVD (enalapril) trials. In the HOPE
trial performed in a high risk population the preventive antiatherosclerotic,
endothel-preserving effects of ramipril resulted in a significant mortality and
morbidity reduction. In the EUROPA trial a lower risk population--symptomfree
coronary patients--were treated by perindopril, and it was proven also in this
cohort, that the long term ACE inhibitor treatment decreased the combined
endpoint of cardiovascular mortality, myocardial infarction and resuscitated
sudden death. Based on the above data it can be advised, that all coronary
patients regardless of left ventricular function and symptoms should receive long
term ACE inhibitor treatment besides the other established preventive medications
(platelet aggregation inhibitors + statins + beta receptor blockers).

PMID: 15077477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Res Vet Sci. 2004 Jun;76(3):243-7.

Epithelial response to experimentally introduced intraluminal bacteria in the
avian epididymal ducts.

Aire TA(1), van Wilpe E, Josling D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Onderstepoort 0110, South Africa. tom.aire@up.ac.za

The response of the epithelial cells of the various ducts of the avian
epididymis, whose function is poorly understood, to intraluminal bacteria was
evaluated by the injection of an avirulent strain of Salmonella gallinarium into 
the RT for 24 h. Ultrastructurally, bacteria and invading mononuclear cells were 
present in the lumina of the RT, proximal efferent ducts (PED) and distal
efferent ducts. However, only the non-ciliated (Type I) cells of the PED
epithelium ingested bacteria from the lumen. Fragments of bacteria also occurred 
in several intercellular spaces in the epithelium of the PED. Some mononuclear
cells also contained fragments of bacteria. Neither cell death in the various
epithelia nor mononuclear infiltration of the periductal tissue occurred.
Therefore, in addition to the established function of absorbing most of the
testicular fluid entering the epididymis, the Type I cells also appear capable of
recognising and removing foreign particulate matter from the epididymal
through-flow in the proximal part of the epididymis.

PMID: 15046959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Curr Diab Rep. 2004 Apr;4(2):135-42.

New autoimmune genes and the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes.

Hornum L(1), Markholst H.

Author information: 
(1)Type 1 Pharmacology, Hagedorn Research Institute, Niels Steensens Vej 6,
DK-2820 Gentofte, Denmark. hmar@hagedorn.dk

Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease with a complex polygenic inheritance.
Until recently, only three susceptibility genes had been reproducibly identified,
namely HLA, INS-VNTR, and CTLA4. During the past 7 years, a number of new
putative susceptibility genes have been isolated from both human and animal
models of the disease. We present eight genes implicated in type 1 diabetes
etiology and discuss them in relation to the pathogenesis of the disease: VDR,
IL6, IL12B, AIRE, FOXP3, B2m, Cblb, and Lyp/Ian4l1.

PMID: 15035974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Curr Opin Immunol. 2004 Apr;16(2):197-202.

Good riddance: Thymocyte clonal deletion prevents autoimmunity.

Venanzi ES(1), Benoist C, Mathis D.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin Diabetes Center, Department
of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 1 Joslin
Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Clonal deletion is arguably the most important mechanism of eliminating
self-reactive thymocytes from the T-cell repertoire. Recent work has identified
new players in this process. On the thymocyte side, several molecules have been
newly implicated in the pathway from initial T-cell receptor signaling through to
the final result: gene transcription and thymocyte apoptosis. In addition,
several proapoptotic molecules have been found to be necessary for the death of
self-reactive thymocytes. On the antigen-presenting cell side, the expression of 
peripheral self-antigens, regulated at least in part by the autoimmune regulator 
(AIRE) protein, is crucial for complete elimination of autoreactive thymocytes.
The importance of thymic peripheral antigen expression and clonal deletion to
self-tolerance is demonstrated in the autoimmune diseases
autoimmune-polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy and type-1
diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 15023413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Hum Mutat. 2004 Mar;23(3):245-57.

APECED-causing mutations in AIRE reveal the functional domains of the protein.

Halonen M(1), Kangas H, Rüppell T, Ilmarinen T, Ollila J, Kolmer M, Vihinen M,
Palvimo J, Saarela J, Ulmanen I, Eskelin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, 
Finland. maria.halonen@helsinki.fi

A defective form of the AIRE protein causes autoimmune destruction of target
organs by disturbing the immunological tolerance of patients with a rare
monogenic disease, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy (APE)-candidiasis (C)-ectodermal
dystrophy (ED), APECED. Recently, experiments on knockout mice revealed that AIRE
controls autoimmunity by regulating the transcription of peripheral
tissue-restricted antigens in thymic medullary epithelial cells. Thus, AIRE
provides a unique model for molecular studies of organ-specific autoimmunity. In 
order to analyze the molecular and cellular consequences of 16 disease-causing
mutations in vitro, we studied the subcellular localization, transactivation
capacity, homomultimerization, and complex formation of several mutant AIRE
polypeptides. Most of the mutations altered the nucleus-cytoplasm distribution of
AIRE and disturbed its association with nuclear dots and cytoplasmic filaments.
While the PHD zinc fingers were necessary for the transactivation capacity of
AIRE, other regions of AIRE also modulated this function. Consequently, most of
the mutations decreased transactivation. The HSR domain was responsible for the
homomultimerization activity of AIRE; all the missense mutations of the HSR and
the SAND domains decreased this activity, but those in other domains did not. The
AIRE protein was present in soluble high-molecular-weight complexes. Mutations in
the HSR domain and deletion of PHD zinc fingers disturbed the formation of these 
complexes. In conclusion, we propose an in vitro model in which AIRE
transactivates transcription through heteromeric molecular interactions that are 
regulated by homomultimerization and conditional localization of AIRE in the
nucleus or in the cytoplasm.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14974083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Br Poult Sci. 2003 Dec;44(5):674-82.

Ultrastructural study of spermiogenesis in the turkey, Meleagris gallopavo.

Aire TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Onderstepoort, Republic of South Africa.
tom.aire@up.ac.za

1. Ultrastructural changes that take place in the spermatids of the turkey were
studied. Twelve steps of spermiogenesis are described. 2. Acrosomal formation is 
similar to that in the domestic fowl and quail. The perforatorium develops as a
dense granule in a tubular invagination of the thickened part of the nuclear
membrane during the acrosomal phase of spermatid development. 3. Patchy
appearances of the circular (CM) and longitudinal (LM) manchette occur
concurrently for a very brief period before the complete disappearance of the
former and full establishment of the latter, an indication that the CM
reorganises to become the LM. 4. A chromatoid body, as found in mammals, is
present in the mid-piece of the turkey spermatid, and glycogen aggregations occur
in the spermatid cytoplasm, but not in the mature spermatid or spermatozoon. 5.
Mitochondrial alignment around the axoneme in the mid-piece takes place only
after the dissolution of the LM, unlike in the Japanese quail. 6. The merits and 
disadvantages of the 4-phase and step-wise systems of spermatid classification
and evaluation are discussed.

PMID: 14965087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Pathol. 2004 Feb;202(2):180-7.

A comparative study of mRNA and protein expression of the autoimmune regulator
gene (Aire) in embryonic and adult murine tissues.

Adamson KA(1), Pearce SH, Lamb JR, Seckl JR, Howie SE.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Group, MRC Centre for Inflammation Research, University of
Edinburgh, Medical School, Teviot Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9AG, UK.
K.A.Adamson@ed.ac.uk

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS1) is a rare autosomal recessive
human disorder caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE) and
characterized by multiple autoimmune diseases. As reports of the tissue
expression pattern of the murine Aire gene are discordant, a comprehensive survey
of Aire expression was undertaken in adult and embryonic tissues at the mRNA and 
protein levels using real-time RT-PCR, in situ hybridization, and
immunohistochemistry. In the adult, the highest Aire mRNA expression was in the
thymus. All the other tissues investigated expressed Aire mRNA at low levels, but
it was barely detectable in the adrenal gland. Aire protein expression was
observed in the thymus, spleen, and lymph nodes. A common pattern was observed in
other tissues, with staining in epithelial cells. An exception to this was the
gut, where staining was seen in the mucin spaces. In embryonic tissue, Aire mRNA 
and protein expression was detected from E14.5 in the thymus. In the fetal liver,
unlike the adult, staining was observed at E14.5 and decreased towards term.
Thus, Aire is expressed in immunologically relevant tissues and in a restricted
number of extra-immunological tissues in the adult. Furthermore, the presence of 
Aire protein is reported in extra-thymic tissues of the embryo.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 14743500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Exp Med. 2004 Jan 19;199(2):167-72.

AIRE functions as an E3 ubiquitin ligase.

Uchida D(1), Hatakeyama S, Matsushima A, Han H, Ishido S, Hotta H, Kudoh J,
Shimizu N, Doucas V, Nakayama KI, Kuroda N, Matsumoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, University of
Tokushima, 3-18-15 Kuramoto, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene mutation is responsible for the development of
autoimmune-polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy, an organ-specific
autoimmune disease with monogenic autosomal recessive inheritance. AIRE is
predominantly expressed in medullary epithelial cells of the thymus and is
considered to play important roles in the establishment of self-tolerance. AIRE
contains two plant homeodomain (PHD) domains, and the novel role of PHD as an E3 
ubiquitin (Ub) ligase has just emerged. Here we show that the first PHD (PHD1) of
AIRE mediates E3 ligase activity. The significance of this finding was
underscored by the fact that disease-causing missense mutations in the PHD1
(C311Y and P326Q) abolished its E3 ligase activity. These results add a novel
enzymatic function for AIRE and suggest an indispensable role of the Ub
proteasome pathway in the establishment of self-tolerance, in which AIRE is
involved.

PMCID: PMC2211764
PMID: 14734522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 Nov;1005:431-5.

AIRE-1 (autoimmune regulator type 1) as a regulator of the thymic induction of
negative selection.

Park Y(1), Moon Y, Chung HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Microbiology, Hanyang University Hospital,
Seoul, Korea. parkys@hanyang.ac.kr

The monogenic autoimmune syndrome, APS-1 (autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 
1), is characterized by the loss of self-tolerance to multiple organs. Although
mutations in the AIRE (autoimmune regulator) gene are responsible for the APS-1, 
the function of AIRE is not known. AIRE may determine thymic induction of
tolerance to self-antigens in multiple organs. To study the function of AIRE in
induction of self-tolerance, an in vitro negative selection system was made using
10(6) DO11.10 TCR transgenic thymocytes, 10(5) antigen-presenting cells (APC),
and the different constructs of ovalbumin (OVA). In this system, the addition of 
the immunodominant epitopes of OVA peptide, the antigenic ligand for the DO11.10,
made the thymocytes apoptotic and negatively selected. Overexpression of the AIRE
gene in APC using retroviral transduction did not cause more thymocytes to become
apoptotic. However, the suppression of the expression of AIRE in APC using the
dominant-negative gene made the recovery rates of the thymocytes higher than
those with the expression of LacZ as a control, and consequently inducing loss of
self-tolerance. From these studies, it might be possible to suggest that the AIRE
gene might regulate thymic induction of the negative selection process. The
target genes for transcriptional regulation by AIRE have been investigated to
study the influence of AIRE expression on other proteins in antigen presentation.
The expression level of B7.1 was higher in APC expressing the dominant-negative
form of AIRE. The target gene regulated by AIRE in transcription will be screened
using cDNA microarray.

PMID: 14679106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Pediatr Diabetes. 2003 Sep;4(3):151-4.

Life-threatening autoimmunity with diabetes: management with an insulin pump.

Franklin VL(1), Torrance T, Peebles M, Wilkie R, Greene S.

Author information: 
(1)Maternal and Child Health Sciences, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School,
Dundee DD1 9SY, UK. v.franklin@dundee.ac.uk

A 2-yr-old boy presented initially with type 1 diabetes (T1D). Over the next 9
yrs, he developed multiple autoimmune conditions including Evans' syndrome,
alopecia, and autoimmune bowel disease. Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy,
candidiasis, ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) syndrome was considered, but no
mutations were found in the autoimmune regulator-1 (AIRE-1) gene, making this
diagnosis unlikely, and he did not fulfill the clinical criteria for immune
dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked (IPEX) syndrome. We
describe the challenges created by the combination of these diseases and how
introduction of insulin pump therapy revolutionized his care.

PMID: 14655274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Curr Opin Immunol. 2003 Dec;15(6):718-24.

Transcription factors in autoimmunity.

Ramsdell F(1), Ziegler SF.

Author information: 
(1)Celltech R&D, Inc, 1631 220th Street SE, Bothell, WA 98021, USA.
sziegler@vmresearch.org

The identification of two transcription factors that, when mutated, are
responsible for severe autoimmune disease in humans is leading to a better
understanding of the fundamental processes involved in T-cell tolerance. Both
AIRE and FOXP3, identified initially via their association with genetically
manipulated mice, are critically involved in tolerance induction in humans.
Although mutations in these genes may cause rare but serious diseases, it is
likely that other transcription factors will contribute to the genetic load that 
predisposes certain individuals to disease.

PMID: 14630208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Curr Opin Immunol. 2003 Dec;15(6):668-76.

Negative selection and autoimmunity.

Ohashi PS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute, University Health Network, 610 University Avenue,
Toronto ON M5G 2M9 Canada.

Erratum in
    Curr Opin Immunol. 2004 Oct;16(5):673.

The impaired elimination of self-reactive T cells is one factor that contributes 
to autoimmunity. Although the mechanism of thymic negative selection has been
studied for decades, recent data demonstrate that the mechanisms underlying this 
fundamental process remain extremely controversial. Nonetheless, new models such 
as the Aire-deficient mice have demonstrated the importance of thymic negative
selection in autoimmune disease progression in mice and humans.

PMID: 14630201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Eur Respir J. 2003 Oct;22(4):709-11.

Fatal primary pulmonary hypertension in a 30-yr-old female with APECED syndrome.

Korniszewski L(1), Kurzyna M, Stolarski B, Torbicki A, Smerdel A, Ploski R.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Pediatrics, Section of Diabetology and Birth Defects, Warsaw Medical
Academy, Warsaw, Poland.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is caused
by mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene, which has a central
function in maintaining immunological tolerance. A number of conditions with
proven or likely autoimmune pathogenesis occur in APECED: hypoparathyroidism,
adrenocortical insufficency, candidiasis, hypogonadism, type 1 diabetes,
hypothyroidism, hypophysitis, hepatitis, malabsorption, nail dystrophy, enamel
hypoplasia and keratopathy. It is not clear which factors are responsible for
variation in clinical picture of APECED, but human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
genotype may be important. The authors report the first description of a case of 
primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH) in patient with APECED, caused by R257X
mutation in AIRE. The HLA genotype of the patient (DRB1*01/DRB1*11,
DQB1*0301/DQB1*0501) has been previously reported as a predisposing factor to
PPH. The findings from this study, provided that other similar cases are
reported, suggest that immune deregulation plays a role in the pathogenesis of
primary pulmonary hypertension.

PMID: 14582926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Oct;88(10):4602-8.

The hypoparathyroidism of autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal
dystrophy protective effect of male sex.

Gylling M(1), Kääriäinen E, Väisänen R, Kerosuo L, Solin ML, Halme L, Saari S,
Halonen M, Kämpe O, Perheentupa J, Miettinen A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, University of Helsinki, FIN-00014
Helsinki, Finland.

In autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy,
hypoparathyroidism (HP) is the most common endocrine component. It occurs in most
(but not all) patients. Determinants of its occurrence are unknown, and there is 
no proof for its autoimmune nature. Recently, the Ca(2+)-sensing receptor (CaSR) 
was reported to be an autoantigen in HP. With our group of 90 patients, we aimed 
at identifying the determinants and pathomechanism of HP. For the determinants,
we evaluated gender and the HLA class II. For the pathomechanism, we searched for
parathyroid autoantibodies, including antibodies against CaSR and PTH. Also, we
studied whether AIRE is expressed in the human parathyroid, because its absence
could be a pathogenetic factor. We found a clear gender linkage with lower and
later incidence in males. Of the 14 patients who had escaped HP, 13 were males.
This was associated with adrenal failure, which was the first or only
endocrinopathy in 47% of males vs. 7% of females. In contrast, we found no
linkage to the HLA class II. By immunofluorescence, 19% of the patients had
antibodies to parathyroid epithelia. By immunoblotting, these recognized several 
parathyroid proteins. No antibodies were observed against the CaSR or PTH. By
RT-PCR, AIRE mRNA was not found in the parathyroid.

PMID: 14557429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Oct;88(10):4576-85.

Reversible metaphyseal dysplasia, a novel bone phenotype, in two unrelated
children with autoimmunepolyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy:
clinical and molecular studies.

Harris M(1), Kecha O, Deal C, Howlett CR, Deiss D, Tobias V, Simoneau-Roy J,
Walker J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick, New South
Wales 2031, Australia.

We report the association of an undescribed, reversible metaphyseal dysplasia
(RMD) with autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED) in two patients, one homozygous and one heterozygous for a 13-bp
deletion in exon 8 of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. One patient also had 
a novel deletion in exon 6, resulting in a frameshift mutation and introduction
of a STOP codon in exon 10. Their APECED phenotypes differed, but both patients
developed progressive skeletal deformities and growth failure from early
childhood. Radiological examination suggested a generalized abnormality of
endochondral ossification, with irregular, flared, radioopaque regions in the
metaphyses, subjacent to the growth plates. Histopathology in patient 1 showed
islands of calcified cartilage within bone, consistent with impaired coupling of 
cartilage resorption with vascular invasion and ossification. Despite discordance
for puberty, both patients experienced radiological resolution of their bone
disease in their mid-teens, with improvement in histopathology in patient 1. RMD 
may constitute a rare phenotypic variation of APECED, possibly resulting from
autoimmunity directed against skeletal proteins. We also demonstrated AIRE
expression in chondrocytes derived from human fetal growth plates, primary
culture of human chondrocytes, and two chondrosarcoma cell lines, suggesting a
potential role for abnormal AIRE expression in the development of RMD.

PMID: 14557425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Anat Embryol (Berl). 2003 Dec;207(4-5):355-61. Epub 2003 Oct 7.

The morphological features of the rete testis of the ostrich (Struthio camelus).

Aire TA(1), Soley JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Private Bag X 04, 0110 Onderstepoort, Republic of South
Africa. taire@op.up.ac.za

The epithelium of the rete testis of the ostrich is simple cuboidal to columnar
in nature, unlike the more flattened epithelium encountered in other
non-passerine birds. A solitary cilium projects into the ductal lumen. A unique
lateral cell membrane modification, similar, in some respects, to a
hemi-desmosome, occurs frequently along the length of this membrane. The lateral 
cell membrane is complexly folded, and the cell contains an abundance of
intermediate filaments, particularly in the vicinity of the nucleus and the
internal surface of the basal cell membrane. The Golgi complex and endoplasmic
reticulum are moderately developed. Another unique feature of the cell is the
presence of a solitary, large, heterogeneous lipid body/droplet situated in the
immediate supranuclear region of the cell. Overall, the cell structure conveys
the impression of a metabolically active cell, which has the capability of
transporting material from the duct lumen to the basal part of the cell, and of
protein synthesis, apparently much in excess of what is necessary for cellular
maintenance and sustenance.

PMID: 14530972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Nat Immunol. 2003 Nov;4(11):1121-7. Epub 2003 Sep 28.

Lymphotoxin pathway directs thymic Aire expression.

Chin RK(1), Lo JC, Kim O, Blink SE, Christiansen PA, Peterson P, Wang Y, Ware C, 
Fu YX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Committee in Immunology, The University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The autoimmune regulator Aire is a key mediator of central tolerance for
peripherally restricted antigens. Its absence in human patients results in
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy. The cellular
signals that regulate Aire expression are undefined. We show here that
lymphotoxin signaling is necessary for the expression of Aire and its downstream 
target genes. The failure of Aire induction in the thymi of lymphotoxin-deficient
and lymphotoxin-beta receptor-deficient mice contributes to overt autoimmunity
against self antigens normally protected by Aire. Conversely, stimulation of
lymphotoxin-beta receptor by agonistic antibody leads to increased expression of 
Aire and tissue-restricted antigens in both intact thymi and cultured thymic
epithelial cell line. These findings define the essential cross-talk between
thymocytes and thymic stroma that is required for central tolerance.

PMID: 14517552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Water Res. 2003 Jul;37(13):3145-54.

Environmental fate of Triclosan in the River Aire Basin, UK.

Sabaliunas D(1), Webb SF, Hauk A, Jacob M, Eckhoff WS.

Author information: 
(1)Procter & Gamble Technical Centers Ltd., Rusham Park, Whitehall Lane, Egham,
Surrey, TW20 9NW, UK. sabaliunas.d@pg.com

The concentrations and removal rate of Triclosan, an antibacterial ingredient in 
consumer products, were measured at advanced trickling filter (TF) and activated 
sludge (AS) wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) in the River Aire basin in the UK
in September 2000. Additionally, the in-stream removal of Triclosan was measured 
directly in Mag Brook, the stream receiving the treated effluent from the TF
plant, using a fluorescent dye tracer to determine the water plug travel times.
The in-stream removal of the dissolved and un-ionized (i.e. bioavailable)
fraction of the compound was measured using semipermeable membrane devices
(SPMDs) deployed at various distances downstream from the WWTP discharge point.
The estimated removal rates were used in the GREAT-ER (Geography-Referenced
Regional Exposure Assessment Tool for European Rivers) model to predict the
site-specific distribution of Triclosan concentrations in the Aire basin as well 
as to calculate regional concentrations. High WWTP (approximately 95%) and
in-stream (0.21-0.33 h-1) removal rates of Triclosan in Mag Brook confirm that
this chemical is rapidly eliminated from the aquatic environment.

PMID: 14509701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Sci Total Environ. 2003 Oct 1;314-316:513-34.

Fingerprinting suspended sediment sources in a large urban river system.

Carter J(1), Owens PN, Walling DE, Leeks GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geography, University of Exeter, Exeter, Devon EX4 4RJ, UK.

Very few studies have attempted to quantify the sources of suspended sediment
transported in urban river systems. In this study, statistically verified
composite fingerprints and a multivariate mixing model have been used to identify
the main sources of the suspended sediment transported by the River Aire and its 
main tributary, the River Calder. Because of the polluted nature of the
Aire/Calder catchment and its effect on fingerprint property concentrations,
source tracing was undertaken separately for the upper and lower reaches. The
mean contributions from individual source types (i.e. surface materials from
woodland, uncultivated and cultivated areas, channel bank material, road dust and
solids from sewage treatment works) varied between the upper and lower reaches of
the rivers, reflecting the change in land use from primarily pasture and moorland
in the upper reaches to mainly urban areas (with some cultivated land) in the
lower reaches. The suspended sediment in the upper reaches of the River Aire
originates largely from channel bank sources (43-84%) and from uncultivated
topsoil (16-57%). In the lower reaches of the Aire/Calder system, local sources
of cultivated topsoil contribute 20-45% of the suspended sediment load and there 
is a significant contribution from urban sources, such as road dust (19-22%) and 
solids from sewage treatment works (14-18%). In the upper reaches, the proportion
of sediment derived from each of the two main geological areas corresponds
broadly to the proportion of the catchment occupied by each geological area. The 
relative contribution from the Rivers Aire and Calder to the suspended sediment
load transported below the confluence demonstrates that most of the sediment is
derived from the River Calder.

PMID: 14499548  [PubMed]


267. Sci Total Environ. 2003 Oct 1;314-316:495-512.

The impact of a convectional summer rainfall event on river flow and fine
sediment transport in a highly urbanised catchment: Bradford, West Yorkshire.

Old GH(1), Leeks GJ, Packman JC, Smith BP, Lewis S, Hewitt EJ, Holmes M, Young A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Maclean Building, Crowmarsh Gifford,
Wallingford, Oxon OX10 8BB, UK. gho@ceh.ac.uk

Urban watercourses are important assets to cities, but they often have extremely 
'flashy' hydraulic regimes and poor water quality, making them potential hazards.
Current knowledge of the impact of intense rainfall events on urban river water
discharge and, in particular, fine sediment transport is limited. Continuous
monitoring of flow and turbidity (subsequently calibrated to suspended sediment
concentration) was undertaken at a network of four sites throughout the highly
urbanised Bradford catchment in West Yorkshire, NE England. An intense
convectional rainfall event, which occurred over central Bradford in June 2001,
generated extreme flow and fine sediment transport responses at the most
downstream site, Shipley Weir. In just 15 min, discharge increased from 0.45 to
34.6 m(3) s(-1) (median annual peak instantaneous discharge of 27.5 m(3) s(-1),
1983-2001) and suspended sediment concentration increased from 14 to 1,360 mg
l(-1). A peak sediment flux of 47.2 kg s(-1) was recorded. It is demonstrated
that this extremely large and urban flux of fine sediment is likely to have a
major downstream impact on water quality in the River Aire.

PMID: 14499547  [PubMed]


268. Sci Total Environ. 2003 Oct 1;314-316:439-50.

PCB congener dynamics in a heavily industrialized river catchment.

Meharg AA(1), Wright J, Leeks GJ, Wass PD, Owens PN, Walling DE, Osborn D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Ecology and Hydrology, Monks Wood, Abbots Ripton, Huntingdon,
Cambridgeshire PE17 2LS, UK. a.meharg@abdn.ac.uk

PCB congener concentrations in the water column of a highly industrialized river 
catchment, the Aire/Calder, in N.E. England were determined weekly on a routine
basis, and 2 hourly through selected high flow (flood) events. Bed, suspended and
floodplain sediment PCB congener concentrations were also determined along
transects of the rivers investigated. Weekly monitoring revealed that the sum of 
11 quantified (Sigma11) PCBs rose in concentration by two orders of magnitude
during late summer compared to their winter minimum values. This rise was
concurrent with sustained periods of low flow. SigmaPCB concentrations were
rapidly diluted during high flow (flood) events. Suspended sediment was, on
average, 13 times more contaminated with PCBs than bed sediment, with means of
4.0 and 53.8 ng/g, respectively, while floodplain samples had an intermediate
concentration of 29.8 ng/g. Principle components analysis (PCA) of congener
profiles showed that all three sediment types were similar, but that congener
profiles differed considerably between sediment and whole-water samples. There
was no change in the percentage contribution of individual PCB congeners apparent
from weekly whole-water monitoring. However, the congener pattern in whole-waters
changed systematically during high flow events. PCA showed that whole-water
samples collected during high flow events had progressively more sediment
characteristics, and then returned to whole-water characteristics on cessation of
the event. The PCA evidence, dilution of PCB concentrations during events, and
suspended sediments more contaminated than bed sediments, indicate that the major
sources of PCBs in this catchment are current inputs from sewage treatment works,
rather than remobilization of bed sediments.

PMID: 14499544  [PubMed]


269. Sci Total Environ. 2003 Oct 1;314-316:397-409.

LOIS in-stream water quality modelling. Part 2. Results and scenarios.

Boorman DB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Wallingford, Oxfordshire OX10 8BB, UK.
dbb@ceh.ac.uk

The catchment and river modelling undertaken within the UK Land Ocean Interaction
Study programme represents the most extensive consistent exercise of this type
undertaken in the UK. The calibrated model provides a quantitative assessment of 
the water and chemical fluxes transported by the rivers Derwent, Yorkshire Ouse, 
Wharfe, Aire, Don and Trent into the Humber estuary. These fluxes have been
partitioned according to source (diffuse or point) for each basin, and a number
of determinands. Total nitrogen from diffuse sources ranged from 92% on the
largely agricultural Derwent to 38% from the industrial Don catchment. Even on
catchments dominated by diffuse sources, point sources can contribute most during
summer months. A quantitative assessment of the effect of in-stream processes
suggests that denitrification can remove up to 40% of the total nitrogen entering
the river system. A climate change scenario representing the 2050s revealed major
changes in flow patterns, with all rivers showing a faster return to zero soil
moisture deficit in the autumn and increased winter runoff, but a mixed picture
of enhanced and reduced summer flows. Many associated fluxes may also increase,
but long-term mean concentrations reduce because of the increased flows. The
effect of the scenario on a river ecosystem classification was minor. Fertilizer 
reduction scenarios showed that even a large reduction in N applied as fertilizer
(50%) resulted in much smaller reductions in the load delivered to the Humber
estuary (6-16%).

PMID: 14499542  [PubMed]


270. Sci Total Environ. 2003 Oct 1;314-316:379-95.

LOIS in-stream water quality modelling. Part 1. Catchments and methods.

Boorman DB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Wallingford, Oxfordshire OX10 8BB, UK.
dbb@ceh.ac.uk

The catchment and river modelling undertaken within the UK Land Ocean Interaction
Study (LOIS) programme represents the most extensive consistent exercise of this 
type undertaken in the UK. The calibrated model provides a quantitative
assessment of the water and chemical fluxes transported by the rivers Derwent,
Yorkshire Ouse, Wharfe, Aire, Don and Trent into the Humber estuary, i.e. a total
drainage area of almost 18,000 km2 (almost 15% of the area of England) with 2,088
km of modelled river. The model simulated flow, temperature, pH, suspended
sediment, dissolved oxygen, biochemical oxygen demand, particulate organic
nitrogen, ammonium, ammonia, nitrite, nitrate, zinc (dissolved and particulate), 
lindane and atrazine. For all rivers, except the Trent, simulations were for the 
period 1985-1995; the simulation period for the Trent was 1998-1995. The
modelling used routine monitoring data collect by the England and Wales
Environment Agency, for both calibration and validation, with other data sets
mainly collated by the LOIS River-Atmosphere Coastal Study (RACS) data centre
(e.g. land use, soils, river network). A stepwise model development started with 
a basic water quality model driven by observed in-stream water quality, and
resulted in the development of a LOIS specific version of the in-stream model
Quality Evaluation and Simulation Tool for River-systems that could be used to
explore scenarios. The performance of the model was demonstrated by the
reproduction of long-term statistics describing loads and concentrations,
together with graphical output in the form of time series and distributions. The 
simulations were subsequently used to drive a linked
catchment-river-estuary-coast-sea model covering the full domain of the RACS
area.

PMID: 14499541  [PubMed]


271. Sci Total Environ. 2003 Oct 1;314-316:271-88.

Linear alkylbenzene sulfonate and boron monitoring in four catchments in the UK
contribution to GREAT-ER #11.

Holt MS(1), Fox KK, Daniel M, Buckland H.

Author information: 
(1)ECETOC, Av. E. Van Nieuwenhuyse 4 Bte 6, B-1160, Brussels, Belgium.
martin.holt@ecetoc.org

A comprehensive monitoring programme was carried out in the Aire, Calder, Went
and Rother catchments in the UK. A total of 804 effluent samples from 36 sewage
treatment works (STWs) and 1100 water samples from 54 river sampling sites were
analysed. Concentrations of linear alkylbenzene sulfonate (LAS), boron and other 
water quality determinands in STW effluent and river waters over a 2-year period 
(August 1996-August 1998) are reported. The data illustrate the temporal and
spatial variations in concentrations of LAS and boron in river waters and
effluents. Concentrations of LAS in effluents reflect the biological treatment
employed and the influence of tertiary treatment is clearly demonstrated.

PMID: 14499537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2003 Aug;111(5):288-93.

Lupus-like panniculitis in a patient with autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED).

Füchtenbusch M(1), Vogel A, Achenbach P, Gummer M, Ziegler AG, Albert E, Standl
E, Manns MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Gastroenterology, Academic
Hospital München-Schwabing, Munich, Germany.
martin.fuechtenbusch@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder, characterised by a loss of self-tolerance to
endocrine tissues, chronic candidiasis and ectodermal disorders. APECED is
associated with mutations of a single gene, designated autoimmune regulator
(AIRE). We describe a 31-year-old APECED patient with non-traumatic, cutaneous
ulcers on both forearms with features of a lupus-like panniculitis. On admission 
to the ICU in September 2001, the patient suffered from a ketoacidotic,
hyperglycemic coma and adrenal crisis due to an Enterobacter-cloacae sepsis,
originating from multiple, necrotising deep cutaneous ulcers. These ulcers
spontaneously developed on both forearms, some of which were just emerging, full 
blown or healing with scars. Histological examination showed signs of a scarring 
panniculitis and vasculitis. Immunohistochemistry and direct immunofluorescence
with characterisation of immunoglobulin and complement-factor binding pattern
revealed features of a lupus-like panniculitis. Sequence analysis of all 14 exons
of the AIRE gene revealed a R257 X mutation in exon 6 resulting in a nonsense
mutation at codon 257 confirming the diagnosis of APECED. Oral treatment with 60 
mg/day corticosteroids for two weeks led to complete resolution of all ulcers. In
conclusion, mutations in the AIRE gene may provide the genetic background against
which additional factors can initiate an autoimmune process. Here, autoimmune
panniculitis appears to be an associated feature of the APECED syndrome. Our
findings support the use of immunosuppressive therapy for autoimmune disease
components of the APECED syndrome.

PMID: 12951636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Clin Nephrol. 2003 Jul;60 Suppl 1:S53-8.

Clinical studies on the blockade of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone-system.

Hennig L.

The clinical value of inhibition of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone-system
(RAAS) in heart failure has clearly been documented for the ACE-inhibitors as
well as for the angiotensin-I-receptor blocker (AT1) by extensive intervention
studies (AIRE, CONSENSUS, SAVE, ELITE II, ValHeFT and others). The additional
specific vascular and renal protection, acting beyond the lowering of blood
pressure, has been investigated in the past years in numerous studies in patients
with arterial hypertension, often accompanied by diabetes mellitus type II.
Whereas for nephroprotection, especially also in additionally present diabetes
mellitus type II, study results clearly support the assumption of additional
protective effects, which exceed the purely blood-pressure lowering effect; the
data available for vascular protection (coronary and cerebral vessels) are
insufficient.

PMID: 12940534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Rev Neurol. 2003 Jul 16-31;37(2):101-5.

[Treatment of chronic tension type headache with mirtazapine and amitriptyline].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín-Araguz A(1), Bustamante-Martínez C, de Pedro-Pijoán JM.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital del Aire, Departamento de Medicina,
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. amartina@medynet.com

INTRODUCTION: The mechanisms at play in the production of tension type headaches 
(TTH) are partially unknown. Some of the aspects that have been discussed in
connection with this issue include genetic, vascular and biochemical factors and 
even a predisposition of certain personalities to suffer from this kind of pain. 
Yet, the relation between neurotransmitters like noradrenalin (NAd) and serotonin
(5 HT) and chronic TTH (CTTH) seems to be quite clear and hence the use of
antidepressants that act on these substances in the pharmacological treatment of 
CTTH. In this study, the qualitative and quantitative efficiency of amitriptyline
is compared with that of mirtazapine (two antidepressants that act on NAd and 5
HT) in the prophylaxis of CTTH.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A sample of 60 patients with CTTH criteria was divided into
two groups, and subjects were administered one of the drugs at 50% random for six
months. Group I was administered 25 mg of amitriptyline and group II received 30 
mg of mirtazapine, both given in a single night time oral dose. Later, the two
groups were compared before and after treatment, taking into account the
following aspects: objective and subjective improvements, depression criteria
according to the Hamilton 17 coefficient, reduction in the amount of pain killers
taken, and the side effects produced by the two drugs.
RESULTS: Both groups of patients presented depression criteria, which improved
after taking the drugs, without any objective differences between the two forms
of therapy, although the subjective feeling of improvement was greater with
mirtazapine. In both groups there was a significant reduction in the usual
consumption of analgesics after the prophylaxis. Side effects with both
antidepressants were relatively frequent, but well tolerated, and the most common
were a dry mouth and drowsiness. There were significantly fewer in the group of
patients treated with mirtazapine than in those who received amitriptyline.
CONCLUSIONS: First, depression and CTTH clearly coexist and that there is a
certain dysphoric component associated to suffering chronic headache. Second,
mirtazapine has proved to be as efficient in the treatment of CTTH as
amitriptyline, but has significantly fewer side effects, probably because it acts
more selectively on the brain receptors. It could, therefore, be a drug worth
considering for use in the prophylaxis of chronic TTH.

PMID: 12938066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. An Med Interna. 2003 Jul;20(7):367-9.

[Indifferentiated rheumatism and/or epileptic flatulence].

[Article in Spanish]

Veiga Cabello R(1), Toral Revuelta JR, Sánchez Sánchez E, Fernández Alvaro J,
Sáez Garrido Jde D.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Reumatología, Medicina Interna. Hospital del Aire. Madrid, Spain. 
med028714@nacom.es

A clinical case study of a 50 year-old woman brought to the Rhematology
Department is presented, who showed clinical dry syndrome with immune disorders
(not currently defined) and developed tumors (benign at present) and analytical
autoimmunity with positive antitopoisomerase type I (formerly Scl70) confirmed.
The clinical case is commented and the metheorism causes are discussed, among it,
a possible variation of abdominal epilepsy as ictal flatulence, secondary to a
meningioma of the right brain convexity.

PMID: 12892555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Actas Esp Psiquiatr. 2003 Jul-Aug;31(4):234-8.

[Delusion and Rose's disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Rodríguez-Palancas Palacios A(1), Losantos Pacual RJ, Pastor Llord L, Lisbona Gil
A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Psiquiatría, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, Spain.
RDGUEZ_PALANCAS@terra.es

A clinical case of a patient who was admitted to the psychiatric service due to
persecutory type delusion manifestations, deterioration of general physical
condition and dermatological disorders is presented. The psychiatric, family and 
personal background, on the one hand, and the cachectic condition of the patient,
explained by the nutritional history, on the other, explain the psychitic
expression of underlying vitamin-nutritional deficit. The clinical evolution
presented after onset of treatment helps understand the etiological conditioning 
factors of the syndrome presented.

PMID: 12838447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Curr Ther Res Clin Exp. 2003 Jul;64(7):401-11. doi:
10.1016/S0011-393X(03)00110-3.

A new high-absorption-rate Paracetamol 500-mg formulation: a comparative
bioavailability study in healthy volunteers.

Portolés A(1), Puerro M(2), Terleira A(1), Rodríguez A(1), Caturla MC(3),
Fernández N(4), Vargas E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Study Unit, Clinical Pharmacology Service, Hospital
Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain. (2)Clinical Pharmacology Study Unit, Clinical 
Pharmacology Service, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, Spain. (3)MCC-Analítica,
Barcelona, Spain. (4)Belmac Laboratories S.A., Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Paracetamol is often the analgesic or antipyretic of choice,
especially for patients for whom salicylates or other nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs are contraindicated.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to compare the absorption rate of a new
tablet formulation of paracetamol (500 mg) with a reference formulation of
paracetamol at the same dose.
METHODS: This was a single-center, Phase I, open-label, randomized, 2-period,
crossover, single-dose, comparative bioavailability clinical trial. During both
study periods, healthy volunteers were given a single oral dose of a more
hydrophilic test formulation of paracetamol, or a reference formulation. Fifteen 
plasma samples were obtained to determine paracetamol concentrations and to
calculate kinetic parameters.
RESULTS: The study participants comprised 24 healthy volunteers (12 men, 12
women; mean [SD] age, 22.8 [1.5] years). The pharmacokinetic parameters
calculated for the test versus the reference formulation were as follows: median 
time to maximum concentration (Tmax), 0.42 versus 0.75 hour; mean (SD) maximum
plasma drug concentration (Cmax), 9.85 (2.40) µg/mL versus 8.33 (2.22) µg/mL; and
mean (SD) area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time 0 to infinity 
(AUC0-8), 30.16 (8.87) µg·h/mL versus 28.49 (8.57) µg · h/mL. The 90% CIs of the 
ratios were as follows: base e logarithm (Ln)-transformed Cmax, 105.08% to
137.59%; Ln-AUC0-8, 102.02% to 110.43%; and the difference in Tmax, -0.375 to
-0.085 hours.
CONCLUSIONS: The speed of release and absorption was statistically significantly 
higher with the test formulation compared with the reference one (evaluated using
Tmax, Cmax, and Cmax/AUC parameters). This speed is especially important for a
rapid analgesic or antipyretic effect.

PMCID: PMC4053016
PMID: 24944391  [PubMed]


278. Acta Biomed. 2003 Apr;74(1):9-33.

Update on autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes (APS).

Betterle C(1), Zanchetta R.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Immunology and Allergology, Department of Medical and Surgical
Sciences, University of Padua, Padua, Italy. corrado.betterle@unipd.it

Autoimmune Polyendocrine Syndromes (APS) were initially defined as a multiple
endocrine gland insufficiency associated to an autoimmune disease in a patient.
Neufeld & Blizzard (1980) suggested a classification of APS, based on clinical
criteria only, describing four main types. APS-1 is characterized by presence of 
chronic candidiasis, chronic hypoparathyroidism, Addison's disease. It is a very 
rare syndrome interesting young subjects correlating to different mutations of
AIRE (AutoImmuneRegulator) gene on chromosome 21. APS-2 is characterized by
presence of Addison's disease (always present), autoimmune thyroid diseases
and/or type 1 diabetes mellitus. It is a rare syndrome interesting particularly
adult females and associated to a genetic pattern of HLA DR3/DR4. Autoimmune
thyroid diseases associated to other autoimmune diseases (excluding Addison's
disease and/or hypoparathyroidism), are the main characteristics of APS-3. The
different clinical combinations of autoimmune diseases not included in the
previous groups are characteristics of APS-4. In this paper criteria for defining
a disease as autoimmune are presented. Furthermore, the classification,
epidemiology, pathogenesis, genetic, animal models, clinical features,
laboratory's tests, imaging, therapy, recent progresses in understanding the APS 
and a detailed analysis of large group of our patients affected by different
types of APS are proposed and discussed.

PMID: 12817789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2003 May;111(3):174-6.

A novel AIRE mutation in an APECED patient with candidiasis, adrenal failure,
hepatitis, diabetes mellitus and osteosclerosis.

Vogel A(1), Strassburg CP, Deiss D, Manns MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Medical School
of Hannover, Hannover, Germany. avogel@gmx.net

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder, which is characterized by an immune-mediated
destruction of endocrine tissues, chronic candidiasis and ectodermal disorders.
In contrast to many other autoimmune diseases, APECED is associated with
mutations of a single gene, designated autoimmune regulator (AIRE). We describe
an APECED patient with severe deformities of the tibia with radiological signs of
metaphyseal dysplasia in addition to candidiasis, hepatitis, diabetes mellitus
and adrenal failure. In this patient, we identified a novel AIRE mutation in
association with the C322fsX372 mutation in exon 8, which is frequently detected 
in Caucasian patients. The frame shift mutation G263fsX377 in exon 6 results in a
protein lacking both PHD zinc-finger domains similar to the R257 X mutation. This
novel mutation was not found in 50 German controls.

PMID: 12784192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Anat Embryol (Berl). 2003 Apr;206(5):409-17. Epub 2003 Mar 21.

The ductuli efferentes testis of the greater cane rat ( Thryonomys swinderianus).

Aire TA(1), van der Merwe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Onderstepoort 0110, Republic of South Africa.
taire@op.up.ac.za

The structure of the efferent ducts of animals is known to vary from one species 
to another, it even varies between segments of the ducts in the same species. In 
the grasscutter or greater cane rat ( Thryonomys swinderianus), there are three
segments of the efferent duct, based on their content of non-ciliated or
principal cell types. Type I non-ciliated cell is present exclusively in the long
proximal part of the duct, and exhibits a well-developed subapical endocytic
apparatus as well as numerous oval or pleomorphic dense bodies. The type II
non-ciliated cell predominates in the middle part of the duct, displays a poorly 
developed subapical endocytic apparatus but contains large, numerous vacuoles and
dense bodies, all of which fill about two-thirds of the cell height. The type III
non-ciliated cell, found in the epithelium of the terminal part of the duct, is
poorly endowed with a subapical endocytic apparatus and contains no conspicuous
endocytic vesicles or vacuoles. Only a few, small, dense bodies are present, if
at all. The efferent duct of the cane rat is thus similar to that of man, the
bull, goat and dog, in containing three varieties or types of non-ciliated cells.
This report is the first to describe multiple non-ciliated cells in the
epithelium of the efferent ducts of a rodent and, indeed, of a mammal smaller
than the dog.

PMID: 12684763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Environ Pollut. 2003;123(3):393-7.

NARSTO fine-particle and ozone assessments.

Hales JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Envair, 12507 Eagle Reach, Pasco, Washington 99301, USA. jake@cgenv.com

NARSTO, a tri-national North American consortium for applied tropospheric
pollution research, conducts periodic assessments of air-pollution behavior to
provide an information interface between the research community and individuals
working in policy analysis and air-quality management. The first of these,
entitled An Assessment of Tropospheric Ozone Pollution--A North American
Perspective, appeared in late 2000 and has been circulated widely throughout the 
United States, Canada, Mexico, Europe, and South America. The second (currently) 
entitled NARSTO Assessment of the Atmospheric Science on Particulate Matter, is
presently in its third-draft phase and is available for general review. A fourth 
draft, incorporating comments from the current review stage, will be submitted in
January 2002 to a tri-national review committee composed of the Canadian Royal
Society, the US National Academy of Sciences, and the Mexican Red de Desarrollo e
Investigación de la Calidad del Aire en Grandes Ciudades. Finalization of the
document will follow this review, which will conclude in July 2000. Publication
is expected in December 2002. These two assessments contain substantial amounts
of policy-relevant information, which is of interest to the research community as
well as those working in policy analysis and air-quality management. This
presentation provides a brief overview of features and findings of the two
documents.

PMID: 12667767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Gac Med Mex. 2003 Jan-Feb;139(1):57-63.

[Effects of air pollution on human health and their importance in Mexico City].

[Article in Spanish]

Vallejo M(1), Jáuregui-Renaud K, Hermosillo AG, Márquez MF, Cárdenas M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Electrofisiología, División de Investigación Clínica,
Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, México, D.F.

The impact of air pollution on human health is a complicated problem. In this
review, we describe the main health effects of exposure to ozone, carbon
monoxide, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, lead and particulate matter.
Geographical characteristics of the metropolitan area of Mexico City that favor
pollutant persistence with adverse effects on the population are described; the
use of the Indice Metropolitano de la Calidad del Aire (IMECA), current norms,
and present programs to diminish this problem are discussed. Evidence shows that 
through these actions, air quality has improved. However, some pollutants such as
ozone and particulate matter, still exceed the standard. To further improve air
quality in the city, existing programs should continue and multidisciplinary
research, both basic and applied, is required.

PMID: 12666410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 30;278(22):19784-90. Epub 2003 Mar 21.

Characterization of regulatory elements and methylation pattern of the autoimmune
regulator (AIRE) promoter.

Murumägi A(1), Vähämurto P, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere and Department of
Pathology, Tampere University Hospital, Lenkkeilijänkatu 6, Finland.

Defects in the AIRE gene cause a monogenic autoimmune syndrome APECED (autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy), which is characterized by
loss of self-tolerance to multiple organs. In concordance with its role in immune
tolerance, AIRE is most strongly expressed in thymic epithelial cells and in
cells of monocytic-dendritic lineage. The AIRE protein has been shown to function
as a transcriptional regulator, however, the mechanisms regulating AIRE gene
expression are not known. Here we have characterized the AIRE promoter region by 
identifying a minimal promoter region within 350 bp of the translation initiation
codon. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and transient transfections with
mutated promoter constructs revealed a functional TATA box (-163 to -153) and
binding sites for transcription complexes AP-1 (-307 to -296), NF-Y (-213 to
-202), and Sp1 (-202 to -189). The presence of a 390-bp CpG island within the
proximal promoter suggested that cytosine methylation has a role in
transcriptional regulation of AIRE, which was supported by in vitro methylation
experiments of promoter constructs. Sodium bisulfite sequencing showed a less
methylated status of AIRE promoter in the thymic epithelial cell line TEC1A3
compared with HeLa and monocytic cells U937 and THP-1. Real-time PCR analysis
showed that treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azaCdR), a DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor, up-regulated AIRE transcript levels in TEC1A3, U937,
and HeLa cells and that even greater activations in TEC1A3 and U937 cells were
observed using combined treatments with deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A.
These results suggest that AIRE gene expression is modulated through
modifications in chromatin methylation and acetylation.

PMID: 12651856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Ann Pharmacother. 2003 Mar;37(3):412-9.

Ramipril for the prevention and treatment of cardiovascular disease.

Vuong AD(1), Annis LG.

Author information: 
(1)Area Health Education Centers (AHEC), Department of Pharmacy Practice, College
of Pharmacy, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. awarner@ufl.edu

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effectiveness of ramipril in the prevention and
treatment of cardiovascular disease and determine its need for inclusion on a
formulary.
DATA SOURCES: A MEDLINE and PubMed database search was conducted (1987-May 2002).
Only journals written in the English language were selected for review. DATA
EXTRACTION AND STUDY SELECTION: Articles reporting the use of ramipril in humans 
were evaluated. Emphasis was placed on randomized, controlled trials assessing
efficacy.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Ramipril is an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor that
exerts its effects through inhibition of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system. It exhibits a safety profile that is similar to that of other ACE
inhibitors and is comparable in cost to the majority of the available agents.
Clinical trials have proven the effectiveness of ACE inhibitors in the treatment 
of hypertension, heart failure, and nephropathy. Ramipril, however, is the only
ACE inhibitor currently approved for the prevention of cardiovascular events in
high-risk patients without evidence of left-ventricular dysfunction or heart
failure, based on the results of the HOPE (Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation) 
trial. Whether this effect is specific to ramipril has yet to be proven. This
article emphasizes the major trials involving ramipril including the AIRE (Acute 
Infarction Ramipril Efficacy), REIN (Ramipril Efficacy in Nephropathy), and HOPE 
trials.
CONCLUSIONS: Although similar to other ACE inhibitors in many aspects, it cannot 
be assumed that the benefits shown with ramipril in the HOPE trial are a class
effect. Ongoing trials should help to clarify this matter. Until this time,
current evidence justifies the inclusion of ramipril on a formulary.

PMID: 12639174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Endocr J. 2002 Dec;49(6):625-33.

A novel missense mutation of AIRE gene in a patient with autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy, candidiasis and ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), accompanied
with progressive muscular atrophy: case report and review of the literature in
Japan.

Sato K(1), Nakajima K, Imamura H, Deguchi T, Horinouchi S, Yamazaki K, Yamada E, 
Kanaji Y, Takano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Endocrinology, Tokyo Women's
Medical University, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan. satokan@endm.twmu.ac.jp

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy, candidiasis, and ectodermal dystrophy (APECED)
also known as autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type I, is a rare autosomal
recessive disorder that results in several autoimmune diseases due to mutations
in the AIRE (autoimmune regulator) gene. A 39-year-old female patient developed
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis at 3 yrs, idiopathic hypoparathyroidism at 11
yrs, chronic hepatitis at 23 yrs, Addison's disease and diabetes mellitus type I 
at 27 yrs. In addition, the patient developed progressive muscular atrophy of
unknown etiology at the beginning of the third decade, and is bedridden at the
present time. Her grandparents, parents, brother and daughter did not develop any
features of APECED, but her father died of hepatoma. Direct sequencing of the
AIRE gene revealed a novel missense mutation at exon 1 (R15C), which was
identified to be of maternal origin. The other mutation was not found despite
repeated sequencing of the whole coding regions. The R15C mutation was not
detected in patients with idiopathic hypoparathyroidism (N= 10), idiopathic
Addison's disease (N = 3), and normal subjects (N = 55). Although we could not
analyze the father's gene, these results suggest that the patient is probably a
compound heterozygote of the AIRE gene, in which the other abnormal allele could 
not be identified by the present analytical method. These data are compatible
with the recent review that only one defective allele was detectable in some
patients with clinically evident APECED. We found only six Japanese patients
compatible with diagnosis of APECED, indicating that this autoimmune disease is
extremely rare in our country.

PMID: 12625412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Nat Immunol. 2003 Apr;4(4):350-4. Epub 2003 Mar 3.

Aire regulates negative selection of organ-specific T cells.

Liston A(1), Lesage S, Wilson J, Peltonen L, Goodnow CC.

Author information: 
(1)ACRF Genetics Lab, Medical Genome Centre, John Curtin School of Medical
Research, The Australian National University, ACT 2601 Australia.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2003 Apr;4(4):303-4.
    Immunol Cell Biol. 2007 Jun;85(4):267-8.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 is a recessive Mendelian disorder
resulting from mutations in a novel gene, AIRE, and is characterized by a
spectrum of organ-specific autoimmune diseases. It is not known what tolerance
mechanisms are defective as a result of AIRE mutation. By tracing the fate of
autoreactive CD4+ T cells with high affinity for a pancreatic antigen in
transgenic mice with an Aire mutation, we show here that Aire deficiency causes
almost complete failure to delete the organ-specific cells in the thymus. These
results indicate that autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome 1 is caused by
failure of a specialized mechanism for deleting forbidden T cell clones,
establishing a central role for this tolerance mechanism.

PMID: 12612579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Genes Immun. 2003 Jan;4(1):12-21.

Autoimmune regulator: from loss of function to autoimmunity.

Pitkänen J(1), Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere and Tampere Hospital,
Finland.

The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is a gene where mutations cause the recessively
inherited disorder called autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal
dystrophy (APECED) or autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 (APS1).
Variable combinations of autoimmune endocrine diseases such as Addison's disease,
hypoparathyroidism, and type 1 diabetes characterize APECED. The AIRE protein has
several domains indicative of a transcriptional regulator. AIRE contains two PHD 
(plant homeodomain) type zinc fingers, four nuclear receptor binding LXXLL
motifs, a putative DNA-binding domain named SAND and, in addition, a highly
conserved N-terminal domain similar to the homogenously staining region domain of
the Sp100 protein. At the subcellular level, AIRE is expressed in nuclear dots
resembling promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies, which are associated with
several transcriptionally active proteins. AIRE is primarily expressed in thymic 
medullary epithelial cells and monocyte-dendritic cells in the thymus but also in
a rare subset of cells in the lymph nodes, spleen and fetal liver. The disease,
caused by mutations in AIRE, its function as a protein involved in transcription,
and its restricted expression in cells important in negative selection, all
together suggest that AIRE is a central protein in the maintenance of immune
tolerance. In this review of the recent literature we discuss the results of
these studies with particular attention on the AIRE expression pattern and its
function as a transcriptional regulator, as well as the effects of patient
mutations on the molecular characteristics of the protein.

PMID: 12595897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Res Vet Sci. 2003 Apr;74(2):153-62.

A morphological study of simple testicular cysts in the ostrich (Struthio
camelus).

Aire TA(1), Soley JT, Groenewald HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Onderstepoort 0110, South Africa. taire@op.up.ac.za

Simple testicular cysts are rare in mammals and of unknown aetiology, but dietary
conditions have been implicated in this phenomenon in poultry. This study
characterises the structural features of simple intratesticular cysts in the
ostrich. Seven testes from a total of 15 sexually mature ostriches slaughtered
during the breeding season were used. The testes contained multifocal,
fluid-filled, unilocular cysts which were lined by a simple squamous or low
cuboidal epithelium and surrounded by a thick layer of fibrous connective tissue.
The cysts developed within seminiferous tubules and displayed morphological
features similar to those reported in man and domestic poultry. The testis
parenchyma revealed several foci composed of intermingled normal seminiferous
tubules and variably sized intratesticular cysts. The atrophic tubules lay within
a mass of hyperplastic, fibroblastic intertubular connective tissue in the
proximity of large cysts and their formation appeared to result from hydrostatic 
pressure exerted by cysts. Morphological evidence supports a continuous process
of cyst formation in the affected testis and a concomitant progressive loss of
atrophic seminiferous tubules. A pathogenetic scenario of cyst formation and the 
effect of simple cysts on testicular histology has been proposed. Although the
course of this phenomenon remains unknown, its impact on the fertility of this
economically important bird deserves closer scrutiny.

PMID: 12589740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Rev Med Liege. 2002 Nov;57(11):710-4.

[Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome (APS)].

[Article in French]

Warzée E(1), Legros JJ, Geenen V.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinologie à la Faculté de Médecine, Chef du Service d'Endocrinologie du
CHU de Liège.

As a complement to basic research, thorough clinical investigation of rare
diseases may provide fundamental elements which improve our understanding of
still obscure pathophysiologic mechanisms. This is the case with
immunoendocrinopathy syndromes. Since Addison's pioneer observations in the 19th 
century, physicians have known that some individuals and their families may be
affected by several spontaneous endocrine insufficiencies that are associated
with autoimmune extra-endocrine processes. APS-I or APECED syndrome appears in
children firstly affected by recurrent muco-cutaneous candidiasis and
hypoparathyroidism, followed by adrenocortical insufficiency and by other
autoimmune processes. APS-I is a monogenic disorder resulting from one mutation
in the AIRE gene. The protein encoded by AIRE is a nuclear transcription factor
the precise target of which is still not known. AIRE is mainly expressed by cells
playing a crucial role in the establishment of central T cell self-tolerance
(medullary epithelium, macrophages and dendritic cells of the thymus). APS-I must
be considered in children affected with recurrent candidiasis without any sign of
primary immune deficiency. Scientific investigation of the biological nuclear
events controlled by AIRE has to be pursued. Undoubtedly, their deciphering will 
increase our knowledge of the mechanisms responsible for the establishment of
central T cell self-tolerance and will open novel strategies for managing many
autoimmune diseases. APS-II is a more common syndrome characterized by
adrenocortical insufficiency spontaneously occurring in non tuberculous adults
and associated with autoimmune thyroiditis and/or type 1 diabetes. Contrary to
APS-I, APS-II is linked to genetic loci of the major histocompatibility complex. 
There is no adrenal insufficiency in APS-III which includes autoimmune
thyroiditis, type 1 diabetes, and other autoimmune extra-endocrine processes
(like pernicious anemia and vitiligo).

PMID: 12564102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Tissue Antigens. 2002 Dec;60(6):489-95.

Role of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene in alopecia areata: strong
association of a potentially functional AIRE polymorphism with alopecia
universalis.

Tazi-Ahnini R(1), Cork MJ, Gawkrodger DJ, Birch MP, Wengraf D, McDonagh AJ,
Messenger AG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genomic Medicine, University of Sheffield, Royal Hallamshire
Hospital, Sheffield, UK. r.taziahnini@sheffield.ac.uk

Alopecia areata is characterized by a reversible form of patchy or complete hair 
loss associated with T-cell infiltration of hair follicles. The lifetime disease 
risk of approximately 1.4% in the general population is increased to more than
30% in autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dysplasia syndrome
(APECED), a recessive condition resulting from a mutation of the autoimmune
regulator (AIRE) gene on chromosome 21q22.3. Aire protein is thought to have
transcriptional regulatory activity but its role is not well defined at present. 
In this study, we have examined the possible involvement of AIRE in the
pathogenesis of alopecia areata. On screening the AIRE coding sequence, we
identified 20 variants. Two of these at positions, G961C and T1029C, give rise to
amino acid changes, S278R and V301A, located in the DNA-binding segment (SAND)
and PHD1 zinc finger motif, respectively. We found no difference in the frequency
of the AIRE T1029C polymorphism between the control and patient groups. We
genotyped 202 alopecia areata patients and 175 matched Caucasian controls for the
AIRE G961C alleles. The frequency of the rare allele (961G) was 0.08 in the
controls and there was a significant increase to 0.13 in alopecia areata overall 
and 0.20 in severe disease (alopecia universalis). We found no association
between the AIRE G961G variant and mild (patchy) alopecia areata or alopecia
totalis. However, the AIRE 961G allele is a potent risk factor (> 3) for the
severest form of alopecia areata, and for disease of early age at onset (at 30
years). The change from serine to arginine in the SAND domain of AIRE protein may
have a significant effect on AIRE DNA-binding activity. Moreover, our results
could provide a rational explanation of the unusually high frequency of AA in
APECED patients, supporting the concept of AA as an autoimmune disease.

PMID: 12542742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. An Med Interna. 2002 Nov;19(11):589-93.

[Economic class syndrome].

[Article in Spanish]

Ríos Tejada F(1), Villegas Fernández F, Azofra García JA, Callol Sánchez L.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio Medicina Aeroespacial (CIMA), Hospital Universitario del Aire,
Madrid. francisco.rios@aero.cima.es

Comfort, safety and time saving makes air travel more and more popular and widely
use by an increased number of people in a range of extended age frame. Recent
concerns in the global news have again raised an issue about the association of
thromboembolic disease and air travel. Although there are numerous studies in the
literature examining venous thromboembolic disease (VTE), variability of
population demographics makes difficult a right and prospective assessment in the
context of the cabin environment and air travel. Literature review clearly
demonstrate that VTE is multicausal in nature, resulting in differing etiologic
and predisposing factors across different age groups. Many questions are still to
be answered, How many cases?, Direct association to Air Travel?, How to prevent
it in the aviation environment? In this paper we analyze the incidence of VTE and
some additional epidemiological aspects, risk and predisposing factors,
diagnostic, and preventive measures given by the airline, the user, aviation
authorities, aeromedical especialist in order to cope this complication. Finally 
we discuss the physiopathological bases in which VTE is developed and related
considerations of this syndrome in the context of the aviation environment.

PMID: 12522898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Nov-Dec;15(9):1491-6.

Immunological findings in patients with autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) and their family
members: are heterozygotes subclinically affected?

Sedivá A(1), Ciháková D, Lebl J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, 
Czech Republic. Anna.Sediva@lfmotol.cuni.cz

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED; APS-1) is
an autosomal recessive autoimmune disease, caused by mutations in the AIRE
(autoimmune regulator) gene. Due to the proposed role of AIRE in central immune
tolerance, the immune investigation of four females diagnosed with APECED, their 
siblings, parents and 14 age-matched controls was performed. The parameters
analyzed included immunoglobulins, autoantibodies, cellular immunity and
production of cytokines IFNgamma, IL-4 and IL-10, reflecting Th1xTh2 balance. Low
IFNgamma levels (455 +/- 191 pg/ml) were detected in all affected girls compared 
to controls (910 +/- 406 pg/ml). Two girls with homozygous R257X mutations showed
similarly marked elevation of IgM and increase of CD3+CD4+ lymphocytes. Positive 
autoantibodies against smooth muscle were found in one affected girl; another
girl and her mother had antibodies against gastric parietal cells. Interestingly,
all fathers had dramatically elevated levels of IgA and activated T lymphocytes. 
High frequency of abnormal immune results among parents is a novel finding which 
might suggest a subclinical immune deficit in heterozygotes with AIRE mutations.

PMID: 12503856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Neurologia. 2002 Dec;17(10):633-42.

[Pareidolia in Beato de Liébana's illuminated Visigothic codes].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín Araguz A(1), Bustamante Martínez MC, Fernández-Armayor Ajo V, López Gómez 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid, España.
amartina@medynet.com

The visual perception alterations constitute a characteristic etymological field 
in some neurological and psychiatric processes (such as hallucinations,
hallucinosis, etc.) that can also appear in healthy people (metamorphosias,
pareidolias). The pareidolia is a phenomenon characterized by the non
auto-provoked visualization of a perception in which reality and daydream are
combined. It constitutes a source of inspiration for different artistic
manifestations, is the basis of some common psychological explorations (such as
Rorcharch test) and it even can be the explication to some situations considered 
as paranormals, for example the vision of faces in the Moon or in Mars or the
apparition of sacred figures either in spots or shades... Beato of Liébana was a 
cantabrian presbyter, author in the eight century of the Comments of the
Apocalypse exegesis, copied and illuminated repeated times all through the
following centuries. Given the marked revealing and eschatological component of
the Apocalypse, starting from the Leon's School (known also as Mozarabic since
the Ninth Century), the original was enriched adding another texts with their own
illustrations. From them, the Comments to Daniel's Book, from Saint Jeronimus,
stands out. The whole of the illuminated Hispanic manuscripts constitutes a
"corpus" of amazing codices international known today as Beatos. We have
demonstrated that the first History's graphic representation of a pareidolia
phenomenon is found in the miniature Visigoth Hispanic manuscripts known as
Beatos; we have arrived to this conclusion studying two facsimiles from the x
Century (Beato of Valcavado and Beato of Gerona) specially the miniature called
Baltasar's Feast; in both codices, is illustrated how this Babylon king perceives
the way a phantasmagoric hand spurts up from a candlestick flame and writes in
the adjacent wall three mysterious words: MANE, TECEL, FARES, which were only
interpreted by Prophet Daniel, requested ad hoc. Baltasar mixed up
unintentionally the perceived and the daydreamed starting from a visual field
barely structured, we conclude that he suffered from a pareilolia phenomenon,
graphically represented by the first time in History in the Beatos.

PMID: 12487959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Rev Mal Respir. 2002 Oct;19(5 Pt 1):585-92.

[The AIRE Study: data analysis of 753 European children with asthma].

[Article in French]

Blanc FX(1), Postel-Vinay N, Boucot I, De Blic J, Scheinmann P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Pneumologie, Service de Médecine Interne, CHU Bicêtre, Assistance
Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
xavier.blanc@bct.ap-hop-paris.fr

PROBLEM: To analyse the paediatric data from the AIRE study (Asthma insights and 
reality in Europe) describing the standard of asthma control in Europe.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Among the 73,880 households contacted by telephone in 7
countries 753 children under the age of 16 were identified. An interview was
conducted with a close relative to determine the frequency and severity of
symptoms during the recent month, visits to casualty and hospital admissions
during the past year, the medications used, the effects on the lives of the
children, the opinions of the parents on the level of control of asthma and the
monitoring methods used.
RESULTS: 38.2% of children reported diurnal symptoms and 28% disturbance of sleep
at least once a week. The consequences were important: limitation of sporting
activities (29.5%) and absence from school (42.7% in the past year). Treatment
was inadequate: 26% of children used inhaled steroids yet 45.9% had persistent
asthma. The level of control was overestimated: 61% of parents of children with
severe persistent asthma considered the asthma to be well controlled.
CONCLUSION: European asthmatic children are poorly controlled, under-treated and 
rarely followed up. The consequences, particularly absence from school, should
stimulate an improvement in their therapeutic and educational management.

PMID: 12473945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Dec 15;11(26):3299-308.

Systematic mutagenesis of the functional domains of AIRE reveals their role in
intracellular targeting.

Ramsey C(1), Bukrinsky A, Peltonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, UCLA School of Medicine, Gonda Center,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Mutations in the human autoimmune regulator (AIRE ) gene cause a multi-systemic
autoimmune syndrome that is known as autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). To date more than
39 different disease mutations have been identified. They span the entire region 
of the AIRE gene that encodes a polypeptide with multiple functional domains: an 
N-terminal homogeneously staining region (HSR), a bipartied nuclear localization 
signal (NLS), a SAND domain, two PHD fingers and four nuclear receptor targeting 
motifs. The APECED mutations include insertions, deletions, substitutions and
introduction of premature termination codons, while most mutations disrupt one of
the functional domains. We have constructed a series of deletion mutants
systematically removing one or more functional domain(s) and investigated the
stability and sub-cellular compartmentalization of the corresponding
polypeptides. Here we show that the first 188 amino acids, containing the HSR
domain and the NLS proved necessary for both cytoplasmic filament formation and
nuclear targeting. Deletion of the SAND domain and even point mutations in the
SAND domain, resulted in the aggregation of the polypeptides in the cytoplasm and
interfered with the proper nuclear targeting. The PHD fingers seemed to be
necessary for the formation of characteristic dot-like complexes in the nucleus, 
but their deletion did not interfere with nuclear entry.

PMID: 12471056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2002 Dec;21(12):2526-35.

The potential for estradiol and ethinylestradiol to sorb to suspended and bed
sediments in some English rivers.

Holthaus KI(1), Johnson AC, Jürgens MD, Williams RJ, Smith JJ, Carter JE.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Wallingford, Oxon OX10 8BB, United Kingdom.

The endocrine-disrupting impact of steroid estrogens on fish will be strongly
influenced by their distribution between sediment and water. Laboratory studies
were performed to investigate the potential for sorption of 17beta-estradiol (E2)
and 17alpha-ethinylestradiol (EE2) to bed and suspended sediments taken from five
British rivers. Sediment material was collected from the Rivers Aire and Calder
(located in urban and industrialized areas in Yorkshire, UK), the River Thames
(at a relatively rural site in Oxfordshire, UK), and from the estuaries of the
Rivers Tees and Tyne. Using anaerobic conditions to inhibit biodegradation, it
was found that 80 to 90% of binding to bed sediments was complete within 1 d, but
that an equilibrium had not been reached after 2 d. Bed sediments gave
distribution coefficients (Kd) ranging from 4 to 74 L/kg for E2 and from 8 to 121
L/kg for EE2 for samples taken over a range of seasons and locations. Sorption to
suspended sediment gave Kd values ranging from 21 to 122 L/kg for E2 and 19 to
260 L/kg for EE2. However, these Kd values suggest less than 1% removal of the
steroid estrogens from the aqueous phase given the ambient suspended sediment
concentration. In the bed sediments, higher Kd values were associated with
smaller particle size and higher organic carbon content. In most cases, the Kd
values obtained for EE2 were higher than those for E2 by a factor of up to three.

PMID: 12463545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Chromatogr A. 2002 Nov 8;976(1-2):335-43.

Determination of nineteen 4-alkylphenol endocrine disrupters in Geneva municipal 
sewage wastewater.

Espejo R(1), Valter K, Simona M, Janin Y, Arrizabalaga P.

Author information: 
(1)Service Scientifique de l'Environnement, CP 78, 1211 Geneva 8, Switzerland.

A method for the determination of 18 isomeric 4-nonylphenols and
4-tert.-octylphenol in wastewater using GC-MS and LC-MS has been developed. This 
procedure has been applied to the determination of the free allylphenols and the 
analysis of these substances in the form of 4-alkylphenol polyethoxylates, their 
various hydrosoluble metabolites and other hydrosoluble 4-alkylphenol containing 
degradation products ("bonded" alkylphenols) after their cleavage with hydroiodic
acid. In the environment, the final degradation products of 4-alkylphenol
polyethoxylates and their metabolites are the long-chain free 4-alkylphenols,
which are responsible of endocrine disruption in various animal species. The
average concentration of free alkylphenols in the wastewater of the sewage plant 
in Aïre, Geneva (Switzerland) ranges from 1.0 to 6.8 microg/l (average 2.5
microg/l). The concentration of "bonded" 4-alkylphenols can reach about 0.66
mg/l. The precision of the method and its accuracy are satisfactory with recovery
rates for the free 4-alkylphenols and "bonded" 4-nonylphenols ranging from 74 to 
79% and 80 to 87%, respectively. The relative standard deviation is lower than 6%
for all analyzed compounds. The detection limits are in the range of 0.4 to 6
ng/l (typically 2 ng/l) and quantification limits are between 2 to 22 ng/l
(typically 10 ng/l) for all individual isomeric alkylphenols.

PMID: 12462626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Curr Opin Immunol. 2002 Dec;14(6):760-4.

Autoimmune endocrine disease.

Anderson MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin Diabetes Center; Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.
mark.anderson@joslin.harvard.edu

The immune system can attack almost any given organ in a very specific and
directed fashion. The endocrine system appears to be particularly vulnerable to
this kind of insult. Which endocrine organs are most susceptible and why? Genetic
studies and animal models have revealed some commonalities for these diseases.
The MHC locus appears to help control not only susceptibility to disease but also
which endocrine organs are attacked. Autoimmune thymectomy models have revealed
suppressor cell populations, which are being intensely sought after as a
protective mechanism against endocrine autoimmunity. Finally, the recent cloning 
of the causative gene for autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type I, called AIRE, 
has brought central tolerance back into focus as an important mechanism in these 
endocrine diseases.

PMID: 12413526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Endocrinol Invest. 2002 Oct;25(9):804-11.

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene on chromosome 21: implications for autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) any more common
manifestations of endocrine autoimmunity.

Meyer G(1), Badenhoop K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a
rare, but well-defined monogenic disorder that is caused by mutations in the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene on chromosome 21q22.3. Patients most often
suffer from loss of endocrine function in the parathyroid and adrenal glands but 
may also develop Type 1 diabetes, thyroid disease or hypogonadism. The disease
may therefore serve as a model for sporadic endocrine autoimmunity and help to
develop new screening and prevention methods. To date at least 46 mutations of
AIRE have been identified in affected individuals. Little is known about
heterozygosity states but patients with the more prevalent isolated autoimmune
endocrinopathies such as Type 1 diabetes, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, Graves' or
Addison's disease do not have any of the common mutations. This does not rule out
AIRE to be affected either by so far unknown or regulatory variants. The recent
characterization of AIRE knockout mice with similar immune pathological findings 
compared to the human setting will help to elucidate endocrine autoimmunity.

PMID: 12398240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Hum Reprod Update. 2002 Sep-Oct;8(5):483-91.

Genetic disorders in premature ovarian failure.

Laml T(1), Preyer O, Umek W, Hengstschlager M, Hanzal H.

Author information: 
(1)University of Vienna Medical School, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
Austria. thomas.laml@akh-wien.ac.at

This review presents the genetic disorders associated with premature ovarian
failure (POF), obtained by Medline, the Cochrane Library and hand searches of
pertinent references of English literature on POF and genetic determinants cited 
between the year 1966 and February 2002. X monosomy or X deletions and
translocations are known to be responsible for POF. Turner's syndrome, as a
phenotype associated with complete or partial monosomy X, is linked to ovarian
failure. Among heterozygous carriers of the fragile X mutation, POF was noted as 
an unexpected phenotype in the early 1990s. Autosomal disorders such as mutations
of the phosphomannomutase 2 (PMM2) gene, the galactose-1-phosphate
uridyltransferase (GALT) gene, the FSH receptor (FSHR) gene, chromosome 3q
containing the Blepharophimosis gene and the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene,
responsible for polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy, have been
identified in patients with POF. In conclusion, the relationship between genetic 
disorders and POF is clearly demonstrated in this review. Therefore, in the case 
of families affected by POF a thorough screening, including cytogenetic analysis,
should be performed.

PMID: 12398227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Rev Neurol. 2002 Jul 1-15;35(1):95-7.

[Santiago Ramón y Cajal: his activity as a military doctor (1873-1875)].

[Article in Spanish]

Moreno Martinez JM(1), Martin Araguz A.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Central del Aire, Madrid, España.

Santiago Ram n y Cajal entered the Medical Corps after graduating in Medicine in 
1873. His marked Spanish nationalist character and his excellent physical
condition led him to serve in the third Carlist war as a medical lieutenant and
later in the Cuban War as a captain. His stay in Cuba, however, was marked by
hardship and illness. The decline of Spain s colonialist policy, the war that was
fought in a hostile climate and atmosphere, and the corruption of the military
officers led to Santiago being posted to the frontlines on a fixed logistics
system of trails. All this was to end in military failure and the subsequent loss
of the colony. Disillusioned and seriously ill from malaria, which nearly killed 
him, he returned to Spain after being discharged for illness. Shortly afterwards,
thanks to Dr. Jenaro Casas, he became a university lecturer, which put an end to 
his military career

PMID: 12389201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Science. 2002 Nov 15;298(5597):1395-401. Epub 2002 Oct 10.

Projection of an immunological self shadow within the thymus by the aire protein.

Anderson MS(1), Venanzi ES, Klein L, Chen Z, Berzins SP, Turley SJ, von Boehmer
H, Bronson R, Dierich A, Benoist C, Mathis D.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin Diabetes Center; Department
of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital; Harvard Medical School, 1 Joslin
Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2002 Nov 15;298(5597):1348-9.

Humans expressing a defective form of the transcription factor AIRE (autoimmune
regulator) develop multiorgan autoimmune disease. We used aire- deficient mice to
test the hypothesis that this transcription factor regulates autoimmunity by
promoting the ectopic expression of peripheral tissue- restricted antigens in
medullary epithelial cells of the thymus. This hypothesis proved correct. The
mutant animals exhibited a defined profile of autoimmune diseases that depended
on the absence of aire in stromal cells of the thymus. Aire-deficient thymic
medullary epithelial cells showed a specific reduction in ectopic transcription
of genes encoding peripheral antigens. These findings highlight the importance of
thymically imposed "central" tolerance in controlling autoimmunity.

PMID: 12376594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Praxis (Bern 1994). 2002 Aug 21;91(34):1339-46.

[Autoimmune hepatitis and overlap syndrome: diagnosis].

[Article in German]

Berg PA(1), Klein R.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik Abt. II, Universität Tübingen.

Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is a rare autoimmune disease (incidence about 5% among
all chronic liver disorders) that reflects a loss of tolerance to normal hepatic 
proteins. AIH is characterized by female preponderance, hypergammaglobulinemia,
extrahepatic syndromes and a good response to immunosuppressive treatment. AIH
may be subdivided into two or three subtypes. AIH type 1 is characterized by
antinuclear autoantibodies (ANA) and/or smooth muscle antibodies (SMA). SMA are
actin-specific, can occur without ANA and their presence relates strongly to AIH.
AIH type 2 is defined by the presence of anti-liver-kidney microsomal antibodies 
(LKM-1). Patients with AIH type 2 are typically younger at the time of disease
onset, exhibit higher inflammatory activity, suffer more frequent relapses under 
immunosuppressive treatment and are more likely to progress to cirrhosis. AIH
type 3 is characterized by autoantibodies against the soluble liver antigen (SLA)
and liver-pancreas antigen (LP), but ANA/SMA are frequently present and,
therefore, some authors consider this autoantibody manifestation as belonging to 
AIH type 1. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) recognize cytoplasmic or
nuclear components of neutrophilic granulocytes and are detected with high
prevalence in patients with autoimmune liver diseases. They are associated with
AIH type 1 but not with AIH type 2. However, 40-70% of patients with primary
sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) also produce these autoantibodies. Autoimmune
cholangitis is an idiopathic disorder with mixed hepatocellular and cholestatic
findings that typically has antinuclear antibodies (ANA). It may be considered as
an atypical form of primary biliary cirrhosis. It has been recognized that some
forms of AIH may also occur with variable incidence and severity especially in
patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (overlap AIH/PBC) or primary sclerosing
cholangitis (AIH/PSC). On the basis of clinical, biochemical, serological,
histological and radiological criteria a clear distinction between these
conditions can be readily made in the majority of cases. An association of
AIH-typical autoantibodies (anti-LKM-1, anti-SLA/LP) in association with
antimitochondrial autoantibodies (AMA) almost confirm the overlap syndrome
AIH/PBC. In PSC patients expressing typical ERCP findings and suffering from
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), the diagnosis of an overlap syndrome between
PSC/AIH can be readily made in the presence of ANCA and AIH relevant
autoantibodies. Apart from this kind of overlap syndrome involving different
types of autoimmune disorders within the liver AIH can be also associated with
other organspecific autoimmune disorders as documented in the autoimmune
polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS-1). In this disease homozygosity for a defect 
in a single gene (AIRE) leads to a broad spectrum of organ specific autoimmune
diseases.

PMID: 12233264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2002 Jul;27(5):405-9.

Epidemiology and genetics of alopecia areata.

McDonagh AJ(1), Tazi-Ahnini R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Division of Genomic Medicine, Royal Hallamshire 
Hospital, University of Sheffield, UK. a.j.mcdonagh@sheffield.ac.uk

The frequency of alopecia areata and observed patterns of heritability are in
keeping with a polygenic inheritance model but the genetics of alopecia areata is
still poorly understood. The role of environmental factors in triggering disease 
initiation or exacerbation remains almost entirely speculative. Using the
candidate gene approach, three susceptibility/severity factors have been
identified. HLA alleles were the first to show a strong association with alopecia
areata and some DQB and DR alleles have been demonstrated to confer a high risk
for disease by both case-control and family-based studies. Interleukin (IL)-1
cluster genes, mainly the IL-1 receptor antagonist, show a strong association
with disease severity in alopecia areata and a number of other autoimmune and
inflammatory diseases. Finally, the association of alopecia areata with Down's
syndrome, the high frequency of alopecia areata in autoimmune polyglandular
syndrome type I due to mutations of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene on
chromosome 21q22.3 and the finding of association with MX1, another gene in the
Down's syndrome region of chromosome 21 indicate this area of the genome as a
promising target for future-family based investigations. The role of individual
genes of the MHC, IL-1 cluster or chromosome 21q22.3 is difficult to establish
and further genetic and functional investigations are needed to confirm their
involvement in the pathogenesis of alopecia areata.

PMID: 12190641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Hypertens Suppl. 2002 May;20(2):S34-8.

Left ventricular hypertrophy and heart failure in women.

Agabiti-Rosei E(1), Muiesan ML.

Author information: 
(1)University of Brescia, c/o Spedali Civili, 2o Medicina generale, Brescia
25100, Italy. agabiti@master cci.unibs.it

The importance of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) as a powerful predictor of
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, independent from blood pressure and other
cardiovascular risk factors, is widely recognized. Women have a lower prevalence 
of LVH than men for any given level of blood pressure. The occurrence of LVH
increases progressively with older age and LVH becomes more common in women after
menopause. Available data indicate that both hypertension and LVH are stronger
risk factors for stroke and for heart failure in women than in men. Women are
more likely to maintain a better left ventricular systolic function than men with
similar heart failure symptoms, and heart failure due to diastolic dysfunction is
more common in women than in men. Few studies have demonstrated that patients who
fail to achieve a reduction of LVH are much more likely to suffer cardiovascular 
events than those in whom the left ventricular mass is reduced by
antihypertensive treatment. Reversal of LVH therefore represents a major goal in 
the treatment of hypertensive patients. The degree of cardiac hypertrophy
reduction is influenced by baseline severity of LVH, by the duration of treatment
and by the degree of 24-h blood pressure control. In addition, beyond the control
of blood pressure, different classes of antihypertensive drugs may differently
interfere with several non-hemodynamic stimuli, and therefore have a different
effect on left ventricular mass. Data regarding the effect of antihypertensive
therapy on LVH in women are not adequate. Few studies have suggested a possible
additive effect of estrogen replacement therapy on left ventricular mass changes 
in hypertensive postmenopausal women. Many of the major heart failure
intervention trials did not include women or had only a small proportion of
female patients. In the SAVE, AIRE, TRACE and SOLVD trials, treatment with
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors resulted in similar benefit to women and
in men. In studies evaluating the effect of beta-blocker treatment in patients
with heart failure, the benefit was statistically significant in men but not in
women. Results from further multicenter ongoing trials are awaited to definitely 
evaluate whether regression of LVH carries a similar benefit in women and men,
and whether different therapeutic strategies may be applied to women to regress
LVH and to prevent the progression to heart failure.

PMID: 12183849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Clin Immunol. 2002 Jun;103(3 Pt 1):277-83.

Distinct clinical phenotype and immunoreactivity in Japanese siblings with
autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS-1) associated with compound
heterozygous novel AIRE gene mutations.

Kogawa K(1), Kudoh J, Nagafuchi S, Ohga S, Katsuta H, Ishibashi H, Harada M, Hara
T, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Biosystemic Science, Kyushu University Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Japan.

We herein report on two Japanese siblings with autoimmune polyglandular syndrome 
type 1 (APS-1). The brother, who expressed a characteristic phenotype of APS-1,
had developed severe mucocutaneous candidiasis in early infancy and thereafter
developed hypoparathyroidism and Addison's disease, along with a severe
deterioration of his immunologic function. In contrast, the 44-year-old sister,
who showed a noncharacteristic phenotype of APS-1, developed insulin-dependent
diabetes with high anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody, mild nail
candidiasis, and autoimmune hepatitis with intact immunoreactivity. She had three
susceptible human leukocyte antigen (HLA) loci for type 1 autoimmune diabetes.
The expression of T cell receptor (TCR)V beta 5.1 increased in both patients,
while the brother showed a widely suppressed expression of many TCRV beta
families. Both individuals possessed compound heterozygous novel autoimmune
regulator (AIRE) gene mutations (L29P and IVS9-1G > C). The same AIRE gene
mutations can thus be associated with characteristic and noncharacteristic
phenotypes of APS-1, and HLA may possibly influence the phenotype of APS-1.

PMID: 12173302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Eur J Heart Fail. 2002 Aug;4(4):553-8.

Cost-effectiveness of the treatment of heart failure with ramipril: a Spanish
analysis of the AIRE study.

Hart WM(1), Rubio-Terres C, Pajuelo F, González Juanatey JR.

Author information: 
(1)EcoStat Consulting Group, San Sebastián, Spain.

AIMS: To estimate the cost-effectiveness of adding ramipril to conventional
treatment in patients with heart failure after myocardial infarction from the
perspective of the Spanish National Health System.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A retrospective analysis of the AIRE study was made, using
previously published data from the clinical trial combined with local Spanish
resource and cost data. A typical rehospitalisation for a heart failure episode
would last an average of 11.6 days with an average cost of 350.80 per day. The
incremental cost of ramipril per life-year gained in the baseline case was
1550.10 after 3.8 years of follow-up. Sensitivity analysis showed that the basic 
conclusions were robust in spite of extreme variations in the values of the key
parameters of the model.
CONCLUSION: The use of ramipril in addition to conventional treatment in heart
failure patients after myocardial infarction is cost-effective both according to 
currently accepted international standards of what constitutes a cost-effective
intervention and also indirectly by comparing the results with similar
pharmaceutical products financed under the Spanish National Health System.

PMID: 12167396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Rev Neurol. 2002 May 1-15;34(9):877-92.

[Neuroscience in Al Andalus and its influence on medieval scholastic medicine].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín-Araguz A(1), Bustamante-Martínez C, Fernández-Armayor Ajo V,
Moreno-Martínez JM.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología; Hospital Central del Aire, Madrid, 28027, España.
amartina@medynet.com

INTRODUCTION: Since the application of technical medicine by the Greeks, modern
neurology has been based on a body of knowledge and cultural heritage from
ancient times. In this paper we review the contribution made by Al Andalus to
neuroscience during the Middle Ages and its repercussions on modern neurology.
DEVELOPMENT: Following the death of Mohammed in the vii century AD, Islam enjoyed
one of the most spectacular periods of expansion in the history of mankind.
Occupation of the cities of Alexandria and Gundishapur put the Arabs into contact
with original Greco Latin manuscripts, which were assimilated and divulged by
Islamic scientists in the middle eastern caliphates of Damascus and Bagdad as
well as the western caliphates of Al Andalus (Spain) and Kairwan (Tunis). This
classical hippocratico galenico medicine was refashioned into the so called
arabized galenism, which markedly influenced the Scholastics and the cultured
world of the lower Middle Ages and became the basis of European medicine until
well into the Renaissance period. There was a first Spanish cultural Renaissance 
in Al Andalus during the ix xii centuries, which led to a flowering unheard of in
the Middle Ages before then. Andalusian doctors made major contributions to the
body of knowledge about neuroscience and developed major philosophical concepts
of human understanding. Thus, Abulcasis (936 1013), the father of modern surgery,
developed material and technical designs which are still used in neurosurgery.
Averroes suggested the existence of Parkinson s syndrome and attributed
photoreceptor properties to the retina. Avenzoar described meningitis,
intracranial thrombophlebitis, mediastinal tumours and made contributions to
modern neuropharmacology. Maimonides wrote about neuropsychiatric disorders and
described rabies and belladonna intoxication.
CONCLUSION: Aside from the political, religious and cultural differences between 
Al Andalus and the Christian kingdoms of the Iberian peninsula, the historical
Andalusian period (711 1492) forms one of the most brilliant periods of Spanish
neuroscience.

PMID: 12134355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Rev Neurol. 2002 Jun 1-15;34(11):1092-4.

[The history and social importance of cerebrovascular pathology].

[Article in Spanish]

Moreno-Martínez JM(1), Fernández-Armayor V.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Central del Aire, Madrid, 28027, España.

In this work we present a study of the different conceptual, physiopathological, 
anatomical and clinical aspects that cerebrovascular pathology has had throughout
history, from the early pre scientific beginnings of religious medicine, through 
the Renaissance period up to the Modern and Contemporary Ages. In the second part
we emphasise its social importance and economic cost, and new methodologies are
proposed for use in its study and pursuit. We also highlight the need for the
creation of stroke units.

PMID: 12134309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Rev Neurol. 2002 Jun 16-30;34(12):1183-94.

[Neuroscience in ancient Egypt and in the school of Alexandria].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín-Araguz A(1), Bustamante-Martínez C, Emam-Mansour MT, Moreno-Martínez JM.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Central del Aire, Madrid, España.
amartina@medynet.com

INTRODUCTION: About five thousand years ago, one of the most ancient, important
and enduring civilisations in the history of Mankind flourished on the banks of
the Nile. In Egypt, all the branches of human knowledge attained a high degree of
development and today it is considered the mother of medicine. Despite the marked
religious component that affected all its activities, the medicine of the
Pharaohs was practised in a rational and deductive manner, and the Egyptians were
the inventors of clinical observation.
METHOD: The desert climate of the Nile Valley has preserved monuments, mummies
and papyruses which have enabled us to get a certain idea of the degree of
development reached in medical matters. The aim of this work is to analyse them
from a neuroscientific point of view. The anatomical discoveries of the Egyptians
originated in the inspection of wounds and the practice of embalming. They came
to know a large number of diagnoses and were able to prescribe many different
forms of treatment. They also attained a certain proficiency in dealing with
neurotraumatological patients. They practised anamnesis, prognostics and a
regulated surgery that infrequently included trephination. Their conservatism
meant that, after the Macedonian domination, the traditional Egyptian medicine
was replaced the Greek medicinal arts, which reached their maximum period of
splendour in the School of Alexandria, where Herophilus and Erasistratus,
pioneers in the study of anatomy and brain circulation, were especially renowned.
CONCLUSIONS: From the point of view of the neurosciences, the Egyptians were the 
first to describe the brain, migraine, epilepsy, strokes, tetanus, Bell s palsy
and the sequelae of head injuries and of spinal transection. Their artwork
sometimes shows neurological patients and, according to Herodotus, there were
doctors who were specialised in head diseases and could therefore be considered
the precursors of our present day neurologists.

PMID: 12134287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2002 Jun;31(2):431-9, viii.

Animal models of autoimmune polyglandular syndrome.

Ikegami H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
ikegami@geriat.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

Animal models for autoimmune polyglandular syndrome that are either spontaneous
or induced by manipulations are presented. In addition, recent cloning of the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene responsible for autoimmune polyglandular
syndrome type I, and its homologue in mice, Aire, provided the opportunity to
study the effect of this gene on autoimmune diseases by producing knockout mice. 
These animal models make it possible to perform experiments that cannot be
performed in humans, which will increase our understanding of the cause and
molecular mechanisms of the autoimmune diseases and lead to the development of
effective methods for their prevention and intervention.

PMID: 12092459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2002 Jun;31(2):321-38, vi.

Population genetics and functions of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE).

Kumar PG(1), Laloraya M, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, Center for
Mammalian Genetics and Diabetes Center of Excellence, College of Medicine, Box
100275, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

The autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS1), also known as autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APS1), is a monogenic
autosomal disease with recessive inheritance. It is characterized by chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis, multiple autoimmune endocrinopathies, and ectodermal
dystrophies. The defective gene responsible for this disease has been identified 
and named "autoimmune regulator" (AIRE). The AIRE gene is located on chromosome
21q22.3. At least 45 different disease-causing mutations in AIRE have been
discovered. This review summarizes the global distribution of AIRE mutations and 
the relevance of major mutations to the clinical disorders associated with APS1. 
We also will review studies on the structure and DNA-binding ability of the AIRE 
protein and the possible malfunctions of the AIRE protein as a result of major
disease-causing mutations.

PMID: 12092453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Res Vet Sci. 2002 Jun;72(3):186-93.

An unusual mechanism of disposal of superfluous spermatozoa in vasectomised
quails.

Aire TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Onderstepoort 0110, Republic of South Africa.

As part of a series of studies designed to evaluate usual and potential functions
of epithelial cells in the avian epididymis under varying circumstances, adult,
sexually active male Japanese quails were vasectomised for 3, 6 and 8 weeks. The 
testes, epididymides and deferent ducts were studied histologically and
ultrastructurally. Testicular lesions were minimal, but epididymal response was
profound. Non-ciliated (type I) cells of the proximal efferent duct (PED)
actively phagocytized spermatozoa and their fragments. An especially noteworthy
and apparently novel observation was the proliferation of the lining epithelium
in parts of the PED to form additional adluminal sheets of spermiophagic
epithelium which did not lie directly on basal laminae. These sheets were
composed exclusively of non-ciliated cells. Spermatozoal dissolution and
macrophage activity were also important mechanisms for the disposal of
superfluous and incarcerated spermatozoa in the epididymis of this bird.

Copyright 2002 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 12076112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jun;87(6):2568-74.

AIRE mutations and human leukocyte antigen genotypes as determinants of the
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy phenotype.

Halonen M(1), Eskelin P, Myhre AG, Perheentupa J, Husebye ES, Kämpe O, Rorsman F,
Peltonen L, Ulmanen I, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute,
Biomedicum, Haartmaninkatu 8, FIN-00290 Helsinki, Finland. maria.halonen@ktl.fi

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED, OMIM
240300) is a rare autoimmune disease caused by mutations in the autoimmune
regulator (AIRE) gene on chromosome 21q22.3. This monogenic disease provides an
interesting model for studies of other common and more complex autoimmune
diseases. The most common components of APECED are chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, and Addison's disease, but several other
endocrine deficiencies and ectodermal dystrophies also occur and the phenotype
varies widely. The AIRE genotype also varies; 42 different mutations have been
reported so far. To understand the complexity of the phenotype, we studied the
AIRE and human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II genotypes in a series of patients
with APECED. The only association between the phenotype and the AIRE genotype was
the higher prevalence of candidiasis in the patients with the most common
mutation, R257X, than in those with other mutations. Addison's disease was
associated with HLA-DRB1*03 (P = 0.021), alopecia with HLA-DRB1*04- DQB1*0302 (P 
< 0.001), whereas type 1 diabetes correlated negatively with
HLA-DRB1*15-DQB1*0602 (P = 0.036). The same HLA associations have previously been
established for non-APECED patients. We conclude that mutation of AIRE per se has
little influence on the APECED phenotype, whereas, in contrast to earlier
reports, HLA class II is a significant determinant.

PMID: 12050215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Anat Histol Embryol. 2002 Apr;31(2):113-8.

Cyclical reproductive changes in the non-ciliated epithelia of the epididymis of 
birds.

Aire TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Onderstepoort 0110, Republic of South Africa.
taire@op.up.ac.za

The epididymis of two species of domestic birds, the domestic fowl (Gallus
domesticus), duck (Anas platyrhynchos), and of domestic and feral guinea-fowl
(Numida meleagris) was studied during the three main phases of the reproductive
cycle (prepuberal, sexually mature and active, and sexually mature but inactive
or resting) with a view to identifying major histological and ultrastructural
changes associated with and distinctive for each phase. Rete testis cells
accumulated numerous variably sized lipid droplets in all birds, as well as large
heterogeneous and lipofuscin-containing dense bodies in the guinea-fowl, during
the resting but not in the other phases. The principal or Type III cells of the
connecting and epididymal ducts exhibited profound structural changes, including,
but not limited to, rarefied cytoplasm, inconspicuous and general loss of
sparsely granular endoplasmic reticulum, loss of secretory vesicles in the drake,
and an enhanced and conspicuous presence of lipid droplets in the guinea-fowl.
The rete cells appeared to be less sensitive than the Type III cells to a reduced
level or absence of lumenal androgens. These phase-dependent changes may help to 
prevent or minimize discrepancies in the interpretation of the normal structure
of the epididymis in birds during the sexually active phase, as distinct from the
other two phases and their intermediate phases.

PMID: 12047247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Toxicol Lett. 2002 May 10;131(1-2):39-50.

Exposure simulation for pharmaceuticals in European surface waters with GREAT-ER.

Schowanek D(1), Webb S.

Author information: 
(1)Procter & Gamble Eurocor, Temselaan 100, B-1853 Strombeek-Bever, Belgium.

The Geo-referenced Regional Exposure Assessment Tool for European Rivers
(GREAT-ER) model was developed as an aquatic chemical exposure prediction tool
for use within environmental risk assessment (ERA) schemes and river basin
management. The GREAT-ER software calculates the distribution of predicted
environmental concentrations (PECs) of consumer chemicals in surface waters, for 
individual river stretches, as well as representative average PECs for entire
catchments. The system uses an ARC/INFO-ArcView (ESRI) based Geographical
Information System (GIS) for data storage and visualization, combined with simple
mathematical models for prediction of chemical fate. Use of GREAT-ER 1.03 to
derive PECs is illustrated for Ethinyl Oestradiol, Paracetamol, Aspirin,
Dextropropoxyphene, Clofibrate and Oxytetracycline in three river basins, i.e.
Aire (UK), Lambro (Italy) and Rur (Germany). In contrast with household consumer 
chemicals the transformation of pharmaceuticals in the human body needs to be
incorporated in the emission estimation. The "PECinitial" of these
pharmaceuticals in surface waters ranges from >1 microg/l (Oxytetracycline and
Paracetamol) down to <1 ng/l (Ethinyl Oestradiol). Risk characterization
employing PECs or measured environmental concentrations (MECs) and
predicted-no-effect-concentrations (PNECs) from available ecotoxicity data is
also reported.

PMID: 11988357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Morphol. 2002 Jul;253(1):64-75.

Morphological changes in the efferent ducts during the main phases of the
reproductive cycle of birds.

Aire TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Pretoria, 
Onderstepoort 0110, South Africa. taire@op.up.ac.za

The changes that take place in the efferent ducts during the major phases of the 
reproductive cycle of birds were studied morphologically using standard
histological, morphometric, and ultrastructural methods in prepuberal, sexually
mature and sexually active, and sexually mature but sexually inactive domestic
fowl (Gallus domesticus), drake (Anas platyrhynchos), and guinea fowl (Numida
meleagris). Profound structural and dimensional changes occurred in both segments
(proximal and distal) of the efferent ducts and, in particular, in the
nonciliated (Type I) cell of the proximal duct of sexually mature but inactive
birds. The subapical tubulovacuolar system was markedly atrophic in nonciliated
(Types I and II) cells and the numerous round dense globules of Type I cells that
normally occurred in sexually active birds were replaced by fewer and more
pleomorphic bodies containing lipofuscin granules in sexually resting birds.
Lipid droplets, few and extremely large in inactive drakes but numerous and
smaller in size in guinea fowls and domestic fowls, occurred in the Type I cell
at both infra- and supranuclear levels of resting but not in prepuberal or
sexually active birds. Ciliated cells in both segments of the ducts exhibited
fewer and less profound phase-dependent changes ultrastructurally. Generally, the
Type I cells of the proximal efferent duct appeared to be more sensitive to
androgen deprivation than the Type II cell of the distal efferent duct or
ciliated cells in both ducts. These morphologically phase-dependent features of
the efferent ducts of birds may be used, together with or independent of
testicular changes, in the determination of the status of the testis and
epididymis of a male bird with regard to the reproductive cycle, especially in
seasonally breeding species.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11981805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Mol Med (Berl). 2002 Apr;80(4):201-11. Epub 2002 Feb 5.

The genetic background of autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal
dystrophy and its autoimmune disease components.

Vogel A(1), Strassburg CP, Obermayer-Straub P, Brabant G, Manns MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Medical School 
of Hanover Carl-Neubergstrasse 1, 30625 Hanover, Germany.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by an immune-mediated destruction of
endocrine tissues, chronic candidiasis, and additional ectodermal disorders. In
contrast to many other autoimmune diseases, APECED is associated with mutations
of a single gene, designated autoimmune regulator (AIRE). To date, 45 different
mutations of the AIRE gene have been identified and are distributed throughout
the entire coding region. Several of the AIRE mutations predict the transcription
and translation of a truncated protein, which may be nonfunctional. In contrast
to the genetic background of APECED, in all of the autoimmune conditions
typically associated with APECED the conclusive role of a single genetic locus
capable of providing insight into the etiology of the disease has not been
identified. Here we provide an overview of the current clinical and genetic
features of APECED in comparison to the genetic background of the frequently
associated disease components of APECED.

PMID: 11976729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Eur J Endocrinol. 2002 Apr;146(4):519-22.

Mutational analysis of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene in sporadic
autoimmune Addison's disease can reveal patients with unidentified autoimmune
polyendocrine syndrome type I.

Bøe AS(1), Knappskog PM, Myhre AG, Sørheim JI, Husebye ES.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Institute of Medicine, Haukeland University
Hospital, N-5021 Bergen, Norway. Anette.Boe@med.uib.no

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether patients with Addison's disease and
polyendocrine syndromes have undiagnosed autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I
(APS I).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty patients with clinical manifestations resembling APS
I and with autoantibodies typical of this condition were screened for Norwegian
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene mutations.
RESULTS: A 30-year old man who had developed Addison' s disease at the age of 12,
but had no other components of APS I, was homozygous for the 1094-1106 deletion
mutation in exon 8 of the AIRE gene, the most common mutation found in Norway.
CONCLUSIONS: APS I patients with milder and atypical phenotypes are difficult to 
diagnose on clinical grounds. Autoantibody analysis and mutational analysis of
AIRE may therefore be helpful modalities for identifying these individuals.

PMID: 11916620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Respir Med. 2002 Mar;96(3):142-9.

Asthma control and differences in management practices across seven European
countries.

Vermeire PA(1), Rabe KF, Soriano JB, Maier WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Antwerp (UIA), Belgium.
paul.vermeire@ua.ac.be

Failure to follow asthma management guidelines may result in poor asthma control 
for many patients. The Asthma Insights and Reality in Europe (AIRE) survey, a
multi-national survey assessing the level of asthma control from the patients
perspective in seven Western European countries, previously demonstrated that the
Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) guideline goals were not achieved in Western 
Europe and that both adults and children with asthma were poorly controlled.
Using additional data on asthma management practices from each of the seven
countries in the AIRE survey, we compared variations in asthma morbidity and
asthma management practices across countries to provide insight into the reasons 
for poor asthma control. Asthma management practices and asthma control among
adults and children with current asthma were suboptimal in each of seven
countries surveyed. Among patients with symptoms of severe persistent asthma,
over 40% reported their asthma was well or completely controlled. School absence 
due to asthma was reported by upto 52.7% of children and up to 27.6% of adult
reported work absence due to asthma. Lung function testing in the past year was
uncommon: ranging from 13.5% of children in the U.K. to 68.8% of adults in
Germany. Written asthma management plans were used by less than 50% of adults and
less than 61% of children in all seven countries. Most adults (49.5-73.0%) and a 
large proportion of children (38.4-70.6%) had follow-up visits for their asthma
only when problems developed. The ratio of recent inhaled corticosteroid use to
recent short-acting beta-agonist use was inappropriate (<1) among patients with
symptoms of severe asthma in all countries. This disparity was greatest among
adults in Italy and France, where recent inhaled corticosteroid use was reported 
by less than one in nine patients reporting recent use of short-acting
bronchodialators (IS:SAB <0.11). Management practices differ between countries
and additional public health interventions and resources may be necessary to
reduce patient suffering. Further efforts to fully implement asthma management
guidelines are required to improve asthma control in Europe.

PMID: 11905548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2002 May;72(1-2):423-9.

Acute third ventricular administration of insulin decreases food intake in two
paradigms.

Air EL(1), Benoit SC, Blake Smith KA, Clegg DJ, Woods SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH
45267, USA. aire@ucmail.uc.edu

The pancreatic hormone, insulin, has been hypothesized to be an important
regulator of food intake. Consistent with this hypothesis is the finding that
exogenous insulin, in doses that do not affect blood glucose, reliably suppresses
food intake and body weight. However, previous experiments have utilized a
long-term delivery paradigm, in which insulin is administered via osmotic
minipump and changes in body weight and food intake are measured across days. In 
separate experiments, we report that acute central injections of insulin can
reduce food intake. In Experiment 1, injection of insulin (8 mU) into the third
cerebral ventricle reliably suppressed intake of pelleted rat chow beginning at
onset of the rats' dark phase. In Experiment 2, central insulin reliably and dose
dependently suppressed intake of a 1-h 15% sucrose meal in the middle of the
light phase. These data suggest that insulin can reduce food intake in acute
delivery paradigms and provide another means by which to assess the roles of
other central systems in the mediation of insulin's effects on energy
homeostasis.

PMID: 11900815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Actas Urol Esp. 2002 Jan;26(1):57-9.

[Synchronous primary urologic triple neoplasia. Report of a new case and review
of the literature].

[Article in Spanish]

Vallejo Herrador J(1), Sánchez de la Muela P, Diz Rodríguez R, Martín-Laborda F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Urología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

Herein we present the case of a patient who went to the emergency department
complaining of haematuria. With a conservative management, the radiologic and
endoscopic studies show a bladder tumour and an incidental left renal mass. After
several radical procedures, the last a cystoprostatectomy, it was shown that the 
patient had a new tumour inside his prostate gland. We comment the surgical
procedures, the clinical evolution and the five years follow-up. We review the
few cases described in the literature.

PMID: 11899743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 2002 Feb;20(2):98-101.

[Mixed bacterial infections of the oral cavity].

[Article in Spanish]

Maestre JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Microbiología Clínica, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

PMID: 11886687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2002 Mar;21(3):480-8.

The potential for estradiol and ethinylestradiol degradation in English rivers.

Jürgens MD(1), Holthaus KI, Johnson AC, Smith JL, Hetheridge M, Williams RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Wallingford, Oxon, United Kingdom.

Water samples were collected in spring, summer, and winter from English rivers in
urban/industrial (River Aire and River Calder, Yorkshire, UK) and rural
environments (River Thames, Oxfordshire, UK) to study the biodegradation
potential of the key steroid estrogen 17beta-estradiol (E2) and its synthetic
derivate ethinylestradiol (EE2). Microorganisms in the river water samples were
capable of transforming E2 to estrone (E1) with half-lives of 0.2 to 9 d when
incubated at 20 degrees C. The E1 was then further degraded at similar rates. The
most rapid biodegradation rates were associated with the downstream summer
samples of the River Aire and River Calder. E2 degradation rates were similar for
spiking concentrations throughout the range of 20 ng/L to 500 microg/L. Microbial
cleavage of the steroid ring system was demonstrated by release of radiolabeled
CO2 from the aromatic ring of E2 (position 4). When E2 was degraded, the loss of 
estrogenicity, measured by the yeast estrogen screen (YES) assay, closely
followed the loss of the parent molecule. Thus, apart from the transient
formation of E1, the degradation of E2 does not form other significantly
estrogenic intermediates. The E2 could also be degraded when incubated with
anaerobic bed sediments. Compared to E2, EE2 was much more resistant to
biodegradation, but both E2 and EE2 were susceptible to photodegradation, with
half-lives in the order of 10 d under ideal conditions.

PMID: 11883412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2002 Mar;21(3):515-9.

Reduction in the estrogenic activity of a treated sewage effluent discharge to an
English river as a result of a decrease in the concentration of industrially
derived surfactants.

Sheahan DA(1), Brighty GC, Daniel M, Jobling S, Harries JE, Hurst MR, Kennedy J, 
Kirby SJ, Morris S, Routledge EJ, Sumpter JP, Waldock MJ.

Author information: 
(1)CEFAS, Centre for Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, Burnham Laboratory,
Burnham-on-Crouch, Essex, United Kingdom. d.a.sheahean@cefas.co.uk

As a result of the introduction of tighter discharge limits and effluent
treatment processes at source, the concentration of alkylphenol ethoxylates and
nonylphenol present in the final effluent discharge from a sewage treatment works
that treats trade effluent from the textiles industry was reduced. The estrogenic
effects of the final effluent discharge to the Aire River were compared over a
four-year period during which various treatment measures were introduced. Male
rainbow trout exposed to the effluent on four occasions in consecutive years
(1994-1997) showed a reduction in the level of induced vitellogenesis between
1994 and 1997. A marked decrease in gonadosomatic index (GSI) and increase in
heptaosomatic index (HSI) was measured in fish exposed to the effluent in 1994.
In successive years, these differences diminished, and in the case of the GSI no 
measurable difference was observed between fish exposed to the final effluent or 
those in the control group in 1997. However, an increase in HSI was still
measurable in 1997 in fish exposed to the final effluent and at sites farther
downstream. The reduction in the effects of the effluent paralleled the reduction
in the concentration of nonylphenol as well as its mono- and diethoxylates, which
have been demonstrated to produce estrogenic effects in trout exposed to these
compounds in the laboratory. This study demonstrates that the setting of more
restricted discharge limits for known estrogenic chemicals of industrial origin
can lead to significant reductions in the estrogenic activity of the watercourses
into which the effluents are discharged.

PMID: 11878464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Feb 15;11(4):397-409.

Aire deficient mice develop multiple features of APECED phenotype and show
altered immune response.

Ramsey C(1), Winqvist O, Puhakka L, Halonen M, Moro A, Kämpe O, Eskelin P,
Pelto-Huikko M, Peltonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, UCLA School of Medicine, Gonda Center,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095-7088, USA.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a
monogenic autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in the AIRE gene. Here 
we have produced knock-out mice for the Aire gene. The Aire-/- mice develop
normally; however, autoimmune features of APECED in Aire-/- mice are evident,
including multiorgan lymphocytic infiltration, circulating autoantibodies and
infertility. The distribution of B and T cells and thymic maturation as well as
activation of T cells appear normal, while the TCR-Vbeta repertoire is altered in
peripheral T cells of Aire-/- mice. When mice are challenged with immunization,
the peripheral T cells of Aire-/- mice have a 3-5-fold increased proliferation.
These findings suggest that the Aire gene is not necessary for normal T cell
education and development, while a defect in immune response detected in
challenged Aire-/- mice underlines the crucial role of AIRE/Aire in maintaining
homeostatic regulation in the immune system.

PMID: 11854172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 2001 Dec;19(10):475-8.

[Staphylococcus lugdunensis infection: Report of thirteen cases].

[Article in Spanish]

Sánchez P(1), Buezas V, Maestre JR.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Microbiología Clínica, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Staphylococcus lugdunensis is a coagulase-negative staphylococcus
associated with infections such as aggressive endocarditis, repeated abscess
formation and opportunist infections.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: S. lugdunensis isolates recovered at our hospital during
three years (1997-2000) were studied. The fibrinogen affinity factor and tube
free-coagulase were analysed. The identification was made by the Crystal GPID
(Becton-Dickinson) and Wider (Soria Melguizo) systems. Antibiotic sensitivity
testing was performed with Wider panels. The clinical records of patients with S.
lugdunensis recovered were studied.
RESULTS: Thirteen S. Lugdunensis isolates were recovered from the following
sources: abscess (9), surgical wound (2), blood culture (1), and urine (1). In
ten cases the microorganism was obtained in pure culture; in the remaining three 
cases, S. lugdunensis grew in mixed culture. Two cases were excluded, as S.
lugdunensis was considered not to be associated with the clinical condition.
Lesions were located at: inguinal region (4), gluteal region (2), breast (2),
abdominal wall (1), foot (1), unknown (1). Tent of the 13 isolates (76%) had
fibrinogen affinity factor. Penicillin sensitivity was observed in 11/13 strains 
(84.6%). In one case, the isolate was beta-lactamase producer (7.6%); and in
other case, the isolate was resistant to methicillin (7.6%).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study we observed that S. lugdunensis is associated with
skin and soft tisue infections, particularly abscess formation. The infection
occurs most frequently in cancer patients, as observed in three cases in our
series. The necessity of correctly identifying S. Lugdunensis is underscored. The
recovery of coagulase-negative staphylococci should not reassure us unless a
potentially pathogen species has been ruled out.

PMID: 11844452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Feb;87(2):841-6.

Delineation of the molecular defects in the AIRE gene in autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy patients from Southern Italy.

Meloni A(1), Perniola R, Faà V, Corvaglia E, Cao A, Rosatelli MC.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricerca sulle Talassemie e Anemie Mediterranee, Consiglio
Nazionale Ricerche, 09121 Cagliari.

In this study, we have carried out molecular analysis of the AIRE (autoimmune
regulator) gene in 11 patients (from 8 families) affected by autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy, originating from a
restricted area of Southern Italy (the Salento peninsula in Puglia). Of the 16
mutant AIRE alleles from the 8 probands studied, 12 carried a missense mutation
(W78R in 9, P539L in 2, and P252L in 1), 2 carried the Q358X nonsense mutation,
and 2 carried the 1058delT frameshift mutation. All these mutations except the
1058delT are novel. Each of the detected mutations either predicts a premature
termination of the protein or results in a nonconservative amino acid change,
most likely adversely affecting the function of the protein. The W78R missense
mutation is relatively common in these patients, having been detected (in
homozygosity or compound heterozygosity) in 6 of the 8 probands tested,
indicating the presence of a founder effect. The results of this study contribute
to the delineation of the molecular pathology of the AIRE gene and enhance our
ability to perform a molecular diagnosis in autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy patients from Southern Italy.

PMID: 11836330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Am J Cardiol. 2002 Jan 24;89(2A):11A-16A; discussion 16A-17A.

Angiotensin II and trials of cardiovascular outcomes.

Sleight P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of 
Oxford, England, Oxford, UK. peter.sleight@attglobal.net

Proven cardiovascular benefit from angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibition
is a cornerstone of evidence-based medicine. The first study to show dramatic
benefits from ACE inhibition was the Cooperative North Scandinavian Enalapril
Survival Study (CONSENSUS-I), in which a 31% decrease in the rate of death was
observed in patients with severe heart failure at the end of 1 year of enalapril 
treatment (p = 0.001). This result led to large long-term studies-including
Survival and Ventricular Enlargement (SAVE), Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy
(AIRE), Trandolapril Cardiac Evaluation (TRACE), and Study of Left Ventricular
Dysfunction (SOLVD)-which verified that ACE inhibition decreases heart failure,
myocardial infarction (MI), and mortality, and that striking benefit could be
observed within 30 days. Short-term studies of patients in the acute phase of a
heart attack verified that ACE inhibition provided rapid benefits. A
meta-analysis of short-term (up to 8 weeks) studies of ACE inhibition (including 
CONSENSUS-II, Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio della Sopravvivenza nell'Infarto
Miocardico [GISSI]-3, International Study of Infarct Survival [ISIS]-4, and the
Chinese Captopril Study [CCS]-1) demonstrated that post-MI risk was reduced by
10% within the first day of treatment. The immediacy of the benefit suggested
that ACE inhibition not only improved cardiovascular function in failing hearts
but also affected important mechanisms in patients without overt heart failure.
Effects on more general mechanisms of heart disease suggested that patients with 
problems other than hypertension or heart failure might benefit from ACE
inhibitors. The Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) study investigated
the hypothesis that ACE inhibition would confer benefits to patients who were at 
high risk for cardiovascular events, but who were without left ventricular
dysfunction or heart failure. Long-term reductions in MI, stroke, cardiac arrest,
and heart failure, as well as improvements in mortality, were observed in this
population after treatment with ACE inhibitors. Substudies of the HOPE study
revealed that ACE inhibition reduced progression of atherosclerosis and improved 
myocardial remodeling. Taken together, these studies provide evidence that
supports treatment of a broad population of patients at risk for cardiovascular
events with ACE inhibitors. The next step is to combine ACE inhibition with other
treatments to maximize patient benefit. The Ongoing Telmisartan Alone and in
combination with Ramipril Global Endpoint Trial (ONTARGET) will compare the
efficacy of an ACE inhibitor (ramipril) with an angiotensin receptor blocker
(telmisartan), and determine whether these treatments in combination will further
reduce morbidity and mortality from cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 11835905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Water Res. 2002 Feb;36(3):685-701.

The phosphorus content of fluvial sediment in rural and industrialized river
basins.

Owens PN(1), Walling DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geography, School of Geography & Archaeology, University of
Exeter, Devon, UK. p.n.owens@exeter.ac.uk

The phosphorus content of fluvial sediment (suspended sediment and the < 63
microm fraction of floodplain and channel bed sediment) has been examined in
contrasting rural (moorland and agricultural) and industrialized catchments in
Yorkshire, UK. The River Swale drains a rural catchment with no major urban and
industrial areas, and the total phosphorus (TP) content of fluvial sediment is
generally within the range 500-1,500 microg g(-1). There is little evidence of
any major downstream increase in TP content. In contrast, fluvial sediment from
the industrialized catchments of the Rivers Aire and Calder exhibits both higher 
levels of TP content and marked downstream increases, with values of TP content
ranging from < 2,000 microg g(-1) in headwater areas upstream of the main urban
and industrial areas, to values > 7,000 microg g(-1) at downstream sites. These
elevated levels reflect P inputs from point sources, such as sewage treatment
works (STWs) and combined sewer overflows. The influence of STWs is further
demonstrated by the downstream increase in the inorganic P/organic P ratio from <
2 in the headwaters to > 4 in the lower reaches. Comparison of the P content of
suspended sediment with that of the <63 microm fraction of potential source
materials suggests that topsoil from upland moorland/pasture and from cultivated 
areas, and channel bank material are likely to be the main sources of particulate
P (PP) in the River Swale and in the headwaters of the Rivers Aire and Calder. In
the middle and lower reaches of the Rivers Aire and Calder, inputs associated
with urban and industrial land uses, such as STWs, industrial effluents and
street dust, are likely to represent the dominant sources of PP. During high flow
events, such urban inputs may be diluted by inputs from moorland and agricultural
land in the headwaters. Consequently, for all three rivers, there are inverse
relationships between the TP content of suspended sediment and both discharge and
suspended sediment concentration, reflecting changes in sediment and P sources
during high flow events. Spatial variations in the P contents of the < 63 microm 
fraction of overbank floodplain deposits and channel bed sediment evidence a
similar pattern as those for suspended sediment, with relatively low levels of TP
in the River Swale and elevated levels in the middle and downstream reaches of
the Rivers Aire and Calder. The PP concentrations associated with floodplain and 
channel bed sediment are, however, lower than equivalent values for suspended
sediment, and this primarily reflects the differences in the particle size
composition between the three types of sediments. Rates of floodplain deposition 
and the amounts of fine-grained sediment stored in the river channels are
relatively high, and suggest that such environments may represent important sinks
for PP. Based on the sediment samples collected from the study basins, a simple
four-fold classification which relates the TP content of suspended sediment to
upstream land use has been established. Both the range and the absolute values of
TP content tend to increase with an increase in the level of urbanization and
industrialization.

PMID: 11827331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Keio J Med. 2001 Dec;50(4):225-39.

The autoimmune regulator: a key toward understanding the molecular pathogenesis
of autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy.

Meriluoto T(1), Halonen M, Pelto-Huikko M, Kangas H, Korhonen J, Kolmer M,
Ulmanen I, Eskelin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, 
Finland. tanja.meriluoto@ktl.fi

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is an
autoimmune disease with autosomal recessive inheritance. APECED is characterized 
by the breakdown of tolerance to several organ-specific selfantigens. The
symptoms of APECED fall into three main categories: autoimmune
polyendocrinopathies, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, and ectodermal
dystrophies. The gene defective in APECED, AIRE, has been cloned and numerous
mutations in this gene have been found in patients with APECED. AIRE is predicted
to encode a 545-amino-acid protein containing structural domains characteristic
for transcription regulators. The protein has been shown to act as a
transcriptional activator in vitro. The AIRE protein is mainly localized to the
nucleus, where it can be detected as speckles resembling nuclear bodies. In
humans, the expression of AIRE has been observed predominantly in immunologically
relevant tissues, especially the thymus. Recently, we have shown in the mouse
that Aire is also expressed in various tissues and cell types outside the immune 
system.

PMID: 11806500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Immunol Lett. 2002 Mar 1;80(3):195-8.

Expression of AIRE gene in peripheral monocyte/dendritic cell lineage.

Kogawa K(1), Nagafuchi S, Katsuta H, Kudoh J, Tamiya S, Sakai Y, Shimizu N,
Harada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Biosystemic Science, Kyushu University Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Fukuoka 812, Japan.

The responsible gene for autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1, known as
autoimmune regulator (AIRE), was identified by positional cloning. The AIRE gene 
was reported to be expressed in the thymus medulla and lymph nodes. However, an
expression of the AIRE gene in peripheral blood cells has not yet been reported. 
In the present study, we found that the AIRE gene was restrictively expressed in 
peripheral CD14-positive monocytes but not in CD4-positive T cells nor
polymorphonuclear cells, as assessed by RT-PCR. Moreover, immunocytochemical
study revealed the expression of the AIRE protein not only in CD14-positive
monocytes but also in differentiated dendritic cells, cultured in RPMI1640 medium
containing 800 U/ml GM-CSF, 1000 U/ml IL-4 and 100 U/ml TNF-alpha. Thus, it was
concluded that the AIRE gene is restrictively expressed in the peripheral
monocyte/dendritic cell lineage.

PMID: 11803052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Neurocirugia (Astur). 2001 Dec;12(6):509-12.

[Epidural lumbar hematoma, epidural anesthesia and low-molecular-weight
heparins].

[Article in Spanish]

Rodríguez-Arias CA(1), Martínez R, Mac-Veigh I, Taboada M.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurocirugía, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

Epidural hematoma is an uncommon but serious complication of epidural
anaesthesia. The use of low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) as thromboprophylaxis
has increased the occurrence of this pathology. We report the case of a
81-year-old man who underwent an arthroscopy of the knee, with epidural
anaesthesia and administration of LMWH. The patient suffered an important pain
due to a lumbar epidural haematoma which was diagnosed by magnetic resonance,
after withdrawal of the epidural catheter. He improved after surgical evacuation,
and no neurological deficit was present. We comment the association of LMWH,
epidural anaesthesia and epidural haematoma.

PMID: 11787399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2001 Dec;20(12):2841-7.

Sexual disruption in a second species of wild cyprinid fish (the gudgeon, Gobio
gobio) in United Kingdom freshwaters.

van Aerle R(1), Nolan TM, Jobling S, Christiansen LB, Sumpter JP, Tyler CR.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental and Molecular Fish Biology, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Exeter, United Kingdom. r.van-aerle@exeter.ac.uk

To establish whether the intersex condition seen in the roach (Rutilus rutilus)
in United Kingdom (UK) rivers was species specific or a more general phenomenon
in fish, evidence for sexual disruption was sought in a second cyprinid species, 
the gudgeon (Gobio gobio). Gudgeon were collected from the Rivers Aire and Lea
(at locations that receive high-volume discharges of sewage treatment works [STW]
effluent and that contain intersex roach) and from two still waters, and their
gonads were examined histologically for evidence of intersexuality (the
simultaneous presence of oocytes and testicular tissue). Intersex gonads were
found at all sites, with the highest incidences occurring at one of the still
waters (Lakeside Fisheries: 15%) and at sites on the River Aire (Thwaite Weir,
Silsden Bridge, and Knostrop: 14, 13, and 12%, respectively). In the River Lea
and Longton Park Lake, the incidence of intersexuality in gudgeon was 6%. In most
cases, intersex gonads were characterized by a few primary oocytes/gonad section 
in an otherwise normal testis. However, at some sites on the River Aire (Thwaite 
Weir and Knostrop), the intersex condition was more severe. At Thwaite Weir, for 
example, more than half of the gonad in 40% of the intersex fish was comprised of
ovarian tissue. Elevated concentrations of plasma vitellogenin both in male and
in intersex fish indicated that fish had been exposed to estrogen(s). Some of the
gudgeon were found at sites several kilometers downstream of any point discharge 
of STW effluent; therefore, the results likely are representative of this species
in wild populations found in typical UK river ecosystems. Together with the
findings in the roach, these data on the gudgeon confirm that sexual disruption
in fish in UK rivers is not species specific.

PMID: 11764169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Afr J AIDS Res. 2002;1(2):125-42. doi: 10.2989/16085906.2002.9626552.

AIDS, individual behaviour and the unexplained remaining variation.

Katz A(1).

Author information: 
(1)a 15 Chemin du Passeur , 1219 , Aire , Switzerland.

From the start of the AIDS pandemic, individual behaviour has been put forward,
implicitly or explicitly, as the main explanatory concept for understanding the
epidemiology of HIV infection and in particular for the rapid spread and high
prevalence in sub-Saharan Africa. This has had enormous implications for the
international response to AIDS and has heavily influenced public health policy
and strategy and the design of prevention and care interventions at national,
community and individual level. It is argued that individual behaviour alone
cannot possibly account for the enormous variation in HIV prevalence between
population groups, countries and regions and that the unexplained remaining
variation has been neglected by the international AIDS community. Biological
vulnerability to HIV due to seriously deficient immune systems has been ignored
as a determinant of the high levels of infection in certain populations. This is 
in sharp contrast to well proven public health approaches to other infectious
diseases. In particular, it is argued that poor nutrition and co-infection with
the myriad of other diseases of poverty including tuberculosis, malaria,
leishmaniasis and parasitic infections, have been neglected as root causes of
susceptibility, infectiousness and high rates of transmission of HIV at the level
of populations. Vulnerability in terms of non-biological factors such as labour
migration, prostitution, exchange of sex for survival, population movements due
to war and violence, has received some attention but the solutions proposed to
these problems are also inappropriately focused on individual behaviour and
suffer from the same neglect of economic and political root causes. As the
foundation for the international community's response to the AIDS pandemic,
explanations of HIV/AIDS epidemiology in terms of individual behaviour are not
only grossly inadequate, they are highly stigmatising and may in some cases, be
racist. They have diverted attention from poverty and powerlessness as root
causes of vulnerability to infection and as such they are a waste of scarce
resources. A return to a basic needs approach to all the diseases of poverty is
nothing more than proven public health wisdom and experience. A sustainable and
meaningful response to AIDS is simultaneously a sustainable and meaningful
response to all the diseases of poverty. The obstacles to the adoption of this
approach are economic and political and must be confronted at the level of
international financial institutions, the globalisation of neoliberal economic
systems, the growing power imbalances between and within nations and the
undermining of democracy and national sovereignty. An alternative strategy for
AIDS and the other diseases of poverty would build on macroeconomic reforms for a
fair, rational and sustainable international economic order so that
democratically elected governments may meet their people's basic needs, including
health, without external interference.

PMID: 25871816  [PubMed]


336. Rev Esp Quimioter. 2001 Sep;14(3):232-7.

[Advantages and disadvantages of topical antifungal agents].

[Article in Spanish]

Vera JR(1), Cervera LA.

Author information: 
(1)Dpto. de Microbiología, Hospital del Aire, Universidad Complutense, Madrid.

PMID: 11753443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Lung Cancer. 2002 Jan;35(1):23-8.

Prognostic significance of tumor infiltrating natural killer cells subset CD57 in
patients with squamous cell lung cancer.

Villegas FR(1), Coca S, Villarrubia VG, Jiménez R, Chillón MJ, Jareño J, Zuil M, 
Callol L.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, C/ Arturo Soria 82,
28027, Madrid, Spain. villegasfernandez@hotmail.com

Natural killer (NK) cells have been implied in the resistance against certain
tumors and virally-infected cells. The prognostic significance of tumor
infiltrating NK cells in primary squamous cell lung carcinoma (SqCLC) has not
been fully studied. Fifty patients with primary SqCLC were evaluated for the
presence of tumor infiltrating natural killer cells subset CD57 (TINK) after
surgery. None of them received adjuvant therapy. Immunohistochemical studies of
surgery pieces were performed by using the monoclonal antibody CD57. The number
of TINK cells was counted by using a MICRON image analyzer. The total area
studied for each tumor was of 1 cm(2). In this area, 50 intratumoral fields of
0.173 mm(2) were selected. The reference value used was the median (five TINK
cells/field) of all tumors analyzed. After a minimum follow-up of 2 years the
Kaplan-Meier method was used to obtain survival curves. Multivariate analysis
were performed by using the Cox regression model. The survival was significantly 
better in patients with more than five TINK cells/field (Logrank P=0.0317).
According to TNM classification, in those patients screened as stage IB (37
patients) the differences in survival were significantly higher (Logrank
P=0.0016). In the multivariate analysis including TNM (surgical-pathologic
stage), age, and endoscopy localization, the risk of death in patients with less 
than five TINK cells/field was 2.50 fold higher (CI 95%; range 1.07-5.85) than in
those patients with more than five TINK cells/field. These results show that TINK
cells appear to be a prognostic factor in the survival of patients with SqCLC.
The possible antitumoral role of these cells in SqCLC is discussed.

PMID: 11750709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Neurocirugia (Astur). 2001 Aug;12(4):348-55.

[Radiation-induced intracerebral sarcoma].

[Article in Spanish]

Cañizal-García JM(1), Bárcena-Orbe A, Mestre-Moreiro C, Rivero-Martín B,
Rodriguez-Arias CA, Coca-Menchero S.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurocirugía, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

We report a case of radiation-induced sarcoma in a 50 year-old male patient who
was treated with total resection and radiation for right temporal lobe PNET. He
received a dose of 60-Gy. A sequential magnetic resonance image 32 months after
the completion of radiation therapy and 34 months after surgery showed a mass in 
the right temporal cerebral convexity. The postoperative diagnosis was sarcoma.
Two years later the patient was operated because of a new lesion with similar
characteristics. The follow up from the PNET diagnosis is 5 years and 10 months
and the survival from sarcoma diagnosis is now 3 years and there is no evidence
of recurrence. The development of sarcoma subsequent to cranial irradiation is an
infrequent event but it should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a
lesion that progresses several years after radiation therapy or when a new lesion
appear.

PMID: 11706681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Chemosphere. 2001 Oct;45(3):329-37.

The evolution of the pH in Europe (1986-1997) using panel data.

Marín E(1), Pérez-Amaral T, Rúa A, Hernández E.

Author information: 
(1)Dpto. Física del Aire, Facultad de Físicas Avda, Universidad Complutense,
Madrid, Spain.

The temporal evolution of pH values in precipitation over Europe during the
period 1986-1997 is examined using panel data. The use of panel data techniques
allows us to determine the temporal evolution of groups of stations rather than
analyzing the temporal behavior of each of them. The analysis reveals three
different temporal patterns: Peripheral, Central and French. We find a
significant increasing trend (P < 0.00001) in both Peripheral and Central
patterns. The annual increases are +0.057 pH-units yr(-1) and +0.022 pH-units
yr(-1) respectively. However the French pattern is characterized by a significant
decreasing trend (P < 0.004) and the annual decrease is -0.022 pH-units yr(-1).
The standard errors of panel data estimates are around 47% smaller than those of 
classical pooling and 32% smaller than aggregate time-series regression. The use 
of panel data produces higher R2 values than classical pooling and aggregate
data. This technique takes into account the individual heterogeneity, allows a
larger number of data points and improves the efficiency of the estimates. In
general, the policies of governments to reduce pollutant emissions seem to be
effective.

PMID: 11592423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Air Waste Manag Assoc. 2001 Sep;51(9):1346-50.

Multivariate space analysis of the major precipitation ions over Europe,
1986-1997.

Marín E(1), Hernández E, Bourhim S, Rúa A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Física del Aire, Facultad de CC. Físicas, Universidad
Complutense, Madrid, Spain.

The annual average concentrations (1986-1997) of the major ions SO4(2-), NO3-,
Cl-, NH4+, Na+, Mg2+, Ca2+, and K+ in precipitation are analyzed for selected
EMEP stations. The objective is to determine the ion patterns or typologies in
precipitation by principal component analysis (PCA) combined with a cluster
analysis. SO4(2-) and NO3- ions are predominant in central and eastern Europe.
This area corresponds to high emissions of SO2 and NO2. Sea spray ions are
predominant in coastal sites. The soil components show an important contribution 
in southern Europe, possibly due to the soil dust transported from northern
Africa.

PMID: 11575888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Rev Neurol. 2001 Jul 1-15;33(1):82-9.

[Antoniana Margarita: Gómez Pereira, Francisco Lobato and the antecedents of
cerebral mechanicism during the Spanish renaissance].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín-Araguz A(1), Bustamante-Martínez C, Fernández-Armayor Ajo V,
Moreno-Martínez JM, Olmedilla-González N, García De La Rocha ML, Sierra-Sierra I.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología; Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid, 28017,
España. amartina@medynet.com

The year 2000 is the fifth century of the birth, in Medina del Campo (Vallodolid,
Spain) of licenciado Perea (Gomez Perea or Pereira). A man of the Renaissance, he
was an outstanding doctor, humanist, theologist, nominalist philosopher,
naturalist and practical engineer. He developed the first modern theory of
behavior, based purely on mechanicistic principles, describing his ideas in a
text known by the curious title of Antoniana Margarita. The objective of this
paper is to pay him homage on the fifth centenary of his birth, making a
historiographic study of Gomez Perea and his works, with particular emphasis on
the ideological basis and its relationship with Renaissance hydraulic
engineering, collaborating with his colleague Francisco Lobato, author of one of 
the only two pretechnological codices of sixteenth century Spain. The book
Antoniana Margarita is written in Renaissance Latin and was published in Medina
del Campo in 1554. It represents the first truly modern approach to brain
function which excludes the providencialist concepts of Galen involving the soul 
and the spirit, in vogue until then, transmitted through the Arab and Scholastic 
tradition. Analyzing his theory of the automatism of animals Perea made the first
description ever of the reflex arc and the conditioned reflex. He also
established a topographical model of the brain in which he sketched the
functioning of the prefrontal cortex and neurophysiology of memory. Perea was the
immediate forerunner of Neuropsychology and of the methodology and organicist
thought which predominates in modern Neurobiology. He was also a visionary of the
Evolution of Darwin and of modern aetiology.

PMID: 11562865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 2;276(44):41357-64. Epub 2001 Aug 31.

The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is a DNA-binding protein.

Kumar PG(1), Laloraya M, Wang CY, Ruan QG, Davoodi-Semiromi A, Kao KJ, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, Center for
Mammalian Genetics and Diabetes Center of Excellence, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) protein is a putative transcription regulator
with two plant homeodomain-type zinc fingers, a putative DNA-binding domain
(SAND), and four nuclear receptor binding LXXLL motifs. We have shown here that
in vitro, recombinant AIRE can form homodimers and homotetramers that were also
detected in thymic protein extracts. Recombinant AIRE also oligomerizes
spontaneously upon phosphorylation by cAMP dependent protein kinase A or protein 
kinase C. Similarly, thymic AIRE protein is phosphorylated at the tyrosine and
serine/threonine residues. AIRE dimers and tetramers, but not the monomers, can
bind to G-doublets with the ATTGGTTA motif and the TTATTA-box. Competition assays
revealed that sequences with one TTATTA motif and two tandem repeats of ATTGGTTA 
had the highest binding affinity. These findings demonstrate that AIRE is an
important DNA binding molecule involved in immune regulation.

PMID: 11533054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Hum Mutat. 2001 Sep;18(3):225-32.

Novel AIRE mutations and P450 cytochrome autoantibodies in Central and Eastern
European patients with APECED.

Cihakova D(1), Trebusak K, Heino M, Fadeyev V, Tiulpakov A, Battelino T, Tar A,
Halász Z, Blümel P, Tawfik S, Krohn K, Lebl J, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere, Department of
Pathology, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
recessive disorder that results in several autoimmune diseases due to the
mutations in the AIRE (autoimmune regulator) gene. APECED patients develop
several autoimmune endocrine disorders and are characterized by the high titer
autoantibodies to organ-specific antigens such as the steroidogenic P450
cytochromes. So far, 38 mutations have been identified in the AIRE gene. We
report here the genetic and autoantibody analysis of 27 APECED patients of
Eastern and Central European origins and one Egyptian patient. From 54 analyzed
APECED chromosomes, eight mutations were detected, four of which (T16M, W78R,
IVS1_IVS4, 30-53dup23bp) are novel. The most prevalent reason for APECED in these
populations was the occurrence of R257X (36 chromosomes) that has been described 
earlier as a common and recurrent mutation in several other populations. The
analysis of humoral immunity to steroidogenic P450 cytochromes by the
immunoblotting of E. coli expressed antigens in the 18 APECED patients showed
that 67%, 44%, and 61% of the Eastern and Central European APECED patients had
autoantibodies to P450c17, P450c21, and P450scc, respectively.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11524733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Hum Mutat. 2001 Sep;18(3):205-11.

APECED mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene.

Heino M(1), Peterson P, Kudoh J, Shimizu N, Antonarakis SE, Scott HS, Krohn K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere and Department of
Pathology, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland. mh55012@uta.fi

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
recessively inherited disorder caused by mutations in the AIRE (autoimmune
regulator) gene. APECED is characterized by variable combinations of endocrine
autoimmune diseases such as Addison's disease, hypoparathyroidism, and type 1
diabetes. The AIRE protein contains motifs suggestive of a transcription
regulator and can activate transcription of a reporter gene when fused to a
heterologous DNA biding domain. In this article, mutation analyses of over 200
APECED patients published by several laboratories are summarized. To date 42
different mutations have been identified. These mutations include nonsense and
missense mutations, small insertions and deletions leading into frame shifts, and
splice site mutations. Although mutations are spread throughout the coding region
of the gene some hotspots emerge, including the more common and recurrent
mutations R257X and 967-979del13bp. Some of the identified mutations have been
shown to affect subcellular localization or transactivation properties of the
protein, thus providing insights into the functional properties of the predicted 
protein motifs.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11524731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Gastroenterology. 2001 Sep;121(3):668-77.

Hepatic autoantigens in patients with autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy.

Obermayer-Straub P(1), Perheentupa J, Braun S, Kayser A, Barut A, Loges S, Harms 
A, Dalekos G, Strassburg CP, Manns MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hanover Medical School,
Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED) is caused by mutations of both copies of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE)
gene. It is characterized by susceptibility to mucocutaneous candidiasis and
multiple autoimmune lesions. A serious disease component is hepatitis. To
identify diagnostic autoantibodies for APECED hepatitis, sera from 64 patients
with APECED were screened for autoantibodies established in the diagnosis of
idiopathic autoimmune hepatitis, and for autoantibodies against 10 cytochrome
P450s.
METHODS: Screening methods were indirect immunofluorescence, Western blot,
Ouchterlony gel diffusion, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and
immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: Anti-liver microsomal antibodies were detected in 50% of the patients
with APECED hepatitis and 11% of those without hepatitis. Prevalences of
antinuclear, smooth muscle, anti-liver cytosol, anti-soluble liver protein/liver 
pancreas, and anti-CYP2D6 autoantibodies were 9%, 6%, 3%, 0%, and 0%,
respectively. CYP1A1, CYP2B6, CYP1A2, and CYP2A6 were identified as autoantigens.
Thirty percent of patients with anti-CYP2A6 and 100% of patients with anti-CYP1A2
were affected by hepatitis. Despite the high specificity of anti-CYP1A2 for
APECED hepatitis, its sensitivity was low (50%). Anti-CYP2A6 and anti-CYP1A2 were
not detected in patients with autoimmune hepatitis (N = 68) or nonhepatitic
controls (N = 81).
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-CYP1A2 is a highly specific but insensitive marker for APECED
hepatitis. No clinical correlation was observed for anti-CYP2A6. Autoimmune
hepatitis and APECED hepatitis are characterized by different molecular targets
of autoantibodies with no overlap.

PMID: 11522751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Eur Respir J. 2001 Jul;18(1):248.

Clinical management of asthma in 1999: the Asthma Insights and Reality in Europe 
(AIRE) study.

Bergquist P, Crompton GK.

Comment on
    Eur Respir J. 2000 Nov;16(5):802-7.
    Eur Respir J. 2000 Nov;16(5):797-8.

PMID: 11510801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. MMW Fortschr Med. 2001 Jun 14;143(24):56-7.

[AIRE Study: diminished quality of life is the rule in asthma. Optimally
controllable, still badly controlled].

[Article in German]

[No authors listed]

PMID: 11469023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Cardiovasc J S Afr. 2000 Apr;11(2):89-94.

A South African pharmaco-economic analysis of the Acute lnfarction Ramipril
Efficacy (AIRE) Study.

Anderson AN, Moodley I, Kropman K.

OBJECTIVES: Heart failure (HF) is a serious, prevalent health condition in
industrialised countries where the incidence has been on the increase. The
economic repercussions are costly, and therefore cost-effective medication is
important in the overall management of the condition. It has been shown that
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are clinically effective in the
management of HF. Ramipril has been shown to reduce mortality and the probability
of hospitalisation in post-myocardial infarction (MI) patients. Internationally, 
the use of this drug has proved to be cost-effective. The objective of this study
was to investigate the economic implications of using ramipril in South Africa
for post-MI patients with HF. METHODOLOGY: An incremental cost-effectiveness
analysis was performed comparing the use of ramipril and placebo in post-MI
patients with HF who were receiving standard therapy. The economic impacts
included drug acquisition costs and savings on hospitalisation; these were
evaluated based on the clinical benefits of using ramipril in terms of life-years
gained (LYG). The cost-utility of the use of ramipril was determined to provide
an incremental cost per quality-adjusted life-year (QALY). Sensitivity analyses
were performed on the major economic variables; discounting of future costs and
savings was performed at rates of 0%, 5 % and 10 %. RESULTS: The use of ramipril 
results in an incremental cost/LYG of R16 808 and a total incremental cost per
patient per month of R107 over 3.8 years. When the quality of life of the
patients is taken into account, the cost-utility analysis shows an incremental
cost/QALY of R21 382 for those younger than 65 years of age and R18 029 for those
older than 65 years. The pharmaco-economic model was robust and consistent when
tested at the extremes of the major variables, including costs, savings and
discount rates. CONCLUSION: The results indicate that it is cost-effective to
administer ramipril in addition to standard therapy for post-MI patients with HF 
in South Africa.

PMID: 11447469  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


349. Rev Neurol. 2001 Apr 16-30;32(8):788-97.

[The neuroanatomy of Juan Valverde de Amusco and medicine at the time of the
Spanish renaissance].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín Araguz A(1), Bustamante Martínez C, Toledo León D, López Gómez M, Moreno
Martínez JM.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid, 28017, Spain.
amartina@medynet.com

Juan Valverde de Amusco (c. 1525-c. 1564) is considered to have been the most
important Spanish anatomist of the XVI century. A follower of Vesalius, he
increased and divulged knowledge of anatomy during the Renaissance and his book
The history of the composition of the human body was printed in Rome in 1556. The
objective of this paper is to study the neuroanatomy in this book and present
unpublished biographical data and describe the main contributions of this
Castilian doctor to the neurosciences, in the context of Spanish medicine during 
the Renaissance period. He was born in the town of Hamusco (today Amusco) in the 
province of Palencia, which belonged to the Crown of Castile. Juan Valverde
emigrated to Italy to improve his scientific knowledge. He carried out anatomical
studies using the then revolutionary method of direct observation, as opposed to 
the Galenic criteria of authority inherited from the Medieval period. He trained 
in Padua under Realdo Colombo and lived in Rome where he practiced medicine until
his death, becoming deservedly famous. He did not return to Spain since in the
Spanish universities of the time there was a mentality which was reactionary to
modern anatomy. His works, published in Italy but in the Spanish language, give
an idea of the power of the Crown of Castile in the Europe of that period. The
book is profusely illustrated with the first illustrations ever published in the 
history of printing, drawn by Nicolas Beatrizet. The book was sold widely and was
translated and reedited on many occasions, until well into the XVIII century. For
the first time Valverde made precise references to the minor circulation. He was 
the first anatomist to describe the muscles for movement of the eye correctly and
the intracranial course of the carotid arteries. In his work he made the first
drawing of the stapes, described by the Valencian Luis Collado. Vesalius and
Valverde contributed decisively to the beginnings of modern neuroanatomy. Thanks 
to them, the brain is no longer an organ unknown to science.

PMID: 11391519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Hepatology. 2001 May;33(5):1047-52.

Autoimmune regulator AIRE: evidence for genetic differences between autoimmune
hepatitis and hepatitis as part of the autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1.

Vogel A(1), Liermann H, Harms A, Strassburg CP, Manns MP, Obermayer-Straub P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medical School of Hannover,
Germany.

The mechanisms driving the immune-mediated destruction of hepatic tissues in
autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) are unknown. Recently the autoimmune regulator (AIRE),
a gene associated with the development of the autoimmune polyglandular syndrome
type 1 (APS-1), was cloned. About 15% to 20% of APS-1 patients develop hepatitis.
However, the role of AIRE mutations in AIH, primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC),
and primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is not known. To address this issue patients 
with AIH (n = 94), PSC (n = 60), and PBC (n = 30) were analyzed for the presence 
of mutations in exons 6, 8, and 10 of AIRE by single stranded conformation
polymorphism and sequence analysis. Autoantibody patterns of patients with
defects in AIRE were analyzed by indirect immunofluorescence, enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay and Western blot. Heterozygous mutations of AIRE were
identified in 3 patients: a patient with PBC and a patient with AIH type 1
carried a R257X mutation, and a patient with AIH type 2, diabetes mellitus type 1
(IDDM), thyroid disease, and atrophic gastritis carried a G305S mutation in the
first PHD ring finger domain of the AIRE protein. None of the 3 patients with a
defective AIRE allele showed autoantibodies, which are known to associate with
APS-1. These findings show a differential genetic association of autoimmune liver
diseases and hepatitis in APS-1. The subgroup of patients with heterozygous
mutations in AIRE does not represent patients with an incomplete APS-1 syndrome. 
However, the Aire gene defect showed that genes involved in the induction of
immunologic tolerance provide candidates for etiologic factors in autoimmune
liver diseases.

PMID: 11343230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Int J Cardiol. 2001 Apr;78(2):109-13.

CAPRICORN: a story of alpha allocation and beta-blockers in left ventricular
dysfunction post-MI.

Coats AJ.

Beta-blocker therapy is beneficial both after myocardial infarction and in mild, 
moderate and severe chronic heart failure. Recent sub-group analysis of the
Goteborg Metoprolol Trial and the AIRE study confirm that patients receiving
beta-blockers in the setting of post-MI heart failure fare better than patients
not receiving this therapy. For all these reasons the CAPRICORN trial of
carvedilol in post-MI LV dysfunction was an important and eagerly awaited trial. 
The results were presented for the first time at The American College of
Cardiology on March 20 2001. CAPRICORN randomised 984 patients to placebo and 975
to carvedilol between 3 and 21 days (mean 10) after a confirmed MI. Patients had 
to have evidence of a left ventricular ejection fraction 40% or less. All
patients had received ACEI therapy for at least 48 hours prior to randomisation. 
The mean ejection fraction of the patients recruited was 32.7% in the placebo
group and 32.9% in the carvedilol group. Follow-up was for a mean of 15 months
(maximum 2.7 years). All cause mortality was 15.3% (151 deaths) in the placebo
group and 11.9% (116 deaths) in the carvedilol group, giving a hazard ratio of
0.77 (0.60-0.98) and a significance of p = 0.031. And yet this agent will
probably not be given a licence for this indication in the European Union and the
USA. The reason is one of trial design and statistical declarations. Some way
into the trial the Steering Committee decided to change the primary end-point
form all-cause mortality to two co-primary end-points and to allocate their alpha
power of 0.05 unevenly between the combined end-points of all cause mortality and
cardiovascular hospitalisation (alpha 0.045) and all cause mortality (alpha
0.005). In the end neither was achieved, one because of the large number of
non-specific hospitalisations for chest pain and the mortality effect because it 
was allocated a punitive and unachievable target of p < 0.005. The trial is thus 
officially neutral despite showing convincing clinical benefit. Clearly arcane
matters of statistical plans do matter and steering committees should think very 
carefully before changing the primary end-points of major trials.

PMID: 11334653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 2001 Apr;19(4):149-55.

[Contribution to the early diagnosis of bacteremia: microbial growth detection in
liquid culture media by ultrasound].

[Article in Spanish]

Maestre JR(1), Montero de Espinosa FR.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Microbiología Clínica, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

Nosocomial infection is an important problem because the number of patients daily
affected in big hospitals. A big effort exists to develop techniques able to
early detect the micro-organisms which cause the infection. The ultrasound is a
mechanical radiology technique widely used in Medicine for diagnosis and therapy.
It is also well known that this radiation can be used to control relative changes
of several physico-chemical parameters in liquids. As an example, the velocity an
attenuation of acoustic waves coming through a liquid can be accurately measured.
The developed technique consists of an ultrasonic chamber immersed into a
thermostatized water bath with two transducers operating in through-transmission.
Different culture bottles were placed in between the transducers to live the
ultrasound to come across the sample. Several micro-organisms with controlled
concentrations, chosen between the most common in sepsis clinical, were used to
inoculate each bottle. In the case of aerobic metabolism, the carbon dioxide gas 
produced by bacteria introduce elastic changes into the liquid which modify both 
the propagation velocity and the attenuation of the ultrasound. The continuous
monitoring of the time-of-flight and the amplitude of an ultrasonic pulse coming 
through the sample give us a clear indication of the metabolism process. The
signatures observed permits the identification of algorithms to early define the 
positive cases. The developed technique is faster than other commercial systems. 
The intrinsically non-invasive characteristic of the ultrasound and the relative 
cheapness of the technique open new attractive possibilities in microbiological
diagnosis.

PMID: 11333601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Apr;14(4):443-9.

Natural history of asplenism in APECED--patient report.

Starzyk J(1), Kumorowicz-Kopiec M, Kowalczyk M, Starzyk B, Rybakowa M,
Dziatkowiak H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Children and Adolescent Endocrinology, Polish-American
Children's Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Jagiellonian University, Krakow,
Poland. midziatk@cyf-kr.edu.pl

Only a few reports on patients with hypo/ asplenism associated with APECED have
been published, yet hyposplenism has been found in approximately half of the
studied patients. The 7-year follow-up in our only patient with APECED revealed a
decrease of spleen size from normal to half-size by ultrasound and CT
examinations. Scintigraphy of the liver and spleen demonstrated a progressively
diminishing splenic uptake of the tracer from low to complete absence. Peripheral
blood smears revealed permanent thrombocytosis with the presence of Howell-Jolly 
bodies when functional asplenism was reached. The cause of autoimmunization and
hyposplenism in APECED is unknown. We hypothesize that hyposplenism depends
primarily on local AIRE gene dysfunction in the spleen, and secondarily on an
AIRE gene-mediated autoagressive process. In our opinion, hypo/asplenism in
APECED disease might not be noticed in patients with APECED if not directly
examined. Thus we emphasize the necessity of searching for hyposplenism in all
patients with APECED, and recommend scintigraphy.

PMID: 11327379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. An Med Interna. 2001 Feb;18(2):63-8.

[Bronchiolitis obliterans with idiopathic organizing pneumonia. Usefulness and
yield of diagnostic techniques and procedures in a series of 20 patients].

[Article in Spanish]

Jareño Esteban J(1), Zamora García E, Chillón Martín MJ, Pérez Amor E, Villegas
Fernández F, Forniés Menéndez E, Callol Sánchez L.

Author information: 
(1)Servicios de Neumología, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

OBJECTIVE: To assess retrospectively the utility and the profitableness of the
diagnostic procedures and techniques in patients with idiopathic BOOP.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We studied epidemiological features, clinical
manifestations, respiratory function tests, chest radiology, and other diagnostic
procedures and techniques, as well as the evolution and the mortality rates in
patients with histological diagnosis of idiopathic BOOP during the period
1992-1999.
RESULTS: 20 patients (55% F, 45% M). Age: 64 +/- 15 years old, 50% smokers. The
mean period elapsed since the beginning of the symptoms and the time of diagnosis
was 51 +/- 30 days. The clinical presentation is of a subacute influenza-like
illness, with fever, cough, dyspnea and crackles. The more common abnormalities
were. WBC (10,949 +/- 2,6429 mm3, ESR 85 +/- 86 UI/L, LDH 309 +/- 86 UI/L.
Arterial blood gas: PaO2 64 +/- 9, PaCO2 35 +/- 3 mmHg. Pulmonary function tests:
VCF 81 +/- 25%, FEV1/VCF 78 +/- 17%, TLCO 74 +/- 9%, TLCO sb 77 +/- 4%.
Radiological evaluation: bilateral multiple patchy alveolar opacities 75%),
solitary focal lesion (15%) and interstitial opacities (10%). The bronchoscopy
and BAL 10/20 (50%). Transbronchial biopsy 12/20 wit diagnosis (60%). The video
assisted thoracoscopic lung biopsy 1/20 (5%) and open lung biopsy 7/20 (35%).
Recurrences 8/20 (40%). Mortality rate 3/20 (15%).
CONCLUSIONS: The idiopathic BOOP is a benign entity clinic inespecific,
associated to hypoxemia and bilateral alveolar opacities. The transbronchial
biopsy is a diagnostic procedure alternative to the open lung biopsy, in a
compatible clínico-radiological context. The response to treatment is acceptable 
although it presents frequent exacerbations, and low mortality rate.

PMID: 11322000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Waste Manag. 2001;21(4):389-404.

An analysis of UK waste minimization clubs: key requirements for future cost
effective developments.

Phillips PS(1), Pratt RM, Pike K.

Author information: 
(1)SITA Sustainable Waste Management Center, School of Environmental Science,
University College Northampton, UK. paul.phillips@northampton.ac.uk

The UK waste strategy is based upon use of the best practicable environmental
option (BPEO), by those making waste management decisions. BPEO is supported by
the use of the waste hierarchy, with its range of preferable options for dealing 
with waste, and the proximity principle, where waste is treated/disposed of as
close to its point of origin as possible. The national waste strategy emphasizes 
the key role of waste minimization and encourages industry, commerce and the
public to move towards sustainable waste management practice for economic and
environmental reasons. Waste minimization clubs have been used, since the early
1990s, to demonstrate to industry/commerce that reducing waste production can
lead to significant financial savings. There have been around 75 such clubs in
the UK and they receive support from a wide range of agencies, including the
Environmental Technology Best Practice Program. The early Demonstration Clubs had
significant savings to cost ratios, e.g. Aire and Calder at 8.4, but had very
high costs, e.g. Aire and Calder at 400,000 pounds. It is acknowledged that the
number of clubs will have to be approximately doubled in the next few years so as
to have an adequate coverage of the UK. There are at present, marked regional
variations in club development and cognizance needs to be taken, by facilitators,
of the need for extensive coverage of the UK. Future clubs will probably have to 
operate in a financially constrained climate and they need to be designed to
deliver significant savings and waste reduction at low cost. To aid future club
design, final reports of all projects should report in a standard manner so that 
cost benefit analysis can be used to inform facilitators about the most effective
club type. rights reserved.

PMID: 11300539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2001 Mar;54(3):335-8.

Screening for an AIRE-1 mutation in patients with Addison's disease, type 1
diabetes, Graves' disease and Hashimoto's thyroiditis as well as in APECED
syndrome.

Meyer G(1), Donner H, Herwig J, Böhles H, Usadel KH, Badenhoop K.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Department I, Division of Endocrinology, Centre of Internal Medicine, 
Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University Hospital, Frankfurt-am-Main, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED) is a rare systemic autoimmune disorder of monogenic and
autosomal-recessive inheritance. To date, 29 APECED causing mutations have been
identified in the responsible gene AIRE-1, coding for a regulator of
transcription. The aim of this study was to examine whether mutations in AIRE-1, 
in their heterozygous form, predispose to the more common isolated autoimmune
endocrinopathies Addison's disease, type 1 diabetes mellitus, Graves' disease and
Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
DESIGN: Patients with isolated autoimmune endocrine disorders as well as healthy 
controls were analysed for two of the most common AIRE-1 mutations, mutation
R257X in exon 6 and a 13-bp deletion in exon 8. Mutations were detected by
polymerase chain reaction based techniques.
PATIENTS: In total, 726 individuals were investigated for mutation R257X.
Subjects comprised patients with Addison's disease, IDDM, Graves' disease and
Hashimoto's thyroiditis. With regard to the 13 bp deletion we could screen 91
patients with Addison's disease. In addition, six patients with the APECED
syndrome including one family were analysed for both mutations.
RESULTS: Out of the 12 alleles in APECED patients six contained either mutation
R257X or the 13 bp deletion, confirming that these mutations prevail in Europe.
R257X was found in one subject with Hashimoto's thyroiditis in its heterozygous
form. The 13 bp deletion was not detected in any subject with Addison's disease.
CONCLUSIONS: The two studied AIRE-1 mutations are so rare in the general
population that they can not contribute to susceptibility for the more common
isolated autoimmune disorders.

PMID: 11298085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Eur J Endocrinol. 2001 Apr;144(4):347-51.

Identification of a novel mutation in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE-1) gene in a
French family with autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal
dystrophy.

Saugier-Veber P(1), Drouot N, Wolf LM, Kuhn JM, Frébourg T, Lefebvre H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, INSERM EMI 9906, University of Rouen, Rouen,
France. Pascale.Saugier-Verber@chu-rouen.fr

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is
clinically characterized by the presence of two of the three major clinical
symptoms: Addison's disease and/or hypoparathyroidism and/or chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis. Because of its autosomal recessive inheritance, this
rare disorder constitutes an interesting model for understanding the molecular
background of autoimmunity. Recently, mutations in the autoimmune regulator
(AIRE-1) gene have been identified in APECED patients. Here we report, in a large
French APECED family, the identification of a novel AIRE-1 missense mutation
(Pro326Leu) in association with the Arg257Stop mutation which is detected in more
than 80% of mutant Finnish AIRE-1 alleles. This Pro326Leu substitution occurs in 
the first plant homeodomain (PHD)-type zinc-finger domain of the protein which
has been identified in a number of nuclear proteins involved in
chromatin-mediated transcriptional regulation, such as ATRX, TIF1, KRIP-1 and
Mi-2 autoantigen. This mutation highlights the key role of this amino acid in the
structure of the PHD domain and confirms that exon 8 constitutes a mutational
hotspot.

PMID: 11275943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 1;276(22):19597-602. Epub 2001 Mar 26.

Subcellular localization of the autoimmune regulator protein. characterization of
nuclear targeting and transcriptional activation domain.

Pitkänen J(1), Vähämurto P, Krohn K, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, FIN-33014 University of Tampere and
Department of Pathology, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene, defective in the hereditary autoimmune
disease APECED, encodes a transcriptional regulator protein. AIRE is expressed in
the medullary epithelial cells and monocyte-dendritic cells of the thymus with
lower expression in the spleen, fetal liver, and lymph nodes. At the cellular
level, AIRE is located in microtubular structures of the cytoskeleton and in
discrete nuclear dots resembling ND10 nuclear bodies. We studied the determinants
of the targeting of AIRE into these structures. We report here that the
N-terminal HSR domain confers localization to the microtubular network whereas
the C-terminal region contains a second nuclear localization signal. We also
demonstrate that the consensus nuclear localization signal of AIRE is functional 
and that the HSR domain harbors a nuclear export signal. Accordingly, the nuclear
export inhibitor leptomycin B partially inhibits the nuclear export of AIRE. From
a functional standpoint, we show that AIRE can activate the interferon beta
minimal promoter in a transfection assay and demonstrate that the transcriptional
activating function of AIRE is mediated by its two plant homeodomain (PHD) zinc
fingers.

PMID: 11274163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 2000 Nov-Dec;51(8):743-7.

[Basosquamous carcinoma of the floor of the mouth].

[Article in Spanish]

Sancho Martín I(1), Alvarez Montero OL, Félix Muñiz J, Alonso Alonso L, Muñoz
Colado M, Coca Menchero S.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de ORL, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

Basaloid-squamous cell carcinoma is a rare tumor characterized by Wain et al in
1986 as a separate pathological entity. In head and neck more than 100 cases have
been reported, with a strong predilection for hypopharynx, base of tongue, and
supraglotic larynx. This entity also has been described in nasal cavity,
oesophagus, tonsils and oral cavity. Only 14 cases has been reported arising in
the floor of the mouth, and none in our literature. We present a new case in
floor of the mouth and clinicopathological features are emphasized. We have
undertaken moreover a bibliographic review of this uncommon and aggressive
neoplasm.

PMID: 11270114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Sci Total Environ. 2001 Feb 5;266(1-3):177-86.

Downstream changes in the transport and storage of sediment-associated
contaminants (P, Cr and PCBs) in agricultural and industrialized drainage basins.

Owens PN(1), Walling DE, Carton J, Meharg AA, Wright J, Leeks GJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Geography and Archaeology, University of Exeter, UK.
p.n.owens@exeter.ac.uk

Samples of suspended, floodplain and channel bed sediment have been used to
examine downstream changes in ediment-associated contaminant transport and
storage in contrasting rivers in Yorkshire, UK. The concentrations of hosphorus, 
chromium and selected PCBs associated with sediment in the River Aire and its
main tributary, the River Calder, which drain an urbanized and industrialized
catchment, are considerably higher than those in the relatively unpolluted River 
Swale, which drains an agricultural catchment. Concentrations of
sediment-associated contaminants in the Aire/Calder system increase downstream,
reflecting the location of urban and industrial areas in the middle and lower
reaches, and the location of point source inputs, such as sewage treatment works.
The ontaminant concentrations associated with floodplain and channel bed sediment
in the Rivers Aire and Calder are high, particularly in the lower reaches. This, 
combined with measurements of sediment storage on the floodplain and channel bed,
indicate that significant storage of sediment-associated contaminants occurs in
the Rivers Aire and Calder.

PMID: 11258815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Recent Prog Horm Res. 2001;56:69-89.

Genetics of type 1A diabetes.

Redondo MJ(1), Fain PR, Eisenbarth GS.

Author information: 
(1)Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, University of Colorado Health
Sciences Center, Denver 80262, USA.

Type 1A diabetes is an autoimmune disease with genetic and environmental factors 
contributing to its etiology. Twin studies, family studies, and animal models
have helped to elucidate the genetics of autoimmune diabetes. Most of the genetic
susceptibility is accounted for by human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles. The
most-common susceptibility haplotypes are DQA1*0301-DQB1*0302 and
DQA1*0501-DQB1*0201. Less-common haplotypes such as DQA1*0401-DQB1*0402 and
DQA1*0101-DQB1*0501 are associated with high risk for diabetes; however, large
study populations are needed to analyze their effect. The DQA1*0102-DQB1*0602
haplotype is associated with diabetes resistance. DR molecules, such as
DRB1*1401, confer protection from diabetes. Monozygotic twins of patients with
type 1A diabetes have a diabetes risk higher than that for HLA-identical ordinary
siblings, suggesting that non-HLA genes contribute to diabetes risk.
Polymorphisms in the regulatory region of the insulin gene (designated IDDM2),
polymorphisms in cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) gene (IDDM12), and
other genes are likely to contribute to diabetes risk and susceptibility in some 
individuals. In selected families, major diabetogenes (e.g., IDDM17, autoimmune
regulator gene (AIRE)) are likely to be of importance. Other factors--either
noninherited genes (i.e., somatic mutations and T-cell receptor or immunoglobulin
rearrangements) or environment--may have a role in progression to diabetes. This 
is suggested by the finding that the risk for monozygotic twins of patients with 
type 1A diabetes is not 100 percent. Studying the genetics of type 1A diabetes
will allow us to better define this disease, to improve our ability to identify
individuals at risk, and to predict the risk of associated disorders.

PMID: 11237226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Small Rumin Res. 2001 Mar;39(3):225-232.

Morphological changes in the gonads of the Sabi ram experimentally infected with 
Trypanosoma congolense.

Aire TA(1), Akingbemi BT, Ruziwa SD, Nuru HF, Dzoma BM, Joshua RA, Chabbhra R.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Zimbabwe, P.O. Box MP 167, Mount 
Pleasant, Harare, Zimbabwe

Indigenous Sabi rams of Southern Africa were experimentally infected with
Trypanosoma congolense for 8 and 16 weeks. Testes weights (g) were significantly 
(P<0.05) lower in the infected (249.7+/-26.4) compared to the control
(372.63+/-19.4) animals. Histopathological and ultrastructural changes included
seminiferous tubular atrophy and mononuclear infiltration in the testis, and
lesions in the epithelium of the corpus epididymidis (middle segment) as well as 
spermatozoa in the cauda epididymidis. The gonadal lesions may have the
capability to impair fertility in Sabi rams infected with Trypanosoma congolense.

PMID: 11230958  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


363. J Soc Gynecol Investig. 2001 Jan-Feb;8(1 Suppl Proceedings):S52-4.

Autoimmune hypogonadism as part of an autoimmune polyglandular syndrome.

Maclaren N(1), Chen QY, Kukreja A, Marker J, Zhang CH, Sun ZS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New
York, New York 10024, USA. nkmaclaren@aol.com

The most compelling case for autoimmune mediated hypogonadism occurs when ovarian
failure is part of an autoimmune polyglandular syndrome (APS). In patients with
the rare, recessively inherited type 1 APS (APS-1), characterized by the triad of
chronic mucocutaneous moniliasis, hypoparathyroidism, and Addison's disease,
primary amenorrhea (elevated pituitary gonadotropins) or oligomenorrhea and
infertility are constant features. Ovarian failure is associated with
autoantibodies to steroid hormone secreting cells in the adrenal cortex, Leydig
cells of the testes, granulosa/thecal cells of the Graffian follicles, corpus
luteum, and the syncytiotrophoblast of the placenta. These autoantibodies react
with 3 P450 enzymes involved with steroidogenesis, namely, 21-hydroxylase
(adrenal specific), 17 alpha-hydroxylase, and the side chain cleavage enzyme.
Recently the 14 exon, APS-1 (autoimmune regulator or AIRE) gene has been cloned
(chr. 21p22.3), and multiple mutants discovered. Parents who are obligatory
heterozygotes for a single mutant gene lack clinical features of APS-1. They also
do not develop APS-1 autoantibodies. Thus, hypogonadal patients without features 
of APS-1 are unlikely to have AIRE gene mutations. In the more common APS-2/3,
characterized by combinations of autoimmune thyroid disease, immune mediated type
1 diabetes, vitiligo, pernicious anemia, and Addison's disease (type 2, not type 
3), ovarian disease may be seen. In primary hypogonadism outside of the context
of an APS, these autoantibodies are rare.

PMID: 11223374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. An Med Interna. 2000 Aug;17(8):416-8.

[Echography evaluation of Morton's neuroma].

[Article in Spanish]

Tobajas Asensio E(1), Tobajas Asensio JA, Boada Apilluelo E, Torres Nuez J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Radiodiagnóstico, Policlínica del Ejercito del Aire, Hospital
Obispo Polanco, Teruel.

OBJECTIVE: We have carried out a study to evaluate diagnostic usefulness of
ultrasound in Morton's neuroma.
METHODS: Twenty five patients with symptoms suggestive of Morton's neuroma
underwent ultrasound examination of the forefoot. All patients subsequently had
surgical treatment.
RESULTS: Nineteen patients had sonographic evidence of neuroma which were
confirmed surgically and later by histological exams. One patient had sonographic
evidence of a neuroma that was not confirmed surgically. The remaining five
patients did not have sonographic or surgical evidence of neuroma in spite of
clinical signs and symptoms. No adjacent neuromas were appreciated. Ultrasound
accurately predicted the location of the neuroma in 96.7%. Ultrasound
demonstrated a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 83.3%.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that ultrasound is a highly accurate technique in the
diagnosis of the presence and location of Morton's neuromas.

PMID: 11218988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Rev Clin Esp. 2000 Nov;200(11):617-8.

[Diarrhea of nosocomial origin in an adult population].

[Article in Spanish]

Gomis Gavilán M(1), Sánchez Artola B, Barberán López J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Hospital del Aire, Departamento de
Medicina, Universidad Complutense, Madrid.

PMID: 11196591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Basic Res Cardiol. 2000;95 Suppl 1:I8-14.

ACE inhibitors in heart failure: an update.

Smith WH(1), Ball SG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cardiovascular Research, University of Leeds, UK.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are now accepted as part of the
routine management of patients with heart failure. Their use has been mandated in
all the new major mortality trials to test the efficacy of beta-blockers in heart
failure. Morbidity and mortality remain high in those with heart failure even
with the benefits proven for both these groups of agents. In spite of the
evidence for benefit of ACE inhibitors they are persistently used in lower doses 
in clinical practice than tested in the large-scale trials. This was so prevalent
as to allow the conduct of a substantial study, the ATLAS trial, to compare high 
and low dose ACE inhibition. Its equivocal findings have allowed different
interpretations. Clinical experience would suggest that starting with a low dose 
is appropriate but the dose should be titrated then without undue delay to the
levels used in the trials wherever possible. The evidence for benefit with these 
drugs had been obtained largely in patients with impaired systolic function.
However the AIRE study selected patients with clinical evidence of heart failure 
after myocardial infarction rather than with impaired systolic function. A
substantial and long-term benefit was found from ACE inhibition. A cohort of
patients had ventricular function assessed and as anticipated almost one half had
preserved systolic function. Whilst the absolute benefit in lives saved was
greater in the higher risk/low ejection fraction group, the relative risk
reduction was not significantly different between those with preserved or
impaired systolic function. The publication of the HOPE trial, although not a
study of patients with heart failure, has clarified the situation considerably
for those taking day to day care of patients. The HOPE study selected patients on
the basis of high cardiovascular risk excluding those with known impaired
systolic function. Although not an entry requirement for the study, ejection
fraction was measured in a substantial majority and was above 40% indicating
preservation of systolic function. The ACE inhibitor ramipril markedly reduced
the combined end-point of cardiovascular death, stroke and myocardial infarction.
Importantly there was a highly significant 20% risk reduction in the rate of
myocardial infarction, a prospectively defined end-point, over the average four
and a half year follow-up. Taken together with the retrospectively derived
evidence from the heart failure trials there is now compelling evidence that the 
ACE inhibitors prevent myocardial infarction. The majority of patients with
clinical heart failure have underlying ischaemic heart disease. Prevention of
myocardial infarction and control of blood pressure are two key factors in the
management of these patients irrespective of systolic ventricular function. The
ACE inhibitors like the beta-blockers therefore have a pivotal role in their
management. A challenge to current clinical trials is to determine whether these 
properties are shared to the same degree by the angiotensin antagonists or if
even further gains in benefit can come from their combination. The neutral
findings of the ELITE II study comparing the angiotensin antagonist, losartan,
with the ACE inhibitor, captopril, have heightened interest in the on-going
trials addressing these issues.

PMID: 11192359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2001 Feb;54(2):211-7.

Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS I) in Norway.

Myhre AG(1), Halonen M, Eskelin P, Ekwall O, Hedstrand H, Rorsman F, Kämpe O,
Husebye ES.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Institute of Medicine, Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway. Anne.Myhre@med.uib.no

Comment in
    Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2001 Apr;54(4):433-5.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to investigate Norwegian patients
with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I (APS I), with respect to occurrence
and clinical presentation, reactivity towards different autoantigenes and
mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene.
PATIENTS: Twenty Norwegian patients from 15 families with APS I (11 males, nine
females; mean age 26 years, range 4--54) were included by contacting all major
hospitals in Norway.
METHODS: Clinical data was collected from both patients and their physicians by
the use of questionnaires and patient records. Autoantibodies were analysed using
radioimmunoassays based on antigen synthesized by in vitro transcription and
translation. AIRE mutations were determined by DNA sequence analysis.
RESULTS: The prevalence of APS I in Norway was estimated to be about 1 : 80,000
individuals. We found about the same distribution of disease characteristics as
has been reported in Finnish patients. The diagnosis was delayed in many
individuals. In two thirds of the cases, the patients were admitted in Hospital
with acute adrenal insufficiency or hypocalcaemic crisis. Forty percent of these 
patients already had one of the main disease manifestations. Four different
mutations in the AIRE gene were found in the Norwegian cohort. A 13-bp deletion
in exon 8 (1085--1097(del)) was the most frequent mutation, present in 22/40
(55%) of the alleles. Eighty-five percent of the patients had either
autoantibodies against 21 hydroxylase or aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase.
Five of eight women (age > 13 years) had ovarian failure, and all of these had
antibodies against side-chain cleavage enzyme (P = 0.0002).
CONCLUSION: Norwegian patients with APS I clinically resemble patients from
Finland and other European countries. The diagnosis APS I must be considered in
children and adolescents with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, autoimmune
adrenocortical failure or hypoparathyroidism in order to avoid fatal
complications. Analysis of autoantibodies and mutational analysis of the AIRE
gene are valuable diagnostic tools, especially in the early stages of the
disease.

PMID: 11207636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Histochem Cytochem. 2001 Feb;49(2):197-208.

Subcellular location and expression pattern of autoimmune regulator (Aire), the
mouse orthologue for human gene defective in autoimmune polyendocrinopathy
candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED).

Halonen M(1), Pelto-Huikko M, Eskelin P, Peltonen L, Ulmanen I, Kolmer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, National Public Health Institute,
Helsinki, Finland.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), also
known as autoimmune polyglandular syndrome Type I (APS1), is an autosomal
recessive autoimmune disease caused by mutations in a gene designated as AIRE
(autoimmune regulator). Here we have studied the expression of Aire in
transfected cell lines and in adult mouse tissues. Our results show that Aire has
a dual subcellular location and that it is expressed in multiple immunologically 
relevant tissues such as the thymus, spleen, lymph nodes, and bone marrow. In
addition, Aire expression was detected in various other tissues such as kidney,
testis, adrenal glands, liver, and ovary. These findings suggest that APECED
protein might also have a function(s) outside the immune system.(J Histochem
Cytochem 49:197-208, 2001)

PMID: 11156688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Eur Respir J. 2000 Nov;16(5):802-7.

Clinical management of asthma in 1999: the Asthma Insights and Reality in Europe 
(AIRE) study.

Rabe KF(1), Vermeire PA, Soriano JB, Maier WC.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2001 Jul;18(1):248.
    Eur Respir J. 2000 Nov;16(5):797-8.

Asthma management guidelines provide recommendations for the optimum control of
asthma. This survey assessed the current levels of asthma control as reported by 
patients, which partly reflect the extent to which guideline recommendations are 
implemented. Current asthma patients were identified by telephone by screening
73,880 households in seven European countries. Designated respondents were
interviewed on healthcare utilization, symptom severity, activity limitations and
asthma control. Current asthma patients were identified in 3,488 households, and 
2,803 patients (80.4%) completed the survey. Forty-six per cent of patients
reported daytime symptoms and 30% reported asthma-related sleep disturbances, at 
least once a week. In the past 12 months, 25% of patients reported an unscheduled
urgent care visit, 10% reported one or more emergency room visits and 7% reported
overnight hospitalization due to asthma. In the past 4 weeks, more patients had
used prescription quick-relief medication (63%) than inhaled corticosteroids
(23%). Patient perception of asthma control did not match their symptom severity;
approximately 50% of patients reporting severe persistent symptoms also
considered their asthma to be completely or well controlled. The current level of
asthma control in Europe falls far short of the goals for long-term asthma
management. Patients' perception of asthma control is different from their actual
asthma control.

PMID: 11153575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 2000 Oct;18(8):418-9.

[Nodular cutaneous lesion in a homemaker].

[Article in Spanish]

Agustino AM(1), Maestre JM, Fernández-Valencia R, García J, Herrera I, Vivó A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Microbiología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

PMID: 11153207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Scand J Plast Reconstr Surg Hand Surg. 2000 Sep;34(3):199-206.

Experimental model for local application of growth factors in skin
re-epithelialisation.

Sanz Garcia S(1), Santos Heredero X, Izquierdo Hernandez A, Pascual Peña E,
Bilbao de Aledo G, Hamann C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

We did an experimental study to assess the effects of different growth factors on
re-epithelialisation of skin wounds by creating a partial-thickness defect in
rats with a handle dermatome. Three different growth factors that are
particularly involved in the re-epithelialisation phase of wound repair
(epidermal growth factor (EGF), keratinocyte growth factor (KGF), and basic
fibroblast growth factor (FGF-b) n = 10 in each group) were applied locally in a 
hydrocolloid dressing containing solutions of the different factors (EGF 10
micrograms/ml, KGF 3.3 ng/ml, bFGF 1 microgram/ml). The dressings were changed
daily. The thickness of the epithelium, the percentage of re-epithelialisation,
and the maturity of the epithelium were quantified and measured morphometrically.
The results showed that: the experimental model allowed us to apply the growth
factors, while continuously maintaining the dose within the maximum activity of
the growth factor; when EGF, KGF, and bFGF were given according to the protocol
there was significant thickening of the new epidermis (p < 0.01) and acceleration
of the re-epithelialisation (p < 0.05) rate compared with controls, and
significantly more mature epithelium grew (p < 0.05) all of which were evident on
both the third and the fifth days; and EGF and KGF cause a more epidermal
thickening than bFGF.

PMID: 11020915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Baillieres Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 1999 Mar;13(1):77-94.

Peculiarities of osteo-articular infections in children.

Gavilán MG(1), López JB, Artola BS.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario del Aire, C/ Arturo Soria, Madrid, Spain.

Paediatric osteomyelitis is uncommon in the developed world, haematogenous spread
of infection being the most prevalent cause in children. The metaphyses of the
long bones are the sites involved in most cases, but in neonates the infection
may spread to the contiguous epiphysis and joint. Staphylococcus aureus is the
main causal organism in all groups. Plain X-rays take at least 7 days to show the
first signs of osteomyelitis. Bone scans show change earlier, with a high
sensitivity but a lower specificity. Magnetic resonance imaging and computed
tomography are useful, if expensive, imaging techniques but usually require
sedation in children. The causal micro-organisms may be identified from blood
cultures, fine-needle aspiration or surgical drainage. Antimicrobial therapy
should be given for 3-4 weeks, initially via the intravenous route and later
switching to oral medication. Surgery is indicated for the drainage of acute
abscesses or when there has been no improvement with antibiotics; it is essential
in the treatment of chronic osteomyelitis.

Copyright 1999 Harcourt Publishers Ltd.

PMID: 10952850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Aug;85(8):2922-6.

Novel mutations of the autoimmune regulator gene in two siblings with autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy.

Ishii T(1), Suzuki Y, Ando N, Matsuo N, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
tomishii@mac.com

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is the
first multiple autoimmune disease that has been shown to be caused by mutations
of a single gene named autoimmune regulator (AIRE). Fourteen different mutations 
of the AIRE gene have been identified in 61 patients from 55 families with
APECED. However, there has been no report documenting AIRE gene mutations in the 
Asian population. We report on 2 siblings with variable manifestations of APECED 
who were born to a Japanese mother and a Korean father. The 11yr-old girl had
intractable thrush and ungual candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, and occipital
alopecia. The 9-yr-old boy had mild ungual candidiasis alone. Direct sequencing
revealed novel frameshift mutations of the AIRE gene: an insertion of a cytosine 
at nucleotide 29635 at the exon 10 (29635insC), which should lead to a premature 
termination at the codon 371, producing a truncated protein missing the second
plant homeodomain-type zinc finger motif and the third LXXLL motif, and a
deletion of a guanine at nucleotide 33031 at the exon 13 (33031delG), which
should result in a premature termination at the codon 520, yielding a truncated
protein missing the third LXXLL motif. The mother was heterozygous for 29635insC,
and the father was heterozygous for 33031delG. The frameshift mutations were
undetected in 40 alleles of 20 Japanese control subjects. The results imply that 
the C-terminus of AIRE protein including the third LXXLL motif plays a critical
role in the development of APECED, and that the phenotypic spectrum can vary
between siblings with the same mutations.

PMID: 10946904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Eur J Immunol. 2000 Jul;30(7):1884-93.

RNA and protein expression of the murine autoimmune regulator gene (Aire) in
normal, RelB-deficient and in NOD mouse.

Heino M(1), Peterson P, Sillanpää N, Guérin S, Wu L, Anderson G, Scott HS,
Antonarakis SE, Kudoh J, Shimizu N, Jenkinson EJ, Naquet P, Krohn KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere, Finland.
maarit.j.heino@uta.fi

Mutations in the putative transcription factor autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene
are responsible for autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiosis-ectodermal
dystrophy (APECED; OMIM#240300), a monogenic recessively inherited disease
characterized by destructive autoimmune diseases of the endocrine organs, chronic
candidiosis of mucous membranes and ectodermal dystrophies. In this study the
expression of murine homolog for AIRE protein, Aire, was detected in a fraction
of thymic medullary epithelial cells. Subcellularly, in thymus the protein
appears as concentrated into nuclear dot-like structures, whereas in transfected 
cells the protein is also bound along a cytosolic fibrillar network. By RT-PCR
Aire mRNA was detected in thymus, lymph node, spleen and testis although the
second round PCR amplified Aire specific band from most mouse tissues analyzed.
Furthermore, the Aire mRNA was detected in dendritic cell (DC) populations
isolated from thymus and spleen, representing both myeloid- and lymphoid-related 
lineages of DC. We also demonstrate that the Aire protein is absent in the thymus
of RelB-deficient mouse and in NOD thymus most of the Aire positive cells showed 
an abnormal morphology. These results suggest that the Aire protein is associated
with the normal development and/or action of a subset of thymic medullary stromal
cells involved in tolerance induction.

PMID: 10940877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Childs Nerv Syst. 2000 Jun;16(6):363-5.

Recurrence in a different location of a cerebral arteriovenous malformation in a 
child after radiosurgery.

Rodríguez-Arias C(1), Martínez R, Rey G, Bravo G.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Neurosurgery, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

The case of a 9-year-old girl with a right parietal arteriovenous malformation
(AVM) of the brain obliterated after gamma knife (GK) radiosurgery with
subsequent regrowth in a different site is reported. As far as we know, this is
the first reported case of regrowth of an AVM in a different location after
radiosurgery in a child. This situation has to be considered within the context
of causes of unsuccessful treatment of AVMs with radiosurgery and justifies
angiographic monitoring of pediatric patients until they reach adulthood.

PMID: 10933232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 2000 Apr;18(4):204-5.

[Diagnostic procedures in Chlamydia pneumoniae infections].

[Article in Spanish]

Jaqueti J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Central, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

PMID: 10932409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Anat Histol Embryol. 2000 Apr;29(2):119-26.

The surface features of the epithelial lining of the ducts of the epididymis of
the ostrich (Struthio camelus).

Aire TA(1), Soley JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Pretoria, 
Republic of South Africa.

The luminal appearance of the various ducts of the epididymis of the ostrich was 
studied by scanning electron microscopy in tissues fixed by immersion in
glutaraldehyde. The ductal types were similar to those previously described for
some other species of birds. Numerous short microvilli, as well as a single
cilium, projected from the apical surface of the rete testis cell. The ciliated
cells of the efferent ductules projected tufts of cilia into the ductal lumen,
while the non-ciliated cells bore short microvilli. The connecting and epididymal
ducts were lined by a columnar cell type whose apical surface bore uniformly
distributed microvilli and a single, centrally situated cilium. The spermatozoa
found in all ducts of the epididymis bore a distal cytoplasmic droplet. This
observation has implications for the maturational process in the ostrich
spermatozoon in the epididymis. The surface features of the ducts, except for a
few noteworthy differences, were generally similar to those previously described 
for the male domestic fowl, turkey and duck.

PMID: 10932389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Immunol. 2000 Aug 15;165(4):1976-83.

Normal thymic architecture and negative selection are associated with Aire
expression, the gene defective in the
autoimmune-polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED).

Zuklys S(1), Balciunaite G, Agarwal A, Fasler-Kan E, Palmer E, Holländer GA.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Immunology, The Children's University Hospital, Basel University,
Basel, Switzerland.

T cell development is tightly controlled by thymic stromal cells. Alterations in 
stromal architecture affect T cell maturation and the development of
self-tolerance. The monogenic autoimmune syndrome APECED
(autoimmune-polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy) is characterized
by the loss of self-tolerance to multiple organs. Although mutations in the
autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene are responsible for this disease, the function
of AIRE is not known. Here we report on the spatial and temporal pattern of
murine Aire expression during thymic ontogeny and T cell selection. Early during 
development, thymic Aire transcription is critically dependent on RelB and occurs
in epithelial cells in response to lymphocyte-mediated signals. In adult tissue, 
Aire expression is confined to the medulla and the corticomedullary junction,
where it is modulated by thymocytes undergoing negative selection. Aire may
determine thymic stromal organization and with it the induction of
self-tolerance.

PMID: 10925280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Anat Histol Embryol. 2000 Jun;29(3):179-91.

Aspects of the functional morphology of the ductus epididymidis in domestic
anseriform and galliform birds.

Aire TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Pretoria, 
Republic of South Africa.

The structure of the ductus epididymidis, and its capacity to take up luminal
particulate material (India ink) were studied, using scanning and transmission
electron microscopy, in the domestic fowl, turkey and Japanese quail (Order
Galliformes) and drake (Order Anseriformes). The epithelium appeared contractile 
and stable structurally, especially in the drake in which, among other
cytoskeletal features, abundant perinuclear intermediate filaments radiated
peripherally in the principal, nonciliated (Type III) cell. The Golgi complex was
well developed, except in the turkey in which it was extremely inconspicuous.
Sparsely granulated profiles were the main component of the elaborate endoplasmic
reticulum, which was best developed in the drake and least in the turkey. The
cell in the turkey was uniquely laden with large aggregates of lipid droplets.
Generally, characteristics of a cell active in the synthesis and merocrine
secretion of proteinaceous material were evident. There was no evidence of
apocrine-like secretion in well-fixed tissues. The cell lacked the capacity to
take up luminal India ink particles, and displayed very poorly developed
endocytic structural features, which are also probably only selectively and
minimally absorptive. Ultrastructural features varied between and within the
orders studied, necessitating further studies.

PMID: 10916881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Sep;11(7):285-90.

Adrenal autoimmunity: results and developments.

Peterson P(1), Uibo R, Krohn KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Medical Technology, University of
Tampere and Tampere University Hospital, Box 607, 33101 Tampere, Finland.
peterson@csc.fi

Autoimmune Addison's disease (autoimmune adrenalitis) often occurs in autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy syndromes APS1 (APECED) and APS2. Although the genetic
background and etiology of the two syndromes is remarkably different, they both
result in a similar autoimmune destruction of the adrenal cortex. Recently, the
defective gene in APS1, AIRE (autoimmune regulator) was identified, whereas in
APS2, the major genetic factor remains to be found in the human major
histocompatibility complex haplotype (HLA) region. In addition to the genetic
factors, the recent findings in genetics and immunity leading to the pathogenesis
of adrenal autoimmunity in polyendocrinopathy syndromes are discussed.

PMID: 10920386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Rev Esp Quimioter. 1999 Sep;12(3):244-9.

Oral ofloxacin versus parenteral imipenem-cilastatin in the treatment of
osteomyelitis.

Gomis M(1), Barberán J, Sánchez B, Khorrami S, Borja J, García-Barbal J.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

We conducted a prospective, randomized, open-label trial, comparing oral
ofloxacin with intravenous imipenem-cilastatin for the treatment of chronic
osteomyelitis in order to evaluate the efficacy and tolerance. Hospitalized
patients with diagnosis of chronic osteomyelitis and isolation of susceptible
organisms to ofloxacin and imipenem/cilastatin were eligible for enrollment.
Ofloxacin was administered orally (400 mg every 12 hours), and
imipenem-cilastatin was given intravenously (500 mg every 6 hours). Organisms
were considered susceptible to ofloxacin when the minimal inhibitory
concentration (MIC) was <2 micrograms/ml, and to imipenem-cilastatin when the MIC
was <4 micrograms/ml. Thirty-two patients were enrolled, 16 in each group. In the
intent to treat analysis 11 (69%) patients in the ofloxacin group and eight (50%)
in the imipenem-cilastatin group were cured (p = 0.473; 95% confidence interval
of the difference from -14.7% to 52.2%). In the per protocol analysis 10 (91%)
patients in the ofloxacin group and seven (70%) in the imipenem/cilastatin group 
were cured (p = 0.311; 95% confidence interval of the difference from -12.2% to
54%). Our trial suggests that oral ofloxacin is as effective as parenteral
therapy with betalactam antibiotics in the treatment of osteomyelitis, which
could allow a reduction of the period of hospitalization and economic costs.

PMID: 10878516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Rev Esp Enferm Dig. 2000 Apr;92(4):240-3.

[The limits of informed consent in gastroenterology].

[Article in Spanish]

Pérez Piqueras J(1), Payeras G, Villapún M, Ramos A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Aparato Digestivo, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, España.
jpp03m@nacom.es

PMID: 10867413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr). 2000 May-Jun;28(3):163-8.

[Importance of the integrated evaluation of the child with asthma].

[Article in Spanish]

Nieto A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Alergia Infantil, Hospital La Fe, Valencia, España.

When evaluating the effects of the practical application of a therapeutic
strategy, the results of the controlled and random clinical tests with the above 
mentioned treatment, as they are important, do not constitute the only factor to 
be considered. Especially as frequently the clinical tests only take into account
the efficiency of the treatment, without considering other essential aspects such
as safety, performance and cost. The combination of these factors results in the 
PRACTICAL efficiency of the treatment, that often differs considerably from the
results obtained in clinical tests. Therefore, the clinical tests do not
precisely reflect the conditions that exist when a treatment is applied in real
life and thus, the evaluation of the practical efficiency of the said treatment
is essential if you want to know what the real repercussion that the treatment
has on a specific problem, such as asthma, represents. And this is important as, 
in spite of the notable advances over the last few years in the treatment of this
illness, the objectives that the GINA propose in order to consider the control of
asthma as sufficient, are a long way from being achieved, as the results of the
AIRE study that was carried out in 7 European countries illustrate. On the other 
hand, the valuation of the efficiency of a treatment is a problem that is worth
discussing. As, due to operational and precision reasons, of then the clinical
tests consider one or a few variables as objectively as possible (for example,
the lung function) when valuing the efficiency of a treatment. However, on many
occasions it is possible to appreciate notable discrepancies between these
objective variables and the patient's symptoms, the subjective appreciation of
how the asthma is affecting them, etc. Therefore, it is necessary to take into
account the fact that an integral valuation of the repercusion that asthma has on
the patients, their families and their environment, and how a specific treatment 
changes the situation on these levels, and obligues us to consider in an integral
manner, a series of medical (clinical, functional and biological), humanistic
(quality of life, patients satisfaction) and economic variables.

PMID: 10867388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Genomics. 2000 May 1;65(3):293-8.

Isolation and initial characterization of a novel zinc finger gene, DNMT3L, on
21q22.3, related to the cytosine-5-methyltransferase 3 gene family.

Aapola U(1), Kawasaki K, Scott HS, Ollila J, Vihinen M, Heino M, Shintani A,
Kawasaki K, Minoshima S, Krohn K, Antonarakis SE, Shimizu N, Kudoh J, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere, Finland.
ulla.aapola@uta.fi

We have isolated the DNMT3L gene that is related to the
cytosine-5-methyltransferase 3 (DNMT3) family. The gene is located on chromosome 
21q22.3 between the AIRE and the KIAA0653 genes and spans approximately 16 kb of 
genomic sequence. The encoded protein of 387 amino acids has a cysteine-rich
region containing a novel-type zinc finger domain that is conserved in DNMT3A and
DNMT3B but also in ATRX, a member of the SNF2 protein family. The novel domain,
called an ADD (ATRX, DNMT3, DNMT3L)-type zinc finger, contains two subparts: a
C2C2 and an imperfect PHD zinc finger. Expression of the DNMT3L mRNA was not
detectable by Northern blotting; however, RT-PCR amplification revealed that it
is expressed at low levels in several tissues including testis, ovary, and
thymus.

PMID: 10857753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Sci Total Environ. 2000 May 5;251-252:305-16.

The use of measured boron concentration data from the GREAT-ER UK validation
study (1996-1998) to generate predicted regional boron concentrations

Fox KK(1), Daniel M, Morris G, Holt MS.

Author information: 
(1)Unilever Research, Port Sunlight Laboratory, Bebington, Wirral, UK.

The concentrations of boron in the Aire and Calder which have been measured in
order to validate the GREAT-ER model have been used to derive a predicted
environmental concentration (PEC) for boron in the Aire catchment in Yorkshire.
The data have been obtained from 33 sites, with monthly sampling over a 2-year
period. The 90th percentile of the means of measured concentrations (242 microg
l(-1)) is higher than the 90th percentile predicted by the GREAT-ER model (186
microg l(-1)), if river stretches are normalised by their flow volumes, and
unpolluted headwaters are included in the catchment averaging procedure. However,
if the river stretches are normalised by the length of the respective stretch,
and unpolluted headwaters are included, a lower regional PEC of 28 microg l(-1)
is obtained. If normalisation by stretch length is appropriate for regional risk 
assessment, then the 90th percentile of the means of the measured data will
overpredict the regional boron concentration in a catchment such as the Aire,
with a low natural level of boron in the headwaters. Monitoring data for boron in
the effluents from sewage treatment works in the Aire catchment, and for boron in
the Went and Rother catchments, with a higher background boron level, are also
given.

PMID: 10847170  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


386. Sci Total Environ. 2000 May 5;251-252:277-91.

Novel techniques for characterizing complex water use patterns within a network
based statistical hydrological model

Young AR(1), Croker KM, Sekulin AE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hydrology, Wallingford, Oxfordshire, UK.

Information on the magnitude and variability of flow regimes at the river reach
scale is a central component of most aspects of water resource and water quality 
management. Within the UK, river stretches with permanent gauging stations
represent less than one percent of the total number of river stretches mapped at 
a scale of 1:50,000 and fewer than 20% of gauged catchments can be regarded as
having natural flow regimes. This paper is the second of two papers that describe
the development and application of hydrological models for estimating the
variability and magnitude of natural and artificially influenced flow regimes at 
ungauged sites. The development of the models for estimating statistical
descriptions of both the natural and artificially influenced flow regimes at
ungauged river reaches is described by Young et al. (Young AR, Gustard A, Bullock
A, Sekulin AE, Croker KM. Sci Total Environ 2000: this issue). This paper
describes a pragmatic approach for applying the model to a complex river basin
and characterizing the impacts of water use in the basin through example. The
basin selected for the application contains the Aire and the Calder catchments
within south Yorkshire.

PMID: 10847168  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


387. Sci Total Environ. 2000 May 5;251-252:255-63.

Spatial and temporal regulation of the pesticide dieldrin within industrial
catchments

Mehar AA(1), Wright J, Leeks GJ, Wass P, Osborn D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Terrestrial Ecology 2, Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire, UK.

The river catchments of south Yorkshire support a very high density of wool
processing industries. Dieldrin was once used as a moth proofing agent, as a
sheep dip, and as a pesticide to protect wool fleeces during storage and
transport, all of which caused pollution of these catchments due to textile
processing. Weekly sampling of four of these rivers revealed two classes of
dieldrin contamination: the Aire and Calder (the rivers which support very high
concentrations of wool processing industries) had higher concentrations
(averaging approximately 3 ng/l) than the Don and Trent (approximately 1 ng/l).
The average flux of dieldrin from these rivers into the Humber estuary was 9.8
g/day, with the Aire (of which the Calder is a tributary) and the Trent
contributing almost equally, with a smaller contribution from the Don. The Trent 
has the highest average flow, explaining its large contribution to dieldrin flux.
Less detailed sampling of rivers from the north Humber catchment which drain
predominantly rural areas had dieldrin concentrations similar to the heavily
industrialized southern catchment rivers. This suggests that dieldrin from
agronomic and domestic usage may be more persistent than the pollution caused by 
textile processing industries. Evidence is presented to suggest that the
principle dieldrin sources to the Humber catchments are sewage treatment plants, 
and that the dieldrin sources are in rapid equilibrium with the water column.

PMID: 10847166  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


388. Sci Total Environ. 2000 May 5;251-252:243-53.

Chlorobenzenes in rivers draining industrial catchments

Meharg AA(1), Wright J, Osborn D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire, UK.

Eleven chlorobenzenes (out of a total of 12 in the congener series) were
monitored weekly on four industrialized rivers (Aire, Calder, Don and Trent) of
the Southern Humber Catchment in whole water samples. 1,2- and
1,4-dichlorobenzene were present at relatively high levels on both the Aire and
Calder, having mean concentrations of approximately 30 ng/l. They were both at
lower concentrations on the Don and Trent, although the 1,4-isomer dominated. All
other chlorobenzenes monitored were routinely found on all the rivers, with the
exception of hexachlorobenzene, which was only regularly detected on the Trent.
Again, the rivers fell into two classes with respect to their total chlorobenzene
concentrations, with the Aire and Calder being more polluted. The higher levels
of chlorobenzenes (excluding hexachlorobenzene which was used widely as a
agricultural pesticide) on the Aire and Calder, and the dominance of the
1,4-dichlorobenzene congener (accounting for 60-70% of sigma chlorobenzenes) on
the Don and Trent, indicated that the Aire and Calder were predominately
contaminated with chlorobenzenes through industrial sources, while the Don and
Trent were mainly contaminated through domestic sources (1,4-dichlorobenzene is
widely used as a toilet deodorant). 1,4-Dichlorobenzene dominated flux, with the 
Aire, Don and Trent exporting 52.5 kg/year into the Humber estuary, followed by
the 1,2-dichlorobenzene at 38.8 kg/year. Sigma chlorobenzenes exported to the
Humber was 133 kg/year. This is the first study to calculate chlorobenzene fluxes
to the North Sea from a UK catchment.

PMID: 10847165  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


389. Neurologia. 2000 Feb;15(2):76-80.

[Cerebral ischemia in Rendu-Osler-Weber disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Delgado Reyes S(1), García de la Rocha ML, Fernández-Armayor Ajo V, Sierra Sierra
I, Martín Araguz A, Moreno Martínez JM.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

Neurologic manifestations occur in 8-12% of the patients with Rendu-Osler-Weber
disease or hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT), principally infectious
and hemorrhagic and, less frequently, ischemic ones. More than a half of these
neurologic complications are associated with pulmonary arterio-venous
malformations (PAVM). The diagnosis of HHT is based on the presence of
telangiectases, hemorrhagic events and a family history with an autosomal
dominant pattern. We report a case of a patient diagnosed as having HHT with
transient ischemic attacks and a PAVM, which was occluded by the use of
embolotherapy. Cerebral ischemia in HHT is related to the existence of a PAVM and
results from three mechanisms: 1) secondary poliglobulia and hyperviscosity
because of the hypoxemia due to a right-left shunt; 2) communication between the 
airway and the pulmonary circulation during cough access, which produces gas
embolism and hemoptysis; 3) and, finally, paradoxical embolism trough the PAVM,
the same mechanism proposed to the infectious neurologic manifestations of the
disease. When the diagnosis of HHT is suspected, early search and treatment of
PAVM, with embolotherapy or surgery, are necessary in order to avoid respiratory 
problems (hemoptysis, exertional dyspnea, cianosis, clubbing) and neurologic
complications.

PMID: 10769536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Res Vet Sci. 2000 Apr;68(2):135-40.

Active spermiophagy in the initial part of the proximal efferent duct of the
epididymis of normal domestic fowl (Gallus domesticus).

Aire TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Pretoria, 
Onderstepoort, 0110, Republic of South Africa.

In a study of the absorptive activities of the excurrent ducts of the testis of
birds, six adult cocks of the Ovambo breed of domestic fowl were deeply
anaesthetised and intravascularly perfused with buffered 3 per cent
glutaraldehyde. Epididymal tissue was prepared conventionally for electron
microscopy. In favourable sections in three of these birds avid ingestion of
spermatozoa was revealed in the non-ciliated (Type I) cells of the epithelial
lining of the initial part of the proximal efferent duct, at and a little beyond 
its junction with the rete testis. No obvious defects were detected in luminal
spermatozoa. The testicular excurrent ducts were neither distended nor
obstructed, and mononuclear cell mobilisation was absent in both the ductal and
periductal tissue. The significance of this observation with regard to the
specific segment of the efferent duct system involved and how certain spermatozoa
are identified for elimination from the duct lumen, must await precise studies.

Copyright 2000 Harcourt Publishers Ltd.

PMID: 10756130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 2;275(22):16802-9.

The autoimmune regulator protein has transcriptional transactivating properties
and interacts with the common coactivator CREB-binding protein.

Pitkänen J(1), Doucas V, Sternsdorf T, Nakajima T, Aratani S, Jensen K, Will H,
Vähämurto P, Ollila J, Vihinen M, Scott HS, Antonarakis SE, Kudoh J, Shimizu N,
Krohn K, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere and Tampere University 
Hospital, 33101 Tampere, Finland. jp58218@uta.fi

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy, caused by
mutations in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene, is an autosomal recessive
autoimmune disease characterized by the breakdown of tolerance to organ-specific 
antigens. The 545 amino acid protein encoded by AIRE contains several structural 
motifs suggestive of a transcriptional regulator and bears similarity to cellular
proteins involved in transcriptional control. We show here that AIRE fused to a
heterologous DNA binding domain activates transcription from a reporter promoter,
and the activation seen requires the full-length protein or more than one
activation domain. At the structural level AIRE forms homodimers through the
NH(2)-terminal domain, and molecular modeling for this domain suggests a
four-helix bundle structure. In agreement, we show that the common
transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP) interacts with AIRE in
vitro and in yeast nuclei through the CH1 and CH3 conserved domains. We suggest
that the transcriptional transactivation properties of AIRE together with its
interaction with CBP might be important in its function as disease-causing
mutations almost totally abolish the activation effect.

PMID: 10748110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Hepatol. 2000;32(1 Suppl):181-97.

Autoimmune hepatitis.

Obermayer-Straub P(1), Strassburg CP, Manns MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hannover Medical School,
Germany.

Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is a rare disease, characterized by female
predominance, hypergammaglobulinemia, autoantibodies, association with HLA DR3
and HLA DR4 and a good response to immunosuppression. Different subtypes of AIH
may be distinguished, based on differences in the autoantibody patterns. AIH type
1 is characterized by anti-nuclear (ANA) and/or anti-smooth muscular (SMA)
autoantibodies. AIH type 2 is characterized by liver/kidney microsomal
autoantibodies (LKM). AIH type 3 may be distinguished by autoantibodies to
soluble liver proteins (SLA) or the liver pancreas antigen (LP). AIH-2 affects
predominantly pediatric patients and is characterized by a more severe clinical
course, a higher frequency of relapse under immunosuppressive treatment and a
more frequent progression to cirrhosis. In contrast, AIH types 1 and 3 show a
higher age of onset and a better long-term response to immunosuppressive
treatment. At present, the treatment of choice is prednisone alone or a
combination with prednisone and azathioprine. Both treatment protocols show high 
survival rates. However, a rate of 13% of treatment failures and the failure to
induce permanent remission in most patients underlines the urgent need to develop
additional treatment regimens. A yet unknown genetic predisposition is believed
to act as the underlying etiological factor in AIH. This genetic predisposition
includes a few known risk factors such as the presence of HLA DR3 or HLA DR4,
deletions of C4A alleles and female gender. Furthermore, it has to be postulated 
that defects in immunoregulatory genes exist. A model for such defects may be the
autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS1), which results from the defects
in a single gene, the autoimmune regulator type 1 (AIRE-1). Patients with APS1
suffer from mucocutaneous candidiasis and a number of organ-specific autoimmune
diseases. Characteristic is a high variability in the number and character of the
disease components in APS1, indicating that other genetic and environmental
factors may strongly modulate the outcome of disease. Environmental factors may
comprise chemical influences, such as nutritional compounds and drugs, or virus
infections. Several drugs or chemicals were shown to induce hepatitis with
autoimmune involvement, e.g. tienilic acid, dihydralazine and halothane. Adduct
formation of an activated metabolite is believed to act as a trigger and to
induce a specific immune response. Similarly, viruses were repeatedly shown to
trigger autoimmune hepatitis. In virus infections, sequence similarities between 
viral and self-proteins may trigger autoimmune processes and the simultaneous
presence of inflammatory cytokines during virus infection may further increase
the risk of developing self-perpetuating autoimmune reactions which overshoot.

PMID: 10728804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Feb;66(2):378-92.

Mutations in the AIRE gene: effects on subcellular location and transactivation
function of the autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy
protein.

Björses P(1), Halonen M, Palvimo JJ, Kolmer M, Aaltonen J, Ellonen P, Perheentupa
J, Ulmanen I, Peltonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, National Public Health Institute,
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a
monogenic autosomal disease with recessive inheritance. It is characterized by
multiple autoimmune endocrinopathies, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, and
ectodermal dystrophies. The defective gene responsible for this disease was
recently isolated, and several different mutations in the novel gene, AIRE, have 
been identified, by us and by others, in patients with APECED. We have shown that
the APECED protein is mainly localized, both in vitro and in vivo, to the cell
nucleus, where it forms distinct speckles. This accords with the predicted
structural features of the protein, which suggest involvement of AIRE in the
regulation of gene transcription. Here, we report the results of mutational
analyses of a series of 112 patients with APECED who were from various ethnic
backgrounds. A total of 16 different mutations, covering 91% of disease alleles, 
were observed; of these, 8 were novel. The mutations are spread throughout the
coding region of AIRE, yet four evident mutational hotspots were observed. In
vitro expression of four different naturally occurring nonsense and missense
mutations revealed a dramatically altered subcellular location of the protein in 
cultured cells. Interestingly, the wild-type APECED protein tethered to the Gal4 
DNA-binding domain acted as a strong transcriptional activator of reporter genes 
in mammalian cells, whereas most of the analyzed mutant polypeptides had lost
this capacity.

PMCID: PMC1288090
PMID: 10677297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Burns. 2000 Mar;26(2):145-7.

Role of mast cells in the pathogenesis of postburn inflammatory response:
reactive oxygen species as mast cell stimulators.

Santos FX(1), Arroyo C, García I, Blasco R, Obispo JM, Hamann C, Espejo L.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Surgery Unit, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, Spain. xsantos@haire.es

Thermal trauma has a direct effect on mast cells, triggering the secretion of
histamine. This secretion leads to an enhanced xanthine oxidase activity and an
increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), the latter being produced 
after burns through differing mechanisms. As ROS have been shown to have
deleterious effects on cellular membranes, a lesion of the mast cell membrane
could close the circle of autoinjury due to the vasoactive actions of mast cell
mediators. Our studies were designed to assess the potentiality of ROS as
stimulators of mast cell degranulation after burns by comparing two groups of
rats treated, respectively, with SOD and saline solution after a scald injury.
Plasma levels of tryptase and histamine were analyzed as markers of mast cell
activity. A comparison of the mean increases of tryptase between baseline and 3-h
postburn levels in the two groups shows significant differences (p < 0.001)
(control: 0.13+/-0.04, SOD: 0.03+/-0.01). When comparing the mean increases
between the baseline and 3 h postburn levels of histamine in the two groups,
significant differences were also found (p < 0.001) (control group: 2.70+/-0.57. 
SOD group: 1.22+/-0.32). The lower levels of histamine and tryptase induced by
SOD provides indirect evidence that ROS are involved in the process, causing the 
release of such mediators by mast cells, which may in turn suggest that ROS can
act as stimulators of mast cell degranulation in burns.

PMID: 10716357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Feb;85(2):688-91.

Association analysis of the cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) and
autoimmune regulator-1 (AIRE-1) genes in sporadic autoimmune Addison's disease.

Vaidya B(1), Imrie H, Geatch DR, Perros P, Ball SG, Baylis PH, Carr D, Hurel SJ, 
James RA, Kelly WF, Kemp EH, Young ET, Weetman AP, Kendall-Taylor P, Pearce SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

Although autoimmune Addison's disease (AAD) may occur as a component of the
monogenic autoimmune polyendocrinopathy type 1 syndrome (APS1), it is most
commonly found as an isolated disorder or associated with the autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy type 2 syndrome (APS2). It is likely that sporadic (non-APS1) 
AAD is inherited as a complex trait; however, apart from the major
histocompatibility complex, the susceptibility genes remain unknown. We have
examined polymorphisms at two non-major histocompatibility complex candidate
susceptibility loci in sporadic (non-APS1) AAD: the cytotoxic T lymphocyte
antigen-4 (CTLA-4) gene and the autoimmune regulator (AIRE-1) gene. DNA samples
from AAD subjects (n = 90) and local controls (n = 144 for CTLA-4; n = 576 for
AIRE-1) were analyzed for the CTLA-4A/G polymorphism in exon 1 of the CTLA-4 gene
and for the common mutant AIRE-1 allele (964de113) in United Kingdom subjects
with APS1, by using the restriction enzymes Bst7II and BsrBI, respectively. There
was an association of the G allele at CTLA-4A/G in AAD subjects (P = 0.008 vs.
controls), which was stronger in subjects with AAD as a component of APS2 than in
subjects with isolated AAD. In contrast, the mutant AIRE-1 964del13 allele was
carried in one each of the 576 (0.2%) control subjects and the 90 (1.1%) AAD
subjects as a heterozygote (P = 0.254, not significant), suggesting that this
common AIRE-1 gene abnormality does not have a major role in sporadic (non-APS1) 
AAD.

PMID: 10690877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Z Kardiol. 1999 Dec;88(12):982-90.

[Left ventricular remodeling: pathophysiological mechanisms and therapeutic
recommendations].

[Article in German]

Völler H(1), Dietz R.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik am See Fachklinik für Herz- und Kreislauferkrankungen, Rüdersdorf.

Hospital mortality from acute myocardial infarction has decreased in the last two
decades. Left ventricular dysfunction therefore have been mainly due to ischemia.
After extensive myocardial infarction, there are processes of adaptation
(remodeling) which result in altered geometry of the left ventricle. The effects 
of this on neurohormonal systems (organ regulation), on the changed ratio of
myocyte mass and collagen content owing to reactive and reparative fibrosis
(organ texture) and on the molecular and cellular mechanisms (organ structure)
are of crucial importance. Depending on the structural changes, the myocardial
contractility decreases. This is associated with an activation of the circulating
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). The fundamental knowledge available 
has led to the therapeutic use of ACE inhibitors in the post-infarct period. This
treatment enabled a sustained reduction of mortality in several large-scale
randomized studies. The effect of early administration in patients with clinical 
signs of heart failure and/or left ventricular dysfunction was very much greater 
compared to unselected controls. Only 17 and 13 patients had to be treated after 
selection in order to save one life in the AIRE and TREACE Study respectively
(NNT: number needed to treat), whereas e.g. in the ISIS-4 study 200 unselected
patients had to be treated. In clinical practice, however, this life-saving
therapy is only used in every second patient requiring treatment. With
consideration of an individual form of treatment (anterior infarction, large
infarct area, reinfarction, clinical signs of heart failure as well as arterial
hypertension and diabetes mellitus), a greater acceptance of evidence-based
guidelines is thus desirable. Treatment with a high dose may be expected to be of
additional benefit.

PMID: 10654389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Jan;85(1):460-3.

Autoantibodies against aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase identifies a subgroup 
of patients with Addison's disease.

Söderbergh A(1), Rorsman F, Halonen M, Ekwall O, Björses P, Kämpe O, Husebye ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.
annika.soderbergh@medicin.uu.se

Autoantibodies against aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) are present in 
about 50 percent of sera from patients with autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome
type I (APS I) but absent in sera from patients with different organ-specific
autoimmune diseases, such as insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, Hashimoto's
thyroiditis, and Graves' disease. AADC is expressed in the pancreatic beta-cells,
the liver, and the nervous system; and the presence of AADC antibodies has been
shown to correlate to hepatitis and vitiligo in APS I patients. Among 101
investigated patients with autoimmune Addison's disease, 15 had high titers of
AADC antibodies. According to the clinical characteristics of these patients,
only 3 had APS I. The remaining 12 had either isolated Addison's disease or
associated diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, vitiligo, alopecia, gonadal
failure, and pernicious anemia. Autoantibodies against 21-hydroxylase were
present in 9 of 12, whereas autoantibodies against side-chain cleavage enzyme and
17alpha-hydroxylase were present in 3 of 12. Two patients had only autoantibodies
against AADC. DNA was available from 3 of these 12 patients. One of the patients,
a woman with Addison's disease, autoimmune thyroiditis, and premature menopause
was heterozygous for a point mutation (G1021A, Val301Met) in the first plant
homeodomain zinc finger domain of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. The
presence of AADC autoantibodies identifies patients with APS I and a subgroup of 
Addison patients who may have a milder atypical form of APS I or represent a
distinct entity. Measurement of autoantibodies against AADC should be included in
the evaluation of Addison's disease.

PMID: 10634424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Onderstepoort J Vet Res. 2000 Sep;67(3):191-9.

Ultrastructural study of the luminal surface of the ducts of the epididymis of
gallinaceous birds.

Aire TA(1), Josling D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Pretoria, 
Onderstepoort, South Africa.

The various ducts of the epididymides of four gallinaceous birds, the turkey
(Meleagris gallopavo), domestic fowl (Gallus gallus), guinea-fowl (Numida
meleagris) and Japanese quail (Coturnix coturnix japonica) were studied at the
scanning and transmission electron microscopy levels. The tissues were fixed
either by immersion or vascular perfusion, for comparative purposes. Each duct
system, save for a few details, presented similar morphological features in all
species. The epithelial surface of the rete testis was regular and each cell bore
a single cilium, as well as numerous, or in some parts, very few, short, regular 
microvilli. Each of the Types I and II non-ciliated cells of the proximal and
efferent ducts displayed abundant, moderately long and regular microvilli, and a 
solitary cilium. The ciliated cells exhibited tufts of cilia. The Type III
non-ciliated cell of the connecting and epididymal ducts exhibited a solitary
cilium, and numerous microvilli which were intermediate in length between those
of the rete testis and those of the efferent ducts. Vascular perfusion of the
avian epididymal tissue was the superior method of fixation because it minimised 
the developments of fixation artefacts. Apocrine secretion did not appear to
occur in the epididymis of these birds as the apical blebs of Types I, II and III
cells, which have previously been reported, only manifest in this study in
inadequately fixed tissues, and were therefore viewed as being artefacts. The
present findings suggest that the current terminology, as applied to the avian
epididymis, be retained.

PMID: 11131120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 1999 Nov;17(9):483-4.

[Chlamydia pneumoniae and asthma].

[Article in Spanish]

Gomis M(1), López F, Ferrández A.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

PMID: 10614091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Med Clin (Barc). 1999 Nov 6;113(15):592-7.

[Treatment of agitation in dementia patients].

[Article in Spanish]

González Salvador MT(1), Arango López C, Lyketsos CG.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Psiquiatría, Hospital del Aire, Madrid. teresacap@hotmail.com

PMID: 10605687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Autoimmunity. 1999;31(1):47-53.

Chromosomal localization and complete genomic sequence of the murine autoimmune
regulator gene (Aire).

Shi JD(1), Wang CY, Marron MP, Ruan QG, Huang YQ, Detter JC, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine and Center for
Mammualian Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville
32610-0275, USA.

We have recently cloned the murine autoimmune regulator (Aire) gene, the
homologue of human AIRE responsible for the autoimmune polyglandular syndrome
type 1 (APS1) or autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy
(APECED). Here, we report the genomic sequence (18,413 bp) for the entire Aire
gene and its 5' flanking region, which contains putative regulatory sequences.
Comparison of the genomic and cDNA sequences indicates that the Aire gene is
composed of 14 exons and the coding sequence shares high similarities between
mouse and human. The sizes of the homologous introns in the two species are
conserved; however, the introns do not share significant sequence homologies
except the sequences near the splice donor and acceptor sites. Sequence analyses 
of the 5' regulatory region and the complete coding region in three mouse strains
(B6, NOD and SJL) did not reveal any sequence variation, suggesting sequence
conservation between different inbred mouse strains. Using one of the six
microsatellite markers identified by genomic sequencing and a B6 x Cast backcross
mapping panel, we mapped the mouse Aire gene to chromosome 10, a syntenic region 
containing the Cdl18 and Pfkl genes on human chromosome 21q22.

PMID: 10593569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Autoimmun. 1999 Nov;13(3):307-13.

Expression and alternative splicing of the mouse autoimmune regulator gene
(Aire).

Ruan QG(1), Wang CY, Shi JD, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine and Center for
Mammalian Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL
32610, USA.

AIRE, the gene responsible for the autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1
(APS1) or APECED, may act as a transcription factor according to its predicated
protein structure. Here we demonstrate the low expression level of the mouse Aire
gene as it is undetectable by Northern blot analyses. However, RT-PCR analyses
revealed expression of Aire in mouse thymus, ovary, lung, testis, kidney and
adrenal gland. Barely detectable level of RT-PCR product was also found in
thyroid gland and heart but no amplification was detected in pancreas, spleen and
liver. Competitive RT-PCR assays demonstrated highest expression level of Aire
mRNA in thymus. In addition to the complete cDNA (Aire or Aire-1a), we identified
11 alternative splicing forms (designated as Aire-1b, Aire-1c, Aire-1d, Aire-2a, 
Aire-2b, Aire-2c, Aire-2d, Aire-3a, Aire-3b, Aire-3c and Aire-3d). These forms
result from combinations of four alternative splicing units (exon 10, exon 11, 12
bp in exon 6 and 3 bp in exon 8). The relative abundance of these splicing forms 
was also determined.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10550218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Arch Bronconeumol. 1999 Sep;35(8):395-403.

[Early diagnosis of cancer of the lung].

[Article in Spanish]

Callol Sánchez L(1), Gómez de Terreros y Sánchez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

PMID: 10548986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Nurs Stand. 1999 Jun 23-29;13(40):22-3.

Drugs test cop-out?

Weeks S(1), Flatt S, Singleton C.

Author information: 
(1)Aire Court Community Day Hospital, Leeds.

PMID: 10497502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Microsurgery. 1999;19(6):275-80.

Local administration of neurotrophic growth factor in subcutaneous silicon
chambers enhances the regeneration of the sensory component of the rat sciatic
nerve.

Santos X(1), Rodrigo J, Hontanilla B, Bilbao G.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Cirugía Experimental, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid,
Spain. xsantos@haire.es

An experimental model for local administration of neurotrophic growth factor
(NGF) in peripheral nerve lesions is tested. The model consists of a subcutaneous
reservoir connected to the sciatic nerve neurorrhaphy. The right sciatic nerves
were exposed, severed, and repaired at a level 1.5 cm proximal to their
trifurcation. Then, a dome-shaped silicone reservoir connected to the proximal
end of a silicone tube was placed subcutaneously in the dorsum of the
experimental animal. The distal end of the connecting tube was located in the
nerve neurorrhaphy. Two experimental groups were made: Group A (n = 90) received 
daily doses of a solution containing NGF-7S during the first 4 weeks after
surgery and a single weekly dose thereafter. Within this group, three subgroups
of 30 rats each were made: A-4 sacrificed 4 weeks after surgery, A-8 sacrificed
after 8 weeks, and A-12 after 12 weeks. Group B (n = 90) received the same
vehicle solution without NGF under the same schedule and volume as in Group A.
Three subgroups were also made as in Group A depending on the survival period. In
order to locate the neurons in the dorsal root ganglia, the retrograde tracer
horseradish peroxidase was administered at the proximal stump of the sciatic
nerve (tibialis branch), which was severed 1 cm distal to the sciatic
trifurcation. In respect of the nonoperated side, the percentage between the
number of dorsal root ganglia neurons in the NGF-treated group was significantly 
higher than in the control group (P < 0.001). These results demonstrate that
percutaneous administration of multiple doses of NGF in this model enhances
sensory nerve regeneration after sciatic lesions evaluated by horseradish
peroxidase labeling of dorsal root ganglia neurons.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10469442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Hum Hypertens. 1999 Aug;13(8):511-6.

The prognostic significance of a history of systemic hypertension in patients
randomised to either placebo or ramipril following acute myocardial infarction:
evidence from the AIRE study. Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy.

Spargias K(1), Ball S, Hall A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cardiovascular Research, University of Leeds, UK.

BACKGROUND: After acute myocardial infarction (AMI), patients with a history of
arterial hypertension (AH) have a worse prognosis than normotensives. Whether
this adverse risk is beneficially modulated by treatment with
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors is unknown. We evaluated the
prognostic value of antecedent hypertension in post-AMI patients given ACE
inhibitor therapy.
METHODS: We analysed retrospectively data from the AIRE study (randomised,
placebo-controlled trial of ramipril in 2006 post-AMI patients with clinical
heart failure). A history of AH was present in 28% of the patients. We examined
the prognostic value of antecedent hypertension separately among placebo and
ramipril treated patients and also the effect of ramipril on clinical outcomes
according to whether or not a history of AH was present.
RESULTS: Antecedent hypertension was a significant indicator of adverse prognosis
in the placebo (P) treated patients (Hazard Ratio 1.49, 95% Confidence Intervals 
1.13 to 1.97, P = 0.005) but not in the ramipril (R) treated patients (1.17, 0.84
to 1.61, P = 0.34). A similar pattern was observed for the risks of sudden death 
(P: 1.75, 1.21 to 2.54, P = 0.003; R: 1.34, 0.86 to 2.07, P = 0.18) and
severe/resistant heart failure (P: 1.48, 1.08 to 2.03, P = 0.014; R: 1.18, 0.83
to 1.68, P = 0.37). Treatment with ramipril reduced the all-cause mortality risk 
in both hypertensive (0.63, 0.44 to 0.89, P = 0.009) and normotensive patients
(0.78, 0.61 to 0.99, P = 0.041).
CONCLUSION: Antecedent hypertension is not a significant prognosticator in
patients with AMI and clinical heart failure given ACE inhibitor therapy.

PMID: 10455471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Neurologia. 1999 Jun-Jul;14(6):306.

[Occult cephalocele associated with a variant of Dandy-Walker].

[Article in Spanish]

Delgado Reyes S(1), García de la Rocha ML, Esteban Alonso F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

PMID: 10439624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Lancet. 1999 Jul 31;354(9176):391-2.

Safety concerns about digoxin after acute myocardial infarction.

Spargias KS, Hall AS, Ball SG.

We examined clinical outcomes associated with non-randomised digoxin therapy in a
postmyocardial infarction population with clinical heart failure (AIRE study).
Our results raise concern about the safety of digoxin in this population.

PMID: 10437870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Arch Esp Urol. 1999 Jun;52(5):499-504.

[The double-J ureteral catheter: its historical development and current status].

[Article in Spanish]

Vallejo Herrador J(1), Maganto Pavón E, Burgos Revilla FJ, Sánchez de la Muela y 
Naverac P, Martín-Laborda y Bergasa F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Urología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

OBJECTIVE: To review the history of the development of the double-J ureteral
catheter, a device that is necessary in current urological practice.
METHODS/RESULTS: A review of the literature shows that although there are
references on the use of the ureteral catheter before 1967, the history of its
development began in that year, when Zimskind and co-workers designed and used
the first self-retaining catheter that was inserted cystoscopically. However, it 
was not until 1978 when the double-J shape was adopted following the design of
Finney.
CONCLUSIONS: A review of the history of bioimplants development in the field of
Urology shows that catheter design and its biomaterials have developed in
parallel, in an attempt to create a device that functions well and one that is
also well-tolerated by the body in order to reduce the catheter-related
complications.

PMID: 10427887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. An Med Interna. 1999 Jun;16(6):297-8.

[Localized tracheobronchial amyloidosis: a case report and review of the
literature].

[Article in Spanish]

Ramos Meca MA(1), Zuil Martín M, Jareño Esteban J, Villegas Fernández F, Coca
Menchero S, Callol Sánchez L.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

Tracheobronchial amyloidosis is the most common form of localized
bronchopulmonary amyloidoses, although its diagnosis is not very frequent in
daily practice. We present a case of localized tracheobronchial amyloidosis
presented as hemoptysis. The diagnosis and treatment were performed with rigid
bronchoscopy and resection with an Nd-YAG laser.

PMID: 10422299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Pharmacoeconomics. 1998 Dec;14(6):653-69.

Cost-effectiveness analysis of ramipril in heart failure after myocardial
infarction. Economic evaluation of the Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy (AIRE) 
study for Germany from the perspective of Statutory Health Insurance.

Schädlich PK(1), Huppertz E, Brecht JG.

Author information: 
(1)InForMed Gesellschaft für interdisziplinäre Forschung und Beratung im
Gesundheitswesen mbH, Hamburg, Germany. Schaedlich@informed.de

OBJECTIVE: Data from the Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy (AIRE) study were
used in a cost-effectiveness analysis to determine the incremental cost per
life-year gained (LYG) when the ACE inhibitor ramipril was added to conventional 
treatment in patients with heart failure after acute myocardial infarction. In
the AIRE trial, the addition of ramipril significantly lowered rates of total
mortality and rehospitalisation due to heart failure.
DESIGN AND SETTING: The cost-effectiveness analysis was conducted from the
perspective of the Statutory Health Insurance (SHI) provider in Germany. A
modelling approach was used which was based on secondary analysis of existing
data, and costs were those incurred by SHI (i.e. expenses of SHI). In the
base-case analysis, average case-related expenses of SHI were applied and LYG
were quantified by the method of Kaplan and Meier.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES AND RESULTS: The incremental cost-effectiveness ratios of
ramipril varied between 2500 and 8300 deutschmarks (DM) per LYG (1993 values for 
inpatient and 1995 values for outpatient treatment; DM1 approximately $US0.70),
according to the treatment periods of 3.8 years and 1 year, respectively. In the 
sensitivity analysis, the robustness of the model and its results was shown when 
the extent of influence of different model variables on the base-case results was
investigated. First, survival probability and LYG were estimated according to the
Weibull method. Second, the dependency of the target variable (i.e. incremental
cost per LYG) on random variables was described in a simulation. Third, the
influence of the model variables on the target variable was quantified using a
deterministic model. The variance of the target variable was broad and the
hospitalisation impact of adding ramipril to conventional treatment was an
independent variable with much greater influence on the target variable than the 
parameter of clinical effectiveness, i.e. the number of LYG.
CONCLUSION: Results of this evaluation showed that ramipril has a favourable
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio for the treatment of heart failure in post
myocardial infarction patients and can be considered an economical therapeutic
agent from the perspective of SHI (third-party payer) in Germany.

PMID: 10346417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Ann Med. 1999 Apr;31(2):111-6.

Cloning of the APECED gene provides new insight into human autoimmunity.

Aaltonen J(1), Björses P.

Author information: 
(1)National Public Health Institute, Department of Human Molecular Genetics,
Helsinki, Finland.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is the
only autoimmune disease characterized so far that is caused by a defect in a
single gene. We have recently isolated the defective gene in this disease by
positional cloning and have identified several different mutations in APECED
patients. This novel gene, AIRE, contains two plant homeodomain (PHD)-type zinc
finger motifs and a newly described putative DNA-binding domain SAND. We have
further shown that the protein encoded by the AIRE gene is localized to the
nuclear body-like structures of cell nuclei. Similar discrete speckles within the
nucleus have been suggested to be involved in the regulation of transcription,
oncogenesis and differentiation of cells. Together with the predicted structural 
features of the APECED protein the new data obtained both in vitro and ex vivo
suggest that this protein participates in the regulation of gene expression in a 
restricted set of tissues and cells.

PMID: 10344583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 1998 Dec;16 Suppl 2:1-7; discussion 47-52.

[Has the moment arrived for quinolones in the treatment of respiratory
infections?].

[Article in Spanish]

Gomis M(1), Sánchez B, Ledesma F, Barberán J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

PMID: 10344092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Reconstr Microsurg. 1999 Apr;15(3):207-13.

Regeneration of the motor component of the rat sciatic nerve with local
administration of neurotrophic growth factor in silicone chambers.

Santos X(1), Rodrigo J, Hontanilla B, Bilbao G.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Surgery Unit, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

The experimental model reported consists of a subcutaneous reservoir connected to
a rat sciatic nerve anastomosis. The right sciatic nerve was exposed, served, and
repaired at a level 1.5 cm proximal to its trifurcation. Then, a dome-shaped
silicone reservoir, connected to the proximal end of a silicone tube, was placed 
subcutaneously in the dorsum of the experimental animal. The distal end of the
connecting tube was located at the nerve anastomosis. There were two experimental
groups: Group A animals (n = 90) received daily doses of a solution containing
nerve growth factor (NGF)-7S during the first 4 weeks after surgery and a single 
weekly dose thereafter. Within this group, there were three subgroups of 30 rats 
each: A-4 sacrificed at 4 weeks after surgery: A-8 sacrificed at 8 weeks; and
A-12 at 12 weeks. Group B animals (n = 90) received the same vehicle solution
without NGF at the same schedule and volumes as in Group A. There were also three
subgroups as in Group A, depending on the survival period: B-4 (n = 30); B-8 (n =
30); and B-12 (n = 30). In order to localize the motoneurons in the spinal cord, 
the retrograde tracer, horseradish peroxidase (HRP), was administered at the
proximal stump of the sciatic nerve (tibialis branch) that was severed 1 cm
distal to the sciatic trifurcation (1.5 cm distal to the nerve anastomosis). The 
number of spinal neurons in the NGF-treated group was statistically significantly
higher than in the control group (p < 0.001). These results demonstrate that
percutaneous administration of multiple doses of neurotrophic growth factor in
this model enhances motor nerve regeneration after sciatic lesions, evaluated by 
HRP-labeling of spinal motoneurons.

PMID: 10226956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Heart. 1999 Jan;81(1):25-32.

beta blocker treatment and other prognostic variables in patients with clinical
evidence of heart failure after acute myocardial infarction: evidence from the
AIRE study.

Spargias KS(1), Hall AS, Greenwood DC, Ball SG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cardiovascular Research, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.

OBJECTIVES: To examine clinical outcomes associated with optional beta blockade
in a population of patients with evidence of heart failure after myocardial
infarction.
DESIGN AND PATIENTS: Data from the acute infarction ramipril efficacy (AIRE)
study were analysed retrospectively. At baseline 22.3% of the patients were
receiving a beta blocker. To minimise confounding, beta blocker and diuretic
treatments, presence of clinical signs of heart failure, left ventricular
ejection fraction, and 16 other baseline clinical variables were simultaneously
entered in a multivariate Cox regression model. In addition, the same analysis
was repeated separately within a high and a low risk group of patients, as
defined according to the need for diuretic treatment.
RESULTS: beta Blocker treatment was an independent predictor of reduced risk of
total mortality (hazard ratio 0.66, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0. 48 to 0.90)
and progression to severe heart failure (0.58, 95% CI 0.40 to 0.83) for the
entire study population. There were similar findings in high risk patients
requiring diuretics (0.59, 95% CI 0.40 to 0.86; and 0.58, 95% CI 0.38 to 0.89).
CONCLUSIONS: beta Blocker treatment is associated with improved outcomes in
patients with clinical evidence of mild to moderate heart failure after
myocardial infarction. Most importantly, high risk patients with persistent heart
failure appear to benefit at least as much as lower risk patients with transient 
heart failure.

PMCID: PMC1728912
PMID: 10220541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Apr 21;257(3):821-5.

Autoimmune regulator is expressed in the cells regulating immune tolerance in
thymus medulla.

Heino M(1), Peterson P, Kudoh J, Nagamine K, Lagerstedt A, Ovod V, Ranki A,
Rantala I, Nieminen M, Tuukkanen J, Scott HS, Antonarakis SE, Shimizu N, Krohn K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.

The AIRE gene (autoimmune regulator), coding for a putative transcriptional
regulatory factor, is mutated in autoimmune-polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis
ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). We have investigated the expression of the AIRE
gene by mRNA in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry in various human
tissues. Here we show that AIRE is expressed in distinct cells in thymus medulla,
and also in rare cells in lymph node paracortex and medulla, and in spleen and
fetal liver, but not in the target organs of autoimmune destruction. Double
immunofluorescence studies revealed that in thymus medulla both epithelial
(cytokeratin positive) and non-epithelial cells expressed AIRE. Subcellularly,
AIRE was localised in nuclear dots in thymus and lymph node and also in
transfected cells. The cellular localisation of AIRE and its nuclear
localisation, compatible with its predicted protein domains, suggest that AIRE
may regulate the mechanisms involved in the induction and maintenance of immune
tolerance.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10208866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Mar;84(3):844-52.

Severe autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy in an
adolescent girl with a novel AIRE mutation: response to immunosuppressive
therapy.

Ward L(1), Paquette J, Seidman E, Huot C, Alvarez F, Crock P, Delvin E, Kämpe O, 
Deal C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Université de Montréal,
Québec, Canada.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder for which the gene (AIRE) has recently been
identified on chromosome 21q22.3. We present the mutational analyses of a
French-Canadian family with APECED, in which there are two affected siblings, as 
well as the response to cyclosporine A(CyA) therapy in the index patient, the
eldest sibling. Haplotype analysis suggested compound heterozygozity at the AIRE 
locus. Direct sequencing of exon 8 revealed a previously described mutation, a
13-bp deletion (1085-1097) of maternal origin, found in the index patient, her
affected sister, and her unaffected sister. A novel missense mutation
characterized by a T-->G transversion at nucleotide position 398, resulting in a 
leu-->arg amino acid substitution (L93R), was found in exon 2. The mutation was
present in the father, the brother, the index patient, and the affected sister.
The presence of the mutation in the propositus was verified by cloning of PCR
products from genomic DNA. The mutation destroys a PstI restriction enzyme site, 
as confirmed in the aforementioned patients. Screening of 50 French-Canadian
controls with PstI digestion did not show destruction of the restriction-enzyme
site. The index patient's phenotype was severe, manifested by classic features of
the illness (adrenal insufficiency, hypoparathyroidism, candidiasis, and
keratoconjunctivitis with alopecia universalis), as well as by severe exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency, diabetes mellitus, hepatic inflammation, growth hormone
(GH) deficiency due to lymphocytic hypophysitis, and primary ovarian failure.
Oral CyA (5 mg/kg/day) was initiated at 13 yr of age. After 8 months of therapy, 
stimulated pancreatic lipase increased 24-fold with normalization of stool fat
(from 31.5 g/day to 2.5 g/day, normal(N) < 5). There was complete resolution of
her photophobia, and considerable hair regrowth was diffusely apparent. Minimal
side effects were noted. Our experience supports the use of oral CyA for the
treatment of severe APECED-associated exocrine pancreatic failure and
keratoconjunctivitis.

PMID: 10084559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Am Mosq Control Assoc. 1998 Dec;14(4):467-9.

Aqua-Reslin droplet analysis.

Brown JR(1), Steinke WE, Zhai J, Sykes D.

Author information: 
(1)Navy Disease Vector Ecology and Control Center, Jacksonville, FL 32212-0043,
USA.

Aerosol droplets were collected, counted, and sorted using a laser system, the
Army Insecticide Measuring System, Teflon-coated slides, and magnesium
oxide-coated slides. All droplets, for each method and replication, were
generated by a London Aire 1820 or a Leco Model 1600. These data indicate that
the Army Insecticide Measuring System or Teflon-coated slides are so closely
similar to the laser that they could effectively be used in the field without an 
overwhelming loss in precision.

PMID: 10084143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Feb 16;255(2):483-90.

Isolation and characterization of the mouse Aire gene.

Mittaz L(1), Rossier C, Heino M, Peterson P, Krohn KJ, Gos A, Morris MA, Kudoh J,
Shimizu N, Antonarakis SE, Scott HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, University of Geneva, Medical School,
Switzerland.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by Addison's disease and/or
hypoparathyroidism and/or chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. Patients may also
have other clinical symptoms both within and outside the endocrine system, mainly
as a result of autoimmunity against organ-specific autoantigens. The gene for
APECED has recently been identified and termed AIRE (for AutoImmune REgulator).
APECED is a model of organ-specific autoimmunity and isolation and
characterization of the homologous mouse gene, Aire, will provide tools for
dissection of the mechanisms underlying this human disorder and defining
molecular pathways involved in organ-specific autoimmunity. We have isolated and 
completely sequenced the mouse Aire gene which is split into 14 exons over 13 kb 
and encodes a predicted protein of 552 amino acids. The predicted mouse and human
AIRE proteins are 71% identical and contain motifs suggestive of a
transcriptional regulator. Additional conserved motifs are emerging in the
AIRE/Aire proteins including a nuclear localization signal, an "ASS" domain, and 
a "SAND" domain. The human and mouse AIRE promoters have conserved sites for
several thymus-specific transcription factors and others important in
hematopoesis, consistent with its expression in rare cells of the thymus medulla,
lymph nodes, and fetal liver. We have mapped mouse Aire to mouse chromosome 10 by
FISH, to the same region as Pwp2 and Pfkl, confirming synteny to the
corresponding region of human chromosome 21.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10049735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Genomics. 1999 Feb 1;55(3):322-6.

Cloning of Aire, the mouse homologue of the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene
responsible for autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (ASP1).

Wang CY(1), Shi JD, Davoodi-Semiromi A, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine and Center for
Mammalian Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville
32610, USA.

The human autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE), responsible for autoimmune
polyglandular syndrome Type 1 (APS1), has recently been identified by positional 
cloning. Here we report the cloning of Aire, the mouse homologue of AIRE, and the
characterization of its genomic structure. The complete Aire gene is contained in
14 exons and encodes a protein of 552 amino acids. The coding region shares 77%
nucleotide homology and 71% protein homology with human AIRE. As in its human
homologue, Aire contains two PHD-type zinc-finger motifs, suggesting that the
Aire protein may act as a transcription regulator.

PMID: 10049587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Genome Res. 1999 Feb;9(2):158-66.

The mouse Aire gene: comparative genomic sequencing, gene organization, and
expression.

Blechschmidt K(1), Schweiger M, Wertz K, Poulson R, Christensen HM, Rosenthal A, 
Lehrach H, Yaspo ML.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, Department of Genome Analysis, D-07745
Jena, Germany.

Mutations in the human AIRE gene (hAIRE) result in the development of an
autoimmune disease named APECED (autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis
ectodermal dystrophy; OMIM 240300). Previously, we have cloned hAIRE and shown
that it codes for a putative transcription-associated factor. Here we report the 
cloning and characterization of Aire, the murine ortholog of hAIRE. Comparative
genomic sequencing revealed that the structure of the AIRE gene is highly
conserved between human and mouse. The conceptual proteins share 73% homology and
feature the same typical functional domains in both species. RT-PCR analysis
detected three splice variant isoforms in various mouse tissues, and
interestingly one isoform was conserved in human, suggesting potential biological
relevance of this product. In situ hybridization on mouse and human histological 
sections showed that AIRE expression pattern was mainly restricted to a few cells
in the thymus, calling for a tissue-specific function of the gene product.

PMCID: PMC310712
PMID: 10022980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Feb;8(2):277-90.

AIRE encodes a nuclear protein co-localizing with cytoskeletal filaments: altered
sub-cellular distribution of mutants lacking the PHD zinc fingers.

Rinderle C(1), Christensen HM, Schweiger S, Lehrach H, Yaspo ML.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 73, D-14195 Berlin,
Germany.

The gene responsible for autoimmune polyendocrino-pathy candidiasis ectodermal
dystrophy (APECED) recently has been positionally cloned to 21q22.3. This novel
gene, AIRE, encodes for a predicted 57.7 kDa protein featuring two PHD-type zinc 
fingers shared by other proteins involved in chromatin-mediated tran-scriptional 
regulation. APECED is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by multiple 
polyendocrinopathies, and the typical triad of APECED symptoms includes
hypoparathyroidism, primary adrenocortical failure and chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis. The aetiology of APECED is linked directly to mutations within the
coding region of AIRE. These mutations are predicted to lead to truncated forms
of the protein lacking at least one of the PHD zinc fingers. In this study, we
have investigated the sub-cellular localization of AIRE expressed transiently in 
COS cells and fibroblasts. We found that AIRE has a dual nuclear and cytoplasmic 
localization. The wild-type protein is directed to speckled domains in the
nucleus and also shows co-localization with cytoskeletal filaments. N-terminal
AIRE fragments deleted for the PHD domain show altered nuclear localization,
suggesting that the APECED mutations may elicit their primary effects in the
nucleus.

PMID: 9931335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Feb;8(2):259-66.

Localization of the APECED protein in distinct nuclear structures.

Björses P(1), Pelto-Huikko M, Kaukonen J, Aaltonen J, Peltonen L, Ulmanen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, National Public Health Institute and
Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Mannerheimintie 166,
FIN-00300 Helsinki, Finland.

Autoimmune-polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ecto-dermaldystrophy (APECED) is the
only systemic autoimmune disease with a monogenic background known so far
revealing no association with the major histocompatibility complex region. We
have recently isolated the gene defective in this syndrome and characterized
several different mutations in individuals with the disorder. The novel gene,
AIRE, contains a putative bipartite nuclear targeting signal predicting a nuclear
location of the corresponding protein. The presence of two PHD-type zinc finger
domains as well as the newly described putative DNA-binding domain, SAND, in the 
amino acid sequence of the APECED protein implies that it may be involved in the 
regulation of gene expression. Using transient expression of AIRE cDNA in
mammalian cells we demonstrate here the nuclear location of the APECED protein.
Immunohistochemical staining of transfected cells revealed that most of the
recombinant 58 kDa APECED protein is present in the form of nuclear dots. By
double immuno-fluorescence labelling we further show that these APECED-containing
structures and the previously described PML nuclear bodies are largely
non-overlapping. The AIRE protein was also visualized in multiple human tissues: 
a subset of the cells in thymus, in spleen and in lymph node showed nuclear
staining with APECED antiserum. Immunofluorescence labelling of peripheral blood 
mononuclear leukocytes also revealed a nuclear body-like staining pattern in a
fraction of these cells. These data from both in vitro and ex vivo systems,
together with the predicted structural features of the APECED protein, suggest
that this protein is most probably involved in the regulation of gene expression.

PMID: 9931333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Genome Res. 1999 Jan;9(1):62-71.

Mapping ESTs by fiber-FISH.

Horelli-Kuitunen N(1), Aaltonen J, Yaspo ML, Eeva M, Wessman M, Peltonen L,
Palotie A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Helsinki and Laboratory,
Department of Helsinki University Central Hospital, 00290 Helsinki, Finland.
Nina.Horelli-Kuitunen@HUCH.fi

A visual transcript map of six genes was constructed on the chromosome 21q22.3 by
high resolution fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Expressed sequence
tags (ESTs) from six genes-PWP2, KNP1, AIRE, C21orf3, SMT3A, and C21orf1-were
successfully localized by fiber-FISH by use of sensitive tyramide-based
detection. The sizes of the ESTs varied between 315 to 956 bp and most of them
map within the 3'-untranslated region. The ESTs were assigned to and subsequently
ordered within cosmid, PAC, and BAC clones hybridized on DNA fibers. Physical
distances between ESTs and known markers were determined. Our results demonstrate
the feasibility and accuracy of visual mapping EST sequences in relation to known
markers. The main advantage of this approach is that it can be applied to finely 
map any of the database ESTs for positional cloning efforts. The sensitivity,
specificity, and reproducibility of this high-resolution EST mapping technique is
evaluated.

PMCID: PMC310701
PMID: 9927485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Int J Clin Pract Suppl. 1998 May;94:32-6.

Clinical implications for the Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy extension
(AIREX) Study.

Spargias KS(1), Ball SG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cardiovascular Research, University of Leeds, United Kingdom.

It is now clear that angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor treatment
after myocardial infarction (MI) reduces mortality and morbidity. However, the
benefits of ACE inhibition are not homogeneous and are largely confined to
high-risk patients who have subjective or objective evidence of left ventricular 
(LV) dysfunction. How long treatment should continue is a vexed question, which
also arises with other agents, for example beta-blocker use after MI. The AIREX
study assessed the long-term magnitude and duration of the survival benefits
observed with ramipril in patients after MI who have clinically defined heart
failure. The mortality status of all 603 patients recruited from the UK centres
involved in the AIRE study was verified at an extended 5-year follow-up (3 years 
after the AIRE study closed). Ramipril assignation was associated with a 36%
relative and a 11% absolute mortality risk reduction. These findings strongly
support the view to select patients on the basis of impaired LV function and
reinforce the previously reported conclusions of the "selective" ACE inhibition
post-MI trials. Using this approach, the survival benefit is not only of large
magnitude but also sustained over many years. These results also argue for
life-long treatment with an ACE inhibitor, once a decision to treat an individual
patient after MI has been made.

PMID: 9926443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1998 Oct 25;145(1-2):75-80.

Genes and premature ovarian failure.

Christin-Maitre S(1), Vasseur C, Portnoï MF, Bouchard P.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Endocrinologie, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France.
sophie.christin-maitre@sat.ap-hop-paris.fr

Premature ovarian failure (POF) is an heterogeneous syndrome. Among genetic
causes, X monosomy as in Turner syndrome or X deletions and translocations are
known to be responsible for POF. The genes involved in ovarian function, located 
on the X chromosome are still unknown. On the other hand, autosomal abnormalities
have been identified in POF patients such as mutations of the FSH gene, the LH
and FSH receptor genes, chromosome 3q containing the blepharophimosis gene, the
ATM gene (Ataxia-telangiectasia gene). Mutations in the AIRE gene (responsible
for APECED syndrome) can involve ovarian insufficiency. It is likely that studies
on the function of the protein AIRE might improve our knowledge on follicular
development. Furthermore, different mouse models of ovarian failure such as mouse
lacking connexins or mice lacking GDF9 (growth derived factor 9), might increase 
our knowledge of ovarian failure. In the future, a better knowledge of the
cellular and biochemical components involved in folliculogenesis and apoptosis
should elucidate the mechanisms of POF.

PMID: 9922102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Hum Genet. 1998 Dec;103(6):681-5.

Characterization of mutations in patients with autoimmune polyglandular syndrome 
type 1 (APS1).

Wang CY(1), Davoodi-Semiromi A, Huang W, Connor E, Shi JD, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, Center for
Mammalian Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville
32610, USA.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS1), also known as autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), is an autosomal
recessive disorder characterized by the failure of several endocrine glands as
well as nonendocrine organs. The autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene responsible for
APS1 on chromosome 21q22.3 has recently been identified. Here, we have
characterized mutations in the AIRE gene by direct DNA sequencing in 16 unrelated
APS1 families ascertained mainly from the USA. Our analyses identified four
different mutations (a 13-bp deletion, a 2-bp insertion, one nonsense mutation,
and one potential splice/donor site mutation) that are likely to be pathogenic.
Fifty-six percent (9/16) of the patients contained at least one copy of a 13-bp
deletion (1094-1106del) in exon 8 (seven homozygotes and two compound
heterozygotes). A nonsense mutation (R257X) in exon 6 was also found in 31.3%
(5/16) of the USA patients. These data are important for genetic diagnosis and
counseling for families with autoimmune endocrine syndromes.

PMID: 9921903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Baillieres Clin Gastroenterol. 1998 Jun;12(2):293-315.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndromes.

Obermayer-Straub P(1), Manns MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hannover Medical School,
Germany.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS1) is characterized by a variable
combination of disease components: (1) mucocutaneous candidiasis; (2) autoimmune 
tissue destruction; (3) ectodermal dystrophy. The disease is caused by mutations 
in a single gene called APECED (autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal-dystrophy) or AIRE (autoimmune
regulator) coding for a putative transcription factor featuring two zinc-finger
(PHD-finger) motifs. APS1 shows a penetrance of 100%, lack of female
preponderance and lack of association with HLA-DR. Typically, onset of APS1
occurs in childhood and multiple autoimmune manifestations evolve throughout
lifetime. Organ-specific autoantibodies associated with hypoparathyroidism,
adrenal and gonadal failures, IDDM, hepatitis and vitiligo are discussed, and
autoantibody patterns in APS1 patients are compared with autoantibodies in APS
type 2 (APS2). APS2 is characterized by adult onset adrenal failure associated
with IDDM and/or hyperthyroidism. APS2 is believed to be polygenic, characterized
by dominant inheritance and association with HLA DR3.

PMID: 9890074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Hum Mutat. 1999;13(1):69-74.

Mutation analyses of North American APS-1 patients.

Heino M(1), Scott HS, Chen Q, Peterson P, Mäebpää U, Papasavvas MP, Mittaz L,
Barras C, Rossier C, Chrousos GP, Stratakis CA, Nagamine K, Kudoh J, Shimizu N,
Maclaren N, Antonarakis SE, Krohn K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere, Finland.
mh55012@uta.fi

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 (APS-1; MIM# 240300) is a rare
autosomal recessively inherited disease characterised by destructive autoimmune
diseases of endocrine glands. The gene responsible for APS-1, known as AIRE (for 
autoimmune regulator), was recently identified and contains motifs suggestive of 
a transcription regulator. To date, nine APS-1-associated mutations have been
identified in the AIRE gene, including two common mutations R257X and
1094-1106del. In addition to these two mutations, we report seven novel mutations
in 16 APS-1 patients from North America. We found that 1094-1106del and R257X
were the most common mutations in this population of mixed geoethnic origin,
accounting for 17/32 and 4/32 alleles, respectively. Haplotype analyses suggest
that both are recurrent mutations, occurring on several different haplotypes with
closely linked markers. All the novel mutations appear to be rare, occurring in
only single APS-1 families. After examining all coding sequences and exon/intron 
boundaries of the AIRE gene, the other APS-1 allele remained unidentified in
three patients. Genotype-phenotype correlations for APS-1 remain difficult,
suggesting that other genetic or environmental factors, or both, influence the
clinical presentation and disease progression in individual APS-1 patients.

PMID: 9888391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Eur Heart J. 1998 Dec;19 Suppl P:P2-4.

From cost of illness to cost-effectiveness in heart failure.

Lévy E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Paris-Dauphine, Paris, France.

Congestive heart failure is a severe condition responsible for 1%-2% of total
health expenditure. In France, three-quarters of the medical cost of congestive
heart failure, i.e. FF7 billion, is attributed to 150000 annual hospital
admissions. But new treatments, especially ACE inhibitors and beta-blockers, have
demonstrated, through large controlled trials (SAVE, AIRE, US trials on
carvedilol and CIBIS I) that these drugs can reduce mortality and
hospitalization. These results, translated in terms of cost per life year saved, 
show that they are all very cost effective and could be cost saving, under some
conditions.

PMID: 9886705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Neurosci Methods. 1998 Nov 1;85(1):119-27.

Evaluation of peripheral nerve regeneration by nerve growth factor locally
administered with a novel system.

Santos X(1), Rodrigo J, Hontanilla B, Bilbao G.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Cirugía Experimental, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid,
Spain. xsantos@mundivia.es

An experimental model is presented for the local administration of neurotrophic
substances at the site of peripheral nerve lesion. The model consists of a
subcutaneously implanted silicone reservoir and a connecting tube with its distal
end facing the severed and repaired nerve. Wistar rats (n = 180) were divided
into two groups: a control group (saline-treated) (n = 90) and an NGF-treated
group (n = 90). After sciatic nerve axotomy, an epineural repair was performed.
NGF or saline were injected daily into the subcutaneous reservoir for the first 4
weeks after axotomy and weekly single dose between the 8th and 12th weeks. Both
groups were divided into three subgroups of 30 animals each. The animals were
sacrificed at 4, 8 and 12 weeks. Myelinated and non-myelinated axonal and
thickness of myelin sheaths were quantified at the tibialis branch 25 mm distal
to the nerve repair site. Axonal counts showed statistically significant
differences between the treated and control groups at 4, 8 and 12 weeks. Finally,
at 4 weeks the myelinated axons in the NGF group had significantly thicker myelin
sheaths than in the control group. In comparison with other models of
administration of different neurotrophic agents, NGF delivered through this
system demonstrates a significant capacity for improving nerve regeneration
without the problems inherent in multiple anesthesia, device exchange, or short
half-life of the NGF single-dose administration.

PMID: 9874148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Hum Genet. 1998 Oct;103(4):428-34.

A common mutation in Sardinian autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy patients.

Rosatelli MC(1), Meloni A, Meloni A, Devoto M, Cao A, Scott HS, Peterson P, Heino
M, Krohn KJ, Nagamine K, Kudoh J, Shimizu N, Antonarakis SE.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Clinica e Biologia dell'Età evolutiva, Università degli Studi di
Cagliari, Italy. crosatel@mcweb.unica.it

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasisectodermal dystrophy (APECED; also
called APS-1,) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that is more frequent in
certain isolated populations. It is characterized by two of the three major
clinical symptoms that may be present: Addison's disease, and/or
hypoparathyroidism and/or chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. We have recently
identified the gene for APECED, which we termed AIRE (for autoimmune regulator). 
AIRE is expressed in thymus, lymph nodes and fetal liver, and encodes a protein
with two putative zinc fingers and other motifs suggestive of a transcriptional
regulator. Seven mutations have been described to date, including R257X, the
predominant Finnish and northern Italian APECED allele, which has also been
observed in other patients of diverse origin on different haplotypes. A 13-bp
deletion (1094-1106del) has also been observed in several patients of different
geo-ethnic origin. The other described mutations appear to be rare. We present
mutational analyses of the AIRE gene in ten Sardinian APECED families and show
that there is a mutation, R139X, associated with one predominant haplotype unique
to the Sardinian patients (18/20 independent alleles). The carrier frequency of
R139X in Sardinia is 1.7%, giving an estimated population frequency of APECED of 
1/14,400. Using linkage disequilibrium data, the estimated age of the R139X
mutation is between 20 and 25 generations. A previously described 13-bp deletion 
was also observed on an allele of one patient. The identification of a single
common Sardinian APECED mutation will facilitate its genetic diagnosis. Given the
carrier frequency of R139X in the Sardinian population, AIRE may be implicated in
the pathogenesis of other autoimmune diseases in the Sardinian population,
particularly those affecting the endocrine system.

PMID: 9856486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Onderstepoort J Vet Res. 1997 Dec;64(4):291-9.

The structure of the interstitial tissue of the active and resting avian testis.

Aire TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, Medical University of Southern Africa,
Medunsa, South Africa.

The interstitial tissue of the testis was studied in gonadally active and
gonadally inactive domestic fowl (Gallus gallus domesticus), guinea-fowl (Numida 
meleagris), duck (Anas platyrhynchos) and Japanese quail (Coturnix coturnix
japonica). Gonadal inactivity in the fowl was induced by a single subcutaneous
injection of 50 mg oestradiol benzoate. The structure of this tissue was similar 
in all the birds studied. Lymphatic vessels were mostly thin and meandered
between the peritubular tissue peripherally and the centrally located blood
vessels, Leydig cells and macrophages. The basal lamina rested on a closely
associated homogeneous microfibrillar layer free of collagen fibres. The
myofibroblast layer was several cells thick, and quite compact. The basal lamina 
of gonadally resting birds was highly irregular, relatively electron-dense,
contained electron-lucent globules, and sent numerous finger-like processes or
plicae into the seminiferous epithelium, particularly into the Sertoli cells. The
Leydig cells were few but typical in structure. In gonadally inactive birds they 
accumulated lipid droplets, dense heterogeneous bodies, probably lysosomes, and
appeared to degenerate. The avian testicular interstitium is similar to that of
the human and cat in possessing a multi-layered myofibroblast component, and to
that of the rodent in possessing a small number of Leydig cells, as well as in
the location of the lymphatic vessels. Thus the bird combines characteristics of 
the interstitium found variably in mammals.

PMID: 9551481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Dec;63(6):1675-84.

A common and recurrent 13-bp deletion in the autoimmune regulator gene in British
kindreds with autoimmune polyendocrinopathy type 1.

Pearce SH(1), Cheetham T, Imrie H, Vaidya B, Barnes ND, Bilous RW, Carr D, Meeran
K, Shaw NJ, Smith CS, Toft AD, Williams G, Kendall-Taylor P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Medical School, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH,
United Kingdom. spearce@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy type 1 (APS1) is an autosomal recessive disorder
characterized by autoimmune hypoparathyroidism, autoimmune adrenocortical
failure, and mucocutaneous candidiasis. Recently, an autoimmune regulator gene
(AIRE-1), which is located on chromosome 21q22.3, has been identified, and
mutations in European kindreds with APS1 have been described. We used SSCP
analysis and direct DNA sequencing to screen the entire 1,635-bp coding region of
AIRE-1 in 12 British families with APS1. A 13-bp deletion (964del13) was found to
account for 17 of the 24 possible mutant AIRE-1 alleles, in our kindreds. This
mutation was found to occur de novo in one affected subject. A common haplotype
spanning the AIRE-1 locus was found in chromosomes that carried the 964del13
mutation, suggesting a founder effect in our population. One of 576 normal
subjects was also a heterozygous carrier of the 964del13 mutation. Six other
point mutations were found in AIRE-1, including two 1-bp deletions, three
missense mutations (R15L, L28P, and Y90C), and a nonsense mutation (R257*). The
high frequency of the 964del13 allele and the clustering of the other AIRE-1
mutations may allow rapid molecular screening for APS1 in British kindreds.
Furthermore, the prevalence of the 964del13 AIRE-1 mutation may have implications
in the pathogenesis of the more common autoimmune endocrinopathies in our
population.

PMCID: PMC1377639
PMID: 9837820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Rev Esp Quimioter. 1998 Mar;11(1):36-42.

[Cefepim in febrile neutropenic patients].

[Article in Spanish]

Gomis M(1), Barberán J, Ferrádez A, Sánchez B.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

PMID: 9795287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1998 Sep;80(9):1264-9.

Levels of carbon dioxide in helmet systems used during orthopaedic operations.

Rubman MH(1), Siegel MG, Echt AS, Burroughs GE, Lenhart SW.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Sportsmedicine Research and Education Foundation and Deaconess
Hospital, Ohio 45219, USA.

The use of isolation helmets has gained popularity as a method of possible
protection of the operating-room personnel from diseases that can be transmitted 
during operative procedures. However, the use of these systems has been
associated with a variety of symptoms, including fatigue, diaphoresis, nausea,
headache, and irritability. These symptoms have often been attributed to the
mental stress of the operative procedure or the physical discomfort of the
helmet. As far as we know, no manufacturers include the measured levels of carbon
dioxide or the rate of air exchange of their helmet system. A possible common
cause of discomfort with helmet systems is the level of carbon dioxide to which
the person wearing the device is exposed. We measured the levels of carbon
dioxide in four helmet systems from three different manufacturers during light
exercise designed to approximate the exertion during an orthopaedic operation.
All but one unit failed to meet the exposure limits recommended by the National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health and the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration regarding exposure to carbon dioxide. One unit, the
Stackhouse Freedom Aire self-contained system, did meet these standards, but the 
levels of carbon dioxide in this helmet were more than 1000 per cent greater than
the ambient levels in air (440 parts per million compared with 4939 parts per
million). Isolation systems must be evaluated carefully not only for comfort but 
also for the physiological effects caused by exposure to elevated levels of
carbon dioxide. Operating-room personnel who use such systems should be aware
that many of the physical symptoms that they experience may be associated with
elevated levels of carbon dioxide.

PMID: 9759809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 1998 Apr;91 Spec No 2:49-58.

[Treatment with angiotension converting enzyme inhibitors].

[Article in French]

Delahaye F(1), de Gevigney G, Meunier L, Mosnier S, Delaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital cardiovasculaire et pneumologique, Lyon.

Eight randomised clinical trials of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors versus placebo in myocardial infarction have been published in three
years, including over 100,000 patients. High risk myocardial infarction carries a
poor prognosis with a 25% death rate at 42 months in SAVE, 23% at 15 months in
AIRE and 42% at 37 months in TRACE. This form of myocardial infarction benefits
the most from treatment with ACE inhibitors: the relative reductions in risk for 
the previously mentioned trials were 19%, 27% and 22% respectively, and the
absolute reductions in risk of death were 4% at 42 months, 6% at 15 months and 8%
at 37 months, respectively. Studies including all forms of myocardial infarction 
involve populations at lower risk. The effects of ACE inhibitors on mortality are
then less obvious: from 7.7% to 7.2% at 5 weeks in ISIS-4, from 7.1% to 6.3% at 6
weeks in GISSI-3, from 9.6% to 9.0% at 4 weeks in CCS-1, corresponding to
relative reductions in the risk of death of 7%, 12% and 3% respectively and
absolute reductions of the risk of death of 0.5% at 5 weeks, 0.8% at 6 weeks and 
0.6% at 4 weeks, respectively. Who should be treated? All patients for 4 to 6
weeks or only high risk patients. When should treatment be started? Some
investigators institute treatment from the first day but others think it prudent 
to wait until the second day. For how long? Four to 6 weeks would be sufficient
to counteract ventricular remodelling while the benefits are sustained in the
long term. But treatment should be continued long term in high risk patients.
Which molecule, which dose and how many times, should it be taken per day? The
logical answer is molecules with proven efficacy at the dose given in the
clinical trials respecting the number of times indicated per day.

PMID: 9749277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Rev Clin Esp. 1998 Jul;198(7):433-6.

[Soft tissue infections with S. Lugdunensis. Presentation of 2 cases and general 
review].

[Article in Spanish]

Gomis M(1), Sánchez B, Merino P, Sánchez P, Olmeda J, Benezet E.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Hospital del Aire, Universidad
Complutense, Madrid.

Staphylococcus lugdunensis was first described in 1988 by Freney et al. Since
that moment, it has been recognised as an important cause of endocarditis that is
able to involve native valves and follow an aggressive, often fatal course. By
now, we know only few potential virulence factors, but its ability to produce a
wide range of human infections, varying from life threatening (such us
endocarditis) to more benign ones, is unquestionable. Unlike other coagulase
negative Staphylococci, S. lugdunensis is frequently implicated in soft tissue
infections and affects commonly persons with clinical antecedents of neoplastic
diseases. We report two new cases of deep tissue abscesses in patients that had
history of uterine tumours. In both occasions we isolated coagulase negative
Staphylococci that were markedly susceptible to all the antimicrobial agents
tested. It is relevant to perform a detailed microbiological study in order to
avoid misidentification of this species, since it differs significantly from
other coagulase negative ones and may lead to important morbidity--and even
mortality--. There are great differences in the rates of resistant strains
between countries and, up-to-date, the lack of antibiotics susceptibility seems
not to be a serious problem in Europe if we compare with the 30% american strains
that are resistant via production of beta-lactamase.

PMID: 9737151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Hum Mol Genet. 1998;7(10):1547-53.

Gene defect behind APECED: a new clue to autoimmunity.

Björses P(1), Aaltonen J, Horelli-Kuitunen N, Yaspo ML, Peltonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, National Public Health Institute,
University of Helsinki, Mannerheimintie 166, FIN-00300 Helsinki, Finland.

The molecular background of human autoimmunity is poorly understood. Although
many autoimmune diseases have a genetic basis, the actual disease appearance
results from a complex interplay between genes and environment and thus these
diseases represent typical multifactorial diseases. Even with molecular tools
provided by the Human Genome Project, it still remains a challenge to identify
the predisposing DNA variants behind such multifactorial traits. Two strategies
have been suggested to provide short-cuts to the dissection of the genetic
background of complex autoimmune diseases: (i) identification of genes in rare
human diseases with a strong autoimmune component or (ii) unravelling loci
causing phenotypes resembling autoimmune diseases in inbred mice strains.
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a
monogenic autosomal disease with a recessive inheritance pattern, characterized
by multiple autoimmune endocrinopathies, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis and
ectodermal dystrophies. Since it is the only known human autoimmune disease
inherited in a Mendelian fashion, it provides an excellent model to analyse the
genetic component of human autoimmunity. The causative gene for APECED was
isolated recently by a traditional positional cloning strategy by two independent
groups. The cDNA for the APECED gene proved to originate from a novel gene, AIRE 
, which is expressed prevalently in thymus, pancreas and adrenal cortex. Multiple
mutations in AIRE have been identified in APECED patients. The predicted
proline-rich AIRE polypeptide harbours two PHD-type zinc finger motifs and
contains a putative nuclear targeting signal suggesting its involvement in the
regulation of transcription. In the future, functional analysis of the AIRE
protein both in vitro and in vivo will provide valuable insight not only into the
molecular pathogenesis of APECED but also into the aetiology of autoimmunity in
general.

PMID: 9735375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Aug;12(8):1112-9.

Common mutations in autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal
dystrophy patients of different origins.

Scott HS(1), Heino M, Peterson P, Mittaz L, Lalioti MD, Betterle C, Cohen A, Seri
M, Lerone M, Romeo G, Collin P, Salo M, Metcalfe R, Weetman A, Papasavvas MP,
Rossier C, Nagamine K, Kudoh J, Shimizu N, Krohn KJ, Antonarakis SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University of Geneva Medical School, 
Switzerland. Hamish.Scott@medecine.unige.ch

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED; OMIM
*240300, also called APS 1,) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that is more 
frequent in certain isolated populations. It is generally characterized by two of
the three major clinical symptoms that may be present, Addison's disease and/or
hypoparathyroidism and/or chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. Patients may also
have a number of other clinical symptoms including chronic gastritis, gonadal
failure, and rarely, autoimmune thyroid disease and insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus. We and others have recently identified the gene for APECED, which we
termed AIRE (for autoimmune regulator). AIRE is expressed in thymus, lymph nodes,
and fetal liver and encodes a protein containing motifs suggestive of a
transcriptional regulator, including two zinc finger motifs (PHD finger), a
proline-rich region, and three LXXLL motifs. Six mutations, in cluding R257X, the
predominant Finnish APECED allele, have been defined. R257X was also observed in 
non-Finnish APECED patients occurring on different chromosomal haplotypes
suggesting different mutational origins. Here we present mutation analyses in an 
extended series of patients, mainly of Northern Italian origin. We have detected 
12 polymorphisms, including one amino acid substitution, and two additional
mutations, R203X and X546C, in addition to the previously described mutations,
R257X, 1096-1097insCCTG, and a 13-bp deletion (1094-1106del). R257X was also the 
common mutation in the Northern Italian patients (10 of 18 alleles), and
1094-1106del accounted for 5 of 18 Northern Italian alleles. Both R257X and
1094-1106del were both observed in patients of four different geo-ethnic origins,
and both were associated with multiple different haplotypes using closely
flanking polymorphic markers showing likely multiple mutation events (six and
four, respectively). The identification of common AIRE mutations in different
APECED patient groups will facilitate its genetic diagnosis. In addition, the
polymorphisms presented provide the tools for investigation of the involvement of
AIRE in other autoimmune diseases, particularly those affecting the endocrine
system.

PMID: 9717837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Trends Biochem Sci. 1998 Jul;23(7):242-4.

The APECED polyglandular autoimmune syndrome protein, AIRE-1, contains the SAND
domain and is probably a transcription factor.

Gibson TJ, Ramu C, Gemünd C, Aasland R.

PMID: 9697411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Actas Urol Esp. 1998 Apr;22(4):362-5.

[Wunderlich syndrome caused by the rupture of a simple cyst in a patient treated 
with acetyl salicylic acid].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín-Laborda Bergasa F(1), Vallejo Herrador J, Sánchez de la Muela Naverac P,
Herrero Reyes JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Urología, Hospital del Aire, Universidad Complutense de Madrid.

Report case of a Wunderlich syndrome due to spontaneous rupture of a simple renal
cyst. The patient is a 77-year old, hypertensive female who was on routine
treatment with Aspirin. The rarity of retroperitoneal haemorrhage with this
origin is documented; also the influence of aspirin as predisposing factor for
this condition is ruled out. Brief evaluation of the various diagnostic means
available. An accurate evaluation that may allow to adopt a conservative aptitude
is recommended.

PMID: 9658650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Arch Esp Urol. 1998 May;51(4):361-73.

[Double J ureteral catheter. Clinical complications].

[Article in Spanish]

Vallejo Herrador J(1), Burgos Revilla FJ, Alvarez Alba J, Sáez Garrido JC, Téllez
Martínez-Fornés M, Sánchez de la Muela P, Martín-Laborda y Bergasa F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Urología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid, España.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the clinical complications of double-J ureteral catheters.
METHODS: The most relevant studies published in the literature since the
self-retaining indwelling catheter was first described in 1967 are reviewed.
RESULTS: The experience and results reported in the most relevant studies are
presented.
CONCLUSIONS: The double-J ureteral stent has become an integral part of the
urological armamentarium. It allows good urinary drainage from the kidney to the 
bladder and is generally safe and well-tolerated. However, different
complications may occur with short- or long-term use of indwelling stents. These 
complications vary from minor side effects such as hematuria, dysuria, frequency,
flank and suprapubic pain, to major complications such as vesico-ureteric reflux,
stent migration, encrustation, urinary infection, stent fracture, necrosis and
ureteral fistula. Most of these complications require removal of the catheter.

PMID: 9656558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 1998 Mar;49(2):159-62.

[Malignant pleomorphic adenoma of the palate].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín Vázquez C(1), Muñoz Colado M, Lorente Tortosa JM, Abad Róyo JM, Alvarez
Montero OL.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de ORL, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

Pleomorphic adenoma or mixed tumor is the most common benign neoplasm of the
minor salivary glands. These tumors rarely have malignant features. Three
varieties are differentiated by histological features and tumor behavior. Whether
malignant tumors develop on benign adenomas or are malignant from onset is still 
not known. A malignant mixed tumor of the minor salivary glands of the palate is 
reported. The difficulty of histological diagnosis, in spite of
immunohistochemical techniques, is emphasized and the surgical treatment is
described.

PMID: 9650317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Rev Neurol. 1997 Dec;25(148):2036-9.

[Lafora and neuropathology].

[Article in Spanish]

Fernández-Armayor V(1), Moreno JM, Martín A, García ML, Revilla B, Moreno JL.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid, España.

This article wants to be a memory to the figure and neuro-pathologic work of D.
Gonzalo Rodríguez-Lafora. The tediousness of its neurological work allows to
divide it in its slopes neurophatologic, neurophysiologic, clinic and therapy.
Also, it embraces other topics outside of the field of the neurology, centered
fundamentally in the psychiatry. It is without a doubt the facet
neuro-histopathologic the one that provides him bigger national and international
prestige and it contributes to deepen in the histopathology of the senility,
picking up in a definitive way in their work critical valuation of the
discoveries histopathological in the senility (1952) their thought in this
respect. Mention separated deserves its more important discovery: The inclusions 
amylaceous in cells ganglionars, in a certain type of epilepsy myoclonic that
today takes its name. Other entities like the illness of Wernicke, the
hemorrhages hipofisarias, the Parkinson (for scarce months he is not early to
Levy in an important discovery), or the alterations of the malaria in the
cerebral fabric plows object of their attention, of the work of Lafora highlights
its anatomo-pathologics works next to figures as Kraepelin, Alzheimer, Vogt,
Openheim or Brodmann. Professor Lafora's figure is known internationally as
neuropathologist, recognizing its contribution, collection in the world
literature, to the study of the myoclonic epilepsy: 'Lafora disease. A form of
progressive myoclonus epilepsy.

PMID: 9528052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Rev Neurol. 1997 Dec;25(148):2021-31.

[Kinematic deterministic chaos of fluids and fractal geometry in the carotid
system].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín-Araguz A(1), Ruiz-Aláez A, García de la Rocha ML, Fernández-Armayor V,
Delgado-Reyes S, Moreno-Martínez JM.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, España.

Comment in
    Rev Neurol. 1998 Jul;27(155):163-4.

INTRODUCTION: Atherosclerosis is a generalized vascular disorder which tends to
be localized to specific arterial territories. At the bifurcation of the carotid 
artery there is a marked predisposition to form plaques of atheroma on the
postero-external wall. This tendency is due to the kinematics of fluids and their
particular morphological characteristics which are unique in the vascular system.
The carotid tree is a physical, non-lineal or in 'non-equilibrium', dynamic
system which depends on the fluctuating contribution of energy from the cardiac
cycle. It has fractal geometry which follows the Law of Biology of maximum
efficiency with a minimum of effort.
DEVELOPMENT: The complexity of the relationship between the haemo-rheological and
anatomical factors, and the periodic oscillation of flow does not permit use of
simple models and classical determinist equations to describe idealized systems
of continuous movement and Newtonian fluids. On the contrary, since we are
considering a complex dissipative dynamic system. It has marked intrinsic
operational freedom adapting its responses to external disturbances well, thus
determining vasculo-cerebral autoregulation. The theories of Determinist Chaos
and of the Science of Complexity imply the existence of emerging properties which
exceed those of the individual elements in the dynamic systems in
non-equilibrium, which tend to function in the 'frontier of chaos' at the
critical points of phase transition. The carotid tree has non-linear properties, 
appearance of order and fractal 'sibisemejanza'. Pseudo-chaotic vortices
appear--in regions of phase transition between laminar flow and turbulence--with 
the emergence of a 'strange attractor' near to the postero-external wall of the
bulb.
CONCLUSIONS: The anatomical and kinematic complexity of the system, together with
the irreversibility of the second Law of Thermodynamics, lead to a long-term
tendency towards the appearance of a region of stagnant flow with increased
Entropy in the territory of the strange attractor which determines--as an
inevitable long-term outcome--the tendency to the appearance of atherosclerosis
at this particular point.

PMID: 9528050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Rev Neurol. 1997 Dec;25(148):2006-14.

[The spectrum of prion pathology broadens: fatal familial insomnia].

[Article in Spanish]

Delgado-Reyes S(1), Feito-Ibarz N, Ruiz-Aláez A, García de la Rocha ML,
Martín-Araguz A, Moreno-Martínez JM.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

INTRODUCTION: The small group of prion diseases, caused by accumulation in the
brain of an abnormal protein characterized by its aggregation and relative
resistance to proteases (the PrPSc) in man is comprised of Creutzfeldt-Jacob
disease (CJE), the Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker syndrome, kuru and the newest
addition which is fatal familial insomnia (FFI).
DEVELOPMENT: FFI is a hereditary condition with dominant autosomal transmission, 
characterized clinically by progressive insomnia, dysautonomy, changes in the
circadian rhythm of hormone secretion, motor signs and slight to moderate
deterioration of cognition. The usual age of onset is between 40 and 60 years,
and the course of the illness lasts between 7 and 18 months. The
histopathological changes, involving neurone loss and reactive gliosis,
particularly affect the anteroventral and dorsomedial thalamic nuclei. These
lesions lead to insomnia and to autonomic and endocrine disorders. To a lesser
extent and degree, lesions are seen in other thalamic nuclei, the cerebral
cortex, inferior olives and the cerebellum. FFI and some families with CJE have
the same mutation of the codon 178 of the protein prion gene (gene PRNP) with
substitution of aspartic acid by asparagine. Polymorphism of codon 129, which
codifies methionine or valine determines the development of the clinical and
neuropathological phenotype of FFI or CJE respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The description of FFI and the detection of PrPSe in familial cases 
of diffuse subcortical gliosis has indicated the possibility that there may be
other familial or non-familial neurodegenerative diseases caused by prions.

PMID: 9528048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Arch Esp Urol. 1997 Dec;50(10):1089-97.

[The double-J ureteral catheter. Clinical indications].

[Article in Spanish]

Vallejo Herrador J(1), Burgos Revilla FJ, Maganto Pavón E, Téllez Martínez-Fornés
M, Sánchez de la Muela Naverac P, Martín-Laborda Bergasa F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Urología, Hospital Universitario del Aire 1, Madrid, España.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the clinical indications of double-J ureteral catheters.
METHODS: The most relevant studies published in the literature since the
self-retained indwelling catheter was first described in 1967 are reviewed.
RESULTS: The experience and results reported in the most relevant studies are
presented.
CONCLUSIONS: The double J ureteral catheter is essential in urological practice. 
Although its clinical indications are well-established, its use depends on the
urologist's experience in most of the cases.

PMID: 9494198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Eur Heart J. 1997 Sep;18(9):1411-5.

Cost-effectiveness of different ACE inhibitor treatment scenarios post-myocardial
infarction.

McMurray JJ(1), McGuire A, Davie AP, Hughes D.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council's Clinical Research Initiative in Heart Failure,
University of Glasgow, London, UK.

AIMS: To assess the cost-effectiveness of three different treatment strategies
for the use of ACE inhibitors after myocardial infarction. These were (a) a high 
risk (AIRE type) strategy, (b) an intermediate risk (SAVE type) strategy, and (c)
initial, short-term treatment of all patients followed by long-term treatment
according to (a) or (b).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Incremental costs per life year gained were calculated for
each of the above scenarios. The most optimistic cost per life year gained over
10 years, for (a) was L1752 and for (b) was L2962. Strategy (c) increased the
cost per life year gained of (a) to L2017 and (b) to L3110. The incremental
cost-effectiveness ratio was found to be very sensitive to drug cost.
CONCLUSIONS: If a low cost ACE inhibitor is used, initial treatment of relatively
unselected patients followed by long-term treatment of those at high and medium
risk maximizes benefit at an acceptable cost. Use of an ACE inhibitor after
myocardial infarction is very cost-effective by comparison with many other
treatments.

PMID: 9458446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Nat Genet. 1997 Dec;17(4):399-403.

An autoimmune disease, APECED, caused by mutations in a novel gene featuring two 
PHD-type zinc-finger domains.

Finnish-German APECED Consortium.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is the
only described systemic autoimmune disease with established monogenic background,
and the first autoimmune disorder localized outside the major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) region. The primary biochemical defect in APECED is unknown. We
have isolated a novel gene, AIRE, encoding for a putative nuclear protein
featuring two PHD-type zinc-finger motifs, suggesting its involvement in
transcriptional regulation. Five mutations in AIRE are reported in individuals
with this disorder. This is the first report of a single-gene defect causing a
systemic human autoimmune disease, providing a tool for exploring the molecular
basis of autoimmunity.

PMID: 9398840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Nat Genet. 1997 Dec;17(4):393-8.

Positional cloning of the APECED gene.

Nagamine K(1), Peterson P, Scott HS, Kudoh J, Minoshima S, Heino M, Krohn KJ,
Lalioti MD, Mullis PE, Antonarakis SE, Kawasaki K, Asakawa S, Ito F, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.

Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type I (APS 1, also called APECED) is an
autosomal-recessive disorder that maps to human chromosome 21q22.3 between
markers D21S49 and D21S171 by linkage studies. We have isolated a novel gene from
this region, AIRE (autoimmune regulator), which encodes a protein containing
motifs suggestive of a transcription factor including two zinc-finger
(PHD-finger) motifs, a proline-rich region and three LXXLL motifs. Two mutations,
a C-->T substitution that changes the Arg 257 (CGA) to a stop codon (TGA) and an 
A-->G substitution that changes the Lys 83 (AAG) to a Glu codon (GAG), were found
in this novel gene in Swiss and Finnish APECED patients. The Arg257stop (R257X)
is the predominant mutation in Finnish APECED patients, accounting for 10/12
alleles studied. These results indicate that this gene is responsible for the
pathogenesis of APECED. The identification of the gene defective in APECED should
facilitate the genetic diagnosis and potential treatment of the disease and
further enhance our general understanding of the mechanisms underlying autoimmune
diseases.

PMID: 9398839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Allergy. 1997 Oct;52(10):985-91.

Recidivous acute urticaria caused by Anisakis simplex.

Montoro A(1), Perteguer MJ, Chivato T, Laguna R, Cuéllar C.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Inmunología y Alergologia, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

This study aimed to determine the cause of acute recidivous urticaria in patients
who usually eat fish or other seafood. Twenty-five patients were studied. The
skin prick test with larval Anisakis simplex extract was performed; total and
specific IgE against A. simplex was measured with the CAP System; specific
antibodies to A. simplex were determined by ELISA; and immunorecognition patterns
of the sera were studied by Western blot. Nineteen patients showed specific IgE
to A. simplex, but specific IgE to Ascaris was demonstrated in only two patients.
No patients reacted to Toxocara canis or Echinoccocus granulosus antigens with
the same test. The skin prick test was positive in 16 patients, in two of them
persisting for 48 h. Five patients showed neither skin reaction nor specific IgE 
to A. simplex. Sera showed specific immunoglobulin levels against A. simplex
larval crude extract, by both ELISA and Western blot. Likewise, specific
immunoglobulin levels against excretory-secretory antigen were also measured by
ELISA. Only one patient showed sensitization to fish. A. simplex was found to be 
the main cause of acute recidivous urticaria in patients who usually eat fish and
are not sensitized to it.

PMID: 9360749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Lancet. 1997 Aug 2;350(9074):367; author reply 367-8.

AIRE Extension (AIREX) Study.

Dunkley P, Hodgson K.

PMID: 9251662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Lancet. 1997 Aug 2;350(9074):366-7.

AIRE Extension (AIREX) Study.

Tognoni G, Franzosi MG.

PMID: 9251661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Pharmacoeconomics. 1997 Aug;12(2 Pt 2):256-66.

Cost effectiveness in the treatment of heart failure with ramipril. A Swedish
substudy of the AIRE study. Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy.

Erhardt L(1), Ball S, Andersson F, Bergentoft P, Martinez C.

Author information: 
(1)Kardiologkliniken, MalmØ AllmØnna Sjukhus, MalmØ, Sweden.

Erratum in
    Pharmacoeconomics 1997 Dec;12(6):706.

We estimated the cost effectiveness of adding the ACE inhibitor ramipril to
conventional treatment in patients with heart failure after acute myocardial
infarction. These estimates were based on the Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy 
(AIRE) study and on complementary Swedish healthcare resource use data for a
subset of patients. The average follow-up period was 15 months (minimum 6 months,
maximum 3.8 years). The perspective of the analysis was that of the county
councils (third-party payers), and we focused on the cost of drugs and
hospitalisation. The marginal cost effectiveness of the treatment was estimated
over 3 treatment periods: 1, 2 and 3.8 years. The cost-effectiveness ratios
varied between SEK14,148 and SEK33,033 per life-year gained ($US1 = SEK7.70.
Pounds 1 = SEK12.40) for the 3 treatment periods. Adding ramipril to conventional
treatment for heart failure after acute myocardial infarction is therefore cost
effective, and compares favourably with the cost effectiveness of other common
medical therapies in the cardiovascular field.

PMID: 10170450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Andrologia. 1997 Jul-Aug;29(4):201-7.

Chronic ethanol intake may delay the onset of gossypol-induced infertility in the
male rat.

Akingbemi BT(1), Rao PV, Aire TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preclinical Veterinary Studies, University of Zimbabwe, Harare, 
Zimbabwe.

Parameters were obtained from the reproductive organs of ethanol-fed,
gossypol-treated Sprague Dawley rats. The experimental animals were fed either on
a normal (15.17%) or low protein (8.00%) diet. Measurements included reproductive
organ weights, seminal characteristics, serum concentration of testosterone and
histological, stereological and histomorphometric evaluation of the testis. The
testis size, length and diameter of the seminiferous tubule had the least values 
in the protein-malnourished, gossypol-treated rats (3.01 +/- 0.26 g, 0.56 +/-
0.03 m, 281.34 +/- 11.30 microns), in comparison to corresponding animals which
had received ethanol simultaneously with gossypol (3.40 +/- 0.25, 0.71 +/- 0.06
m, 314.42 +/- 11.61 microns). As gossypol and ethanol are both associated with
reduced reproductive capacity, this unexpected but interesting finding lends
support to the hypothesis that either a normal dietary protein or ethanol
consumption may modify the action of gossypol on body tissues, including the
testis. This effect, presumably mediated through changes caused to the
bioavailability of gossypol, modifies its antifertility activity. The present
observation further highlights the need to consider the concurrent administration
of other drugs, such as alcohol, and the nutritional status in the evaluation of 
gossypol for various potential uses.

PMID: 9263570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Reprod Toxicol. 1997 Jul-Aug;11(4):533-8.

The influence of protein malnutrition on the antifertility action of gossypol in 
the Trypanosoma brucei-infected rat: some ultrastructural observations from the
testis.

Akingbemi BT(1), Aire TA, Oke BO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.

The testes of adult male Wistar rats that were variously protein malnourished,
gossypol treated, and/or trypanosome infected (Trypanosoma brucei) were evaluated
ultrastructurally. The findings included several necrotic germ cells in the
seminiferous epithelium and focal degeneration of Sertoli cells. Leydig cells
showed a remarkable paucity of smooth endoplasmic reticulum, and aggregation of
mitochondria. These observations were prevalent in those animals that were
simultaneously protein-malnourished/gossypol treated/ trypanosome infected, and
were either absent or markedly reduced in the other groups. These structural
alterations are probably related to increased gossypol availability to the testis
and/or represent the additive effects of gossypol and trypanosomes. Such tissue
changes could compromise spermatogenesis in affected animals, and suggest that
trypanosome infections may exacerbate testicular lesions in the gossypol-treated 
rat.

PMID: 9241673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Lancet. 1997 May 24;349(9064):1493-7.

Follow-up study of patients randomly allocated ramipril or placebo for heart
failure after acute myocardial infarction: AIRE Extension (AIREX) Study. Acute
Infarction Ramipril Efficacy.

Hall AS(1), Murray GD, Ball SG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cardiovascular Research, Yorkshire Heart Centre, University of
Leeds, UK. a.s.hall@leeds.ac.uk

Comment in
    ACP J Club. 1997 Nov-Dec;127(3):57.

BACKGROUND: In the Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy (AIRE) Study, the effect of
angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibition on the survival of patients with
clinical heart failure after acute myocardial infarction (AMI), was assessed. At 
an average follow-up time of 15 months after randomisation, all-cause mortality
was reduced from 22.6% (placebo group) to 16.9% (ramipril group) representing an 
absolute mortality reduction of 5.7% and a relative risk reduction of 27% (95% CI
11-40%; p = 0.002). Our aim in this study was to assess the long-term (3 years
after the AIRE Study closed) magnitude, duration, and reliability of the survival
benefits observed after treatment with ramipril (target dose 5 mg twice a day)
when compared with placebo.
METHODS: We investigated the mortality status of all 603 patients recruited from 
the 30 UK centres involved in the AIRE Study. Through government records we were 
able to confirm the death or survival of all 603 patients exactly 3 years after
the close of the AIRE Study. Follow-up was for a minimum of 42 months and a mean 
of 59 months. The average duration of treatment with masked trial medication was 
13.4 months for placebo and 12.4 months for ramipril.
FINDINGS: By 0000 h March 1, 1996, death from all causes had occurred in 117
(38.9%) of 301 patients randomly assigned placebo and 83 (27.5%) of 302 patients 
randomly assigned ramipril, representing a relative risk reduction of 36% (95% CI
15-52%; p = 0.002) and an absolute reduction in mortality of 11.4% (114
additional 5-year survivors per 1000 patients treated for an average of 12.4
months).
INTERPRETATION: Our data provide robust evidence that administration of ramipril 
to patients with clinically defined heart failure after AMI results in a survival
benefit that is not only large in magnitude, but also sustained over many years.

PMID: 9167457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Actas Urol Esp. 1997 Apr;21(4):430-3.

[The proximal migration of a double-J catheter. A review of the predisposing
factors. Apropos a case].

[Article in Spanish]

Vallejo Herrádor J(1), Burgos Revilla FJ, Saez Garrido JC, Téllez Martínez-Fornes
M, Martín-Laborda y Bergasa F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Urología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

Case report of a patient bearer of a double-J ureteral catheter due to ureteral
lithiasis. After persistent renoureteral pain and fever, the proximal migration
of the catheter is confirmed radiologically. The predisposing factors for this
complication, described in the literature, are reviewed.

PMID: 9265420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Afr J Med Med Sci. 1997 Mar-Jun;26(1-2):69-72.

The epithelium of the vesicular gland of the African giant rat (Cricetomys
gambianus, Waterhouse): histology and ultrastructure.

Oke BO(1), Aire TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.

The epithelium of the vesicular gland of the African giant rat was studied by the
light and electron microscopes. The gland is compound tubuloalveolar, lined by a 
columnar epithelium, the apical surface of which is covered by a few short
microvilli. The epithelial cells are the principal and basal cells. The principal
cells have an abundance of rough surfaced endoplasmic reticulum (rER), which are 
often arranged in whorls. Basal cells are few, being wedged between adjacent
principal cells in the basal region. They are fairly electron lucent and contain 
fewer organelles. Intraepithelial lymphocytes, which also occur mostly in the
basal region are also present in the epithelium. The presence of these latter
cells is noteworthy in that they are not a known feature of the epithelium of the
vesicular gland of other species.

PMID: 10895235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Arch Esp Urol. 1997 Mar;50(2):159-63.

[Radiopacity of double-J ureteral catheters. Computed tomography quantification
and clinical implications].

[Article in Spanish]

Vallejo Herrador J(1), Cuevas Ibáñez A, Burgos Revilla J, Sáez Garrido JC, Téllez
Martínez-Fornés M, Martín-Laborda y Bergasa F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Urología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether knowledge about the degree of radiopacity of the 
double-J ureteral catheters utilized in Spanish hospitals suffices for correct
radiologic control and subsequent follow-up.
METHODS: The CT attenuation index was utilized to determine the degree of
radiopacity of 23 double-J ureteral stents, comprised of different biomaterials
and from different manufacturers, that are used in Spanish hospitals.
RESULTS: The values ranged from 1,000-3,070 Hounsfield units.
CONCLUSION: All the catheters analyzed were sufficiently radiopaque to permit
good radiologic control during insertion and subsequent follow-up. The
radiopacity of the stent depends on the metal salt employed during the
manufacturing process and not on the biomaterial.

PMID: 9206942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr). 1997 Mar-Apr;25(2):67-72.

Clinical tolerance, parasitological efficacy and environmental effects of
dehumidifiers in stable asthmatics sensitized to house dust mites.

Chivato T(1), Montoro A, Martínez D, Gil P, Zubeldia J, De Barrio M, Baeza ML,
Rubio M, Laguna R.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

Dehumidifiers (DH) are potentially effective appliances as coadjuvant therapy in 
the treatment of bronchial asthma caused by sensitization to house dust mites.
The aims of this study were to analyze DH tolerance in asthmatic patients, to
assess the parasitological effects and to analyze the environmental effects
produced by the use of these appliances in the bedrooms of asthmatic patients
sensitized to house dust mites. 10 stable asthmatic patients sensitized to house 
dust mites were studied. DH appliances (CD-300) were installed in their bedrooms.
Each patient was given symptom scoring tables and a portable peak expiratory flow
(P.E.F.) during a period of 5 months, 1 month before installing the DH and 4
months afterwards. To study the parasitological efficacy of the DHs, we analyzed 
dust samples from the bedrooms and determined the Der p I, Der f I and Der II
allergens by means of a modified ELISA based on monoclonal antibodies. Dust
samples were collected before installing the DHs and after they had been working 
for 2 and 4 months. Dry temperature and relative humidity measurements at three
time intervals (7-9, 15-17 and 22-24 h) were carried out. The 1st measurement was
done prior to installation of the DHs in the patients' bedrooms and the 2nd and
3rd were achieved 2 and 4 months respectively after the installation. Statistical
analysis was done by comparison of paired means. No significant differences were 
detected in the patients' symptoms nor in the P.E.F. measurements in the course
of the study. Decreases in the house dust mite allergens were observed in 4
bedrooms. A significant decrease in relative humidity in the bedrooms of mite
asthma patients after use of dehumidifier appliances was observed (p < 0.01).
Significant differences between the measurements of the bedrooms with and without
DH were detected (p < 0.01). In summary, DHs were well tolerated by stable
asthmatic patients, produced a significant decrease in the relative humidity
level and showed some parasitological efficacy.

PMID: 9150835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Rev Neurol. 1997 Feb;25(138):234-6.

[Lateral sinus thrombosis in the first three months of pregnancy].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín-Araguz A(1), Moreno-Martínez JM, García de la Rocha ML, Fernández-Armayor 
V, Delgado-Reyes S, Revilla-Valle B, Ruiz-Aláez A, Feito N.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurologia, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, España.

Thrombosis of the cerebral venous sinuses is characterized by clinical
pleomorphism and variable pathogenesis. Although there is a relationship with
pregnancy and especially with the puerperium, occurrence during the first
trimester of pregnancy is unusual and this may effect the diagnosis and
treatment. We describe the case of a 33 years-old patient with lateral sinus
thrombosis in the first trimester of pregnancy. This was diagnosed and
followed-up by magnetic resonance. Investigations as to its aetiology were
inconclusive and it followed a benign course without anticoagulation. Thrombosis 
of the venous sinuses has been found empirically to be related to states of
deficiency of S protein, hypercoagulability, anaemia and deshydration during
pregnancy, to having previously taken contraceptive pills. Behçet's disease,
other coagulopathies, central or systemic vasculitis, collagen disorders, septic 
and neoplastic disorders and a large number of cases of unknown aetiology. In our
patient neurological deterioration secondary to a venous infarct or
intraparenchymatous haemorrhage was not seen. There was full recovery and
complete spontaneous canalization of the sinus, as shown on posterior cranial
angiography. The controversial decision to use heparin in thrombosis of the
cerebral venous sinuses should probably depend on the possible risks and benefits
in each individual case, taking into account the clinical findings, aetiology and
topography of the thrombosed sinus.

PMID: 9147744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Rev Neurol. 1997 Feb;25(138):225-9.

[Segmental arteriographic anomalies in migranous cerebral infarct].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín-Araguz A(1), Fernández-Armayor V, Moreno-Martínez JM, García de la Rocha
ML, Revilla B, Esteban-Alonso F, Delgado-Reyes S, Ruiz-Aláez A, Feito N.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Universidad
Complutense, Madrid, España.

A migranous cerebral infarct (ICM) has the appearance of an ischaemic cerebral
lesion which occurs during a migraine crisis and is shown by neuroimaging
techniques to be in the corresponding vascular area. Four young patients are
described. They fulfilled the clinical and neuroimaging criteria for
compatibility with ICM and the protocol for the aetiological study of stroke was 
normal. Angiography ruled out other causes of ischaemia (dissection,
fibromuscular dysplasia, etc.) and showed segmental images of 'vasculitis
appearance' similar to these described in Call's syndrome, in 'benign
intracranial angiopathy' and in other intracranial vasculopathies or criteria of 
'reversible segmental cerebral vasoconstriction'. The pathogenic significance, as
with migraine, is still unknown.

PMID: 9147742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Nurs Stand. 1997 Jan 29;11(19):22-4.

Leadership for change.

Greenwood A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aire Court Community Unit, Leeds.

PMID: 9110758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Acta Neurochir (Wien). 1997;139(10):933-41.

Idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus: analysis of factors related to
cerebrospinal fluid dynamics determining functional prognosis.

Bárcena A(1), Mestre C, Cañizal JM, Rivero B, Lobato RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

This investigation has been undertaken to analyze the findings with both the
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure (Pcsf) and CSF pulse pressure (PP) in order to
predict the outcome of patients with the syndrome of idiopathic normal pressure
hydrocephalus (NPH). Accordingly, a prospective clinical study was planned in
which two groups of patients with NPH, having analogous prevalence of several
matched clinical and radiological parameters, were separated on the basis of
their positive or negative response to shunting. Both the resting Pcsf and CSF PP
profiles were compared in these two groups, and between them and normal controls.
CSF PP amplitude and CSF PP latency correlated directly in conditions associated 
with either normal or high compliance (controls and patients with Alzheimer-like 
disorders), whereas this correlation was inverse in states of low compliance
(NPH). On the other hand, shunt-responders showed a resting Pcsf significantly
higher than both non-responders and controls. The following conclusions were
obtained: 1) CSF PP is a high-amplitude and relative low-latency wave in NPH when
compared with controls: 2) CSF PP amplitude and latency correlate directly in
normal subjects and in those with primary cerebral atrophy; 3) a non-reversible
stage of NPH could be conceived in contradistinction to the reversible one, in
both of which an inverse correlation between the amplitude and the latency takes 
place, the main difference between them being the resting Pcsf, which is
significantly lower in the former than in the latter, depending on the degree of 
atrophic changes developed.

PMID: 9401653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 1997;109 Suppl 2:17-24.

[Multi-drug management after myocardial infarct].

[Article in German]

Kritz H(1), Sinzinger H.

Author information: 
(1)Wilhelm-Auerswald Atheroskleroseforschungsgruppe (ASF) Wien.

Since the results of studies done with
angiotensin-converting-enzyme(ACE)-inhibitors, systemic thrombolysis and primary 
percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTCA) have been published, post-myocardial
infarction therapy has changed dramatically. In most european countries systemic 
thrombolysis as early as possible is the standard therapy. Cardiologists prefer
more and more immediate revascularisation if the technical standard of the
hospital is allowing an acute intervention. Pharmacological therapy is done
initially with beta-blockers and platelet aggregation inhibitors, if necessary
intravenously, since the results of the e.g. GUSTO- and the AIRE-study are known.
If left ventricular dysfunction exists or develops, ACE-inhibitors are given
after the third day post myocardial infarction.

PMID: 9340918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Eur Heart J. 1997 Jan;18(1):41-51.

Effect of ramipril on morbidity and mode of death among survivors of acute
myocardial infarction with clinical evidence of heart failure. A report from the 
AIRE Study Investigators.

Cleland JG(1), Erhardt L, Murray G, Hall AS, Ball SG.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Research Initiative in Heart Failure, University of
Glasgow, Scotland, U.K.

Comment in
    Eur Heart J. 1997 Jan;18(1):3-4.

BACKGROUND: The importance of the effects of ACE inhibitors on sudden death,
progressive heart failure and recurrent infarction to the reduction in overall
mortality in heart failure and after myocardial infarction is disputed.
METHODS: The AIRE study randomized 2006 patients with clinical or radiological
evidence of heart failure within 2-9 days of a myocardial infarction to receive
ramipiril 5 mg b.d. or matching placebo. Outcomes were assessed independently by 
members of an end-points committee blinded to treatment allocation.
RESULTS: Fewer patients developed severe resistant heart failure as their first
validated end-point on rampril, despite the greater number of at-risk survivors, 
compared to placebo (n = 143 vs 178; risk reduction 23%; CI 5 to 39%; P = 0.017).
Ramipril did not alter the rate of reinfarction or stroke. Irrespective of
treatment allocation 182 (46%) patients developed resistant heart failure prior
to death. A validated acute or remote myocardial reinfarction occurred in 76
(19%) patients prior to death and chest pain occurred in 90 (23%) patients around
the time of death suggesting an ischaemic element to these deaths Eighty deaths
occurred on the index admission, 167 during re-admission and 145 out-of-hospital.
Sudden death accounted for 54% of all deaths and 93% of out-of-hospital deaths.
Ramipril reduced the risk of sudden death by 30% (95% CI: 8-47%; P = 0.011).
However, overall, 45% of those patients who died suddenly had severe or worsening
heart failure prior to their death. Only 39% of sudden deaths were considered to 
be due to arrhythmias. Ramipril reduced the risk of death from circulatory
failure by 18%, but this did not reach statistical significance (95% CI; 41 to
-14%; P = 0.237). The magnitude of the effects on sudden death and death due to
circulatory failure were not significantly different. However, 38% of the
reduction in overall mortality was from the subgroup with sudden death who had
developed prior severe resistant heart failure (placebo n = 35, ramipril n = 15),
again emphasizing the marked benefit in preventing failure. Ramipril did not
selectively alter the proportion of in- to out-of-hospital deaths.
CONCLUSION: Ramipril reduces mortality and progression to resistant heart failure
among patients with evidence of heart failure early after myocardial infarction. 
Retarding the progression of heart failure appears to be a major factor
contributing to the reduction in mortality both by reducing circulatory failure
and by reducing sudden death.

PMID: 9049514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Magnes Res. 1996 Dec;9(4):293-8.

Intravenous magnesium load test in elderly patients with protein-energy
malnutrition.

Toral Revuelta JR(1), Martínez Hernández D, Martínez Ruiz M, Llobell Seguí G,
Peralba Vañó JI, Ribera Casado JM.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital del Aire, Internal Medicine Department, Madrid, Spain.

Forty-two elderly patients were subjected to a nutritional assessment and an
intravenous magnesium load (0.5 mmol/kg). After 48 h, patients with
protein-calorie malnutrition (PCM) showed magnesium retentions (MgR) above 20 per
cent, thus indicating magnesium deficit, and greater (P < 0.001) than those from 
well-nourished patients. The discriminating cross-point for undernourished
patients was at 28 per cent with 95 per cent sensibility and specificity. There
were significant correlations between MgR and most nutritional parameters. An
increase of the RMg constitutes a PCM indicator which may be useful to quantify
it.

PMID: 9247877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr). 1996 Nov-Dec;24(6):243-7.

Serum levels of eosinophil cationic protein and eosinophil protein x in pollen
atopic patients with stable asthma and its relation with bronchial
hyperresponsiveness.

Chivato T(1), Martínez D, Blasco R, Melgarejo M, Gómez de Terreros FJ, Laguna R.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

Eosinophils are important effector cells in allergic inflammation described in
allergic rhinitis (AR) and allergic bronchial asthma (BA). During the pollen
season serum levels of eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) and eosinophil X
protein/eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (EPX/EDN) are increased in BA. The aim of
the present study was to evaluate the serum levels of ECP and EPC in pollen
atopic patients with AR and BA during the winter. 92 patients were studied. They 
were divided into three groups: I 29 patients with AR, II 51 patients with BA and
III 12 healthy subjects. Allergic rhinitis and bronchial asthma were diagnosed by
routine clinical tests: clinical history, skin tests, total IgE and specific IgE.
In addition ECP and EPX were determined in serum. All patients were asymptomatic,
stable and without medical treatment. Methacholine challenge test (MCT) was
performed in all patients. MCT were positive in 4 patients of group I and 45
patients of group II. ECP levels (ug/l) were: 21 (I), 24 (II) and 7 (III). EPX
levels (ug/l) were 35 (I), 45 (II) and 21 (III). Statistical differences (p <
0.01) were observed both in ECP and EPX levels in patients with MCT positive in
relation to patients with MCT negative, and in allergic patients (I and II) in
comparison with the healthy subjects (III) (p < 0.01). ECP and EPX serum levels
are increased in patients with a positive MCT in the winter, out of the pollen
season, when patients are asymptomatic, stable and without treatment. This fact
suggests that eosinophils play an important role in the pathogenesis of bronchial
asthma.

PMID: 9010559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Appl Toxicol. 1996 Sep-Oct;16(5):375-80.

Ethanol intake may modify gossypol toxicosis in the rat.

Akingbemi BT(1), Rao PV, Aire TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preclinical Veterinary Studies, University of Zimbabwe, Mount
Pleasant, Harare, Zimbabwe.

Some aspects of the toxicity of gossypol were investigated in ethanol-fed,
gossypol-treated Sprague-Dawley rats, with and without protein malnutrition.
Serum creatine phosphokinase activity was depressed in all gossypol-treated rats 
and gossypol caused greater decreases than ethanol in those animals that were fed
the normal diet. Even though the adrenal glands were enlarged in all
gossypol-treated rats, this was accompanied by depressed serum cortisol levels.
Histopathological findings, including vacuolar degeneration of hepatocytes and
dilation of the sinusoids in the liver, atrophy and leucocytic infiltration of
cardiac myofibres, vacuolation of the renal glomerulus and cellular depletion of 
the spleen and thymus, were most severe in the protein-malnourished,
gossypol-treated rats; these were generally absent in the other groups. These
findings indicated that either adequate levels of protein in the diet and/or
ethanol consumption have the effect of reducing gossypol toxicity, probably by
reducing the amount of gossypol available for tissue exposure through enhanced
metabolism and/or clearance from the body. However, an evaluation of the
metabolic pathways involved in gossypol metabolism in ethanol-fed individuals
might provide a better understanding of these observations.

PMID: 8889787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Eur Heart J. 1996 Sep;17(9):1390-403.

Mode of death in chronic heart failure. A request and proposition for more
accurate classification.

Narang R(1), Cleland JG, Erhardt L, Ball SG, Coats AJ, Cowley AJ, Dargie HJ, Hall
AS, Hampton JR, Poole-Wilson PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.

The proportion of patients reported to die suddenly or from progressive
circulatory failure is not consistent among studies of heart failure. Lack of an 
adequate or consistent classification of how patients die contributes to the
current confusion over the mode of death in heart failure. Defining how patients 
with heart failure die could be important in developing strategies to reduce the 
continuing high mortality associated with this condition. We identified 27
studies that reported 50 or more deaths among patients with heart failure to
ascertain how death was classified. Definitions of sudden death appeared
heterogeneous and the majority of studies failed to publish or make reference to 
how circulatory failure was defined. A framework for the classification of the
mode of death has been developed in which clear separation of the activity and
place at the time of death, cause of death, mode of death, and events prior to
death is made (ACME: Activity, Cause, Mode and Event). This mode of classifying
death has been successfully piloted in two mortality studies; AIRE and NETWORK.
Classifying mortality in this way will help identify pathways leading to death
and hence suggest therapies and strategies to reduce mortality in patients with
heart failure, a group of patients whose prognosis remains poor.

PMID: 8880025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Br J Clin Pract Suppl. 1996 Jul;84:31-5.

How ACE inhibitors reduce death from myocardial infarction: hypotheses from the
AIRE study. Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy study.

Ball SG(1), Hall AS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cardiovascular Research, Leeds University, UK.

Doctors treat patients, not populations. 'Evidence-based' practice is essential
but extrapolation to the individual patient is always necessary and this fact is 
well illustrated by data from trials of ACE inhibitors post-myocardial
infarction. In the AIRE (Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy) study, 2,006
patients with some evidence of heart failure, even if transient, after a
myocardial infarction, were randomised to receive oral ramipril or placebo in
addition to standard treatment. Follow-up was for a minimum of six and an average
of 15 months. The risk reduction in total mortality was 27% (95% CI 11-40%; p =
0.002); approximately 40 lives might be expected to be saved for every 1000
patients treated for one year. Benefit was apparent within weeks of starting
treatment. Additional data from the AIRE study are considered in relation to the 
findings of other mortality trials. It is argued that ACE inhibitors offer most
to those patients with impaired left ventricular function through a mechanism not
related to the prevention of myocardial re-infarction.

PMID: 8995000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Comp Pathol. 1996 Jul;115(1):13-22.

Gossypol toxicosis in the rat associated with protein malnutrition and
experimental infection with Trypanosoma brucei.

Akingbemi BT(1), Aire TA, Oke BO, Onwuka SK, Ogwuegbu SO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.

The toxicity of gossypol, a compound occurring naturally in the cotton plant, was
investigated in Trypanosoma brucei-infected, gossypol-treated rats, with and
without protein malnutrition. The liver, heart, lungs, spleen and adrenal glands 
were enlarged in all gossypol-treated rats. Gossypol treatment or trypanosome
infection, either alone or together, invariably caused significant reductions in 
the serum activity of creatine phosphokinase and amylase and in the serum
concentration of cortisol. The serum biochemical changes, together with
histopathological findings in various organs, indicated that the toxicity of
gossypol and pathology of trypanosome infection, either alone or in concert,
could be exacerbated by protein malnutrition. This finding suggests that the
previously reported antiparasitic properties of gossypol may be of little
ultimate benefit due to these serious side effects. The spleen in the
protein-malnourished, trypanosome-infected and gossypol-treated animals exhibited
only a slight decrease in the number of lymphatic nodules, but a marked cellular 
depletion, especially of cortical tissue, was observed in the thymus. These
observations would seem to justify further study of the immune status of
trypanosome-infected, gossypol-treated animals.

PMID: 8878748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Am Heart J. 1996 Jul;132(1 Pt 2 Su):244-50.

Who should be treated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors after
myocardial infarction?

Ball SG(1), Hall AS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cardiovascular Research, Leeds University, United Kingdom.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are now established drugs in the
treatment of hypertension and heart failure. However, their use in patients after
a myocardial infarction has occurred remains controversial. The major clinical
question regarding ACE inhibitors is whether they should be given to all patients
immediately after thrombolysis or whether their use should be restricted to a
particular subgroup. This question has now been addressed in several large-scale 
trials of mortality after myocardial infarction, and no important new information
seems likely to emerge on the issue. Clinicians must therefore decide what their 
practice will be on the basis of data that are currently available. The authors
of the recently published Gruppo italiano per lo Studio delta Sopravvlvenza nell'
infarcto Miocardico (GISSI-3) and Fourth International Study of Infarct Survival 
(ISIS-4) mega-trials advocate a policy of widespread and early use of ACE
inhibitors in all patients after myocardial infarction occurs. However, the small
mortality benefit observed from use of ACE inhibitors in these studies lacks
certainly and may prove difficult to reproduce in the general population of
patients who have had an infarct outside the setting of a trial. Although
patients were essentially not selected apart from the exclusion of those with
marked hypotension, the low 6-month and 1-year mortality figures indicate
"selection" compared with the typical population of patients who have had a
myocardial infarction. Furthermore, a significant long-term mortality benefit was
not observed with the short-term (4- to 6-week) use of ACE inhibitors in these
trials. In contrast, in the Survival and Ventricular Enlargement (SAVE), Acute
Infarction Ramipril Efficacy (AIRE), and Trandopril Cardiac Evaluation (TRACE)
trials, where evidence of impairment of ventricular function was used to select
patients, both a marked and certain benefit regarding mortality was apparent from
long-term prescription of these drugs. Importantly, the marked benefit observed
in these selected patients may have been "diluted out" in the larger scale trials
of unselected patients where the majority may have gained little and some may
have been harmed by treatment or its withdrawal. In most of the large mortality
trials the rationale for use of ACE inhibitors after myocardial infarction was
stated to be their likely beneficial effect on "remodeling" of the heart after
"Infarct expansion." Because adverse remodeling occurs in only a proportion of
patients after a heart attack, the benefits of ACE inhibitor therapy might be
predicted to be largely limited to this group, which would favor a selective
policy. However, strong claims have been made that ACE inhibitors have other
important actions, including prevention of myocardial infarction. If this is
confirmed in a number of ongoing large-scale trials. then an even ore widespread 
use of these agents can be expected.

PMID: 8677863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Int J Androl. 1996 Jun;19(3):179-89.

Infection with Trypanosoma brucei potentiates the antifertility effect of
gossypol, especially in the protein-malnourished male rat.

Akingbemi BT(1), Aire TA, Oke BO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.

Reproductive parameters were investigated in gossypol-treated male rats that had 
been infected experimentally with Trypanosoma brucei and then place on one of two
diets of differing (low and normal) protein content. The endpoints assessed were 
reproductive organ weights, semen epididymal sperm counts, serum testosterone and
histological, stereological and histomorphometric evaluation of the testis and
accessory reproductive organs. Most of the parameters studied were lowest in the 
protein-malnourished, gossypol-treated, trypanosome-infected animals, when
compared to those obtained from the corresponding animals that were only
gossypol-treated or trypanosome-infected. Mean testicular size and the diameter
and the total length of seminiferous tubules were especially reduced, indicating 
that the overall volume of the seminiferous epithelium in these animals was
smaller. These findings suggest that reproductive capacity could be impaired in
protein-malnourished, trypanosome-infected animals fed on gossypol-containing
products, even when there are no obvious clinical signs of disease. This could
translate into increased production costs in a farm enterprise. Screening for
haemoparasitism would also seem to be worthwhile prior to evaluation and/or use
of gossypol (or perhaps other potential contraceptives) in human subjects,
especially in communities that are confronted with severe food shortages.

PMID: 8876268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol. 1996 May-Jun;6(3):208-9.

Anaphylaxis induced by ingestion of a pollen compound.

Chivato T(1), Juan F, Montoro A, Laguna R.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Inmunología y Alergia, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

We report on the case of a 32-year-old atopic patient who showed a severe
anaphylactic reaction due to the ingestion of a pollen compound prepared in an
herbalist's. A few minutes after ingestion, generalized pruritus, difuse
erythema, facial edema, cough, hoarseness and dysphonia appeared, and the
emergency administration of subcutaneous epinephrine and intravenous
methylprednisolone was necessary. Skin tests with a battery of inhalants and food
allergens were performed. The patient only showed sensitization to Artemisia
vulgaris, Taraxacum officinalis and Salix alba. Specific IgE levels were
evaluated by FEIA-CAP giving a seric level of CAP class 3 to Artemisia vulgaris
and class 2 to Taraxacum officinalis and Salix alba. Samples of the pollen
compound were shown in the microscopical analysis to be 93% pollens and 6% fungi.
In the qualitative study Taraxacum officinalis (15%), Artemisia vulgaris (5%) and
Salix alba (15%) were the main elements identified. In summary, this case study
describes a food-induced systemic reaction due to a pollen compound in an atopic 
patient with a history of allergic rhinitis. Pollinic patients must be informed
on the risks that the consumption of these compounds might cause.

PMID: 8807513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Rev Neurol. 1996 Mar;24(127):306-10.

[Untreatable hiccup as un unusual sign in a rostral occlusion syndrome of the
basilar artery].

[Article in Spanish]

Revilla B(1), Martín-Araguz A, Feito N, Moreno-Martínez JM, García de la Rocha
ML, Moreno Pérez-Crespo JL, Fernández-Armayor V.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurologia, Hospital Universitario del Aire (Universidad
Complutense), Madrid.

Hiccoughs (singultus) is a habitual physiological phenomenon, the persistence of 
which might indicate neurological and extraneurological multiple lesions. Its
activation involves starting up numerous central and peripheral mechanisms which 
have yet to be clearly determined. Hiccoughs results from an intermittent
myoclonus of the diaphragm, reflex in origin, with unknown authentic cause or
physiological significance. It has been suggested that, more than just an
abnormal reflex, it could be a type of myoclonus brought on by repeated activity 
of the 'solitary inspiratory nucleus', by releasing control of the
inhibiting-activating upper nervous system activity. We present the case of a
patient with uncontrollable hiccoughs lasting over six years as a result of
paramedial bilateral thalamic ischaemia (rostral occlusion syndrome of the
basilar artery type 1) of cardioembolic origin (auricular fibrillation) secondary
to hyperthyroidism.

PMID: 8742397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Actas Urol Esp. 1996 Mar;20(3):255-60.

[PSA and PSAD study in patients with renal dysfunction].

[Article in Spanish]

Sánchez de la Muela P(1), González Parra E, Blasco R, Vallejo J, Fanlo B,
Melgarejo M, Martín-Laborda F, Ortíz A, Labanda P.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Urología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

This study analyzes the changes in serum and urinary PSA values in 28 subjects;
13 with creatinine clearance under 75 ml/mn and 15 with creatinine clearance over
75 ml/mn. Both groups were compared for prostate size, measured by transrectal
ultrasound, prostate weight, serum PSA (SPSA), 24h urine PSA (PSAO), PSA
clearance (PSACl), serum creatinine (SCr), creatinine clearance (CrCl), PSA
density (PSAD), PSA/creatinine ratio (PSA/Cr) and PSACl/CrCl ratio. Mean values
of SPSA and PSAO were 4.5 +/- 0.8 and 222 +/- 29.7 ng/ml respectively, values for
SCr, CrCl and PSACl averaging 1.62 +/- 0.2 mgr/dl, 71.6 +/- 6.5 ml/mn and 150.5
+/) 32.9 ml/mn. Median prostate size was 32.6 +/- 3.9 cc, with weights of 40.3
+/- 4.9 g and mean PSA density (PSAD) 0.13 +/- 0.02. The results of the
homogeneity study showed that there are no significant differences between both
groups with regard to the variables considered in the study. SPSA values were
higher in patients with CrCl < 75; 3.4 vs 5.7, but not significantly. There are
no significant differences between PSAO and PSACl values for both groups, even
though PSAO levels were higher in patients with CrCl < 75 ml/min (p = 0.1). PSAD 
values for patients with CrCl > 75 ml/mn were lower than those for patients with 
CrCl < 75 ml/mn; 0.09 vs 0.17 (p = 0.08). In the entire sample, PSAD levels
showed correlation with SPSA and PSA/Cr values; R = 0.63 (P = 0.0003) and r = 0.5
(p = 0.009) respectively. Also, they were significantly but inversely correlated 
with PSACl levels; r = - 0.5 (p = 0.006) and PSACl/CrCl; r = - 0.048 (p = 0.01). 
No correlation was seen between PSAD values and the following parameters; PSAO (p
= 0.7), SCr (p = 0.5) and CrCl (p = 0.27). When the group of patients with CrCl <
75 ml/mn is considered, PSAD values are correlated exclusively with PSACl values;
r = - 0.69 (p = 0.008) and PSACl/CrCl; r = 0.68 (p = 0.009). Our data appear to
indicate that there is a certain relationship between PSAD and the renal function
although the physiopathological mechanism responsible for that is unknown.
Nevertheless, considering the sample size, more comprehensive studies will be
necessary to obtain more convincing results.

PMID: 8712042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 1996 Mar-Apr;47(2):149-52.

[Hemangiosarcoma of the nasal cavity].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín Vázquez C(1), Bullido E, Alvarez Montero O, Abad Royo JM, Lorente Tortosa 
JM, Muñoz Colado M.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de ORL, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

Hemangiosarcoma is a rarely diagnosed in the nasal cavity and there are few
reports in the ENT literature. The most interesting aspect of our 82-year-old
male's case was that he presented all the findings characteristic of
angiosarcoma, but the final post-mortem diagnosis was unexpected because of the
poor information available until that moment.

PMID: 8695206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Arch Bronconeumol. 1996 Mar;32(3):145-7.

[Bilateral pleural effusion and rheumatoid arthritis. Diagnostic value of pleural
fluid cytology].

[Article in Spanish]

Jareño Esteban J(1), Chillón Martín MJ, Villegas Fernández F, Callol Sánchez L,
Girón Moreno RM, Gómez de Terreros FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Militar Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

We present a 69 years old male patient diagnosed of rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
with signs of pleuropulmonar disease. The diagnose of RA was done of 49 years and
since then treated with non steroid antiinflammatory drugs and during the acute
phases of RA with steroid drugs. The pleural effusions showed an exudate with
pseudochilothorax criteria with acid pH acid low glucose concentrations. The
cytological study of the effusion demonstrated the presence of characteristic
mononuclear cells.

PMID: 8634794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Rev Neurol. 1996 Jan;24(125):84-6.

[Ischemic infarct, mitral valve prolapse and protein S deficiency].

[Article in Spanish]

de la Rocha ML(1), Rodríguez-Arias CA, Pérez-Crespo JL, Martín-Araguz A, Revilla 
B, Fernández-Armayor V, Moreno-Martínez JM.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurologia y Neurocirugia, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

Ischaemic stroke in young people, that is in those under 45 years of age, forms a
distinct entity. Whereas in the case of older patients the main cause is
arteriosclerosis, in the younger group a broad spectrum of etiologies can be
found. It is for this reason that in these latter cases we must carry out a
diagnostic study that is not only more exhaustive but also additionally is aimed 
at seeking out specific pathologies as for instance a possible association with
vasculitis, infectious diseases, hematological abnormalities or unclear
cardiopathology. Given the therapeutic transcendency that findings might have, in
order to avoid new bouts in patients at the most productive moments in their
lives, we believe it to be of great interest to carefully study these patients as
exhaustively as need be. In the present work we present the case of a young
patient with ischaemic infarct in the region of both upper cerebella which
started out with a clinical picture of ataxia and dysarthria with benign course
and total recovery. Possible etiologies are discussed in the light of findings
made during complementary tests, as well as the unusual location of the lesions.

PMID: 8852007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 1996;49 Suppl 1:S35-9.

What have the ACE-inhibitor trials in postmyocardial patients with left
ventricular dysfunction taught us?

Reynolds G(1), Hall AS, Ball SG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cardiovascular Research, Leeds University, UK.

A series of elegant experimental studies and careful clinical observation over a 
decade or more have led to the concept of 'infarct expansion' and 'remodelling'
of the heart, culminating in a number of major mortality studies indicating the
effectiveness of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors in patients after
myocardial infarction (MI). But has this concept been too narrow in predicting
which patients might benefit from treatment with ACE inhibitors? Measurable
infarct-expansion with progressive dilatation probably occurs in less than 20% of
patients, whereas increase in volume and hypertrophy of the heart as responses to
compromised function are likely wherever significant myocardial damage has
occurred. Irrespective of infarct expansion, cumulative extensive damage can lead
to an inevitable downward spiral with gross ventricular dilatation and death in
heart failure. But in the majority of patients after MI a 'new equilibrium' is
established in which initial dilatation and subsequently hypertrophy restore
adequate function. Is it possible to distinguish patients in whom the cost and
inconvenience of long-term therapy with an ACE inhibitor justify the likely
benefit from treatment after an MI? The SAVE, AIRE and recent TRACE studies allow
a rational approach for the clinician, indicating the effectiveness of these
drugs in patients with evidence of impaired ventricular function. However, the
prospect that ACE inhibitors prescribed long term might also prevent myocardial
reinfarction could justify wider use. Post-MI patients are an easily identifiable
high-risk group for a cost-effective programme of secondary prevention.
Reinfarction in an already damaged ventricle carries a particularly poor
prognosis and its prevention by ACE inhibitors could make a major contribution to
the undoubted benefit from these agents. The recently completed TRACE study with 
its long-term follow-up may help resolve this issue, which is also being
investigated in a number of long-term prospective studies in populations at high 
risk of cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 8834930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1996;27 Suppl 2:S19-24.

Clinical benefit of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in chronic heart
failure.

Kiowski W(1), Sütsch G, Dössegger L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, University Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland.

The ideal therapy for patients with chronic heart failure should reduce symptoms 
related to pulmonary congestion or low perfusion, prevent the progression of left
ventricular dysfunction and, ultimately, should reduce mortality. Extensive
studies in humans have investigated the effects of angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitors on these goals of therapy. As an example, the ACE inhibitor
cilazapril significantly improved exercise tolerance, as borne out by a
meta-analysis of six placebo-controlled, randomized 3-month trials. Comparison of
the effects of cilazapril and captopril vs. placebo in one of the trials
documented similar improvement in exercise tolerance (14 vs. 17%). Results from
other randomized comparative trials suggest that the improvement in symptoms
represents a class effect of ACE inhibitors. A beneficial effect of ACE
inhibition on the progression of left ventricular dysfunction has also been
demonstrated in the SOLVD trial, and a reduction of mortality has been amply
documented in several mortality trials (CONSENSUS I, SOLVD, V-HeFT-II, SAVE,
AIRE, SMILE) in patients with or without preceding myocardial infarction. Reports
that ACE inhibitors also reduce the incidence of reinfarction after myocardial
infarction have not been confirmed in all studies but raise the interesting
concept that ACE inhibition may interact, in a beneficial but thus far not
well-understood way, with key processes in the development of atherosclerosis,
thereby preventing plaque rupture, thrombus formation, and myocardial infarction.
Taken together, a large database convincingly demonstrates that ACE inhibitors
are effective not only in improving symptoms but also in the prevention of
progression of left ventricular dysfunction, in the reduction of mortality, and
possibly in stabilizing the atherosclerotic disease process.

PMID: 8723395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. An Med Interna. 1995 Dec;12(12):589-92.

[Evaluation of the efficacy of naltrexone in alcoholism by the determination of
serum carbohydrate-deficient transferrin].

[Article in Spanish]

Martinez Ruiz M(1), Llobell Segui G, Peralba Vaño JL, Toral Revuelta JR.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital del Aire, Servicio de Medicina Interna, Arturo Sorial, Madrid.

Naltrexone (NTX) has been shown to be a useful drug for the treatment of alcohol 
dependence (AD). Carbohydrate-deficient transferrin (CDT) in serum is a new
biologic marker of alcohol abuse. To evaluate the efficacy of NTX (50 mg/d) in
AD, a group of 20 alcoholics with CDT > 20 U/l was studied using monthly
laboratory tests (CDT, ESR, AST, ALT, GGT) and specific psychological testing
(CAGE). After the second month statistically significant differences in CDT
levels were found. By the end of the study, 13 patients (responders) had
normalized their CDT levels. There was no correlation between CDT values and the 
other laboratory markers. The difference in routine laboratory markers between
responders and non responders was not significant. NTX was well tolerated by all 
the patients and significant alcohol abstinence was achieved. CDT was
demonstrated to be a effective marker for the evaluation of alcoholic abstinence 
during treatment with NTX. Superior results were obtained in comparison with the 
routine customary markers for AD.

PMID: 8679801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Mil Med. 1995 Nov;160(11):593-6.

Air evacuation of critically burned patients.

Santos FX(1), Sanchez-Gabriel J, Mayoral E, Hamann C.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital del Aire, Arturo Soria, Madrid, Spain.

We analyze the repercussions of air evacuation on the physiopathology of the
critically burned patient based on the experience on 63 patients evacuated by
air. Clinical repercussions are due to accelerations, vibrations, noise, and,
primarily, to altitude. Accelerations are important during take-off and landing, 
and vibrations may be important in helicopter evacuations in the presence of
craniofacial trauma. The noise, especially in helicopters, can interfere with
diagnostic and therapeutic maneuvers in-flight. The altitude modifies atmospheric
pressure, partial pressure of oxygen, and water concentration in inhaled air. In 
the aircraft we use, atmospheric pressure is between 550 and 532 mm Hg at the
normal flight altitudes. This situation determines the expansion of body gases.
Hypoxia seriously worsens any respiratory insufficiency, primarily in the
presence of smoke inhalation. The decrease of water concentration in the inhaled 
air compels the increase of fluid perfusion. Pre-flight and in-flight measures
are analyzed, especially with regard to smoke inhalation, pneumothorax, and
parenteral perfusion.

PMID: 8538899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Contraception. 1995 Oct;52(4):261-5.

Reduced level of serum cholesterol in low protein-fed Wistar rats administered
gossypol and chloroquine.

Nwoha PU(1), Aire TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife,
Nigeria.

Gossypol and chloroquine were administered in goya oil and distilled water,
respectively, to low protein-fed (LP) and normal protein-fed (NP, control) adult 
male albino Wistar rats for 4 and 8 weeks' duration. Gossypol (GP) and
chloroquine (CQ) were administered separately and in combination (GPCQ). At the
end of the treatment periods, the rats were anesthetized and blood drawn by
cardiac puncture, centrifuged, and sera obtained for assay of total cholesterol
and triglycerides levels. The data obtained were analyzed by two-way ANOVA. The
results showed that the interaction of GP and CQ in LP and NP-fed rats produced
significant effects (P<0.001) on the serum levels of cholesterol and
triglycerides. Serum cholesterol level was lower at 8 than at 4 weeks in LP-fed
rats but higher at 8 than at 4 weeks in LP fed rats. The administration of GP,
CQ, and GPCQ resulted in lower serum cholesterol and triglycerides at 8 than at 4
weeks in LP fed rats but higher serum cholesterol at 4 than at 8 weeks in NP-fed 
rats. In LP and NP-fed rats, the levels of serum cholesterol and triglycerides
were generally lower in GCPQ-treated than GP- or CQ-treated rats. The
implications of the findings are discussed.

PMID: 8605786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Contraception. 1995 Oct;52(4):255-9.

The effects of gossypol and chloroquine interaction on serum electrolytes of
protein-malnourished rats.

Nwoha PU(1), Aire TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Obefemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife,
Nigeria.

Serum sodium (Na), potassium (K), chloride (Cl), phosphate (Po), and calcium (Ca)
were assayed in adult male Wistar rats fed a low protein diet (LP) and a normal
protein diet (control, NP) and administered gossypol (GP) and chloroquine (CQ)
alone and in combination (GPCQ), for 4 and 8 weeks. Gossypol was administered at 
20 mg/kg body wt/rat/day in Goya oil and chloroquine at 5 mg/kg body wt/rat for 3
days/week in distilled water. The data, analyzed by two-way ANOVA, showed that
the interaction had significant effects on the serum levels of Na, K and Po (P < 
0.001) but not on chloride and calcium (P > 0.05). Serum levels of sodium,
potassium and phosphate in LP rats were significantly lower than in NP rats. In
LP and NP rats, the levels of Na, K, and Po at 8 weeks were significantly higher 
than at 4 weeks; and GPCQ treatment produced significantly lower sodium levels in
LP and NP rats, lower phosphate in LP rats and higher phosphate in NP-fed rats
than GP or CQ administered alone. Potassium level in GPCQ was between levels in
Gp- and CQ-treated rats. The administration of gossypol and chloroquine together 
may not adversely affect serum electrolytes in protein-malnutrition state any
more than gossypol or chloroquine administered alone.

PMID: 8605785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Rev Esp Enferm Dig. 1995 Oct;87(10):725-30.

[Sedation in endoscopy].

[Article in Spanish]

Pérez-Piqueras J(1), Silva González C, Payeras Llodrá G, Díaz Lobón J, Sánchez
Sánchez E, Villapún Blanco M, Madrona Pérez C, Chi Anderson T, Santa Valiente J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Aparato Digestivo, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

PMID: 8519539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Burns. 1995 Sep;21(6):445-8.

Comparison of the effects of nerve growth factor and superoxide dismutase on
vascular extravasation in experimental burns.

Santos FX(1), Escudero M, Pérez L, Lozano T, Obispo JM, Hamann C, Rodríguez C.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Surgery Unit, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

Superoxide dismutase (SOD), a free-radical scavenger, inhibits the increase of
vascular permeability in experimental burn lesions in rats. In this study the aim
was to determine whether Nerve Growth Factor (NGF), which has been implicated in 
the modulation of some inflammatory reactions, behaves in an analogous way. The
study compares the haematocrit (Ht) and haemoglobin (Hb) variations in three
groups of rats treated respectively with saline solution, SOD and NGF,
immediately after causing a 25 per cent dermal burn injury. Statistical
comparison (Student's t test) of the Ht and Hb variations between the Control
group (Ht and Hb increase) and the NGF group (Ht and Hb decrease), shows
significant differences in the intervals between 15 and 60 min (P < 0.01) and
between 60 and 120 min (P < 0.05). Although SOD is able to control extravasation 
in the immediate postburn period (basal-15 min), NGF has a comparable effect in
subsequent periods. The overall action of NGF shows that this agent is able to
maintain Ht and Hb values at basal levels even after 120 min postburn. These
results seem to be the first evidence of an inhibitory effect of NGF on the
vascular permeability in burn lesions.

PMID: 8554687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 1995 Aug;9 Suppl 3:503-7.

ACE inhibitors and calcium antagonists in the treatment of congestive heart
failure.

Hansen JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Hvidovre University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.

The increased mortality after myocardial infarction is related to the risk of
reinfarction, sudden death, and the development and progression of heart failure;
in congestive heart failure it is due to the progression of heart failure and
sudden death. ACE inhibitors have been proven to prevent cardiovascular events,
especially the progression of heart failure, in postinfarct patients with reduced
ejection fraction and heart failure in the SAVE and AIRE trials. In patients with
congestive heart failure, ACE inhibitor treatment has prevented cardiovascular
death and reduced morbidity due to progressive heart failure in the SOLVD trials.
In post-myocardial infarction patients, the calcium antagonist nifedipine did not
affect mortality or morbidity; diltiazem improved prognosis in patients without
congestive heart failure and in patients with non-Q-wave infarction; and
verapamil improved prognosis by prevention of reinfarction and sudden death.
Combination treatment with both verapamil, which has pronounced antiischemic
properties and prevents sudden death and reinfarction, and an ACE inhibitor,
which prevents the progression of heart failure, is a possibility for future
cardiovascular therapy that should be evaluated.

PMID: 8562467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Hum Hypertens. 1995 Aug;9 Suppl 4:S41-6.

[Combination therapy in cardiovascular diseases other than hypertension].

[Article in French]

Clement D(1), Wimart MC, Thibout E.

Author information: 
(1)Département des Maladies Cardiovasculaires, Hôpital Universitaire, Gand,
Belgique, France.

As in hypertension, the addition of a second active drug is believed to enhance
treatment efficacy; however, the extent to which a combination of two low-dose
drugs outperforms conventional monotherapy remains uncertain. Established
treatments of angina comprises nitrates compounds, beta-blockers and calcium
antagonists, which are often given in combination. Beta-blockers are major
players in this field as they inhibit the tachycardia induced by nitrates and
calcium antagonists; there is therefore a pathophysiological justification for
their use in combination therapy, supported by repeated confirmation of positive 
clinical effect. The most widely chosen calcium antagonists are dihydropyridines;
verapamil may impair conduction. However, it is not clear whether combination
enhances the effects of the individual antianginal substances. Diuretics are for 
most clinicians the keystone treatment of heart failure; diuretics are often
combined with other drugs, e.g. amiloride and spironolactone. The latter also
have a beneficial effect on myocardial structure (myocardium/collagen ratio).
ACE-inhibitors are of proven clinical efficacy, and, in addition, have a
beneficial effect on survival. They combine well with diuretics: because the
diuretic stimulates renin release, the ACE-inhibitor can be given at a lower dose
(enhancement of effect). There are, however, certain drawbacks (hypotension,
hyperkalemia with antialdosterones). The results of combining ACE-inhibitors with
calcium antagonists and beta-blockers await investigation. The ISIS studies
demonstrated the advantages of combining beta-blockers, thrombolysis and aspirin 
in acute infarction. ACE-inhibitors have recently been added to the regimen with 
a positive effect (extended survival), especially in the presence of a decreased 
ejection fraction (SAVE, AIRE, GISSI 3 and ISIS 4 studies).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT
250 WORDS)

PMID: 7674273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Cardiol Clin. 1995 Aug;13(3):379-90.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors post-myocardial infarction.

Young JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio, USA.

Results from SOLVD, SAVE, AIRE, GISSI-III, ISIS-IV, and the Chinese Captopril
Trial suggest that therapy with ACE inhibitors, at least with enalapril,
captopril, ramipril, and lisinopril, induce significant reduction in morbidity
and mortality rates in patients with ischemic heart disease, myocardial
infarction, and a wide range of ventricular function and myocardial infarction.
SOLVD and SAVE results, in particular, demonstrate improved survival and reduced 
major ischemic events in patients with depressed systolic ventricular function.
SOLVD points out that institution of ACE inhibitor therapy need not be done
immediately post-myocardial infarction to accrue benefit. GISSI-III and ISIS-IV, 
on the other hand, suggest that use of ACE inhibitor drugs early post-myocardial 
infarction produces significant, albeit small, benefits when drugs are begun
early post-event in conjunction with other routinely used therapeutic strategies.
The prospective, well-designed, and well-controlled nature of these clinical
trials, the consistency of their findings, and the high level of morbidity and
mortality in placebo groups establish the importance of preventing ischemic
events with the prescribed ACE inhibitors. Particularly important is the fact
that none of these clinical trials were designed to determine optimal dose or
frequency of administration of the ACE inhibitors chosen. Targeting dose
principles were utilized and clinicians wishing to generate similar results in
their own patient population should choose one of the ACE inhibitors studied and 
administer it in the manner described in hopes of achieving outcomes similar to
those detailed in the summarized clinical trials. Finally, recommendations
regarding post-myocardial infarction therapy with ACE inhibitors can be
summarized. Patients having acute or remote infarction should have an assessment 
of ventricular function. All patients with depressed systolic function, whether
they are or are not symptomatic, should receive a trial of an appropriate ACE
inhibitor. Patients suffering an acute myocardial infarction should have an
assessment of ventricular function early and, if the ejection fraction is low
(probably < 50%), an appropriately chosen ACE inhibitor should be begun after 24 
hours have elapsed. ACE inhibitor therapy should be begun in combination with
other proven effective post-myocardial infarction treatment strategies. In
patients with normal systolic function, advantages of ACE inhibitor therapy are
less clear, but patients with large anterior wall myocardial infarction will
likely benefit, even without objective evidence of left ventricular systolic
dysfunction. Concomitant utilization of thrombolytic agents, aspirin, and beta
blockers should not interdict use of ACE inhibitor therapy.

PMID: 7585774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. An Med Interna. 1995 Jul;12(7):333-6.

[Diffuse lung hemorrhage and necrotizing glomerulonephritis in a case of
Wegener's granulomatosis. Diagnostic and therapeutic approach].

[Article in Spanish]

Villegas Fernández FR(1), Callol Sánchez L, Chillon Martín MJ, Jareño Esteban J, 
Moreno Muro M, Cuevas Ibáñez A, Gómez-Terreros FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

We present the case of a 59 years old male with Wegener's Granulomatosis with
uncommon manifestations such as diffuse pulmonary hemorrhage and acute renal
failure due to necrotizing glomerulonephritis. Neutrophil anticytoplasmic
antibodies determination was negative. Conventional and high resolution thoracic 
computed tomography showed cavitated lung nodules with small peripheral vessels. 
These lesions, that are characteristic of this type of vasculitis, were not
appreciated on the routine chest roetgenogram. Definitive diagnosis was made by
the histological study of open lung and renal biopsies. Favourable response to
corticosteroids, immunosuppressive drugs and hemodialysis was obtained. Diffuse
pulmonary hemorrhage is an uncommon manifestation of Wegener's Granulomatosis,
and must be considered as a vital emergency that justify the use of aggressive
diagnostic and therapeutic methods.

PMID: 7578815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 1995 Jul-Aug;46(4):317-9.

[Meningitis and cerebrospinal liquid fistula as a complication from the surgery
of endolymphatic sac].

[Article in Spanish]

Muñoz Colado M(1), Lorente Tortosa JM, Abad Royo JM, Alvarez Montero O, Gascón de
la Hoz A, Bullido Gómez de las Heras E.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de ORL, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

A 28 years old woman diagnosed of Méniére's disease was surgically treated with a
drainage from endolymphatic system and a valve placed. Six years after surgery,
the patient presented a bacteria meningitis an a cerebrospinal fluid leak to
mastoid was found. New surgery was needed. Complications of endolymphatic system 
surgery, its treatment and frequency are discussed. This case is a very rare.

PMID: 7546860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Rev Esp Anestesiol Reanim. 1995 Jun-Jul;42(6):236-45.

[Pharmacokinetics of halogenated inhalation anesthetics].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín-Larrauri R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Intensiva, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

PMID: 7676095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Int J Oncol. 1995 May;6(5):1093-8.

Carcinoembryonic antigen in the diagnosis of lung-cancer using bronchoalveolar
lavage - a comparative-study with healthy-subjects, chronic-bronchitis,
respiratory-infections and interstitial pulmonary-diseases.

Alvarezsala R(1), Prados C, Deterreros F, Blasco R, Pino J, Gomez L, Alvarezsala 
J, Callol L, Villamor J.

Author information: 
(1)UNIV AUTONOMA MADRID,HOSP LA PAZ,SERV PNEUMOL,MADRID,SPAIN. UNIV AUTONOMA
MADRID,AIRE HOSP,SERV PNEUMOL,MADRID,SPAIN. UNIV AUTONOMA MADRID,SAN CARLOS
HOSP,SERV PNEUMOL,MADRID,SPAIN. UNIV AUTONOMA MADRID,SAN CARLOS HOSP,NUCL MED
SERV,MADRID,SPAIN. UNIV AUTONOMA MADRID,HOSP LA PAZ,NUCL MED SERV,MADRID,SPAIN.
UNIV AUTONOMA MADRID,AIRE HOSP,NUCL MED SERV,MADRID,SPAIN. UNIV COMPLUTENSE
MADRID,MADRID,SPAIN.

The use of serum CEA values in the prognosis and in monitoring the course of lung
cancer is well accepted. However, the main problem presented by using serum CEA
determinations for diagnosis is the lack of sensitivity. In this study,
sensitivity was increased by determining CEA using bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
of the affected lung. We studied CEA in the BAL of healthy subjects and patients 
with chronic bronchitis, respiratory infections and interstitial pulmonary
diseases to observe if CEA could differentiate malignancies from benign pulmonary
pathologies. Five groups of patients (previously described) were studied using
BAL in the affected area of the patients with lung pathologies or in the middle
lobe and lingula of healthy people. CEA was analyzed in the BAL using
radioimmunoanalysis according to the Behring Institute recommendations. CEA
levels in BAL of lung cancer patients were higher than in the other groups. No
correlation was found between CEA concentrations in BAL and tumor histology. CEA 
studies in BAL may be useful in the diagnosis of lung cancer and in the screening
of the high risk people to develop bronchial carcinoma.

PMID: 21556645  [PubMed]


498. Br Heart J. 1995 May;73(5):470-4.

ACE for whom? Implications for clinical practice of post-infarct trials.

Walsh JT(1), Gray D, Keating NA, Cowley AJ, Hampton JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University Hospital, Nottingham.

OBJECTIVE: To determine how many lives would be saved if patients were routinely 
treated with ACE inhibitors after myocardial infarction according to the criteria
of four recent major clinical trials, and to estimate the costs and benefits of
these approaches.
DESIGN: Retrospective survey.
SETTING: The Nottingham Health District.
PATIENTS: Data from 7855 patients admitted between 1989 and 1990 were combined
and the selection criteria of four major clinical trials (AIRE, SAVE, GISSI-3,
and ISIS-4) were applied.
RESULTS: Of the patients admitted in Nottingham with confirmed myocardial
infarcts 39% were eligible for AIRE and 8% for SAVE. In patients with suspected
myocardial infarction as defined by the major trials, 60% would have been
eligible for GISSI-3 and 63% for ISIS-4. Treating appropriate patients in
accordance with these trials would have saved 20 (AIRE), 3 (SAVE), 4 (GISSI-3)
and 5 (ISIS-4) lives each year in Nottingham at a drug cost of 5400 pounds, 33
pounds 791, 2730 pounds, and 4116 pounds per life per year saved respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Short-term treatment with ACE inhibition appears to be cheaper but
such an approach would save fewer lives. The AIRE study is the most applicable to
current clinical practice but ACE inhibitors should be offered routinely to
patients satisfying the criteria of any of the four major clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC483866
PMID: 7786664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Comp Pathol. 1995 May;112(4):361-71.

The effects of protein malnutrition and experimental infection with Trypanosoma
brucei on gossypol treatment in the rat: haematological and serum biochemical
changes.

Akingbemi BT(1), Ogwuegbu SO, Onwuka SK, Oke BO, Aire TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.

This study was designed to evaluate the interaction between protein malnutrition,
gossypol treatment and blood parasitosis (Trypanosoma brucei) in the Wistar rat. 
Haematological and serum biochemical changes were evaluated in the rats, which
were placed on two planes of nutrition--low protein (LP) and normal protein
(NP)--and either treated with gossypol or infected with Trypanosoma brucei, or
both. Higher parasitaemia occurred in gossypol-treated NP rats than in the
corresponding LP group. Gossypol treatment and trypanosomal infection, either
alone or in concert, caused an anaemia that was both macrocytic and hypochromic. 
Both treatments together also caused increases in serum alkaline phosphatase and 
alanine aminotransferase activities, which were accompanied by depressed serum
albumin concentrations, suggestive of hepatic dysfunction in affected rats. These
results suggest that, with adequate protein intake, the growth and infectivity of
trypanosomes is not inhibited by gossypol but that protein malnutrition has a
beneficial effect of reduced parasitaemia. Unfortunately, this beneficial effect 
is counteracted by gossypol enhancement of hepatic dysfunction caused by
trypanosomes.

PMID: 7593758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Drugs. 1995 Mar;49(3):440-66.

Ramipril. An updated review of its therapeutic use in essential hypertension and 
heart failure.

Frampton JE(1), Peters DH.

Author information: 
(1)Adis International Ltd, Auckland, New Zealand.

Ramipril is a second generation angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor.
Like enalapril, it is a prodrug and is hydrolysed in vivo to release the active
metabolite, ramiprilat, which has a long elimination half-life, permitting
once-daily administration. The antihypertensive efficacy of ramipril has been
confirmed in large-scale noncomparative studies conducted in general practice as 
well as in more rigorously controlled clinical trials. In the former,
approximately 85% of patients with mild to moderate essential hypertension have
responded successfully to treatment with ramipril 2.5 or 5 mg/day, while
comparative trials indicate that the antihypertensive efficacy of the drug is
equivalent to that of other established ACE inhibitors and the beta-adrenoceptor 
antagonist atenolol. As expected, the response rate to ramipril monotherapy is
lower in patients with severe hypertension (around 40%), although the blood
pressure lowering effect can be enhanced with the addition of a diuretic such as 
hydrochlorothiazide or piretanide. The antihypertensive efficacy of ramipril is
maintained in patients with diabetes mellitus and preliminary data indicate that 
the drug has the beneficial effect of decreasing urinary albumin excretion in
diabetic patients with nephropathy. Ramipril is superior to atenolol in causing
regression of left ventricular hypertrophy, although the clinical significance of
this effect per se remains to be established. The large-scale Acute Infarction
Ramipril Efficacy (AIRE) study demonstrated that ramipril 5 or 10 mg/day
significantly decreased the risk of all-cause mortality by 27% in patients with
clinical evidence of heart failure after acute myocardial infarction, even if
transient. The beneficial effect of ramipril was apparent by 30 days of treatment
and appeared to be greatest in patients with more severe ventricular damage after
infarction. Ramipril is well tolerated in general practice, with 5% or fewer
patients discontinuing therapy because of drug intolerance. The data available
suggest that ramipril shares a similar tolerability profile to that of other
established ACE inhibitors. Thus, clinical data confirm ramipril as a useful
alternative ACE inhibitor for the treatment of patients with mild to moderate
hypertension, and indicate a beneficial effect of the drug in patients with
clinical evidence of heart failure after acute myocardial infarction. It is also 
reasonable to assume that ramipril will be of value in the treatment of patients 
with more established heart failure or asymptomatic left ventricular dysfunction.

PMID: 7774515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Rev Esp Anestesiol Reanim. 1995 Feb;42(2):41-6.

[Decrease in isoflurane requirements and of postoperative pain with preanesthetic
intrathecal morphine].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín-Larrauri R(1), Mestre C, Bárcena A, Cañizal JM, de la Torre J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Anestesiología y Reanimación, Hospital Universitario del Aire,
Madrid.

Comment in
    Rev Esp Anestesiol Reanim. 1995 Oct;42(8):349-51.

OBJECTIVES: 1) To determine whether preanesthetic intrathecal administration of
0.5 mg morphine reduces isoflurane requirements for anesthetic maintenance. 2) To
assess the duration of postoperative analgesia and the type and frequency of
complications attributable to the procedure.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A series of 45 adults were distributed into 3 groups of 15 
patients each based on site of surgery and site of preanesthetic (30 min)
injection of 0.5 mg pure morphine. Control group (C0) patients underwent lumbar
surgery and received subcutaneous morphine. Group C0.5 patients also underwent
lumbar surgery but received intrathecal morphine. Group A0.5 patients underwent
long-duration high abdominal surgery and received intrathecal morphine.
Anesthesia was maintained with nitrous oxide (60%) in oxygen (40%) and a variable
concentration of isoflurane. Isoflurane needs were assessed by averaging six
consecutive measurements of end-tidal isoflurane pressure (M30FETiso) taken at
intervals of 5 min. Postoperative analgesia was evaluated by means of a visual
analog scale that was converted to numerical units (VASn).
RESULTS: M30FETiso in group C0 (0.8%) was always higher (p < 0.01) than in the
other two groups. M30FETiso in group A0.5 was higher (p < 0.01) than in group
C0.5 during the first 150 min of surgery. After 180 min, there were no
differences in M30FETiso (0.10-0.16%) between the two groups receiving
intrathecal morphine. VASn results (mean +/- SD) in the first 4 hours were higher
in group C0 (7.33 +/- 0.6) than in group C0.5 (1.13 +/- 0.35) and group A0.5
(1.07 +/- 0.26). The time of morphine-dependent analgesia was shorter (p < 0.01) 
in group C0 (0.62 +/- 0.38 hours) than in groups C0.5 (30.4 +/- 5.11 hours) and
A0.5 (28 +/- 4.34 hours). There were no significant differences between the two
groups receiving intrathecal morphine.
CONCLUSIONS: Preanesthetic subarachnoid lumbar injection of 0.5 mg of pure
morphine reduced early requirements for isoflurane in lumbar surgery (0.14% after
60 min). This reduction was initially less in patients undergoing abdominal
surgery (0.44% at 60 min) but was the same after 150 min. Postoperative analgesia
was long-term and independent of type or duration of surgery. There was no
respiratory depression after surgery and the incidence of postoperative
complications was similar in the two groups that received subarachnoid morphine.

PMID: 7899651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 1995 Feb;9(1):89-102.

Reduction of ischemic events with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors:
lessons and controversy emerging from recent clinical trials.

Young JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor therapy has been associated with a 
substantial (> or = 20%) reduction in the risk of major ischemic events in two
recent clinical trials with long-term follow-up: Studies of Left Ventricular
Dysfunction (SOLVD) and the Survival and Ventricular Enlargement (SAVE) study.
Participants in these studies included patients with a low ejection fraction (<
or = 0.35 in SOLVD and < or = 0.40 in SAVE), generally without symptoms of
congestive heart failure. Approximately 80% of patients enrolled in SOLVD and all
participants in SAVE had histories of ischemic heart disease or acute myocardial 
infarction (SAVE). In both SOLVD and SAVE the risk of experiencing a major
ischemic event such as myocardial infarction was reduced significantly following 
prolonged ACE inhibitor therapy. In the SOLVD trial, this effect was evident
across a range of patient subgroups, including varying concomitant drug
therapies. In both studies, several months elapsed before this benefit became
apparent, suggesting an effect on underlying ischemic pathophysiology. A third
trial of ACE inhibitor therapy postinfarction, the Acute Infarction Ramipril
Efficacy (AIRE) Study, demonstrated a 27% reduction in all cause mortality but no
effect on myocardial infarction after a 15-month mean follow-up. No effect of ACE
inhibition on risk of survival or reinfarction was reported in the Cooperative
New Scandinavian Enalapril Survival Study (CONSENSUS-II), which began the drug
within 24 hours of infarction and terminated follow-up at 6 months, a time not
likely to demonstrate infarction reduction benefit based on the SOLVD and SAVE
observations. Neither AIRE nor CONSENSUS-II had objectively determined left
ventricular dysfunction as an entry criterion, as did SOLVD and SAVE, but AIRE
mandated "clinical" congestive heart failure prior to randomization. More
recently, preliminary results from the third Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio della 
Sopravvivenza nell'Infarto Miocardico (GISSI-3), the Fourth International Study
of Infarct Survival (ISIS-4), and the Chinese Captopril Trial suggested that
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor mortality benefits post-myocardial 
infarction would be detected in these megatrials as early as 35 days after the
event.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 7786840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 1995 Feb;13(2):104-12.

[Usefulness of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic parameters fro establishing
the optimal dosage of antibacterials].

[Article in Spanish]

Gomis Gavilán M(1), Prieto Prieto J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

PMID: 7711116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Rev Neurol. 1995 Jan-Feb;23(119):145-7.

[Wilson disease: a new case treated with trientine].

[Article in Spanish]

Moreno Pérez-Crespo JL(1), García de la Rocha ML, Martín Araguz A, Olmedilla N,
Rodríguez Arias CA, Porta J, Moreno Martínez JM.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

Hepatolenticular degeneration, also known as Wilson's disease (WD), is an
infrequent hereditary disorder which is transmitted in recessive autosomic
fashion: its genetic defect is to be found in the long branch of chromosome 13
(13q14.3) and allows disorder to take place which has not been sufficiently
clarified, in the bilious excretion of the copper (Cu) which is deposited in an
anomalous manner on a level with different organic tissues, giving rise to
characteristic clinical manifestations which are, basically, of a neurological,
hepatic, psychiatric and ocular nature. We present the case of a young patient
whose case began, four years ago, with depressive-type manifestations, with
diagnosis only being made now. Our opinion on the early detection of asymptomatic
patients is commented on, along with that concerning the effectiveness and safety
of therapeutic alternatives to D-penicilamine.

PMID: 8548611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Microsurgery. 1995;16(2):71-6.

Experimental model for local administration of nerve growth factor in
microsurgical nerve reconnections.

Santos FX(1), Bilbao G, Rodrigo J, Fernández J, Martínez D, Mayoral E, Rodríguez 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Surgery Unit, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

An experimental model for local administration of neuronotrophic substances at
the site of peripheral nerve lesion is presented. The model consists of a
subcutaneously located silicone reservoir and a connecting tube with its distal
end fixed in the proximity of the severed and repaired nerve. The results of the 
preliminary tests of the model are presented. Sixty Sprague-Dawley rats were
divided into two groups: control (saline-treated) (n = 30) and NGF-treated (n =
30). After axotomy of the sciatic nerve, an epineurial repair is performed. NGF
or saline is injected daily into the subcutaneous reservoir during the first 3
weeks after axotomy and a single dose in the fourth week. The regenerated nerve
observed in the NGF-treated group after four weeks of treatment presents a
greater percentage of myelinated axons, thicker myeline sheaths, and more mature 
endoneurial layers. This experimental model provides a reliable and quantitative 
way to deliver neuronotrophic substances in site and at different administration 
rates.

PMID: 7783608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Arch Esp Urol. 1995 Jan-Feb;48(1):36-41.

[Endoscopic cervicotomy: elective treatment in bladder neck sclerosis].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín-Laborda y Bergasa F(1), Vallejo Herrador J, Sánchez de la Muela Naverac
PL.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Urología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid, España.

OBJECTIVES: The present study compared the efficacy of perimetric resection of
the sclerotic ring (TR) and two-incision endoscopic cervicotomy (TC) for bladder 
neck sclerosis.
METHODS: Fourteen cases (11 primary and 3 recurrence) underwent perimetric TR
using a conventional 24 F curved loop resectoscope to excise the sclerotic
diaphragm completely. In 11 cases (9 primary and 2 recurrence following previous 
perimetric (TR) two deep incisions were made at 5 and 7 o'clock with the Collins 
blade. Occasionally, the Sachse urethrotome had to precede the insertion of the
conventional 24 F sheath.
RESULTS: Of the 14 cases with bladder neck sclerosis that underwent perimetric
TR, 5 (36%) recurred, while no recurrence was observed in the 11 patients treated
by double TC. The results were assessed on the basis of the clinical findings and
control flowmetry.
CONCLUSIONS: Dysuria was the most common clinical symptom and was confirmed by
flowmetry. Confirmation must be done endoscopically and preferably under
anesthesia to permit treatment, if required, during the same session. TC is more 
reliable and TR is not advocated because of the high recurrence rate.

PMID: 7733685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. An Med Interna. 1994 Dec;11(12):595-7.

[Neck pyomyositis associated with polymicrobial sepsis of sinusal origin].

[Article in Spanish]

Toral Revuelta JR(1), Llobell Seguí G, Peralba Vañó JI, Martínez Ruiz M.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

Spontaneous pyomyositis (primary pyomyositis) is an infrequent disease in
non-tropical countries, caused by bacterial infection of skeletal muscle.
Although pyomyositis is associated in many cases to septicemia, the occurrence of
that disease as a secondary manifestation of bacteremia is very unusual,
requiring a high-grade index of suspicion to diagnose it in the early stages. We 
present one case of cervical pyomyositis, caused by Fusobacterium necrophorum and
group F streptococcus, during the course of a sepsis of sinusal origin, that was 
treated without surgical therapy. This so uncommon form of presentation of
Fusobacterium septicemia, its diagnosis and treatment are discussed.

PMID: 7734667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cardiologia. 1994 Dec;39(12 Suppl 1):191-6.

[ACE-inhibitors after infarction: current knowledge and future prospects].

[Article in Italian]

Penco M(1), Romano S, Fedele F, Dagianti A.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Cardiologia, Università degli Studi, L'Aquila, Roma.

Experimental and clinical findings showing a beneficial effect on ventricular
remodelling have led to a widespread use of ACE-inhibitors in myocardial
infarction. Recent trials (SAVE, AIRE, GISSI 3, ISIS 4) have clearly demonstrated
that in patients with left ventricular dysfunction and/or heart failure the
treatment with ACE-inhibitors is mandatory, although several questions remain
unanswered. Recent experimental observations on the relationship between ACE and 
endothelial function, and between ACE and intimal proliferation have gone forward
leading to new perspectives on the potential use of ACE-inhibitors in all
patients with acute myocardial infarction.

PMID: 7634266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cardiologia. 1994 Dec;39(12 Suppl 1):149-55.

[Trials with ACE-inhibitors in acute myocardial infarction].

[Article in Italian]

Dalla Volta S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Medicina Clinica, Divisione e Cattedra di Cardiologia, Università 
degli Studi, Padova.

In acute myocardial infarction, the results of the trials with ACE-inhibitors
have not been always good, in contrast with what has been observed in chronic
heart failure. The comparison of these compounds with the placebo has
demonstrated lack of reduction of mortality in the study CONSENSUS II, favorable 
results on the survival as first endpoint and on the secondary endpoints, as
reinfarction, heart failure and stroke in the studies SOLVD, AIRE, GISSI 3, ISIS 
4, and uncertain (interim report) results in the Chinese study. Nevertheless, the
analysis of the recruitment of the patients with acute infarction and the way
these patients have been treated seem to be the most important cause of the
conflicting results. ACE-inhibitors have proved no efficacy in acute myocardial
infarction without signs of left ventricular failure (CONSENSUS II), have
worsened the clinical picture and the mortality in patients in shock or with
severe heart failure in the acute phase. On the reverse, in presence of mild to
moderate left ventricular dysfunction and failure, the use of ACE-inhibitors has 
been followed by reduction of mortality in the early (AIRE, GISSI 3, ISIS 4),
medium term (GISSI 3) and long-term follow-up (up to 4 years in the AIRE study). 
In parallel with the reduction of the primary endpoint, also secondary endpoints 
have been favorably influenced by the different ACE-inhibitors. No differences
have been observed among the different class of compounds. ACE-inhibitors seem,
therefore, to have a clear indication in acute myocardial infarction with mild or
moderate signs and symptoms of heart failure.

PMID: 7634258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Comp Pathol. 1994 Nov;111(4):413-26.

Haematological and serum biochemical changes in the rat due to protein
malnutrition and gossypol-ethanol interactions.

Akingbemi BT(1), Aire TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preclinical Veterinary Studies, University of Zimbabwe, Harare.

The effects of protein malnutrition on haematological and serum biochemical
values were evaluated in gossypol-treated rats which were simultaneously fed with
ethanol. Gossypol caused anaemia, leucopenia and thrombocytopenia in malnourished
animals, suggesting a depression of bone marrow activity. Gossypol also caused a 
significant elevation of serum alkaline phosphatase and alanine aminotransferase 
activities and increases in the concentrations of Mg++ and Ca++ with reduced
albumin, regardless of the nutritional status. These changes were more severe
with malnutrition. Ethanol alone caused a thrombocytopenia but no other
significant haematological changes. However, it appeared to cause derangement of 
lipid and protein metabolism as reflected in serum cholesterol and urea. The
toxic effects seen in gossypol-treated rats were significantly reduced in animals
simultaneously given ethanol. As the livers of gossypol-treated rats were
significantly heavier than in these animals, it seems possible that ethanol
consumption enhances the ability of the liver to metabolize gossypol, thereby
reducing its accumulation and consequently its toxicity. However, further studies
are needed to determine the mechanisms responsible.

PMID: 7884058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Endoscopy. 1994 Oct;26(8):710.

Endoscopic diagnosis and treatment of an esophageal bezoar resulting from bulk
laxative ingestion.

Pérez-Piqueras J(1), Silva C, Jaqueti J, Sáez MA, Martinez D, Santa JM, Peralba
I.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Endoscopy. 1995 May;27(4):342.
    Endoscopy. 1995 Aug;27(6):462.

PMID: 7859686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. An Med Interna. 1994 Aug;11(8):385-8.

[Hemangioma, the most frequent hepatic tumor. Diagnosis with dynamic CAT].

[Article in Spanish]

Cuevas Ibáñez A(1), Santos Cores J, Molina López-Nava P, Fernández Iglesias P,
Bones Purkiss J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Radiodiagnóstico, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

The sensitivity, specificity and predictive values of dynamic CAT with contrast
piston-stroke performed at a single cut are described for the diagnosis of
hepatic hemangiomas. We analyzed the correlation between the findings obtained
through dynamic CAT and those obtained through echography, PAAF, analytic and
clinical study of the patients with suspicion of hepatic hemangioma. The
following values were obtained: sensitivity 92.3%; specificity 50%; VPP 88.8%;
VPN 60%; and global diagnostic affectivity 84.37%. According to these results, we
think that dynamic CAT is a highly reliable test for the diagnosis of hepatic
hemangiomas.

PMID: 7772685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Hypertens Suppl. 1994 Jul;12(4):S65-71.

Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibition and coronary artery disease.

Pepine CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville
32610.

PURPOSE: To review the evidence on the effects of angiotensin converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors in coronary artery disease.
EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES: In studies of experimental atherosclerosis involving
hypertensive and normotensive hyperlipidemic animals, ACE inhibitors have had
potent anti-atherogenic effects, reducing the total aortic intimal surface
involved and the aortic cholesterol content. In balloon-injured animals, ACE
inhibitors have suppressed the myointimal proliferative response in rats and
rabbits, but not in higher species such as pigs and baboons, indicating possible 
species-specific effects. In spontaneously hypertensive rats, ACE inhibitors have
modulated alterations in endothelium-related vasodilation, although similar
effects have not been observed in human hypertension.
CLINICAL STUDIES: ACE inhibition has not been shown to prevent restenosis after
percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty. However, cardiac ischemic events 
have been prevented by ACE inhibition in patients with coronary artery disease
and left ventricular dysfunction in a number of studies, including the Studies of
Left Ventricular Dysfunction (SOLVD), Survival and Ventricular Enlargement (SAVE)
study, Acute Infarction and Ramipril Efficacy (AIRE) study and the Gruppo
Italiano per lo Studio della Streptochinesi dell'Infarto Micardico 3 (GISSI-3)
trial. Other ongoing studies such as the QUinapril Ischemic Event Trial (QUIET)
are assessing ACE inhibitor effects in patients with coronary artery disease and 
a normal left ventricular function.
CONCLUSIONS: ACE inhibitors prevent the development of atherosclerosis in
hyperlipidemic animal models. They also prevent the myointimal proliferative
response to injury in some animal models, but not in higher animal species or in 
humans. They can reduce the number of cardiac ischemic events in patients with
coronary artery disease and left ventricular dysfunction; their effects in those 
patients with a normal left ventricular function are now being assessed.

PMID: 7965277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 1994 Jun;8(3):469-72.

The new trials: AIRE, ISIS-4, and GISSI-3. Is the dossier on ACE inhibitors and
myocardial infarction now complete?

Opie LH.

Recent studies have strengthened the arguments for the use of
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors in the early postinfarct period.
Those with clinically detectable heart failure, and hence at highest risk, will
benefit most, as shown in the AIRE study, but those at lower risk with left
ventricular dysfunction still have some benefit, theoretically through
ventricular remodeling. In patients in the very early stages of acute myocardial 
infarction, three trials have shown discordant results. In CONSENSUS-II,
intravenous enalaprilat followed by oral enalapril gave no benefit, rather
causing excess hypotension and a possible increase in mortality. In ISIS-4 and
GISSI-3, mortality improved by 0.46% and 0.8%, respectively, with risk reductions
of 9% and 11%. Added transdermal nitrate in GISSI-3 gave a total reduction of
17%. In view of the risk of hypotension (20% in ISIS-4, compared with placebo
10%), very early ACE inhibition will probably only be used for selected patients.
Logically, one target group would be those seen 7-24 hours after the onset of
symptoms, particularly 7-12 hours, at which time captopril alone gave a reduction
of 14.5% in risk. These mortality differences compare favorably with those
recently found when comparing tPA and streptokinase in the GUSTO study.

PMID: 7947363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 1994 Jun;8(3):433-6.

Infarct-related heart failure: the choice of ACE inhibitor does not matter.

Ray S, Dargie H.

Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are effective across the whole
spectrum of heart failure from mild to severe but there are little data on the
use of ACE inhibitors specifically in patients with postinfarct heart failure.
Pharmacological properties that might potentially be relevant to the choice of
drug after myocardial infarction include differences in metabolism, possession of
a sulphydryl group, tissue binding, duration of action, and side effect profile. 
Of these duration of action is probably the most important, as longer acting
drugs generally cause more prolonged first-dose hypotension that shorter acting
agents and first-dose hypotension is a particular concern in the early
postinfarct period. In the SAVE study captopril was effective in reducing
mortality and delaying the onset of symptomatic heart failure after myocardial
infarction. Similarly, ramipril reduced mortality in the AIRE study. In contrast,
enalapril was largely ineffective in CONSENSUS II. These differences result
largely from study design and do not indicate an inherent superiority of
captopril or ramipril over enalapril. Nonetheless, a short-acting agent should
probably be used for the initial dose in postinfarct heart failure to minimize
the risks of prolonged hypotension. This aside, the choice of agent is far less
important than appropriate patient selection and appropriate maintenance dosages.

PMID: 7947358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Eur Heart J. 1994 May;15 Suppl B:20-5; discussion 26-30.

ACE inhibition, atherosclerosis and myocardial infarction--the AIRE Study in
practice. Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy Study.

Ball SG(1), Hall AS, Murray GD.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Cardiovascular Studies, University of Leeds, U.K.

Unlike most cell-types in the body, cardiomyocytes do not replicate in adult
life. Consequently myocardial infarction produces irreparable damage to the heart
which in turn increases the likelihood of premature death. Recent trials indicate
that immediate aspirin and thrombolytic therapy beneficially modify the natural
history of myocardial infarction, reducing both short- and long-term mortality
rates. However, the occurrence of early heart failure in as many as one third of 
patients continues to carry with it a particularly poor prognosis. Recent trials 
with ACE inhibitors indicate that delayed initiation (beyond 24 h) and long-term 
maintenance treatment of patients selected on the basis of either heart failure
(AIRE Study) or an ejection fraction of less than 40% (SAVE Study) result in
large reductions in all-cause mortality. Although the exact mechanism of this
benefit remains uncertain the reduction of further myocyte death due to
reinfarction or gradual toxic attrition has been suggested. The currently
unreported ISIS-4 and GISSI-3 should provide additional information as to whether
the clinical indications for ACE-inhibitor therapy should be extended to other
patient groups.

PMID: 8076659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Rev Esp Enferm Dig. 1994 Apr;85(4):267-72.

[New techniques in endoscopy: rubber band ligation of esophageal varices].

[Article in Spanish]

Pérez Piquéras J(1), Silva González C, Santa Valiente JM, Díaz Lobón JM, Sánchez 
Sánchez E, Madrona Pérez C.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

PMID: 8031616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Neurologia. 1994 Apr;9(4):133-40.

[Syndromes involving rostral occlusion of the basilar artery: a preliminary study
and proposal for a new clinical and neuro- radiological classification].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín Araguz A(1), Moreno Martínez JM, García de la Rocha ML, Moreno
Pérez-Crespo JL, Fernández-Armayor Ajo V, Esteban Alonso F, Cuevas Ibáñez A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Universidad
Complutense, Madrid.

Occlusion of the top of the basilar artery causes infarctions in supra- and
infra-tentorial regions (thalamus, occipito-temporal lobes, rostral trunk and
cerebellum) with characteristic clinical and radiological manifestations. We
studied 17 patients with this syndrome whose clinical data and neurological
images led us to classify them into four groups: type I (2 patients, 12%),
showing mainly alterations in consciousness and ocular motricity, and bilateral
thalamic infarction; type II (6 patients, 35%), with campimetric manifestations
and uni- or bilateral ischemia of the occipito-temporal lobes; type III (5
patients, 29%), with associated corticospinal deficits and lacunar images in the 
rostral brainstem; and type IV (4 patients, 24%) with symptoms of and
neuro-images revealing lesions in the cerebellum. The proposed classification is 
an attempt to facilitate diagnosis by neuro-imaging and to group patients
according to prognosis.

PMID: 8018343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. S Afr Med J. 1994 Feb;Suppl:1-4.

The Grande Roche ACE debate.

[No authors listed]

First, we had the discussion 'Are all ACE inhibitors equal?', and the debate was 
really in relation to heart failure. I came away with the impression that
although there might be variations with renal function, hypotension and so on,
most of you felt that it was ACE inhibition that was of primary importance, and
that it was therefore permissible to extrapolate from one study to another. The
recently published AIRE study of post-infarct patients used ramipril, with a
change in mortality that gives credence to the idea that it's not just captopril,
not just enalapril, but is likely to be a class effect of ACE inhibitors. I think
that's the feeling I got from you. Do ACE inhibitors prolong life? I think
Professor Weich made a very simple and a very good point, because it allowed us a
general extrapolation. The simple point is: the sicker the patient, certainly
with heart failure, the more the benefit of the ACE inhibitor. It's like the idea
that in elderly hypertensives, or the diabetic hypertensive, the greater the risk
factor the greater the benefit. The more we want to treat prophylactically,
whether it's micro-albuminuria, or transient hypertension, or minimal left
ventricular dysfunction, the longer we will have to treat, and the more patients 
we will have to treat to get objective evidence of any differences. Professor
Oosthuizen suggested that we should also be thinking of renal impairment,
potential renal impairment with cardiovascular disease in diabetes as another
valid end-point.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8042078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. G Ital Cardiol. 1994 Jan;24(1):59-70.

[Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors during acute phase of myocardial
infarct].

[Article in Italian]

Mazzotta G(1), Vecchio C.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Cardiologia, E.O. Ospedalieri Galliera, Genova.

Up to September, 1993, several questions were open on the use of angiotensin
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors after myocardial infarction. The SAVE trial
has shown that patients with left ventricular dysfunction and a recent (mean 11
days) myocardial infarction benefit from assuming captopril per os during the
subsequent clinical course. The SOLVD trials have indicated that therapy with
enalapril per os increases the survival of patients with left ventricular
dysfunction, a history of myocardial infarction and hemodynamic decompensation.
However, the CONSENSUS II trial has not shown similar results on patients with
all range left ventricular function, treated within 24 hours of infarction with
i.v. enalaprilat and then enalapril per os. In this study, 6-month mortality has 
been slightly better in the placebo group, and there seems not to be any subgroup
benefitting from the ACE inhibitor. In October and November, 1993, the
International Cardiologic Community has received the results of 3 large
multicenter trials on postinfarction patients: the AIRE (ramipril per os), the
GISSI 3 (lisinopril per os) and the ISIS 4 (captopril per os) studies. These
trials has pointed out the followings: 1) prompt therapy (within 24 hours of
chest pain) with ACE inhibitors is able to improve short term survival in
patients with clinical evidence of heart failure, in women and old patients; 2)
ACE inhibitors and nitro derivatives are complementary therapies in the acute and
subacute phase of infarction, and their association produces the best improvement
in short-term survival. There seems to be no intelligible reason, up to now, to
deem that any ACE inhibitor should be considered better than another one in the
acute phase of infarction, but still during the first 72 hours after the onset of
chest pain the advantages have been shown only with lisinopril and captopril. The
negative results of the CONSENSUS II trial are probably dependent on the
excessively abrupt acute hypotensive effect of i.v. enalaprilat. This last "large
trial" decade has taught us that many treatments can be advantageous for acute
myocardial infarction but, apart from thrombolysis, all other medical therapies
should not be given extensively, but to peculiar patients carefully selected on
clinical grounds. Guidelines from official consensus conferences are expected
now, to segregate different patterns of clinical presentations to be treated
differently.

PMID: 8200499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Z Kardiol. 1994;83 Suppl 4:65-74.

[Indications for ACE inhibitors in the postinfarct period].

[Article in German]

Ertl G(1), Gaudron P, Neubauer S, Hu K, Zdrojewski T, Horn M, Kochsiek K.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik, Universität Würzburg.

Prognosis of patients post-myocardial infarction depends largely on the degree of
left ventricular dysfunction, which results from loss of contractile tissue and
remodeling of infarcted and surviving myocardium. This remodeling process may
result in chronically progressive dysfunction and ultimately in heart failure.
Next to mechanical determinants humoral control of hypertrophy, dilatation and
qualitative changes of surviving myocardium are discussed. A major determinant of
the extent of remodeling is infarct size. Efficacy of angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors on infarct size was tested in animal experiments with
conflicting results. Recent clinical studies also report beneficial (GISSI-3 and 
ISIS-4) or no (CONSENSUS II) effects on survival post-myocardial infarction when 
ACE-inhibitors were used in the acute phase. Up to date it remains unsettled
which patients may benefit from acute therapy with ACE-inhibitors. Three days
after myocardial infarction hemodynamically stable patients with heart failure
may be treated with ACE-inhibitors (AIRE study). Prognosis may be improved and
manifestation of heart failure prevented or delayed also in patients without
heart failure treated in this phase of myocardial infarction with ACE-inhibitors 
(SAVE study). Prevention of heart failure may also be observed in patients
treated later (at least 4 weeks) after myocardial infarction (SOLVD prevention
arm). It is essential for this indication that patients are carefully selected
for treatment depending on left ventricular function. Duration of treatment in
patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction probably has to be lifelong,
the doses of ACE-inhibitors used have to be relatively high (e.g. 3 x 50 mg
captopril or 2 x 10 mg enalapril).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7856283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Z Kardiol. 1994;83 Suppl 4:57-62.

ACE-inhibitor therapy after myocardial infarction--a new treatment strategy.

Hall AS(1), Ball SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Leeds, UK.

Potential benefit or harm of drug therapy in patients with chronic congestive
heart failure and those later presenting to hospital after an acute myocardial
infarction (AMI) have been studied in a number of large-scale survival studies
during the last few decades. Currently available data are reviewed in order to
consider both methodology and also the clinical relevance of findings with
emphasis on trials with ACE-inhibitors like CONSENSUS-II, the ISIS-4, GISSI-3 and
Chinese mega-trials, TRACE, SAVE and AIRE. Results of SAVE and AIRE show a clear 
survival benefit for the patients. Furthermore, the benefit of both trials was in
addition to any other benefit which resulted from aspirin, thrombolytic and
beta-blocker therapies. In absolute terms, treatment of 1,000 patients with
ramipril (AIRE) for 1 year would be expected to result in the prevention/delay of
40 premature deaths. The beneficial effects of ramipril were clearly apparent by 
30 days though additional benefit beyond this point was also present.
Furthermore, prespecified subgroup analysis revealed significant benefit for
patients at risk like women and the elderly. A selective approach is argued for
the treatment of patients with ACE-inhibitors after myocardial infarction.

PMID: 7856281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Appl Opt. 1993 Nov 20;32(33):6808-17. doi: 10.1364/AO.32.006808.

Retrieval of atmospheric O(3), HNO(3), CFC-11, and CFC-12 profiles from
MIPAS-B-89 limb emission spectra.

Clarmann TV, Oelhaf H, Fischer H.

During the night from May 17 to May 18, 1989, the first of four flights of the
Michelson Interferometer for Passive Atmospheric Sounding, Balloon-borne version 
(MIPAS-B) instrument took place from the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales
balloon-launching site at Aire-sur-l'Adour (France, 44° N latitude). From
approximately 33 km float altitude, stratospheric and tropospheric limb infrared 
emission spectra have been recorded by this novel type of fast-scanning
interferometer. Although the measured spectra did not reach the expected quality 
and the a priori information on the corresponding viewing directions was coarse, 
the data were processed successfully with a retrieval algorithm specially adapted
for application to noisydata. Mixingratio profiles of ozone, nitric acid, CFC-11,
and CFC-12 havebeen retrieved from limb sequences of wide spectral intervals by
nonlinear least-squares fitting in combination with a layer-bylayer onion-peeling
approach. A rigorous error analysis has been carried out by means of Monte Carlo 
calculations.

PMID: 20856534  [PubMed]


24. Rev Esp Enferm Dig. 1993 Nov;84(5):336-8.

[AIDS as non-suspected cause of chronic diarrhea and malabsorption].

[Article in Spanish]

Sánchez E(1), Santa JM, Gutiérrez JA, Díaz-Lobón JM, Pérez-Piqueras J, Madrona C.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

We report a case of chronic diarrhoea resulting in malabsorption syndrome in a
patient with AIDS. Diarrhoea started two years before AIDS was diagnosed. The
absence of risk factors may have delayed the diagnosis.

PMID: 8305261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Rev Esp Enferm Dig. 1993 Nov;84(5):287-9.

[Gastric ulcers caused by post-burning stress: contribution of free radicals].

[Article in Spanish]

Obispo Martín JM(1), Laguna Ibáñez C, Prieto del Portillo I, Borobia Melendro L, 
Canales Bedoya C, Santos Heredero J, Marigómez Santos JL, Pérez Piqueras J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Cirugía Experimental, Hospital del Aire de Madrid.

The purpose of this study was to analyse the blocking effect of superoxide
dismutase (S.O.D.) at doses of 15.000 U.I. per kilogram (body weight), on the
release of oxygen-derived free radicals, experimentally caused in the rat by
burning 20% of the surface of its body, and its impact over macroscopic and
microscopic lesions of the gastric mucosa. We used 48 rats divided into 5 groups.
In groups 3 and 5 we provided S.O.D. i.v. immediately after the burn. All the
animals had a catheter in their femoral vein for the administration of drugs.
Morphologic data showed that 2 hours after the burn S.O.D. did not have any
influence on the gastric injury; 5 hours after the burn, the morphologic damage
of the gastric mucosa was less severe. The scavenging of the superoxide ion (free
radical) by the superoxide dismutase may be responsible of the lower tissular
damage of the gastric mucosa. These results confirm that a period of initial
ischaemia may be an important etiopathogenic factor in severe lesions of the
gastric mucosa after burns.

PMID: 8305254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. An Med Interna. 1993 Nov;10(11):553-5.

[Multiple paraganglioma].

[Article in Spanish]

Llobell Segui G(1), Martínez Ruiz M, Peralba Vaño JI, Toral Revuelta JR, Martos
Peregrín JA.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

Paragangliomas are tumors of the chromaffin system producing catecholamines and
both the adrenal extra-adrenal type have a common origin at the neural crest,
which has been supported by the similarities of the paraganglions both from a
histological and functional perspective. Most of the extra-adrenal paragangliomas
are bending and non-functional. In addition, they are usually confined to just
one site. We present the case of a young patient with benign multiple
paraglanglioma in two different locations, juxtahepatic and juxtacarotic
(Chemodectoma) and, thus, far away from each other. The extra-abdominal location 
is very rare, with a frequency lower than 2%. In addition, one of paraganglions
was functional and the other one was not. Initially, a surgical intervention was 
performed on the functional abdominal tumoration and latter, another intervention
was performed at the cervical level, both with excellent results. We also
highlight the good response to the postoperative therapy with Prazosin.

PMID: 8117872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Lancet. 1993 Oct 2;342(8875):821-8.

Effect of ramipril on mortality and morbidity of survivors of acute myocardial
infarction with clinical evidence of heart failure. The Acute Infarction Ramipril
Efficacy (AIRE) Study Investigators.

[No authors listed]

Comment in
    Lancet. 1993 Dec 4;342(8884):1418-9.
    Lancet. 1994 Jan 29;343(8892):289-90.
    Lancet. 1993 Dec 4;342(8884):1418.

Survival after acute myocardial infarction has been enhanced by treatment with
thrombolytic agents, aspirin, and beta-adrenoceptor blockade. However there
remains a substantial subgroup of patients who manifest clinical evidence of
heart failure despite the first two of these treatments, and for whom
beta-adrenoceptor antagonists are relatively or absolutely contraindicated. These
patients have a greatly increased risk of fatal and non-fatal ischaemic,
arrhythmic, and haemodynamic events. In this selected high-risk subset of
patients we investigated the effect of therapy with the angiotensin converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitor rampiril, postulating that it would lengthen survival.
2006 patients who had shown clinical evidence of heart failure at any time after 
an acute myocardial infarction (AMI) were recruited from 144 centres in 14
countries. Patients were randomly allocated to double-blind treatment with either
placebo (992 patients) or ramipril (1014 patients) on day 3 to day 10 after AMI
(day 1). Patients with severe heart failure resistant to conventional therapy, in
whom the attending physician considered the use of an ACE inhibitor to be
mandatory, were excluded. Follow-up was continued for a minimum of 6 months and
an average of 15 months. On intention-to-treat analysis mortality from all causes
was significantly lower for patients randomised to receive ramipril (170 deaths; 
17%) than for those randomised to receive placebo (222 deaths; 23%). The observed
risk reduction was 27% (95 % Cl 11% to 40%; p = 0.002). Analysis of prespecified 
secondary outcomes revealed a risk reduction of 19% for the first validated
outcome (i.e., first event in an individual patient)--namely, death,
severe/resistent heart failure, myocardial infarction, or stroke (95% Cl 5% to
31%; p = 0.008). Oral administration of rampiril to patients with clinical
evidence of either transient or ongoing heart failure, initiated between the
second and ninth day after myocardial infarction, resulted in a substantial
reduction in premature death from all causes. This benefit was apparent as early 
as 30 days and was consistent across a range of subgroups.

PMID: 8104270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. An Med Interna. 1993 Jul;10(7):346-8.

[Pseudometastatic hepatic lesions and Kikuchi necrotizing lymphadenitis].

[Article in Spanish]

Toral Revuelta JR(1), Martínez Ruiz M, Llobell Seguí G, Peralba Vaño JI, Mellado 
del Rey F, Martos Pelegrín J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital del Aire., Madrid.

Kikuchi's necrotizing lymphadenitis (KNL) is a benign disease of unknown etiology
affecting lymphatic nodes and some times extranodal organs. We present a case of 
KNL with hepatic lesions simulating metastatic liver disease.

PMID: 8218770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Aten Primaria. 1993 Jun 30;12(2):99-101.

[A meta-analytical review of the response by sex to vaccination against hepatitis
B in hospital personnel].

[Article in Spanish]

Morales JM(1), Jaqueti J, Viña C.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario del Aire, Universidad Complutense de Madrid.

OBJECTIVE: To study the influence of gender on the immunogenic response to the
hepatitis B vaccine in healthy persons.
DESIGN: Meta-analysis.
SETTING: Primary care: prevention.
PARTICIPANTS: The results published between 1983 and 1991 by several authors
dealing with staff in Spanish hospitals were reviewed.
MAIN MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: It was observed that the frequency of women's
antibody response differed significantly from that of men (chi-squared = 23.35; p
< 0.001) with an odds ratio of 2 (95% confidence intervals: 1.64-2.46) and a risk
difference of 7.69% (95% CI: 5.2-10.19%).
CONCLUSIONS: The response rate to the hepatitis B vaccine is significantly higher
among women than men. However, several factors (e.g. age and weight) may affect
these findings. These have not been examined because they were not described in
the findings of the preliminary studies.

PMID: 8329554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Endoscopy. 1993 Jun;25(5):376.

Isolated gastric tuberculosis: a case report.

Perez-Piqueras J(1), Coca S, Silva C, Martinez D, Peralba J, Moreno M.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario del Aire (Servicio de Aparato Digestivo), Madrid,
Spain.

PMID: 8348896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Rev Esp Cardiol. 1993 Jun;46(6):381-4.

[2 cases of transposition corrected in adulthood. The value of computed
tomography and isotopic angiography and a review of the literature].

[Article in Spanish]

Gayán Laviña R(1), Cuevas Ibáñez A, Almeida Guevara A, Rada Martínez I, Alvarez
Antón S, López Miranda A, Hernández Riesco JL, Jiménez Ramos A, Navarro Ruiz V.

Author information: 
(1)Servicios de Cardiología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

Corrected transposition of the great arteries is an unusual congenital heart
defect, above all at ages over 40. Echocardiography and invasive angiography are 
still cornerstones for its diagnosis. However other non-invasive techniques, such
radionuclide angiocardiography and computed tomography, not so used in this
malformation, can help us in its detection. We present 2 cases of corrected
transposition of the great arteries in adults in which these methods were used
and review the literature.

PMID: 8316705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Arch Esp Urol. 1993 May;46(4):311-5.

[Treatment of urethral stenosis with endoscopic urethrotomy with local
anesthesia].

[Article in Spanish]

Virseda Chamorro M(1), Vallejo Herrador J, Martín-Laborda Bergasa F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Urología, Hospital Central del Aire, Universidad Complutense,
Madrid, España.

We evaluated the efficacy of local anesthesia for endoscopic urethrotomy in 20
cases of urethral stricture. Patient clinical features and maximum urine flow
data before and after the procedure were compared. The technical difficulties
encountered are described. Bladder neck sclerosis and/or stricture of the
posterior urethra complicated the procedure. Endoscopic urethrotomy using local
anesthesia is effective in the treatment of urethral stricture.

PMID: 8338371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1993;22 Suppl 9:S22-7.

Validation of primary and secondary outcomes and classification of mode of death 
among patients with clinical evidence of heart failure after a myocardial
infarction: a report from the Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy (AIRE) Study
Investigators.

Cleland JG(1), Erhardt L, Hall AS, Winter C, Ball SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Cardiology), Royal Post-Graduate Medical School,
Hammersmith Hospital, London, England.

The AIRE study--a trial involving over 2,000 patients with clinical heart failure
after myocardial infarction--assessed different outcomes. The primary outcome was
total mortality. The secondary outcome was time to death, or progression to
severe/resistant heart failure, reinfarction or stroke. Tertiary analyses
included hospitalization and mode of death. To obtain maximum quality in the
validation of outcomes and to optimize the quality of the data in the study, an
end-points committee reviewed all data following preset definitions prior to code
break. All definitions used are reported here. Experience of the validation
process demonstrated that there are wide variations in clinical practice and
terminology not only among countries but also among individual investigators.
Variation in the clinical handling and treatment of patients makes it imperative 
to validate outcomes centrally on the basis of available facts.

PMID: 7514237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Nutr Hosp. 1992 Nov-Dec;7(6):393-9.

[Complementary artificial nutrition in kidney failure].

[Article in Spanish]

Ortiz A(1), Parra EG, Rodeles M, Méndez A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Nefrología, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

Denutrition of the uremic patient is a substantial contributing factor to the
high rate of morbimortality. At the present time there are no resources which
slow the catabolic situation conditioned by humoral or hormonal factors, but
resources are available which act on the nutritional factors. The aim of this
paper is to study the effect of additional administration of a complete enteral
diet, but high in calories and in proteins, on the nutrition of dialysis
patients. Six patients undergoing periodic hemodialysis and without metabolic
illness were selected: 236 ml of the solution was administered orally on a daily 
basis for two months. They were studied statistically using the SIGMA Program,
with application of the comparison of paired averages, the variations of
anthropometric and analytical data and urea kinetics. The results revealed a
significant body weight increase, from 58 to 60 kg, and of the tricipital fold
from 10 to 12 cm: both variations were statistically significant (p < 0.01).
There were no variations in the analytical data, or in the urea kinetics (the PCR
was 0.8 g/kg/day and the Kt/V was 0.8). It is concluded that it significantly
improves the nutritional state, there are no side effects and it does not detract
from the efficacy of the dialysis. Therefore, and although the indication for
which it was designed was for predialysis patients, we think that those under
periodic hemodialysis--and, form the same reasons, acute kidney failure
patients--might be areas for the use of this product.

PMID: 1477150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Rev Clin Esp. 1992 Jul;191(3):144-7.

[Pulmonary lymphangiomatosis associated with renal angiomyolipoma. Presentation
of a case and review of the literature].

[Article in Spanish]

Villegas Fernández FR(1), Callol Sánchez L, Moreno Muro M, Coca Menchero S,
García Pérez C, Gómez de Terreros FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Servicios de Neumología y de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

The case concerned is one of lymphangiomyomatosis (LAM) in a woman aged 39, that 
after a episode of spontaneous pneumothorax was subject to medical research for
progressive dyspnea of medium efforts and bloodstained sputum. High resolution CT
showed numerous thin-walled cystic airspaces of varying sizes distributed
diffusely throughout the lungs. The abdominal CT and ultrasound developed
multiple right renal angiomyolipomas. The histopathological study of the sample
obtained by open lung biopsy was conclusive of LAM. The main feature of this rare
disease, which occurs almost exclusively in women of reproductive age, is the
abnormal proliferation of immature smooth muscle at the level of the distal
airway, small blood vessels and lung lymphatic system, including sometimes the
mediastinal and retroperitoneal lymphatic system. The clinical, functional,
radiological and differential diagnostic aspects with entities
histopathologically similarities are discussed and the therapeutic possibilities 
are reviewed.

PMID: 1502405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Arch Neurobiol (Madr). 1992 Jul-Aug;55(4):188-92.

[Benign evolution of a spontaneous vermian hematoma using conservative
treatment].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín Araguz A(1), Moreno Martínez JM, García de la Rocha ML, Moreno
Pérez-Crespo JL, Masjuán Vallejo J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario del Aire, Madrid.

Spontaneous intracerebellar haematomas are a relatively unusual cause of
haemorrhagic stroke. The uncommon variety of vermian haematomas (5%) represents a
serious diagnostic and treatment challenge and its outcome is generally poor,
being the result of rapid elevation of intracranial pressure and brainstem
compression. A rare case of spontaneous vermian haematoma with benign course
without surgery is reported, including the results of neuroimaging tests.

PMID: 1417425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Actas Urol Esp. 1992 Apr;16(4):346-50.

[Paratesticular rhabdomyosarcoma].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín-Laborda y Bergasa F(1), Virseda Chamorro M, Vallejo Herrador J, Vallejo
Ocaña C, Colmenarejo Rubio A, Moreno Muro M.

Author information: 
(1)Servico de Urología, Hospital del Aire, Universidad Complutense, Madrid.

Presentation of one case of embryonic paratesticular rhabdomyosarcoma in a
19-year old male. Following high inguinal radical orchiectomy, he required
hemiscrotectomy, and it was found to be a foreign body granuloma. Prior to
staging lymphadenectomy, therapy was complemented with radiotherapy and
polychemotherapy according to a VAC protocol. The patient shows clinical
remission at two and a half years after being diagnosed and one and a half years 
after completion of treatment.

PMID: 1636461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Clin Physiol Biochem. 1992;9(3):98-104.

Cardioprotection and ACE inhibitors.

Ball SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Cardiovascular Studies, University of Leeds, England.

Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors are now widely used in the treatment of 
hypertension and heart failure. They are clearly as effective as other
conventional antihypertensive agents in reducing blood pressure and combined with
diuretics seem likely to transform current management of chronic heart failure.
Myocardial infarction remains the major cause of death in patients with raised
blood pressure and current studies should establish whether the attractive
features of ACE inhibitors translate into reduction in the rate of infarction or 
its consequences. Similarly, whilst symptomatic benefit undoubtedly accrues from 
their use in heart failure it is less clear that they can prolong life
particularly when used in the immediate setting of a myocardial infarction. Again
a number of ongoing major trials are set to establish whether these drugs reduce 
death in patients with chronic heart failure (V-HeFT II, SOLVD) and in patients
immediately after myocardial infarction (CONSENSUS II, SAVE,. AIRE, GISSI III and
ISIS IV). The physician has a wide choice of ACE inhibitors with different
pharmacological profiles for clinical use.

PMID: 1302164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Arch Neurobiol (Madr). 1991 Sep-Oct;54(5):229-32.

[Clinicopathological study of a case of oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy].

[Article in Spanish]

Moreno Martínez JM(1), Martín Araguz A, García de la Rocha ML, Masjuán Vallejo J,
Barón Rubio M, Ginel Feito MD.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital del Aire (Universidad Complutense).

One case of oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy is reported, in a 75 year old
white male with manifest family history of palpebral ptosis. He displayed
bilateral ptosis and dysphagia. Diagnosis was carried out after clinical,
electrical and bioptic procedures. Data obtained have been discussed with
previous reports in the literature. It was necessary to perform a cricopharyngeal
myotomy to overcome the malnutrition secondary to his swallowing problem.

PMID: 1804038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Nutr Hosp. 1991 Sep-Oct;6(5):267-75.

[Artificial nutrition in kidney failure].

[Article in Spanish]

Ortiz A(1), Arduán MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Nefrología, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, España.

Renal failure in itself generates a state of malnutrition, due to three main
causes: inadequate ingestion (anorexia, vomiting or diet insufficiencies), the
existence of catabolic factors (proteins, acidosis, PTH) and extrarenal
depuration (which provokes a lack of amino acids and vitamins). Artificial
nutrition constitutes a series of measures that can be adopted to act upon each
of the above causes. Adequate ingestion compared to inadequate ingestion can be
performed orally (especially in chronic renal failure) by parenteral
administration (preferable in acute renal failure) and enteral administration
(complementary in both cases). The quantity and quality of adequate nutrients is 
non-dependent on the method of administration; 500 ml, of water should be
administered plus diuresis, plus loss from other tracts; the mineral intake of
sodium, potassium and phosphorus should be restricted; in the case of vitamins,
these should be administered, especially the B and D complexes; there should be
sufficient calories to constitute a hypercaloric diet (from 30-50 kg/day), at
least 50% in the form of carbohydrates (hypertonic glucose, if administered
intravenously, and dextrinolmaltose or starch if administered through the
digestive tract) and at least 40% in the form of lipids (preferably of vegetable 
origin, rich in non-saturated fatty acids); proteins are the mainstay of
nutrition in renal failure; thus, with a normal renal function or in dialysis, a 
dose of 1 g/kg/day is recommended; in chronic renal failure, 0.5 g/kg/day; in
cases of renal failure not on dialysis, 0.3 g/kg/day, supplemented by essential
amino acids or cetoacids (the effectiveness of the latter is still in
dispute).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1760478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Rev Esp Enferm Dig. 1991 Jul;80(1):33-4.

[Prevalence of antibodies against the hepatitis C virus among the staff of a
general hospital].

[Article in Spanish]

Jaqueti J(1), Navarro-Gallar F, Martínez-Hernández D, Nicolás D, Hernández-Garcia
R, Piqueras JP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Central, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

The prevalence of antibodies against hepatitis C virus (HCV) in 413 hospital
staff (57% total staff) was 1.7%. There were no significant differences in the
sanitary workers (physicians, nurses and assistants of clinic and laboratory)
versus cleaners, office and other non-sanitary workers of hospital staff. The
seropositivity to HCV was not related to sex, age, years in occupation and the
prevalence of hepatitis B virus serological markers. This relatively low
prevalence let suppose than the hospital staff is not a high risk group for HCV
infection.

PMID: 1657082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Rev Clin Esp. 1991 Apr;188(7):358-61.

[Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole++ in the treatment of a case of localized
Wegener's granulomatosis].

[Article in Spanish]

Villegas Fernández FR(1), Callol Sánchez L, Moreno Muro M, Cuevas Ibáñez A, Gómez
de Terreros FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Aparato Respiratorio, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

A 50 year old man, affected by a Wegener's granulomatosis limited to lung, is
presented. The indirect immunofluorescence test for "Anticytoplasmic Antibodies" 
(ACPA) was negative and we got the definitive diagnostic by the histological
study from thoracotomy and biopsy samples. We started treatment with
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and a good evolution with an adequate clinical
control, x-ray study and blood test was obtained. Some aspects of the value of
the ACPA as diagnostic and activity markers of the disease and also the use of an
antimicrobial agent on the treatment of this nosological entity are discussed.

PMID: 1784765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Rev Clin Esp. 1991 Apr;188(6):278-80.

[Serology against Toxoplasma gondii in pregnant women. Development of prevalence 
rates in the course of 4 years].

[Article in Spanish]

Jaqueti J(1), Hernández-García R, Nicolás D, Martínez-Hernández D, Navarro-Gallar
F, García-Esteban RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Central, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

Sera from 1,221 pregnant women were screened for antibodies against Toxoplasma
gondii. The prevalence rate of antibodies was 38.9%. We have observed specific
IgM antibodies 15 pregnant women (1.2%). The prevalence rate was not increased
significantly with the age and number of pregnancies. The seropositivity was
reduced significantly in the 4th year studied. The high rate of seronegativity
observed in the pregnant women represent a high risk of Toxoplasma infestation.

PMID: 1780527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Rev Sanid Hig Publica (Madr). 1991 Mar-Apr;65(2):109-16.

[Development of a health education program prior to a hepatitis B vaccination
campaign among hospital personnel].

[Article in Spanish]

Jaqueti Aroca J(1), Viña Simón C, Rodríguez Hodgson C, Maestre Sánchez E, Romero 
Martín M, Domínguez Carmona M.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Laboratorio central y Medicina Preventiva, Hospital del Aire,
Madrid.

The hepatitis B (HB) is the most frequent occupational infection in health care
workers, and HB vaccination the best way to prevent it. Although sanitary staff
participation in vaccination programs in rather small, it is enlarged after the
previous information. In order to increase staff participation in a second
vaccination program, we have developed an information campaign in our hospital.
In an inquiry to a sample of not vaccination personnel (87/304; 28.6 per 100), we
got the following answers: 92.9 per 100 declared HB as dangerous, 95.4 per 100
believed there was a greater risk for the hospital staff, 87.4 per 100 asked for 
more information (spoken preferably), and 85.1 per 100 accepted vaccination.
However, at the beginning of the campaign, the attachment was reduced to 57.9 per
100. In spite of this decrease, we believe that the acceptance rate of unwilling 
personnel is the result of the information provided.

PMID: 1839334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Acta Gastroenterol Latinoam. 1991;21(1):23-6.

[Prevalence of serum markers of hepatitis B virus in the female personnel at a
general hospital].

[Article in Spanish]

Pérez-Piqueras J(1), Jaqueti J, Navarro-Gallar F, Martínez-Hernández D, Nicolás
D, García Esteban RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Aparato Digestivo, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

We have determined hepatitis B virus markers to 208 female personnel of a general
hospital: 12 physicians 90 nursing personnel, 70 assistants of clinic and
laboratory and 37 cleanliness, and office personnel. The prevalence was 15.31%
(31 persons). Four persons (1.91%) presented HBs-Ag. The prevalence was more low 
that the prevalences found by other authors of our country. The highest
prevalences were found in the cleanliness and office personnel, pursued of
nursing personnel. Among different services, the highest prevalences were found
in the personnel in contact with blood and its derivates. Not were found markers 
in the intensive care unit personnel. The prevalence increased generally with age
and with years in occupation. We associated the low young personnel (33.49% are
more low of 30 years age) and with short years occupation in the hospital (26.31%
are more low of 4 years).

PMID: 1811401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Ann Ist Super Sanita. 1991;27(2):281-7.

Day-time and night-time concentrations of airborne iron particles in the
atmosphere of Madrid.

Valero F(1), Mura MC.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento Fisica Aire, Facultad Ciencias Fisicas, Universidad Complutense, 
Madrid, Spain.

Specific measurements of iron aerosol have been made over a 70 days period at a
semi-urban site of Madrid. Measurements were made with the idea of assessing the 
relative contributions of day-time and night-time concentrations to daily ones.
Statistics of day-time, night-time, daily and survey time period concentrations
are given. Time variations were studied as well, clearly showing daily cyclical
pattern identified by applying time spectral analysis. This periodicity is
undoubtedly due to level differences between day-time and night-time
concentrations of aerosol. Day-time average level ranged from 0.23 to 5.13
micrograms/m3 over the entire survey period (70 days) in contrast with
night-times ones ranging from 0.17 to 3.04 micrograms/m3. Night-time/day-time
concentration ratio shows a highly consistent value, 0.430 + 0.25 (sigma) during 
this period. On occasion when diffusion conditions are similar, this ratio
increases to 0.518 + 0.18 (sigma). Day-time, night-time and daily concentrations 
correlation matrix suggests that former is the best daily level indicator.

PMID: 1755581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1991;18 Suppl 2:S105-9.

The Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy (AIRE) Study: rationale, design,
organization, and outcome definitions.

Hall AS(1), Winter C, Bogle SM, Mackintosh AF, Murray GD, Ball SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Studies, University of Leeds, England.

The rationale, design, organization, and outcome definitions of the Acute
Infarction Ramipril Efficacy (AIRE) Study are described prospectively. A total of
2,000 patients (1,000 per treatment group) will be recruited to this multicenter,
multinational, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study investigating
the effect of oral treatment with ramipril (2.5 or 5 mg twice daily) on the total
mortality of survivors of an acute myocardial infarction (AMI) with early
clinical evidence of heart failure. Secondary outcomes of the study include
progression to severe/resistant heart failure (at which time the patient will be 
withdrawn from the study treatment), reinfarction, and stroke. Treatment will be 
initiated in hospital between day 3 and day 10 following AMI, and follow-up
continued for an average of 15 months and a minimum of 6 months. The study data
will be analyzed on an intention-to-treat basis: a single formal interim analysis
will be conducted after 175 deaths. An Independent Adjudicating Panel will act as
the overall ethical supervisory body for the study and will retain the
randomization code. An International Steering Committee will be responsible for
the clinical definitions of the secondary study outcomes, and will regularly
review progress of the study. We believe that early treatment with ramipril may
reduce the total mortality of patients surviving an AMI with clinical evidence of
heart failure.

PMID: 1725016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Clin Chem. 1990 Dec;36(12):2144.

Adenosine deaminase in pregnancy serum.

Jaqueti J(1), Martinez-Hernández D, Hernández-Garcia R, Navarro-Gallar F,
Arenas-Barbero J.

Author information: 
(1)Lab. Central, Hosp. del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

PMID: 2253371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Rev Esp Cardiol. 1990 Nov;43(9):655-8.

[Percutaneous transluminal valvuloplasty in severe pulmonary stenosis in an aged 
patient. Presentation of a case].

[Article in Spanish]

Rada Martínez I(1), Gayán Laviña R, Alvarez Antón S, Villegas Fernández F,
Almeida Guevara A, Navarro Ruiz V.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

We report a case of severe pulmonary stenosis in a 74 year old patient who was
successfully treated by means of percutaneous transluminal valvuloplasty. This
relatively simple technique is extensively used in children. However, its use is 
considered exceptional in old patients.

PMID: 2151582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. An Med Interna. 1990 Nov;7(11):578-80.

[Conservative treatment in spontaneous splenic rupture due to infectious
mononucleosis].

[Article in Spanish]

Martínez Ruiz M(1), Boned J, Toral JR, Llobell G, Peralba JI.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

Spontaneous rupture of the spleen secondary to infectious mononucleosis
frequently proves to be an urgent surgical decision: splenectomy during a
exploratory laparotomy. Few cases have been described where diagnosis was made by
means of an abdominal ultrasound and those followed-up and treated
conservatively, are most exceptional. A case of rupture of spleen during a course
of an infectious mononucleosis, confirmed by abdominal ultrasounds and treated
conservatively, with good evolution, is presented.

PMID: 2103212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. An Med Interna. 1990 Oct;7(10):531-3.

[Pseudomeningocele after laminectomy].

[Article in Spanish]

García de la Rocha ML(1), Moreno Martínez JM, Martín Araguz A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

Pseudo-meningocele post-laminectomy is a non-frequent complication of this
surgical technique. It is usually diagnosed by myelography; the CT scan has
helped to detect more cases. We present a case studied by CT and RMN and there
are no existing previous publications on the case confirmed by RMN. The relation 
between the findings and the clinic as well as the therapy still on discussion.

PMID: 2104100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Arch Esp Urol. 1990 Sep;43(7):749-54.

[Inverted papilloma of the ureter. Review and treatment criteria].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín-Laborda y Bergasa F(1), Virseda Chamorro M, Bueno Sánchez JL, Vallejo
Herrador J, Coca Menchero S.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Urología, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, España.

We report a case of inverted papilloma of the ureter, a rare disease entity. To
our knowledge, this makes the 22nd case reported in the literature. Patient
anatomopathologic work up included electron microscopy and immunohistochemical
methods. This condition is compared to urothelial tumours of the ureter and we
discuss the therapeutic approach. Correct treatment is by tumor excision
including its base by segmental resection of the ureter and end-to-end
ureterorrhaphy or ureterocystoneostomy in tumors of the lower third. A case
submitted to endoscopic resection with good clinical results has been recently
described by Cabezas Zamora. Perioperative biopsy does not appear to provide more
data relative to the surgical option. Like other authors, we believe that these
warrant the same close follow-up as in urothelioma.

PMID: 2275571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. An Med Interna. 1990 May;7(5):255-7.

[Charcot-Marie-Tooth: a family case report].

[Article in Spanish]

García de la Rocha ML(1), Moreno Martínez JM, Martín Araguz A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital del Aire, Madrid.

Three cases in a Spanish family are presented, showing diagnosis criteria of
hereditary motor-sensitive neuropathy (Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease) type I:
suggestive symptoms, neurological and anatomopathological findings. The current
classification of this pathology.

PMID: 2102722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Zentralbl Veterinarmed A. 1990 Apr;37(3):198-204.

Intrauterine growth rates of the west African dwarf goat and some foetal organs
in relation to strategic feed supplementation during pregnancy.

Osuagwuh AI(1), Aire TA.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.

The intrauterine growth rate of West African dwarf (WAD) goats and their foetal
brain, heart and liver were studied to provide possible approaches for
formulating maternal feeding strategies during pregnancy for minimizing
reproductive wastage due to abortion, dystocia and neonatal mortality.
Twenty-five pregnant adult WAD does, involving 58 foetuses were studied. The
goats were fed a standard farm ration and the foetuses were harvested by
caesarean section at 30, 60, 90, 120 and 140 days of gestation. The data were
analysed by an exponential growth model subjected to multiple linear regression
analysis to obtain the daily growth rate and maximal rate of increase of each
variable studied. The results showed that the foetal body, brain, heart and liver
weights were significantly related with gestational age (P less than 0.01). The
coefficients, b1 and b2, were also significant (P less than 0.01). The variables 
considered in this study showed different maximum rates of growth and different
initial instantaneous growth rates which also decreased at different rates for
each day of gestation. The results indicated that feed supplementation in
pregnant WAD does should be determined from changes in foetal growth rate in
order to minimize reproductive wastage and for economics of animal production,
and that high feed supplementation before 70 and after 118 days post-breeding
should be avoided.

PMID: 2114714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Anat. 1989 Aug;165:75-85.

The ultrastructure of the epididymis of the African giant rat (Cricetomys
gambianus, Waterhouse).

Oke BO(1), Aire TA, Adeyemo O, Heath E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.

PMCID: PMC1256658
PMID: 17103627  [PubMed]


56. Rev Invest Clin. 1989 Jul-Sep;41(3):209-13.

Rating of breathlessness at rest during acute asthma: correlation with spirometry
and usefulness of breath-holding time.

Pérez-Padilla R, Cervantes D, Chapela R, Selman M.

We studied 13 patients with acute attacks of asthma to test the hypothesis that
magnitude of dyspnea at rest correlates well with spirometry and with
breath-holding time. Dyspnea ("falta de aire" in Spanish) was quantitated with a 
linear numerical scale from 0 to 10. We measured breath-holding time, breathing
frequency (f), and FEV1 and FVC both expressed as percent of normal. Measurements
were done on the patient's arrival and were repeated 3 to 6 times until dyspnea
at rest disappeared or was minimal. Dyspnea magnitude, f, and breath-holding time
correlated well with FEV1% and FVC% (r between 0.65 and 0.78), and better with
changes in FEV1% and FVC% with respect to initial values (delta FEV1 y delta FVC;
r between 0.80 and 0.89). Breath-holding time and f changed in proportion to
magnitude of dyspnea (r = -0.85 and 0.87 respectively). Regression equations
were: dyspnea = 6.34 -0.16 (delta FEV1) r = 0.80, and dyspnea = 7.82-0.105
(FEV1%) r = 0.62. Using multiple regression we improved prediction of FEV1% with 
easily obtained variables (R = 0.76). These results suggest that: 1) magnitude of
dysnea, f, and breath-holding time correlate with severity of airflow obstruction
in acute asthma attacks associated with dyspnea at rest; and 2) breath-holding
time varies inversely with dyspnea magnitude when it is present at rest.

PMID: 2813994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Histol Histopathol. 1989 Apr;4(2):247-50.

Ultrastructure and light microscopical study of a Leydig cell tumor of the testis
associated with bilateral gynaecomastia.

Moreno Muro M(1), Coca Menchero S, Martos Pelegrín JA, Izquierdo Hernández A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Central del Aire, Madrid.

Light and electronmicroscopic study of a Leydig cell testicular tumor in an
18-year-old male is presented. Bilateral gynaecomastia and normal hormonal blood 
levels were found. Emphasis on the diagnostic value of electronmicroscopy is
remarked upon, based on the following ultrastructural characteristics of the
cells; 1) Ovoid shaped nuclei with ondulating contours and dispersed and
homogeneous chromatin, 2) Rich agranular endoplasmic reticulum with frequent
special modifications, such as membranous whorls with a central cytoplasmic mass 
or lipid droplets, 3) Numerous mitochondria with occasional tubular cristae, 4)
Numerous lipid vacuoles. Other structures also identified in this tumor are
Reinke crystalloids, cytoplasmic microbodies, myelin figures, gap-type junctional
complexes and paracrystalline inclusions of Payer type E, which are less common.

PMID: 2520461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Acta Oncol. 1989;28(2):290-1.

Tumour markers in broncho-alveolar lavage.

Alvarez-Sala R(1), Blasco R, Callol L, Laguna R, Alvarez-Sala JL, Gomez de
Terreros FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division on Neumology, Hospital del Aire, Madrid, Spain.

PMID: 2736120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Anat. 1988 Oct;160:9-19.

The structure of the epididymis of the giant rat (Cricetomys gambianus,
Waterhouse): histological, histochemical and microstereological studies.

Oke BO(1), Aire TA, Adeyemo O, Heath E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.

The structure of the ductus epididymidis of the African giant rat (Cricetomys
gambianus, Waterhouse) was studied by means of histological (paraffin and
plastic-embedded tissues) and histochemical techniques. Five distinct zones (I-V)
were detected along the epididymal duct on the basis of epithelial height and
cytological composition and structure. The so-called apical cells, which have
been observed in some species of animals, were not seen in the initial segment of
the duct. Clear or light cells were present in the epithelium of the terminal
segment, thus making the giant rat the third species in which this cell has been 
found, after the laboratory rat and the hamster. A large number of
intra-epithelial lymphocytes and macrophage-like cells was commonly observed in
the epithelium throughout the duct; the latter were strongly PAS-positive while
the former tended to increase in number caudally. A microstereological study of
the epididymis showed that Zones I (initial segment) and II contained a
significantly (P less than 0.001) higher proportion of epithelium and a
relatively greater (P less than 0.001) proportion of blood vessels in the
interductal connective tissue than the more caudal segments of the epididymis
which possessed a significantly (P less than 0.01) higher proportion of
interductal connective tissue.

PMCID: PMC1262043
PMID: 2855329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Br Poult Sci. 1988 Mar;29(1):171-4.

Egg-laying pattern of the semi-domesticated helmeted guinea fowl (Numida
meleagris galeata).

Ogwuegbu SO(1), Aire TA, Adeyemo O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.

1. Studies on the egg laying pattern of the semi-domesticated helmeted guinea
fowl showed that the birds laid eggs between 06.00 and 20.00 h local time (05.00 
to 19.00 h GMT). 2. More (67.9%) were laid in the evenings (15.00 to 20.00 h)
than at any other period. 3. There were two distinct periods in the reproductive 
cycle: a breeding season which began in April and ended in September, and a
resting or non-breeding period between October and March. 4. Sequence length was 
predominantly of 4 eggs and July was the month of peak egg production.

PMID: 3382977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Appl Opt. 1987 Aug 1;26(15):3097-102. doi: 10.1364/AO.26.003097.

Helium-cooled balloon-borne infrared experiment for measurements of stratospheric
trace gas emissions.

Rippel H, Hilbert L, Jarisch M, Kampf D, Offermann D, Schneider R.

A helium-cooled IR spectrometer with a diffraction-limited telescope was launched
on 23 Sept. 1983 from Aire-sur-l'Adour (France) as part of the MAP/Globus 1983
campaign. The float altitude of the balloon was 38 km. Limb scan measurements of 
atmospheric emissions were taken in the 5.5-19-microm wavelength region. The
measurements were performed ~1 h before sunrise. From several spectral features
volume mixing ratios of NO(2), H(2)O, CH(4), HNO(3), O(3), and N(2)O were
derived.

PMID: 20490015  [PubMed]


62. Am J Vet Res. 1985 May;46(5):1121-5.

Microtubular mass defect of spermatozoa in the stallion.

Heath E, Aire T, Fujiwara K.

A microtubular mass (MM) defect was found in the spermatozoa of 7 Standardbred
stallions; 3 stallions were sons of the same sire. Two of these 3 stallions and 2
other stallions (for a total of 4 out of the 7 stallions) were considered
subfertile when the defect was first observed. Fertility improved with time,
either during the first breeding season or when a given stallion was used less
frequently; however, the MM defect persisted, consisting of tortuous arrays of
small abnormal microtubules visible only by transmission electron microscopy. The
MM probably contained the protein tubulin as indicated by immunofluorescence.
Microtubules of the MM were different from normal microtubules in being highly
coiled, rather than straight, without interconnecting bridges or arms and had a
20% smaller cross-sectional diameter than did normal microtubules. Synthesis of
the MM may occur near areas of the nuclear membranes normally associated with the
manchette of the developing spermatid.

PMID: 3890632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Bull Pan Am Health Organ. 1985;19(2):120-38.

Clinical and epidemiologic studies of Chagas' disease in rural communities in
Oaxaca State, Mexico, and a seven-year follow-up: I. Cerro del Aire.

Goldsmith RS, Zárate RJ, Zárate LG, Kagan I, Jacobson LB.

PMID: 3902134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Acta Anat (Basel). 1983;117(1):65-72.

Microstereological and histochemical studies of the salivary glands of the giant 
rat (Cricetomys gambianus, waterhouse).

Asojo TA, Aire TA.

The histology and histochemistry of the parotid, submandibular and sublingual
glands were studied. The submandibular gland contained only serous acini as in
the guinea pig, but unlike in many other mammals. The parotid gland contained
only serous acini while the sublingual gland was mixed, mucous acini being the
predominant secretory tissue interspersed by a few serous acini. Serous demilunes
also commonly formed caps on the mucous acini. The ducts of the gland contributed
over 30% of the volume of the submandibular gland, while those of the parotid and
sublingual glands formed about 12 and 10% of the gland, respectively. The
secretions of the parotid gland, as judged by histochemical methods, contained
neutral mucins and some sialomucins. Neutral mucins, sulphomucins and sialomucins
were detected in both the submandibular gland and sublingual gland.

PMID: 6356761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Anat. 1982 Oct;135(Pt 3):513-20.

Surface morphology of the ducts of the epididymal region of the drake (Anas
platyrhynchos) as revealed by scanning and transmission electron microscopy.

Aire TA.

Both scanning (SEM) and transmission (TEM) electron microscopic studies of the
major ductules and ducts of the perfused epididymal region of the drake were
reported. The SEM correlated with TEM studies and confirmed some previous
observations that the non-ciliated Types I and II cells in the proximal and
distal efferent ductules, respectively, possessed apical microvilli as distinct
from the cilia of the ciliated cells. The relative number of each cell type in
each duct was also revealed. All microvilli and cilia were regular in shape. The 
connecting and epididymal ducts showed 'craters' scattered over their entire
epithelial surfaces. Also, a single cilium projected from most of the cells of
the epithelial lining into the lumen of these ducts. The name, 'uniciliated cell'
has been suggested to describe this cell which has, until now, been referred to
as the non-ciliated Type III cell (Aire, 1980; Aire et al. 1979). Neither bulbous
microvilli nor blebbing of the apical plasmalemma of the cells occurred in
properly fixed tissues.

PMCID: PMC1169400
PMID: 7153170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Anat. 1982 Aug;135(Pt 1):97-110.

The rete testis of birds.

Aire TA.

The rete testis in the domestic fowl (Gallus gallus domesticus), Japanese quail
(Coturnix coturnix japonica), guinea-fowl (Numida meleagris galeata) and drake
(Anas platyrhynchos) was studied histologically and with both the scanning and
transmission electron microscopes. All the birds have rete epithelial cells
varying between squamous and high cuboidal. A cilium-like structure projects from
the luminal portion of most cells into the rete lumen, and the outline of the
cells varies from polygonal to elongate. Sparse, stubby microvilli were
concentrated on the cell borders. Ultrastructural features suggest only moderate 
secretory and absorptive activities in the cells. The rete testis of birds is
amply supplied with blood as well as lymphatic vessels and nerves.
Intraepithelial lymphocytes form part of the rete epithelium, and macrophages are
present in large numbers in the rete lumen of the domestic fowl and drake and, to
a lesser degree, also in the rete epithelium of the drake.

PMCID: PMC1168132
PMID: 7130060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Appl Toxicol. 1981 Dec;1(6):292-4.

Effects of kola-nut extract administration on the liver, kidney, brain, testis
and some serum constituents of the rat.

Ikegwuonu FI, Aire TA, Ogwuegbu SO.

Kola-nut extract induced a number of overt neurotoxicological signs in male
albino rats. A decrease in the total body weight and an increase in the absolute 
weights of the liver, kidney, brain and testis were observed after 18 weeks oral 
administration of kola-nut extract to the rats. Total protein, RNA and DNA of
these organs were significantly depressed. The activity of beta-glucuronidase and
beta-galactosidase was induced only in the kidney, brain and testis of treated
animals. While the levels of serum phosphomonoesterases and total cholesterol
were significantly enhanced due to kola-nut intake, serum total and conjugated
bilirubin levels were significantly decreased.

PMID: 6193164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Toxicol Lett. 1981 May;8(3):133-9.

Effects of dimethylnitrosamine on some actions of testosterone.

Ikegwuonu FI, Aire TA, Ogwuegbu SO.

Using homogenates of mouse kidney and testes, the activities of the enzymes,
beta-glucuronidase and beta-galactosidase, were studied as markers of androgen
action. The results obtained differed between testes and kidney homogenates.
Dimethylnitrosamine (DMN) may cause a competitive inhibition of the anabolic
action of testosterone in kidney homogenates but this was not evident from the
results obtained with testes homogenates.

PMID: 7245249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 1981;11(1 Supp 1):1-149.

Osteoarthritis symposium. Palm Aire, Florida, October 20-22, 1980.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 6115472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Andrologia. 1980 Sep-Oct;12(5):467-75.

Sperm production rates, sperm physiology and fertility in rats chronically
treated with sublethal doses of aflatoxin B1.

Egbunike GN, Emerole GO, Aire TA, Ikegwuonu FI.

Rats chronically treated with sublethal doses of aflatoxin B1 suffered severe
testicular degeneration and impaired spermatocytogenesis with a concomitant drop 
in the rate and efficiency of spermatozoal production. Although the major part of
sperm maturation was disturbed, there was no noticeable reduction in the
viability of spermatozoa in storage, hence a fairly high degree of fertilisation 
occurred. That the treatment made the uterine environment less compatible with
normal foetal development was demonstrated by the smaller litter size and higher 
embryo mortality.

PMID: 6778257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Anat. 1980 Aug;131(Pt 1):19-23.

Morphometric study of the avian adrenal gland.

Aire TA.

The interrenal and medullary cords as well as the blood vessels and connective
tissue proportions in the adrenal glands of the male Nigerian fowl (Gallus
domesticus) and guinea-fowl (Numida meleagris) were studied by microstereological
techniques. Laying domestic fowl of the Rhode Island Red breed were entirely
defeathered and maintained in a hot, humid pen for a period of three months,
after which the adrenal glands were also studied microstereologically. Interrenal
cord width was also measured in all the birds studied. The interrenal cords of
the subscapular zone were consistently wider than those cords in the inner zone
of the adrenal glands. This clearly suggested morphological zoning. The
proportion of interrenal tissue was significantly greater in the guinea-fowl than
in the Nigerian fowl, but the medullary tissue and the blood vessels and
connective tissue were not significantly different. Interrenal hypoplasia or
medullary hyperplasia occurred in the defeathered Rhode Island Red fowl as
compared to the control birds of the same breed and sex. The significance of
these findings is discussed.

PMCID: PMC1233284
PMID: 7440402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Anat. 1980 Jun;130(Pt 4):707-23.

The ductuli efferentes of the epididymal region of birds.

Aire TA.

Ultrastructural studies were undertaken on the efferent ductules of the testis of
the domestic fowl (Gallus domesticus), Japanese quail (Coturnix coturnix
japonica) and guinea-fowl (Numida meleagris). Four cell types were identified and
described: ciliated cells which were found in the epithelium of both the proximal
and distal segments of the efferent ductules, non-ciliated Type I cell which,
together with the ciliated cell, formed the epithelium of the proximal efferent
ductule and the non-ciliated Type II cell which, together with the ciliated cell,
formed the epithelium of the distal efferent ductule. Intraepithelial lymphocytes
were the fourth cell type found in the epithelium of both segments of the
efferent ductule of the fowl only.

PMCID: PMC1233197
PMID: 7429963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Int J Androl. 1980 Apr;3(2):188-92.

The response of the male domestic fowl (Gallus domesticus) to alpha-chlorohydrin 
treatment.

Aire TA, Olusanya SK.

Sexually mature male cockerels were treated with low and high doses of
alpha-chlorohydrin for up to 30 days. Neither gross nor histological lesions were
produced by the drug, and sodium, potassium and acid phosphatase levels in the
testicular fluid and ductus deferential plasma were not significantly altered.
All the cockerels given low doses remained fertile.

PMID: 7409904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Poult Sci. 1980 Feb;59(2):453-5.

Aberrant seminiferous tubule portions in the epididymal region of the domestic
fowl (Gallus domesticus).

Aire TA.

The presence of aberrant seminiferous tubule portions in the epididymal region of
the Nigerian breed of domestic fowl were described. Structures resembling sex
cords were also seen and described. The origin of these structures in the
epididymal region was speculatively discussed.

PMID: 7413572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Acta Anat (Basel). 1980;108(2):160-8.

The cycle of the seminiferous epithelium of the domesticated giant rat
(Cricetomys gambianus Waterhouse).

Aire TA.

Spermiogenesis and the stages of the seminiferous epithelium in the testis of the
giant rat were studied in domesticated animals. 19 steps of spermiogenesis on the
basis of the development of the acrosomic system and flagellum were observed, and
the cycle of the seminiferous epithelium can be divided into 14 stages. Although 
the developing spermatids and spermatozoa of the giant rat differed structurally 
from those of the albino rat, the general trend of development and the cellular
content of the seminiferous epithelium were similar in both species of animals.

PMID: 7405535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Cell Tissue Res. 1980;205(2):319-25.

The seminiferous epithelium in the guinea fowl (Numida meleagris).

Aire TA, Olowo-okorun MO, Ayeni JS.

Spermiogenesis and cellular associations in the seminiferous epithelium of the
guinea fowl were studied and described in "sexually" active adult birds. PAS
stain was found to be useful in the recognition of steps of spermatid
differentiation only in the first early stages. Nuclear morphological changes
were subsequently found to be more reliable in tracing steps of spermiogenesis.
It was observed that haematoxylin-eosin stained tissue can be used in the study
of spermiogenesis in the bird. Various stages of the seminiferous epithelium were
observed in any cross-section of the seminiferous tubules. Distinct cellular
associations were observed, but intermix of adjacent germ cells or heterogenous
cellular associations were frequently encountered.

PMID: 7357577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Zentralbl Veterinarmed A. 1980;27(7):578-82.

Plasma glucose and alkaline phosphatase levels in guinea-fowls (Numida meleagris)
and Nigerian domestic fowls (Gallus domesticus).

Olowookorun MO, Ayeni JS, Aire TA.

PMID: 6779460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Toxicology. 1980;17(1):9-16.

The effects of aflatoxin B1 on some testicular and kidney enzyme activity in rat.

Ikegwuonu FI, Egbunike GN, Emerole GO, Aire TA.

The effects of chronic intra-peritoneal administration of aflatoxin B1 on the
activity of alkaline and acid phosphatases; glutamic oxaloacetate (GOT) and
pyruvate transaminases (GPT); 5'-nucleotidase and lactic dehydrogenase enzymes
were monitored in the testis and kidney of adult albino rats. Results showed that
aflatoxin B1 depressed the activity of alkaline phosphatase in both tissues, but 
increased that of acid phosphatase in only the testis. While GOT and
5'-nucleotidase were inhibited, GPT and lactic dehydrogenase activity was
enhanced by this carcinogen. These responses were similar for the testis and
kidney. The above findings coupled with the microscopical observation of the
testis tissue seem to indicate that the essential lesion of this toxin on the
testis may be a modification of the enzymes of germinal cells resulting from a
gradual depletion of the latter. Furthermore, the results appear to show that by 
and large, aflatoxin B1 exerts only slightly different effects on the testis and 
kidney at the enzyme level.

PMID: 6254208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Anat. 1979 Dec;129(Pt 4):703-6.

Micro-stereological study of the avian epididymal region.

Aire TA.

Morphometric studies of the epididymal region of three avian species (Gallus
domesticus, Coturnix coturnix japonica, Japanese quail, and Numida meleagris,
guinea-fowl) were performed using a stereological compensating eyepiece
graticule. The proportions of the volume of the region made up of rete testis
lacunae, proximal and distal efferent ductules, connecting ducts, ductus
epididymidis, blood vessels and connective tissue were determined. The efferent
ductules constituted the largest proportion of the tubular components of the
organs in the three birds (35.3% for the chicken, 56% for the quail and 61.9% for
the guinea-fowl), while the ductus epididymidis formed only 7.6%, 2.4% and 1.8%
of the total epididymal volume in the domestic fowl, quail and guinea-fowl
respectively. The connective tissue component made up 38.7%, 27.3% and 22.6%
respectively. The significance of these results is discussed in relation to the
likely functions of the various components of the epididymal region.

PMCID: PMC1232981
PMID: 536308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Anat. 1979 Oct;129(Pt 3):633-43.

The structure of the excurrent ducts of the testis of the guinea-fowl (Numida
meleagris).

Aire TA, Ayeni JS, Olowo-Okorun MO.

The epididymal region of the guinea-fowl was studied in sexually mature birds.
The structure of the epididymal region was generally similar to that already
described for the domestic fowl, turkey and Japanese quail. Well formed,
intratesticular tubuli recti was seen connecting the seminiferous tubules with
the rete testis. The latter consists of both intracapsular and extracapsular
portions. Six main cell types were recognised in the region: the rete testis was 
lined by squamous cells, the proximal efferent ductules by ciliated and
non-ciliated Type I cells, the distal efferent ductule by ciliated and
non-ciliated Type II cells, and the connecting ductules, ductus epididymidis and 
ductus deferens were lined by non-ciliated Type III and basal cells. The cell
classification adopted in this study is discussed.

PMCID: PMC1233029
PMID: 541246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Arch Androl. 1979 Jun;2(4):371-4.

Effect of 2,6-cis-diphenylhexamethylcyclotetrasiloxane on the reproductive organs
of male mice.

Aire TA, Ikegwuonu FI, Heath EH.

Mice treated with tetrasiloxane, 20 and 40 mg/kg/day, showed lesions in the
reproductive organs, cytological changes in the pituitary glands, and changes in 
levels of cholesterol, phosphomonoesterases, transaminases, 5'-nucleotidase,
lactic and isocitric dehydrogenases, and ATPase.

PMID: 496515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Anat Histol Embryol. 1979 Jun;8(2):172-6.

Macrophages in the excurrent ducts of the testes of normal domestic fowl (Gallus 
domesticus).

Aire TA, Malmqvist M.

PMID: 159005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Res Vet Sci. 1979 May;26(3):277-83.

Long-term vasoligation in the domestic fowl (Gallus domesticus).

Aire TA, Heath EH.

The effects of long-term (14 months) unilateral vasoligation on the tests and
their excurrent ducts of the domestic fowl were studied histologically and
ultrastructurally. Severe testicular degeneration and epididymal atrophy were
observed in the ipsilateral organs while the contralateral control organs were
normal. Massive macrophage activity was observed in the epididymal regions and to
a lesser extent in some severely degenerated seminiferous tubules. Several
granulomata occurred in the epididymal regions and the ducti deferentes, and most
were resorbed or were undergoing resorption at the time of examination.

PMID: 515514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Prax Klin Pneumol. 1979 Apr;33 Suppl 1:379-82.

[The physiology of intrathoracic pressure changes (author's transl)].

[Article in German]

Seith U.

The pleural cavity, because of the thin film of fluid between the pleural layers,
acts like a capillary space within which capillary forces operate. It is due to
these forces that the lungs follow the respiratory movements of the thoracic cage
and diaphragm and are kept expanded within the thorax. "Subatmospheric" pressure 
in the pleural cavity develops only if the capillary space is opened by injury to
one of the pleural layers, thus allowing the elastic pull of the thoracic cage
and lungs to act on the pleural cavity. The subatmospheric pressure registered by
the exploratory needle is, in fact, non-existent in the normal chest. It owes its
existence to the introduction of the needle which causes separation of the
pleural layers and the introduction of a small quantity of air. The pulling and
stretching forces exerted by the thorax and lungs on the air bubble then become
measurable as subatmospheric pressure. The same forces operate during the
respiratory movements and induce changes in volume and pressure in all air or
fluid containing spaces. The result is a delicately regulated consonance of aire 
movement and blood distribution. Simplified graphs illustrate the
interconnections.

PMID: 461313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Acta Anat (Basel). 1979;103(3):305-12.

The epididymal region of the Japanese quail (Coturnix coturnix japonica).

Aire TA.

The epididymal region of the Japanese quail was studied histologically. The organ
consists of the extratesticular portion of the rete testis, the ductuli
efferentes proximales and distales, the ducti conjugentes and ductus
epididymidis. Distinct tubuli recti link the seminiferous tubules with the rete
testis. The non-ciliated cells of the ductuli efferentes proximales and distales 
show, between them, certain internal structural differences which were
highlighted. In 40% of the birds, the ductus deferens showed dark-grey pigments, 
regarded as melanin. The epididymal region was generally similar in structure to 
that of the domestic fowl, turkey and duck.

PMID: 433566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Biochem Exp Biol. 1979;15(1):7-12.

The development and significance of transaminases and 5(1)-nucleotidase
(5(1)-ribonucleotide phosphohydrolase) in chick testis.

Ikegwuonu FI, Aire TA, Heath EH.

The development of testicular glutamate oxaloacetate (GOT) and glutamate pyruvate
(GPT) transaminases and of 5'-Nucleotidase was monitored in the male Nigerian
fowl. The findings indicated triphasic and monophasic oscillations of GOT and GPT
respectively with age. 5(1)-Nucleotidase was found to decrease with increase in
the chronological age of the chicks. Furthermore, while GOT and GPT exhibited
cubic and quadratic relationships respectively with age and testicular weights,
5(1)-Nucleotidase was related to both variables in a quadratic manner. The
results are discussed in terms of spermatogenesis which may bear profoundly on
the overall reproductive performance traits of the Nigerian cockerel.

PMID: 232849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Acta Anat (Basel). 1979;103(2):142-9.

Intraepithelial lymphocytes in the excurrent ducts of the testis of the domestic 
fowl (Gallus domesticus).

Aire TA, Malmquist M.

Cells considered to be lymphocytes are reported in the epithelial lining of the
excurrent ducts of the testis of normal and vasoligated domestic fowl. They
resemble those already reported in the rat and monkey epididymal epithelium, the 
human intestinal mucosa, and in the bursa of Fabricius. The cytoplasm is usually 
less dense than that of adjacent epithelial cells, and contains only a few
organelles. The nucleus is highly heterochromatic and with no definite nucleolus.
Cytoplasmic processes are found to extend from the cell in between epithelial
cells. The possible role of these cells in the reproductive tract of the cockerel
is discussed.

PMID: 84511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Ann Anesthesiol Fr. 1978;19(6):559-62.

[Visual identification of Doppler sounds in gas embolisms].

[Article in French]

Sofianos E, Rifat K, Bopp P.

The method of choice for the early detection of air metabolism during
neurosurgical operations in a sitting position is that of continuous cardiac
auscultation using Doppler effect ultrasound apparatus. In the present study,
involving 15 patients, an air embolism was produced by the injection of 2 ml of
CO2 into the right heart and acoustic changes were recorded on paper using a
photographic process. These optical changes, although variable, were invariably
present and characteristic of aire emboli and represent an additional element in 
early diagnosis.

PMID: 30354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Poult Sci. 1977 Jul;56(4):1158-60.

Age-influence variations in the levels of cholesterol and ATPase activity in the 
testes of prepuberal chicks.

Ikegwuonu FI, Aire TA.

Changes in the levels of total, free and esterified cholesterol and ATPase
activity were measured in male prepuberal Nigerian fowl. Results showed that in
all cases, the testicular levels of these parameters increased to peak levels and
decreased thereafter. Total and free cholesterol levels were maximal at 12 weeks 
while the esterification of cholesterol was maintained from 14 weeks through to
the 16th week. The results of ATPase activity corroborated these findings. The
data suggest that peak androgen formation occurred in these chicks between
14th--16th weeks of age. As evidenced by the higher percentages of esterified
cholesterol at all the ages studied, it is suggested that the Nigerian male fowl 
is an early-maturing specie.

PMID: 203917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Res Vet Sci. 1977 Jan;22(1):72-7.

Granulomas of the testis and excurrent ducts following vasoligation in the fowl
(Gallus domesticus).

Aire TA, Heath E.

Ten adult 18-month-old male fowls were vasoligated unilaterally just anterior to 
the cloaca via an incision made between the base of the tail and the cloacal
orifice. Two birds each were killed at two weeks and four weeks post-ligation,
and the remaining six birds at 12 weeks post-ligation. Forty per cent of the
birds showed severe reactions in the ipsilateral testis, epididymal region and
ductus deferens. The remaining birds showed slight gross changes and near normal 
histology. The contralateral organs in all birds were normal both macroscopically
and microscopically.

PMID: 841207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Biochem Exp Biol. 1977;13(2):173-8.

Age-dependent changes in the activities of ATPase and some pyridine
nucleotide-linked enzymes in the chick testis.

Ikegwuonu FI, Aire TA.

The ontogeny of some of the enzymes connected with carbohydrate metabolism in the
testis were studied in the White-Rock chicks. In the first place testicular
growth in these chicks relate to their overall growth as measured by their body
weights. ATPase and NAD+-dependent succinic dehydrogenase activities decreased
both with advancing age and increasing testicular weight. However, these enzymes 
showed maximum activities at 17 and 28 weeks respectively. NAD+-linked isocitric 
dehydrogenase activity continually increased with increasing testicular weight
and age. It is suggested that during spermatogenesis the activities of these
enzymes are controlled by different developmental mechanisms.

PMID: 210774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1976 Dec 21;451(2):530-5.

The development of phosphomonesterases in the testes of prepuberal chicks.

Aire TA, Ikegwuonu FI.

1. The biochemical development and histochemical localisation of
phosphomonoesterases in the testes of prepuberal chicks have been studied. 2.
Maximum acid phosphatase activity was observed at 12 weeks with a decrease in
enzyme activity after this age, whereas alkaline phosphatase activity fluctuated 
with age. 3. Acid phosphatase activity in chicks was similar to that of the
cockerel in being tartarate-insensitive. 4. There was a low level of significant 
correlation between acid phosphatase activity and testes weight. 5. Both alkaline
and acid phosphatase activities were observed in the basement membrane of the
seminiferous tubules, and acid phosphatase activity also in the various
spermatogenic elements. 6. The results suggest that acid phosphatase is more
involved in spermatogenesis, and more widely distributed than alkaline
phosphatase in testicular tissue during testicular development.

PMID: 187228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Poult Sci. 1976 Nov;55(6):2437-41.

Effect of vasoligation on the reproductive organs of immature cockerels of the
domestic fowl (Gallus domesticus).

Aire TA.

Fifteen sexually immature, 12-week-old cockerels were unilaterally vasoligated.
Eight of these were killed at 4 weeks post-ligation and the remaining 7 at 10
weeks post-ligation. Granulomatous lesions in the ductus deferens were observed
in 2 cockerels of the first and in 1 cockerel of the second group. Cysts showing 
intense granulomatous reactions were present in the epididymis in 1 cockerel of
the first group and 4 cockerels of the second group. The seminiferous tubules
were not seriously affected. The contralateral organs acted as controls and were 
grossly and histologically normal.

PMID: 1019095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Acta Anat (Basel). 1976;95(2):207-17.

Histochemical studies of the development of alkaline and acid phosphatase
activities in the ovary and oviduct of the fowl (Gallus domesticus).

Aire TA, Steinbach J.

Alkaline and acid phosphatase activities were studied in the ovary and oviducts
of pullets from the age of 2-32 weeks. Adult fowls were similarly studied.
Alkaline phosphatase activity was present only in the glandular grooves and
crypts of the immature oviducts. Alkaline phosphatase activity appeared at the
pits of epithelial evaginations as glandular formation commenced. The young,
non-secreting glands also showed the enzyme activity. But in the mature oviduct, 
alkaline phosphatase activity was confined to only the uterovaginal glands or
sperm host glands and the epithelium of the vagina. In the ovary, alkaline
phosphatase activity in the theca interna increased as the diameter of the
follicles increased. Acid phosphatase activity was not present in the ovary, but 
in the oviduct, the enzyme activity was present in the uterine (shell gland)
glands and in the uterovaginal epithelium and glands (sperm host glands).
Alkaline phosphatase activity in the ovarian follicles and in the immature
oviduct is thought to be related to histodifferentiation of these structures.

PMID: 961353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Br Vet J. 1975 Mar-Apr;131(2):146-51.

Development of puberty in the White Fulani (Bos indicus) bull calf.

Aire TA, Akpokodje JU.

PMID: 1137800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Trop Anim Health Prod. 1974 May;6(2):111-6.

Response of White Leghorn and Nigerian cockerels to experimental Salmonella
infection.

Aire TA, Ojo MO.

PMID: 4415595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Acta Anat (Basel). 1974;89(2):203-10.

The development of the endocrine glands and bursa of Fabricius in Nigerian and
White Leghorn cockerels.

Aire TA.

PMID: 4607829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Res Vet Sci. 1973 Nov;15(3):383-5.

Growth of the bursa of Fabricius and thymus gland in the Nigerian and White
Leghorn cockerel.

Aire TA.

PMID: 4792018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Poult Sci. 1973 Nov;52(6):2356-7.

Pigmentation of reproductive organs in the Nigerian fowl.

Aire TA, Steinbach J.

PMID: 4133102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Br Vet J. 1973 Sep-Oct;129(5):72-3.

The origin and nature of "globules" in ejaculates of young rams.

Aire TA.

PMID: 4770244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Poult Sci. 1973 Sep;52(5):1765-9.

Development of puberty in Nigerian and White Leghorn cockerels.

Aire TA.

PMID: 4760735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Res Vet Sci. 1973 Jan;14(1):104-6.

The development of the testis in the dwarf Nigerian ram lamb.

Aire TA.

PMID: 4707886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Med Bord. 1953 Jun;130(6):861-4.

[A modern institute; University and School Center of Therapy of Non-contagious
Diseases in Aire-sur-l'Adour].

[Article in Undetermined Language]

HARDRE JL, GUEX JC.

PMID: 13097002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Can Med Assoc J. 1948 Apr;58(4):388.

Fracture fixation with aire-lite.

RUSSELL CD, BATESON S, LOOS R.

PMCID: PMC1591062
PMID: 18916120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


