
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 25. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8352. [Epub ahead of print]

DNA promoter hypermethylation in nipple fluid: a potential tool for early breast 
cancer detection.

de Groot JS(1), Moelans CB(1), Elias SG(2), Fackler MJ(3), van Domselaar R(1),
Suijkerbuijk KP(1), Witkamp AJ(4), Sukumar S(3), van Diest PJ(1), van der Wall
E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. (2)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Oncology,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA. (4)Department of
Surgery, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: Nipple fluid aspiration provides direct non-invasive sampling of
fluid from the mammary ductal system, where the majority of breast cancers
originate. DNA promoter hypermethylation ("methylation") occurs early and at high
frequency in breast carcinogenesis, bearing the potential as a biomarker for
cancer detection at its earliest stages. We assessed methylation in nipple fluid 
from breasts of healthy women, of women with sporadic breast cancer and of their 
contralateral breasts. Our goal was to investigate whether nipple fluid can be
used as a reliable methylation biomarker source.
METHODS: Methylation levels of 13 genes were analysed by quantitative
multiplex-methylation specific PCR (QM-MSP) in nipple fluid samples from breasts 
of healthy women, and from the affected and contralateral breasts of breast
cancer patients.
RESULTS: Methylation analysis of the low-volume nipple fluid samples was
feasible. Despite the generally low methylation levels, cancerous and healthy
breasts nipple fluid could be discriminated with an area under the receiver
operating characteristic curve (AUC) of 0.64 (p<0.01) based on a multivariate
model including AKR1B1, ALX1, RASSF1A and TM6SF1. Within-patient differences
between cancerous and contralateral nipple fluid samples were less prominent.
CONCLUSIONS: Cancerous nipple fluid contains increased levels of methylation of
tumor suppressor genes that potentially could serve as a biomarker for early
breast cancer detection.

PMID: 27028854  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. PLoS Genet. 2016 Mar 3;12(3):e1005902. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005902.
eCollection 2016.

Mariner Transposons Contain a Silencer: Possible Role of the Polycomb Repressive 
Complex 2.

Bire S(1,)(2), Casteret S(1), Piégu B(1), Beauclair L(1), Moiré N(3), Arensbuger 
P(4), Bigot Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)PRC, UMR INRA-CNRS 7247, PRC, Nouzilly, France. (2)Institute of Biotechnology,
University of Lausanne, and Center for Biotechnology UNIL-EPFL, Lausanne,
Switzerland. (3)UMR INRA 1282, ISP, Parc de Grandmont, Tours, France.
(4)Biological Sciences Department, California State Polytechnic University,
Pomona, California, United States of America.

Transposable elements are driving forces for establishing genetic innovations
such as transcriptional regulatory networks in eukaryotic genomes. Here, we
describe a silencer situated in the last 300 bp of the Mos1 transposase open
reading frame (ORF) which functions in vertebrate and arthropod cells. Functional
silencers are also found at similar locations within three other animal mariner
elements, i.e. IS630-Tc1-mariner (ITm) DD34D elements, Himar1, Hsmar1 and Mcmar1.
These silencers are able to impact eukaryotic promoters monitoring strong,
moderate or low expression as well as those of mariner elements located upstream 
of the transposase ORF. We report that the silencing involves at least two
transcription factors (TFs) that are conserved within animal species, NFAT-5 and 
Alx1. These cooperatively act with YY1 to trigger the silencing activity. Four
other housekeeping transcription factors (TFs), neuron restrictive silencer
factor (NRSF), GAGA factor (GAF) and GTGT factor (GTF), were also found to have
binding sites within mariner silencers but their impact in modulating the
silencer activity remains to be further specified. Interestingly, an NRSF binding
site was found to overlap a 30 bp motif coding a highly conserved PHxxYSPDLAPxD
peptide in mariner transposases. We also present experimental evidence that
silencing is mainly achieved by co-opting the host Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 
pathway. However, we observe that when PRC2 is impaired another host silencing
pathway potentially takes over to maintain weak silencer activity. Mariner
silencers harbour features of Polycomb Response Elements, which are probably a
way for mariner elements to self-repress their transcription and mobility in
somatic and germinal cells when the required TFs are expressed. At the
evolutionary scale, mariner elements, through their exaptation, might have been a
source of silencers playing a role in the chromatin configuration in eukaryotic
genomes.

PMCID: PMC4777549
PMID: 26939020  [PubMed - in process]


3. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 11;11(2):e0149067. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149067.
eCollection 2016.

Experimental Approach Reveals the Role of alx1 in the Evolution of the Echinoderm
Larval Skeleton.

Koga H(1), Fujitani H(1), Morino Y(1), Miyamoto N(1,)(2), Tsuchimoto J(3,)(4),
Shibata TF(5), Nozawa M(6,)(7), Shigenobu S(5,)(8), Ogura A(9), Tachibana K(10), 
Kiyomoto M(11), Amemiya S(11,)(12,)(13), Wada H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Japan. (2)Institute of Biogeosciences, Japan Agency for Marine-Earth
Science and Technology, Yokosuka, Japan. (3)Division of Life Science, Graduate
School of Natural Science and Technology, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan.
(4)Institute for Molecular Science of Medicine, Aichi Medical University,
Nagakute, Japan. (5)National Institute for Basic Biology, Okazaki, Japan.
(6)Center for Information Biology, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima,
Japan. (7)Department of Genetics, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies,
Mishima, Japan. (8)School of Life Science, The Graduate University for Advanced
Studies, Okazaki, Japan. (9)Nagahama Institute of Bio-Science and Technology,
Nagahama, Japan. (10)Graduate School of Bioscience, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Yokohama, Japan. (11)Marine and Coastal Research Center, Ochanomizu
University, Tateyama, Japan. (12)Department of Integrated Biosciences, Graduate
School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Japan.
(13)Research and Education Center of Natural Sciences, Keio University, Yokohama,
Japan.

Over the course of evolution, the acquisition of novel structures has ultimately 
led to wide variation in morphology among extant multicellular organisms. Thus,
the origins of genetic systems for new morphological structures are a subject of 
great interest in evolutionary biology. The larval skeleton is a novel structure 
acquired in some echinoderm lineages via the activation of the adult skeletogenic
machinery. Previously, VEGF signaling was suggested to have played an important
role in the acquisition of the larval skeleton. In the present study, we compared
expression patterns of Alx genes among echinoderm classes to further explore the 
factors involved in the acquisition of a larval skeleton. We found that the alx1 
gene, originally described as crucial for sea urchin skeletogenesis, may have
also played an essential role in the evolution of the larval skeleton. Unlike
those echinoderms that have a larval skeleton, we found that alx1 of starfish was
barely expressed in early larvae that have no skeleton. When alx1 overexpression 
was induced via injection of alx1 mRNA into starfish eggs, the expression
patterns of certain genes, including those possibly involved in skeletogenesis,
were altered. This suggested that a portion of the skeletogenic program was
induced solely by alx1. However, we observed no obvious external phenotype or
skeleton. We concluded that alx1 was necessary but not sufficient for the
acquisition of the larval skeleton, which, in fact, requires several genetic
events. Based on these results, we discuss how the larval expression of alx1
contributed to the acquisition of the larval skeleton in the putative ancestral
lineage of echinoderms.

PMCID: PMC4750990
PMID: 26866800  [PubMed - in process]


4. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Oct 1;8(10):12129-39. eCollection 2015.

ALX1 promotes migration and invasion of lung cancer cells through increasing
snail expression.

Yao W(1), Liu Y(2), Zhang Z(3), Li G(3), Xu X(3), Zou K(2), Xu Y(2), Zou L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Dalian Medical University, Graduate School of Dalian Medical University Dalian
116027, China. (2)The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University
Dalian 116011, China. (3)Department of Radiation Oncology, The Second Affiliated 
Hospital of Dalian Medical University Dalian 116027, China.

Lung cancer is one of the main causes in cancer-related death. Here we reported a
novel functional role of Aristaless-like homeobox1 (ALX1) in lung carcinogenesis.
Analysis of ALX1 in lung cancer specimens confirms upregulation of ALX1 in lung
cancer, especially these with distant metastasis. Moreover, higher level of ALX1 
expression is associated with poorer prognosis of lung cancer patients. Ectopic
expression of ALX1 significantly promotes lung cancer cell proliferation,
migration and invasion, while ALX1 silencing by siRNA significantly inhibits
these abilities of lung cancer cells. The functional role of ALX1 is dependent on
increasing Snail expression and knockdown of Snail could restrain the role of
ALX1. Collectively, we identify critical roles of ALX1 in lung cancer development
and progression. These findings may serve as a framework for future
investigations designed to more comprehensive determination of ALX1 as a
potential therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC4680342
PMID: 26722397  [PubMed - in process]


5. Dev Biol. 2016 Jan 15;409(2):451-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.11.015. Epub 2015
Dec 2.

Aristaless-Like Homeobox protein 1 (ALX1) variant associated with craniofacial
structure and frontonasal dysplasia in Burmese cats.

Lyons LA(1), Erdman CA(2), Grahn RA(3), Hamilton MJ(4), Carter MJ(5), Helps
CR(6), Alhaddad H(7), Gandolfi B(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine & Surgery, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO 65211, USA; Department of
Population Health and Reproduction, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
California-Davis, Davis, CA 95776, USA. Electronic address: Lyonsla@Missouri.edu.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of California-San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Department of Population Health and Reproduction,
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California-Davis, Davis, CA 95776,
USA. (3)Veterinary Genetics Laboratory, School of Veterinary Medicine, University
of California-Davis, Davis, CA 96516, USA; Department of Population Health and
Reproduction, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California-Davis,
Davis, CA 95776, USA. (4)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Institute
for Integrative Genome Biology, Center for Disease Vector Research, University of
California-Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521, USA; Department of Population Health
and Reproduction, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California-Davis, 
Davis, CA 95776, USA. (5)MDxHealth Inc, 15279 Alton Parkway, Suite #100, Irvine, 
CA 92618, USA; Department of Population Health and Reproduction, School of
Veterinary Medicine, University of California-Davis, Davis, CA 95776, USA.
(6)Langford Veterinary Services, University of Bristol, Bristol BS40 5DU, UK.
(7)College of Science, Kuwait University, Safat, Kuwait. (8)Department of
Veterinary Medicine & Surgery, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO 65211, USA; Department of Population Health and
Reproduction, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California-Davis,
Davis, CA 95776, USA.

Frontonasal dysplasia (FND) can have severe presentations that are medically and 
socially debilitating. Several genes are implicated in FND conditions, including 
Aristaless-Like Homeobox 1 (ALX1), which is associated with FND3. Breeds of cats 
are selected and bred for extremes in craniofacial morphologies. In particular, a
lineage of Burmese cats with severe brachycephyla is extremely popular and is
termed Contemporary Burmese. Genetic studies demonstrated that the brachycephyla 
of the Contemporary Burmese is a simple co-dominant trait, however, the
homozygous cats have a severe craniofacial defect that is incompatible with life.
The craniofacial defect of the Burmese was genetically analyzed over a 20 year
period, using various genetic analysis techniques. Family-based linkage analysis 
localized the trait to cat chromosome B4. Genome-wide association studies and
other genetic analyses of SNP data refined a critical region. Sequence analysis
identified a 12bp in frame deletion in ALX1, c.496delCTCTCAGGACTG, which is 100% 
concordant with the craniofacial defect and not found in cats not related to the 
Contemporary Burmese.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4724490 [Available on 2017-01-15]
PMID: 26610632  [PubMed - in process]


6. Bioessays. 2016 Jan;38(1):14-20. doi: 10.1002/bies.201500079. Epub 2015 Nov 25.

Adaptive radiation of Darwin's finches revisited using whole genome sequencing.

Almén MS(1), Lamichhaney S(1), Berglund J(1), Grant BR(2), Grant PR(2), Webster
MT(1), Andersson L(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. (2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton
University, Princeton, NJ, USA. (3)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics,
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden. (4)Department of
Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, USA.

We recently used genome sequencing to study the evolutionary history of the
Darwin's finches. A prominent feature of our data was that different polymorphic 
sites in the genome tended to indicate different genetic relationships among
these closely related species. Such patterns are expected in recently diverged
genomes as a result of incomplete lineage sorting. However, we uncovered
conclusive evidence that these patterns have also been influenced by interspecies
hybridisation, a process that has likely played an important role in the
radiation of Darwin's finches. A major discovery was that segregation of two
haplotypes at the ALX1 locus underlies variation in beak shape among the Darwin's
finches, and that differences between the two haplotypes in a 240<U+2009>kb region in
blunt and pointed beaked birds involve both coding and regulatory changes. As we 
review herein, the evolution of such adaptive haplotypes comprising multiple
causal changes appears to be an important mechanism contributing to the evolution
of biodiversity.

© 2015 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26606649  [PubMed - in process]


7. Cell Rep. 2015 Oct 27;13(4):840-53. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.09.037. Epub 2015 
Oct 17.

New Functional Signatures for Understanding Melanoma Biology from Tumor Cell
Lineage-Specific Analysis.

Rambow F(1), Job B(2), Petit V(1), Gesbert F(1), Delmas V(1), Seberg H(3),
Meurice G(2), Van Otterloo E(3), Dessen P(2), Robert C(4), Gautheret D(2),
Cornell RA(3), Sarasin A(5), Larue L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Normal and Pathological Development of Melanocytes, 91405
Orsay, France; Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) UMR3347, 91405
Orsay, France; INSERM U1021, 91405 Orsay, France; Equipe Labellisée - Ligue
Nationale contre le Cancer, 91405 Orsay, France. (2)Plateforme de
Bioinformatique, UMS AMMICA, Gustave-Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA
52242, USA. (4)INSERM U981, Gustave-Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France. (5)Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) UMR8200, Gustave-Roussy and
University Paris-Sud, 94805 Villejuif, France. (6)Institut Curie, Normal and
Pathological Development of Melanocytes, 91405 Orsay, France; Centre National de 
la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) UMR3347, 91405 Orsay, France; INSERM U1021,
91405 Orsay, France; Equipe Labellisée - Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, 91405 
Orsay, France. Electronic address: lionel.larue@curie.fr.

Molecular signatures specific to particular tumor types are required to design
treatments for resistant tumors. However, it remains unclear whether tumors and
corresponding cell lines used for drug development share such signatures. We
developed similarity core analysis (SCA), a universal and unsupervised
computational framework for extracting core molecular features common to tumors
and cell lines. We applied SCA to mRNA/miRNA expression data from various
sources, comparing melanoma cell lines and metastases. The signature obtained was
associated with phenotypic characteristics in vitro, and the core genes CAPN3 and
TRIM63 were implicated in melanoma cell migration/invasion. About 90% of the
melanoma signature genes belong to an intrinsic network of transcription factors 
governing neural development (TFAP2A, DLX2, ALX1, MITF, PAX3, SOX10, LEF1, and
GAS7) and miRNAs (211-5p, 221-3p, and 10a-5p). The SCA signature effectively
discriminated between two subpopulations of melanoma patients differing in
overall survival, and classified MEKi/BRAFi-resistant and -sensitive melanoma
cell lines.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26489459  [PubMed - in process]


8. Development. 2015 Nov 1;142(21):3769-80. doi: 10.1242/dev.127969. Epub 2015 Sep
23.

microRNA-31 modulates skeletal patterning in the sea urchin embryo.

Stepicheva NA(1), Song JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716,
USA. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE
19716, USA jsong@udel.edu.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that repress the translation and
reduce the stability of target mRNAs in animal cells. microRNA-31 (miR-31) is
known to play a role in cancer, bone formation and lymphatic development.
However, studies to understand the function of miR-31 in embryogenesis have been 
limited. We examined the regulatory role of miR-31 in early development using the
sea urchin as a model. miR-31 is expressed at all stages of development and its
knockdown (KD) disrupts the patterning and function of primary mesenchyme cells
(PMCs), which form the embryonic skeleton spicules. We identified that miR-31
directly represses Pmar1, Alx1, Snail and VegfR7 within the PMC gene regulatory
network using reporter constructs. Further, blocking the miR-31-mediated
repression of Alx1 and/or VegfR7 in the developing embryo resulted in defects in 
PMC patterning and skeletogenesis. The majority of the mislocalized PMCs in
miR-31 KD embryos did not express VegfR10, indicating that miR-31 regulates VegfR
gene expression within PMCs. In addition, miR-31 indirectly suppresses Vegf3
expression in the ectoderm. These results indicate that miR-31 coordinately
suppresses genes within the PMCs and in the ectoderm to impact PMC patterning and
skeletogenesis. This study identifies the novel function and molecular mechanism 
of miR-31-mediated regulation in the developing embryo.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4647217 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26400092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Anticancer Res. 2015 Apr;35(4):1835-42.

Characterization of the 12q amplicons in lipomatous soft tissue tumors by
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification-based copy number analysis.

Creytens D(1), Van Gorp J(2), Speel EJ(3), Ferdinande L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital,
Ghent, Belgium david.creytens@uzgent.be creytensdavid@hotmail.com. (2)Department 
of Pathology, Diakonessenhuis Hospital Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental Biology,
Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, the Netherlands. (4)Department 
of Pathology, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Well-differentiated liposarcoma (WDLPS) and de-differentiated
liposarcoma (DDLPS) are characterized by amplified sequences derived from the
long arm of chromosome 12. The goal of the present study was to identify, besides
the well-known candidate genes, novel relevant genes in these large, complex 12q 
amplicons.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification,
genetic alterations in 19 different genes of 12q12-24 were evaluated in 77
lipomatous soft tissue tumors (including lipomas, WDLPS, DDLPS and pleomorphic
liposarcomas).
RESULTS: We recorded several amplified genes of 12q13-15, including miR-26a-2, a 
gene not well studied in liposarcoma, and the well-known and previously described
genes murine double minute 2 (MDM2), YEATS domain-containing protein 4 (YEATS4), 
high-mobility AT-hook 2 (HMGA2), cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) and tetraspanin
31 (TSPAN31). Interestingly, the amplification profiles of these six genes were
found to be significantly different between WDLPS and DDLPS, more frequently
having a high-level status in DDLPS than in WDLPS. In addition, DDLPS were found 
to have significantly higher mean amplification ratios compared to WDLPS.
Moreover, we identified additional genes exclusively amplified in DDLPS in 12q13,
12q21 and 12q24, including glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), mitogen
activated protein kinase kinase kinase 12 (MAP3K12), cyclin-dependent kinase 2
(CDK2), ALX homeobox 1 (ALX1) and T-box 5 (TBX5).
CONCLUSION: Differences in amplification profiles among WDLPS and DDLPS may be
related to progression/de-differentiation in liposarcomas and show how in the
future amplification profiles could provide an adjunctive tool in characterizing 
progression to DDLPS. In addition, we identified additional genes exclusively
amplified in DDLPS, which may play a role in liposarcomagenesis, particularly in 
the de-differentiation process.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25862836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Apr 14;4(4):712-26. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.02.012.
Epub 2015 Mar 26.

Long-term expandable SOX9+ chondrogenic ectomesenchymal cells from human
pluripotent stem cells.

Umeda K(1), Oda H(2), Yan Q(1), Matthias N(1), Zhao J(1), Davis BR(1), Nakayama
N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center
at Houston Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
Kyoto University School of Medicine, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (3)Institute of
Molecular Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address:
naoki.nakayama@uth.tmc.edu.

Here we report the successful generation and long-term expansion of
SOX9-expressing CD271(+)PDGFRa(+)CD73(+) chondrogenic ectomesenchymal cells from 
the PAX3/SOX10/FOXD3-expressing MIXL1(-)CD271(hi)PDGFRa(lo)CD73(-) neural
crest-like progeny of human pluripotent stem cells in a chemically defined medium
supplemented with Nodal/Activin/transforming growth factorß (TGFß) inhibitor and 
fibroblast growth factor (FGF). When "primed" with TGFß, such cells efficiently
formed translucent cartilage particles, which were completely mineralized in
12 weeks in immunocompromized mice. The ectomesenchymal cells were expandable
without loss of chondrogenic potential for at least 16 passages. They maintained 
normal karyotype for at least 10 passages and expressed genes representing
embryonic progenitors (SOX4/12, LIN28A/B), cranial mesenchyme (ALX1/3/4), and
chondroprogenitors (SOX9, COL2A1) of neural crest origin (SOX8/9, NGFR, NES).
Ectomesenchyme is a source of many craniofacial bone and cartilage structures.
The method we describe for obtaining a large quantity of human ectomesenchymal
cells will help to model craniofacial disorders in vitro and potentially provide 
cells for the repair of craniofacial damage.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4400647
PMID: 25818812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Gene Expr Patterns. 2015 Mar;17(2):87-97. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2015.03.003. Epub
2015 Mar 21.

Expession patterns of mesenchyme specification genes in two distantly related
echinoids, Glyptocidaris crenularis and Echinocardium cordatum.

Yamazaki A(1), Minokawa T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Marine Biology, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku
University, 9 Sakamoto, Asamushi, Aomori, Aomori 039-3501, Japan. (2)Research
Center for Marine Biology, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, 9
Sakamoto, Asamushi, Aomori, Aomori 039-3501, Japan. Electronic address:
takuya@m.tohoku.ac.jp.

The molecular mechanism of the larval mesenchyme cell specification in echinoids 
has been well analyzed. However, most of the data have been provided by studies
of a single group of echinoids, the order Camarodonta. Little is known about this
mechanism in other echinoid orders. We examined the expression patterns of
mesenchyme specification genes, micro1, hesC, alx1, tbr, ets1, cyp1, and gcm, in 
the two non-Camarodonta echinoids, Glyptocidaris crenularis and Echinocardium
cordatum. We found that the expression patterns of some genes contained
characteristics that were unique to one of the species; others were shared by the
two species. Some of the shared characteristics of G.<U+2009>crenularis and E.<U+2009>cordatum 
are not found in the species belonging to Camarodonta, suggesting the derived
status of this order. The expression of ets1 in E.<U+2009>cordatum aboral ectoderm is
one of the molecular level modifications possibly related to an evolutionarily
novel larval structure, the posterior process. Our results suggest that a
considerable number of modifications in the mesenchyme specification mechanisms
have been introduced during the echinoid evolution.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25801498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Tumour Biol. 2015 Aug;36(8):5965-70. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3271-z. Epub 2015
Mar 4.

Depletion of ALX1 causes inhibition of migration and induction of apoptosis in
human osteosarcoma.

Yang M(1), Pan Y, Zhou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, 400037, China.

Osteosarcoma is the most common primary malignant tumor in children and young
adults, and the molecular regulation of the invasion of osteosarcoma (OS) remains
unknown. In this study, we found that increased expression of ALX1 was associated
with the progression of osteosarcoma and that ALX1 protein levels were
significantly elevated in matched distant metastases. High ALX1 levels also
predict shorter overall survival of osteosarcoma patients. We investigated the
therapeutic potential of targeting ALX1 expression using the technique of RNA
silencing via short hairpin RNA (shRNA). Synthetic shRNA duplexes against ALX1
were introduced to downregulate the expression of ALX1 in a highly malignant
osteosarcoma cell line, U2OS. The results obtained indicated that shRNA targeting
of ALX1 could lead to an efficient and specific inhibition of endogenous ALX1
activity. Furthermore, we found that depletion of ALX1 caused a dramatic cell
cycle arrest, followed by massive apoptotic cell death, and eventually resulted
in a significant decrease in migration and invasion of the osteosarcoma cell line
studied.

PMID: 25736924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Nature. 2015 Feb 19;518(7539):371-5. doi: 10.1038/nature14181. Epub 2015 Feb 11.

Evolution of Darwin's finches and their beaks revealed by genome sequencing.

Lamichhaney S(1), Berglund J(1), Almén MS(1), Maqbool K(2), Grabherr M(1),
Martinez-Barrio A(1), Promerová M(1), Rubin CJ(1), Wang C(1), Zamani N(3), Grant 
BR(4), Grant PR(4), Webster MT(1), Andersson L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
SE-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden. (2)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences, SE-75007 Uppsala, Sweden. (3)1] Department
of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, SE-751 23 Uppsala, 
Sweden [2] Department of Plant Physiology, Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå,
Sweden. (4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University, 
Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA. (5)1] Department of Medical Biochemistry and
Microbiology, Uppsala University, SE-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden [2] Department of
Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences,
SE-75007 Uppsala, Sweden [3] Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843-4458, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2015 Feb 19;518(7539):308.

Darwin's finches, inhabiting the Galápagos archipelago and Cocos Island,
constitute an iconic model for studies of speciation and adaptive evolution. Here
we report the results of whole-genome re-sequencing of 120 individuals
representing all of the Darwin's finch species and two close relatives.
Phylogenetic analysis reveals important discrepancies with the phenotype-based
taxonomy. We find extensive evidence for interspecific gene flow throughout the
radiation. Hybridization has given rise to species of mixed ancestry. A
240 kilobase haplotype encompassing the ALX1 gene that encodes a transcription
factor affecting craniofacial development is strongly associated with beak shape 
diversity across Darwin's finch species as well as within the medium ground finch
(Geospiza fortis), a species that has undergone rapid evolution of beak shape in 
response to environmental changes. The ALX1 haplotype has contributed to
diversification of beak shapes among the Darwin's finches and, thereby, to an
expanded utilization of food resources.

PMID: 25686609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Dev Biol. 2015 Apr 1;400(1):148-58. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.01.017. Epub 2015
Jan 30.

Juvenile skeletogenesis in anciently diverged sea urchin clades.

Gao F(1), Thompson JR(2), Petsios E(2), Erkenbrack E(1), Moats RA(3), Bottjer
DJ(2), Davidson EH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
United States. (2)Department of Earth Sciences, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, United States. (3)Translational Biomedical
Imaging Laboratory, Department of Radiology, The Saban Research Institute,
Children<U+05F3>s Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School of Medicine USC, Los Angeles, CA
90027, United States. (4)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, CA 91125, United States. Electronic address: davidson@caltech.edu.

Mechanistic understanding of evolutionary divergence in animal body plans
devolves from analysis of those developmental processes that, in forms descendant
from a common ancestor, are responsible for their morphological differences. The 
last common ancestor of the two extant subclasses of sea urchins, i.e.,
euechinoids and cidaroids, existed well before the Permian/Triassic extinction
(252 mya). Subsequent evolutionary divergence of these clades offers in principle
a rare opportunity to solve the developmental regulatory events underlying a
defined evolutionary divergence process. Thus (i) there is an excellent and
fairly dense (if yet incompletely analyzed) fossil record; (ii) cladistically
confined features of the skeletal structures of modern euechinoid and cidaroid
sea urchins are preserved in fossils of ancestral forms; (iii) euechinoids and
cidaroids are among current laboratory model systems in molecular developmental
biology (here Strongylocentrotus purpuratus [Sp] and Eucidaris tribuloides [Et]);
(iv) skeletogenic specification in sea urchins is uncommonly well understood at
the causal level of interactions of regulatory genes with one another, and with
known skeletogenic effector genes, providing a ready arsenal of available
molecular tools. Here we focus on differences in test and perignathic girdle
skeletal morphology that distinguish all modern euechinoid from all modern
cidaroid sea urchins. We demonstrate distinct canonical test and girdle
morphologies in juveniles of both species by use of SEM and X-ray
microtomography. Among the sharply distinct morphological features of these
clades are the internal skeletal structures of the perignathic girdle to which
attach homologous muscles utilized for retraction and protraction of Aristotles<U+05F3> 
lantern and its teeth. We demonstrate that these structures develop de novo
between one and four weeks after metamorphosis. In order to study the underlying 
developmental processes, a method of section whole mount in situ hybridization
was adapted. This method displays current gene expression in the developing test 
and perignathic girdle skeletal elements of both Sp and Et juveniles. Active,
specific expression of the sm37 biomineralization gene in these muscle attachment
structures accompanies morphogenetic development of these clade-specific features
in juveniles of both species. Skeletogenesis at these clade-specific muscle
attachment structures displays molecular earmarks of the well understood
embryonic skeletogenic GRN: thus the upstream regulatory gene alx1 and the gene
encoding the vegfR signaling receptor are both expressed at the sites where they 
are formed. This work opens the way to analysis of the alternative spatial
specification processes that were installed at the evolutionary divergence of the
two extant subclasses of sea urchins.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25641694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2014 Aug;37(4):297-303. doi: 10.1007/s13402-014-0189-1. Epub 
2014 Aug 16.

Validation of DNA promoter hypermethylation biomarkers in breast cancer--a short 
report.

de Groot JS(1), Pan X, Meeldijk J, van der Wall E, van Diest PJ, Moelans CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, H04.312, PO Box
85500, 3508, GA, Utrecht, the Netherlands.

PURPOSE: DNA promoter hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes is known to
occur early in cancer development, including breast cancer. To improve early
breast cancer detection, we aimed to investigate whether the identification of
DNA promoter hypermethylation might be of added value.
METHODS: The methylation status of a panel of 19 candidate genes (AKR1B1, ALX1,
ARHGEF7, FZD10, GHSR, GPX7, GREM1, GSTP1, HOXD1, KL, LHX2, MAL, MGMT, NDRG2,
RASGRF2, SFRP1, SFRP2, TM6SF1 and TMEFF2) was determined in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded normal breast and breast cancer tissue samples using gel-based 
methylation-specific PCR (MSP).
RESULTS: The promoters of the AKR1B1, ALX1, GHSR, GREM1, RASGRF2, SFRP2, TM6SF1
and TMEFF2 genes were found to be significantly differentially methylated in
normal versus malignant breast tissues. Based on sensitivity, specificity and
logistic regression analyses the best performing genes for detecting breast
cancer were identified. Through multivariate analyses, we found that AKR1B1 and
TM6SF1 could detect breast cancer with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.986 in 
a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) assessment.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our data, we conclude that AKR1B1 and TM6SF1 may serve as
candidate methylation biomarkers for early breast cancer detection. Further
studies are underway to evaluate the methylation status of these genes in body
fluids, including nipple aspirates and blood.

PMID: 25123395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Development. 2014 Jul;141(13):2669-79. doi: 10.1242/dev.104331. Epub 2014 Jun 12.

Larval mesenchyme cell specification in the primitive echinoid occurs
independently of the double-negative gate.

Yamazaki A(1), Kidachi Y(2), Yamaguchi M(3), Minokawa T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Marine Biology, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku
University, 9 Sakamoto, Asamushi, Aomori, Aomori 039-3501, Japan
yama0205@gmail.com. (2)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Aomori University, 2-3-1 Kobata, Aomori, Aomori 030-0943, Japan.
(3)Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan. (4)Research
Center for Marine Biology, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, 9
Sakamoto, Asamushi, Aomori, Aomori 039-3501, Japan.

Echinoids (sea urchins) are divided into two major groups - cidaroids (a
'primitive' group) and euechinoids (a 'derived' group). The cidaroids are a
promising model species for understanding the ancestral developmental mechanisms 
in echinoids, but little is known about the molecular mechanisms of cidaroid
development. In euechinoids, skeletogenic mesenchyme cell specification is
regulated by the double-negative gate (DNG), in which hesC represses the
transcription of the downstream mesenchyme specification genes (alx1, tbr and
ets1), thereby defining the prospective mesenchyme region. To estimate the
ancestral mechanism of larval mesenchyme cell specification in echinoids, the
expression patterns and roles of mesenchyme specification genes in the cidaroid
Prionocidaris baculosa were examined. The present study reveals that the
expression pattern and function of hesC in P. baculosa were inconsistent with the
DNG model, suggesting that the euechinoid-type DNG is not utilized during
cidaroid mesenchyme specification. In contrast with hesC, the expression patterns
and functions of alx1, tbr and ets1 were similar between P. baculosa and
euechinoids. Based on these results, we propose that the roles of alx1, tbr and
ets1 in mesenchyme specification were established in the common ancestor of
echinoids, and that the DNG system was acquired in the euechinoid lineage after
divergence from the cidaroid ancestor. The evolutionary timing of the
establishment of the DNG suggests that the DNG was originally related to
micromere and/or primary mesenchyme cell formation but not to skeletogenic cell
differentiation.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 24924196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Development. 2014 Apr;141(7):1503-13. doi: 10.1242/dev.101436. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Sub-circuits of a gene regulatory network control a developmental
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Saunders LR(1), McClay DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a fundamental cell state change that
transforms epithelial to mesenchymal cells during embryonic development, adult
tissue repair and cancer metastasis. EMT includes a complex series of
intermediate cell state changes including remodeling of the basement membrane,
apical constriction, epithelial de-adhesion, directed motility, loss of
apical-basal polarity, and acquisition of mesenchymal adhesion and polarity.
Transcriptional regulatory state changes must ultimately coordinate the timing
and execution of these cell biological processes. A well-characterized gene
regulatory network (GRN) in the sea urchin embryo was used to identify the
transcription factors that control five distinct cell changes during EMT. Single 
transcription factors were perturbed and the consequences followed with in vivo
time-lapse imaging or immunostaining assays. The data show that five different
sub-circuits of the GRN control five distinct cell biological activities, each
part of the complex EMT process. Thirteen transcription factors (TFs) expressed
specifically in pre-EMT cells were required for EMT. Three TFs highest in the GRN
specified and activated EMT (alx1, ets1, tbr) and the 10 TFs downstream of those 
(tel, erg, hex, tgif, snail, twist, foxn2/3, dri, foxb, foxo) were also required 
for EMT. No single TF functioned in all five sub-circuits, indicating that there 
is no EMT master regulator. Instead, the resulting sub-circuit topologies suggest
EMT requires multiple simultaneous regulatory mechanisms: forward cascades,
parallel inputs and positive-feedback lock downs. The interconnected and
overlapping nature of the sub-circuits provides one explanation for the seamless 
orchestration by the embryo of cell state changes leading to successful EMT.

PMCID: PMC3957374
PMID: 24598159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Development. 2014 Feb;141(4):950-61. doi: 10.1242/dev.105585.

Genome-wide analysis of the skeletogenic gene regulatory network of sea urchins.

Rafiq K(1), Shashikant T, McManus CJ, Ettensohn CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, 4400 Fifth
Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Erratum in
    Development. 2014 Jun;141(12):2542.

A central challenge of developmental and evolutionary biology is to understand
the transformation of genetic information into morphology. Elucidating the
connections between genes and anatomy will require model morphogenetic processes 
that are amenable to detailed analysis of cell/tissue behaviors and to
systems-level approaches to gene regulation. The formation of the calcified
endoskeleton of the sea urchin embryo is a valuable experimental system for
developing such an integrated view of the genomic regulatory control of
morphogenesis. A transcriptional gene regulatory network (GRN) that underlies the
specification of skeletogenic cells (primary mesenchyme cells, or PMCs) has
recently been elucidated. In this study, we carried out a genome-wide analysis of
mRNAs encoded by effector genes in the network and uncovered transcriptional
inputs into many of these genes. We used RNA-seq to identify >400 transcripts
differentially expressed by PMCs during gastrulation, when these cells undergo a 
striking sequence of behaviors that drives skeletal morphogenesis. Our analysis
expanded by almost an order of magnitude the number of known (and candidate)
downstream effectors that directly mediate skeletal morphogenesis. We carried out
genome-wide analysis of (1) functional targets of Ets1 and Alx1, two pivotal,
early transcription factors in the PMC GRN, and (2) functional targets of MAPK
signaling, a pathway that plays an essential role in PMC specification. These
studies identified transcriptional inputs into >200 PMC effector genes. Our work 
establishes a framework for understanding the genomic regulatory control of a
major morphogenetic process and has important implications for reconstructing the
evolution of biomineralization in metazoans.

PMID: 24496631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Feb;164A(2):346-52. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36140. Epub 2013
Dec 13.

Potocki-Shaffer deletion encompassing ALX4 in a patient with frontonasal
dysplasia phenotype.

Ferrarini A(1), Gaillard M, Guerry F, Ramelli G, Heidi F, Keddache CV, Wieland I,
Beckmann JS, Jaquemont S, Martinet D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, San Giovanni Hospital, Bellinzona, Switzerland.

Frontonasal dysplasia (FND) is a genetically heterogeneous malformation spectrum 
with marked hypertelorism, broad nasal tip and bifid nose. Only a small number of
genes have been associated with FND phenotypes until now, the first gene being
EFNB1, related to craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS) with craniosynostosis in
addition, and more recently the aristaless-like homeobox genes ALX3, ALX4, and
ALX1, which have been related with distinct phenotypes named FND1, FND2, and FND3
respectively. We here report on a female patient presenting with severe FND
features along with partial alopecia, hypogonadism and intellectual disability.
While molecular investigations did not reveal mutations in any of the known
genes, ALX4, ALX3, ALX1 and EFNB1, comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) 
techniques showed a large heterozygous de novo deletion at 11p11.12p12,
encompassing the ALX4 gene. Deletions in this region have been described in
patients with Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (PSS), characterized by biparietal
foramina, multiple exostoses, and intellectual disability. Although the patient
reported herein manifests some overlapping features of FND and PPS, it is likely 
that the observed phenotype maybe due to a second unidentified mutation in the
ALX4 gene. The phenotype will be discussed in view of the deleted region
encompassing the ALX4 gene.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24376213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Nov 10;31(32):4140-7. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.48.5516. Epub 2013
Sep 30.

A prognostic DNA methylation signature for stage I non-small-cell lung cancer.

Sandoval J(1), Mendez-Gonzalez J, Nadal E, Chen G, Carmona FJ, Sayols S, Moran S,
Heyn H, Vizoso M, Gomez A, Sanchez-Cespedes M, Assenov Y, Müller F, Bock C, Taron
M, Mora J, Muscarella LA, Liloglou T, Davies M, Pollan M, Pajares MJ, Torre W,
Montuenga LM, Brambilla E, Field JK, Roz L, Lo Iacono M, Scagliotti GV, Rosell R,
Beer DG, Esteller M.

Author information: 
(1)Juan Sandoval, Jesus Mendez-Gonzalez, F. Javier Carmona, Sergi Sayols,
Sebastian Moran, Holger Heyn, Miguel Vizoso, Antonio Gomez, Montse
Sanchez-Cespedes, and Manel Esteller, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute;
Josefina Mora, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau; Manel Esteller, University
of Barcelona and Institucio Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Barcelona;
Miquel Taron and Rafael Rosell, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Badalona,
Catalonia; Marina Pollan, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid; Maria J. Pajares
and Luis M. Montuenga, University of Navarra; Wenceslao Torre, Clínica University
de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; Ernest Nadal, Guoan Chen, and David G. Beer,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI; Yassen Assenov and Fabian
Müller, Max Planck Institute, Saarbrücken, Germany; Christoph Bock, Center for
Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria; Lucia A.
Muscarella, Istituto Di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; Triantafillos Liloglou,
Michael Davies, and John K. Field, The University of Liverpool Cancer Research
Centre, Liverpool, United Kingdom; Elisabeth Brambilla, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire A Michallon, Grenoble, France; Luca Roz, IRCCS Foundation National 
Cancer Institute, Milan; Marco Lo Iacono and Giorgio V. Scagliotti, University of
Torino, Orbassano (Torino), Italy.

PURPOSE: Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a tumor in which only small
improvements in clinical outcome have been achieved. The issue is critical for
stage I patients for whom there are no available biomarkers that indicate which
high-risk patients should receive adjuvant chemotherapy. We aimed to find DNA
methylation markers that could be helpful in this regard.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A DNA methylation microarray that analyzes 450,000 CpG
sites was used to study tumoral DNA obtained from 444 patients with NSCLC that
included 237 stage I tumors. The prognostic DNA methylation markers were
validated by a single-methylation pyrosequencing assay in an independent cohort
of 143 patients with stage I NSCLC.
RESULTS: Unsupervised clustering of the 10,000 most variable DNA methylation
sites in the discovery cohort identified patients with high-risk stage I NSCLC
who had shorter relapse-free survival (RFS; hazard ratio [HR], 2.35; 95% CI, 1.29
to 4.28; P = .004). The study in the validation cohort of the significant
methylated sites from the discovery cohort found that hypermethylation of five
genes was significantly associated with shorter RFS in stage I NSCLC: HIST1H4F,
PCDHGB6, NPBWR1, ALX1, and HOXA9. A signature based on the number of
hypermethylated events distinguished patients with high- and low-risk stage I
NSCLC (HR, 3.24; 95% CI, 1.61 to 6.54; P = .001).
CONCLUSION: The DNA methylation signature of NSCLC affects the outcome of stage I
patients, and it can be practically determined by user-friendly polymerase chain 
reaction assays. The analysis of the best DNA methylation biomarkers improved
prognostic accuracy beyond standard staging.

PMID: 24081945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Gene Expr Patterns. 2013 Dec;13(8):464-72. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2013.09.002. Epub
2013 Sep 16.

Expression of skeletogenic genes during arm regeneration in the brittle star
Amphiura filiformis.

Czarkwiani A(1), Dylus DV, Oliveri P.

Author information: 
(1)Research Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, UCL, Gower Street,
London WC1E 6BT, UK.

The brittle star Amphiura filiformis, which regenerates its arms post autotomy,
is emerging as a useful model for studying the molecular underpinnings of
regeneration, aided by the recent availability of some molecular resources.
During regeneration a blastema initially is formed distally to the amputation
site, and then a rapid rebuild is obtained by adding metameric units, which will 
eventually differentiate and become fully functional. In this work we first
characterize the developmental process of the regenerating arms using two
differentiation markers for muscle and skeletal structures - Afi-trop-1 and
Afi-acoll. Both genes are not expressed in the blastema and newly added
undifferentiated metameric units. Their expression at different regenerating
stages shows an early segregation of muscle and skeletal cells during the
regenerating process, long before the metameric units become functional. We then 
studied the expression of a set of genes orthologous of the sea urchin
transcription factors involved in the development of skeletal and non-skeletal
mesoderm: Afi-ets1/2, Afi-alx1, Afi-tbr, Afi-foxB and Afi-gataC. We found that
Afi-ets1/2, Afi-alx1, Afi-foxB and Afi-gataC are all expressed at the blastemal
stage. As regeneration progresses those genes are expressed in a similar small
undifferentiated domain beneath the distal growth cap, while in more advanced
metameric units they become restricted to different skeletal domains. Afi-foxB
becomes expressed in non-skeletal structures. This suggests that they might play 
a combinatorial role only in the early cell specification process and that
subsequently they function independently in the differentiation of different
structures. Afi-tbr is not present in the adult arm tissue at any stage of
regeneration. In situ hybridization results have been confirmed with a new
strategy for quantitative PCR (QPCR), using a subdivision of the three stages of 
regeneration into proximal (differentiated) and distal (undifferentiated) arm
segments.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3838619
PMID: 24051028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Oncol Lett. 2013 Apr;5(4):1211-1218. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

Abnormal methylation of seven genes and their associations with clinical
characteristics in early stage non-small cell lung cancer.

Zhao Y(1), Zhou H, Ma K, Sun J, Feng X, Geng J, Gu J, Wang W, Zhang H, He Y, Guo 
S, Zhou X, Yu J, Lin Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200032;

To identify novel abnormally methylated genes in early stage non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC), we analyzed the methylation status of 13 genes (ALX1, BCL2,
FOXL2, HPP1, MYF6, OC2, PDGFRA, PHOX2A, PITX2, RARB, SIX6, SMPD3 and SOX1) in
cancer tissues from 101 cases of stage I NSCLC patients and lung tissues from 30 
cases of non-cancerous lung disease controls, using methylation-specific PCR
(MSP). The methylation frequencies (29.70-64.36%) of 7 genes (MYF6, SIX6, SOX1,
RARB, BCL2, PHOX2A and FOLX2) in stage I NSCLC were significantly higher compared
with those in non-cancerous lung disease controls (P<0.05). The co-methylation of
SIX6 and SOX1, or the co-methyaltion of SIX6, RARB and SOX1 was associated with
adenosquamous carcinoma (ADC), and the co-methylation of BCL2, RARB and SIX6 was 
associated with smoking. A panel of 4 genes (MYF6, SIX6, BCL2 and RARB) may offer
a sensitivity of 93.07% and a specificity of 83.33% in the diagnosis of stage I
NSCLC. Furthermore, we also detected the expression of 8 pathological markers
(VEGF, HER-2, P53, P21, EGFR, CHGA, SYN and EMA) in cancer tissues of stage I
NSCLC by immunohistochemistry, and found that high expression levels of p53 and
CHGA were associated with the methylation of BCL2 (P=0.025) and PHOX2A (P=0.023),
respectively. In this study, among the 7 genes which demonstrated
hypermethylation in stage I NSCLC compared with non-cancerous lung diseases, 5
genes (MYF6, SIX6, PHOX2A, FOLX2 and SOX1) were found for the first time to be
abonormally methylated in NSCLC. Further study of these genes shed light on the
carcinogenesis of NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC3629069
PMID: 23599765  [PubMed]


23. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Mar;161A(3):600-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35762. Epub 2013
Feb 7.

Vertical transmission of a frontonasal phenotype caused by a novel ALX4 mutation.

Bertola DR(1), Rodrigues MG, Quaio CR, Kim CA, Passos-Bueno MR.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto da Criança - HC/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil. debora.bertola@icr.usp.br

Frontonasal dysplasias (FND) comprise a spectrum of disorders caused by abnormal 
median facial development. Its etiology is still poorly understood but recently
frontonasal dysplasia phenotypes were linked to loss-of-function mutations in the
ALX homeobox gene family, which comprises the ALX1, ALX3, and ALX4 genes. All
ALX-related frontonasal phenotypes till date had been compatible with an
autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. In contrast, heterozygous
loss-of-function mutations in ALX4 had been only associated with isolated
symmetrical parietal ossification defects at the intersection of the sagittal and
lambdoid sutures, known as enlarged parietal foramina. We report a family with
vertical transmission from mother to son of mild frontonasal dysplasia phenotype 
caused by a novel ALX4 gene mutation
(c.1080-1089_delGACCCGGTGCinsCTAAGATCTCAACAGAGATGGCAACT, p.Asp326fsX21).This is
the first report of a frontonasal phenotype related to a heterozygous mutation in
ALX4. This mutation is predicted to cause the loss of the aristaless domain in
the C-terminal region of the protein and preserves the homeodomain. We speculate 
that a different mechanism, a dominant-negative effect, is responsible for the
distinct phenotype in this family.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23401352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cancer Res. 2013 Mar 1;73(5):1581-90. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2377. Epub
2013 Jan 3.

ALX1 induces snail expression to promote epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and
invasion of ovarian cancer cells.

Yuan H(1), Kajiyama H, Ito S, Yoshikawa N, Hyodo T, Asano E, Hasegawa H, Maeda M,
Shibata K, Hamaguchi M, Kikkawa F, Senga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Division of Cancer Biology, Nagoya
University Graduate School of Medicine, Showa, Nagoya, Japan.

Ovarian cancer is a highly invasive and metastatic disease with a poor prognosis 
if diagnosed at an advanced stage, which is often the case. Recent studies argue 
that ovarian cancer cells that have undergone epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) acquire aggressive malignant properties, but the relevant
molecular mechanisms in this setting are not well-understood. Here, we report
findings from an siRNA screen that identified the homeobox transcription factor
ALX1 as a novel regulator of EMT. RNA interference-mediated attenuation of ALX1
expression restored E-cadherin expression and cell-cell junction formation in
ovarian cancer cells, suppressing cell invasion, anchorage-independent growth,
and tumor formation. Conversely, enforced expression of ALX1 in ovarian cancer
cells or nontumorigenic epithelial cells induced EMT. We found that ALX1
upregulated expression of the key EMT regulator Snail (SNAI1) and that it
mediated EMT activation and cell invasion by ALX1. Our results define the
ALX1/Snail axis as a novel EMT pathway that mediates cancer invasion.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 23288509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Turk Ger Gynecol Assoc. 2013 Mar 1;14(1):50-2. doi: 10.5152/jtgga.2013.12.
eCollection 2013.

Prenatal diagnosis of frontonasal dysplasia with anterior encephalocele.

Esmer AÇ(1), Kalelioglu I(1), Kayserili H(2), Yüksel A(1), Has R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Istanbul University Istanbul Faculty 
of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. (2)Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul
University Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.

Frontonasal dysplasia is a rare congenital anomaly affecting the eyes, nose and
forehead, and occurs sporadically in most of the cases. A 24-year-old woman was
referred to our unit at 27 weeks gestation due to the preliminary diagnosis of
encephalocele. The sagittal and axial sonography of the fetal face depicted a
midline mass measuring 3.8 × 4.2 cm, projecting anteriorly between the fetal
orbits and extending from the the upper aspects of the forehead to the nasal
bridge, which was consistent with the frontal (anterior) encephalocele. There
were prominent hypertelorism and two facial clefts, and the nostrils were
extremely separated. Following genetic counseling, the couple requested
termination of pregnancy. Fetal pathologic examination confirmed the diagnosis of
frontonasal dysplasia and anterior encephalocele with no additional major
malformation. The fetal karyotype was normal and no mutation in the ALX1 gene was
found, excluding ALX1-related frontonasal dysplasia in the differential
diagnosis. Fetuses with neural tube defect may suffer from associated syndromes
and disorders, as with our case. The presence of frontonasal dyplasia should be
considered when an anterior encephalocele is detected by ultrasonography.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMCID: PMC3881724
PMID: 24592072  [PubMed]


26. Comput Biol Med. 2012 Nov;42(11):1141-9. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2012.09.006.
Epub 2012 Oct 10.

Meta analysis of gene expression changes upon treatment of A549 cells with
anti-cancer drugs to identify universal responses.

Agrawal M(1), Gadgil M.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Engineering and Process Development Division, CSIR-National Chemical 
Laboratory, Pune 411008, India.

A meta-analysis of publicly available gene expression changes in A549 cells upon 
treatment with anti-cancer drugs is reported. To reduce false positives, both
fold-change and significance level cutoffs were used. Simulated datasets and
permutation analysis were used to guide choice of ratio cutoff. Of the genes
identified, FDXR is the only gene differentially expressed in six of the seven
drug treatments. Though FDXR has been reported to be differentially expressed
upon treatment with 5-fluorouracil and its expression correlated to long term
disease survival, to our knowledge this is a first study implicating a wide
effect of anti-cancer drug treatment on FDXR expression. The other genes
identified which are differentially expressed in four out of the seven drug
treatments are CDKN1A and PARVB which are upregulated and MYC, HBP1, LDLR, SIM2, 
ALX1 and GPHN which are downregulated.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23063289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jan 15;22(2):239-51. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds423. Epub 2012 Oct
11.

Defective neural crest migration revealed by a Zebrafish model of Alx1-related
frontonasal dysplasia.

Dee CT(1), Szymoniuk CR, Mills PE, Takahashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester
M13 9PT, UK.

Frontonasal dysplasia (FND) refers to a class of midline facial malformations
caused by abnormal development of the facial primordia. The term encompasses a
spectrum of severities but characteristic features include combinations of ocular
hypertelorism, malformations of the nose and forehead and clefting of the facial 
midline. Several recent studies have drawn attention to the importance of Alx
homeobox transcription factors during craniofacial development. Most notably,
loss of Alx1 has devastating consequences resulting in severe orofacial clefting 
and extreme microphthalmia. In contrast, mutations of Alx3 or Alx4 cause milder
forms of FND. Whilst Alx1, Alx3 and Alx4 are all known to be expressed in the
facial mesenchyme of vertebrate embryos, little is known about the function of
these proteins during development. Here, we report the establishment of a
zebrafish model of Alx-related FND. Morpholino knock-down of zebrafish alx1
expression causes a profound craniofacial phenotype including loss of the facial 
cartilages and defective ocular development. We demonstrate for the first time
that Alx1 plays a crucial role in regulating the migration of cranial neural
crest (CNC) cells into the frontonasal primordia. Abnormal neural crest migration
is coincident with aberrant expression of foxd3 and sox10, two genes previously
suggested to play key roles during neural crest development, including migration,
differentiation and the maintenance of progenitor cells. This novel function is
specific to Alx1, and likely explains the marked clinical severity of Alx1
mutation within the spectrum of Alx-related FND.

PMID: 23059813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Evodevo. 2012 Aug 9;3(1):17. doi: 10.1186/2041-9139-3-17.

Development of an embryonic skeletogenic mesenchyme lineage in a sea cucumber
reveals the trajectory of change for the evolution of novel structures in
echinoderms.

McCauley BS(1), Wright EP, Exner C, Kitazawa C, Hinman VF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, 4400 5th
Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA. veronica@cmu.edu.

BACKGROUND: The mechanisms by which the conserved genetic "toolkit" for
development generates phenotypic disparity across metazoans is poorly understood.
Echinoderm larvae provide a great resource for understanding how developmental
novelty arises. The sea urchin pluteus larva is dramatically different from basal
echinoderm larval types, which include the auricularia-type larva of its sister
taxon, the sea cucumbers, and the sea star bipinnaria larva. In particular, the
pluteus has a mesodermally-derived larval skeleton that is not present in sea
star larvae or any outgroup taxa. To understand the evolutionary origin of this
structure, we examined the molecular development of mesoderm in the sea cucumber,
Parastichopus parvimensis.
RESULTS: By comparing gene expression in sea urchins, sea cucumbers and sea
stars, we partially reconstructed the mesodermal regulatory state of the
echinoderm ancestor. Surprisingly, we also identified expression of the
transcription factor alx1 in a cryptic skeletogenic mesenchyme lineage in P.
parvimensis. Orthologs of alx1 are expressed exclusively within the sea urchin
skeletogenic mesenchyme, but are not expressed in the mesenchyme of the sea star,
which suggests that alx1+ mesenchyme is a synapomorphy of at least sea urchins
and sea cucumbers. Perturbation of Alx1 demonstrates that this protein is
necessary for the formation of the sea cucumber spicule. Overexpression of the
sea star alx1 ortholog in sea urchins is sufficient to induce additional
skeleton, indicating that the Alx1 protein has not evolved a new function during 
the evolution of the larval skeleton.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed echinoderm ancestral mesoderm state is highly conserved
between the morphologically similar, but evolutionarily distant, auricularia and 
bipinnaria larvae. However, the auricularia, but not bipinnaria, also develops a 
simple skelotogenic cell lineage. Our data indicate that the first step in
acquiring these novel cell fates was to re-specify the ancestral mesoderm into
molecularly distinct territories. These new territories likely consisted of only 
a few cells with few regulatory differences from the ancestral state, thereby
leaving the remaining mesoderm to retain its original function. The new
territories were then free to take on a new fate. Partitioning of existing gene
networks was a necessary pre-requisite to establish novelty in this system.

PMCID: PMC3482387
PMID: 22877149  [PubMed]


29. Evol Dev. 2011 Jul-Aug;13(4):343-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-142X.2011.00489.x.

Evolution of the Alx homeobox gene family: parallel retention and independent
loss of the vertebrate Alx3 gene.

McGonnell IM(1), Graham A, Richardson J, Fish JL, Depew MJ, Dee CT, Holland PW,
Takahashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction and Development, The Royal Veterinary College, Royal College
Street, London NW1 0TU, UK. imcgonnell@rvc.ac.uk

The Alx gene family is implicated in craniofacial development and comprises two
to four homeobox genes in each vertebrate genome analyzed. Using phylogenetics
and comparative genomics, we show that the common ancestor of jawed vertebrates
had three Alx genes descendent from the two-round genome duplications (Alx1,
Alx3, Alx4), compared with a single amphioxus gene. Later in evolution one of the
paralogues, Alx3, was lost independently from at least three different vertebrate
lineages, whereas Alx1 and Alx4 were consistently retained. Comparison of spatial
gene expression patterns reveals that the three mouse genes have equivalent
craniofacial expression to the two chick and frog genes, suggesting that
redundancy compensated for gene loss. We suggest that multiple independent loss
of one Alx gene was predisposed by extensive and persistent overlap in gene
expression between Alx paralogues. Even so, it is unclear whether it was
coincidence or evolutionary bias that resulted in the same Alx gene being lost on
each occasion, rather than different members of the gene family.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3166657
PMID: 21740507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Dev Biol. 2011 Sep 15;357(2):505-17. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.06.016. Epub 2011 
Jun 30.

Precise cis-regulatory control of spatial and temporal expression of the alx-1
gene in the skeletogenic lineage of s. purpuratus.

Damle S(1), Davidson EH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA.

Deployment of the gene-regulatory network (GRN) responsible for skeletogenesis in
the embryo of the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus is restricted to the
large micromere lineage by a double negative regulatory gate. The gate consists
of a GRN subcircuit composed of the pmar1 and hesC genes, which encode repressors
and are wired in tandem, plus a set of target regulatory genes under hesC
control. The skeletogenic cell state is specified initially by micromere-specific
expression of these regulatory genes, viz. alx1, ets1, tbrain and tel, plus the
gene encoding the Notch ligand Delta. Here we use a recently developed high
throughput methodology for experimental cis-regulatory analysis to elucidate the 
genomic regulatory system controlling alx1 expression in time and embryonic
space. The results entirely confirm the double negative gate control system at
the cis-regulatory level, including definition of the functional HesC target
sites, and add the crucial new information that the drivers of alx1 expression
are initially Ets1, and then Alx1 itself plus Ets1. Cis-regulatory analysis
demonstrates that these inputs quantitatively account for the magnitude of alx1
expression. Furthermore, the Alx1 gene product not only performs an
auto-regulatory role, promoting a fast rise in alx1 expression, but also, when at
high levels, it behaves as an auto-repressor. A synthetic experiment indicates
that this behavior is probably due to dimerization. In summary, the results we
report provide the sequence level basis for control of alx1 spatial expression by
the double negative gate GRN architecture, and explain the rising, then falling
temporal expression profile of the alx1 gene in terms of its auto-regulatory
genetic wiring.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3164750
PMID: 21723273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. BMC Med Genet. 2011 May 20;12:70. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-70.

Clinical and molecular characterization of a transmitted reciprocal translocation
t(1;12)(p32.1;q21.3) in a family co-segregating with mental retardation, language
delay, and microcephaly.

Liao HM(1), Fang JS, Chen YJ, Wu KL, Lee KF, Chen CH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Chromosome translocation associated with neurodevelopmental disorders
provides an opportunity to identify new disease-associated genes and gain new
insight into their function. During chromosome analysis, we identified a
reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 1p and 12q, t(1; 12)(p32.1; q21.3), 
co-segregating with microcephaly, language delay, and severe psychomotor
retardation in a mother and her two affected boys.
METHODS: Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), long-range PCR, and direct
sequencing were used to map the breakpoints on chromosomes 1p and 12q. A reporter
gene assay was conducted in human neuroblastoma (SKNSH) and Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO) cell lines to assess the functional implication of the fusion sequences
between chromosomes 12 and 1.
RESULTS: We determined both breakpoints at the nucleotide level. Neither
breakpoint disrupted any known gene directly. The breakpoint on chromosome 1p was
located amid a gene-poor region of ~ 1.1 Mb, while the breakpoint on chromosome
12q was located ~ 3.4 kb downstream of the ALX1 gene, a homeobox gene. In the
reporter gene assay, we discovered that the fusion sequences construct between
chromosomes 12 and 1 had a ~ 1.5 to 2-fold increased reporter gene activity
compared with the corresponding normal chromosome 12 sequences construct.
CONCLUSION: Our findings imply that the translocation may enhance the expression 
of the ALX1 gene via the position effect and result in the clinical symptoms of
this family. Our findings may also expand the clinical phenotype spectrum of
ALX1-related human diseases as loss of the ALX1 function was recently reported to
result in abnormal craniofacial development.

PMCID: PMC3125236
PMID: 21595979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Dev Dyn. 2011 May;240(5):1063-86. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22605. Epub 2011 Mar 17.

Pbx homeodomain proteins: TALEnted regulators of limb patterning and outgrowth.

Capellini TD(1), Zappavigna V, Selleri L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York, USA.

Limb development has long provided an excellent model for understanding the
genetic principles driving embryogenesis. Studies utilizing chick and mouse have 
led to new insights into limb patterning and morphogenesis. Recent research has
centered on the regulatory networks underlying limb development. Here, we discuss
the hierarchical, overlapping, and iterative roles of Pbx family members in
appendicular development that have emerged from genetic analyses in the mouse.
Pbx genes are essential in determining limb bud positioning, early bud formation,
limb axes establishment and coordination, and patterning and morphogenesis of
most elements of the limb and girdle. Pbx proteins directly regulate critical
effectors of limb and girdle development, including morphogen-encoding genes like
Shh in limb posterior mesoderm, and transcription factor-encoding genes like Alx1
in pre-scapular domains. Interestingly, at least in limb buds, Pbx appear to act 
not only as Hox cofactors, but also in the upstream control of 5' HoxA/D gene
expression.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3081394
PMID: 21416555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Dev Dyn. 2010 Dec;239(12):3391-403. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22476.

Conserved early expression patterns of micromere specification genes in two
echinoid species belonging to the orders clypeasteroida and echinoida.

Yamazaki A(1), Furuzawa Y, Yamaguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa, Japan.

The micromere gene regulatory network (GRN) has been extensively examined using
sea urchins belonging to the order Echinoida. To examine whether the network of
Echinoida species is conserved in Scaphechinus mirabilis, an irregular echinoid
of the order Clypeasteroida, the genes micro1, hesC, alx1, ets1, and delta were
isolated from S. mirabilis and their expression patterns were compared with those
from Hemicentrotus pulcherrimus, a species belonging to the order Echinoida. Data
from this study suggest that the early GRN architecture had been largely
established in a common ancestor of these two species. On the other hand, we
found vegetal shifts in expression domains of some GRN members in H. pulcherrimus
embryos compared to S. mirabilis embryos.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21046631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Oct 8;11:141. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-141.

Genes encoding critical transcriptional activators for murine neural tube
development and human spina bifida: a case-control study.

Lu W(1), Guzman AR, Yang W, Chapa CJ, Shaw GM, Greene RM, Pisano MM, Lammer EJ,
Finnell RH, Zhu H.

Author information: 
(1)Dell Pediatric Research Institute, UT Austin, Austin, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Spina bifida is a malformation of the neural tube and is the most
common of neural tube defects (NTDs). The etiology of spina bifida is largely
unknown, although it is thought to be multi-factorial, involving multiple
interacting genes and environmental factors. Mutations in transcriptional
co-activator genes-Cited2, p300, Cbp, Tfap2a, Carm1 and Cart1 result in NTDs in
murine models, thus prompt us to investigate whether homologues of these genes
are associated with NTDs in humans.
METHODS: Data and biological samples from 297 spina bifida cases and 300 controls
were derived from a population-based case-control study conducted in California. 
37 SNPs within CITED2, EP300, CREBBP, TFAP2A, CARM1 and ALX1 were genotyped using
an ABI SNPlex assay. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated for
alleles, genotypes and haplotypes to evaluate the risk for spina bifida.
RESULTS: Several SNPs showed increased or decreased risk, including CITED2
rs1131431 (OR = 5.32, 1.04~27.30), EP300 rs4820428 (OR = 1.30, 1.01~1.67), EP300 
rs4820429 (OR = 0.50, 0.26~0.50, in whites, OR = 0.7, 0.49~0.99 in all subjects),
EP300 rs17002284 (OR = 0.43, 0.22~0.84), TFAP2A rs3798691 (OR = 1.78, 1.13~2.87
in Hispanics), CREBBP rs129986 (OR = 0.27, 0.11~0.69), CARM1 rs17616105 (OR =
0.41, 0.22~0.72 in whites). In addition, one haplotype block in EP300 and one in 
TFAP2A appeared to be associated with increased risk.
CONCLUSIONS: Modest associations were observed in CITED2, EP300, CREBBP, TFAP2A
and CARM1 but not ALX1. However, these modest associations were not statistically
significant after correction for multiple comparisons. Searching for potential
functional variants and rare causal mutations is warranted in these genes.

PMCID: PMC2964532
PMID: 20932315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Dec 15;111(6):1437-44. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22871.

Expression of homeobox genes in oral squamous cell carcinoma cell lines treated
with all-trans retinoic acid.

Acquafreda T(1), Nunes FD, Soprano DR, Soprano KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo,
São Paulo, Brazil.

Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) may arise from potentially malignant oral
lesions. All-trans retinoic acid (atRA), which plays a role in cell growth and
differentiation, has been studied as a possible chemotherapeutic agent in the
prevention of this progression. While the mechanism by which atRA suppresses cell
growth has not been completely elucidated, it is known that homeobox genes are
atRA targets. To determine if these genes are involved in the atRA-mediated OSCC 
growth inhibition, PCR array was performed to evaluate the expression of 84
homeobox genes in atRA-sensitive SCC-25 cells compared to atRA-resistant SCC-9
cells following 7 days with atRA treatment. Results showed that the expression of
8 homeobox genes was downregulated and expression of 4 was upregulated in SCC-25 
cells but not in SCC-9 cells. Gene expression levels were confirmed for seven of 
these genes by RT-qPCR. Expression of three genes that showed threefold
downregulation was evaluated in SCC-25 cells treated with atRA for 3, 5, and 7
days. Three different patterns of atRA-dependent gene expression were observed.
ALX1 showed downregulation only on day 7. DLX3 showed reduced expression on day 3
and further reduced on day 7. TLX1 showed downregulation only on days 5 and 7.
Clearly the expression of homeobox genes is modulated by atRA in OSCC cell lines.
However, the time course of this modulation suggests that these genes are not
direct targets of atRA mediating OSCC growth suppression. Instead they appear to 
act as downstream effectors of atRA signaling.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20830740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Development. 2010 Aug 1;137(15):2559-69. doi: 10.1242/dev.048819.

Scapula development is governed by genetic interactions of Pbx1 with its family
members and with Emx2 via their cooperative control of Alx1.

Capellini TD(1), Vaccari G, Ferretti E, Fantini S, He M, Pellegrini M, Quintana
L, Di Giacomo G, Sharpe J, Selleri L, Zappavigna V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The genetic pathways underlying shoulder blade development are largely unknown,
as gene networks controlling limb morphogenesis have limited influence on scapula
formation. Analysis of mouse mutants for Pbx and Emx2 genes has suggested their
potential roles in girdle development. In this study, by generating compound
mutant mice, we examined the genetic control of scapula development by Pbx genes 
and their functional relationship with Emx2. Analyses of Pbx and Pbx1;Emx2
compound mutants revealed that Pbx genes share overlapping functions in shoulder 
development and that Pbx1 genetically interacts with Emx2 in this process. Here, 
we provide a biochemical basis for Pbx1;Emx2 genetic interaction by showing that 
Pbx1 and Emx2 can bind specific DNA sequences as heterodimers. Moreover, the
expression of genes crucial for scapula development is altered in these mutants, 
indicating that Pbx genes act upstream of essential pathways for scapula
formation. In particular, expression of Alx1, an effector of scapula blade
patterning, is absent in all compound mutants. We demonstrate that Pbx1 and Emx2 
bind in vivo to a conserved sequence upstream of Alx1 and cooperatively activate 
its transcription via this potential regulatory element. Our results establish an
essential role for Pbx1 in genetic interactions with its family members and with 
Emx2 and delineate novel regulatory networks in shoulder girdle development.

PMCID: PMC2927673
PMID: 20627960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2010 Aug;88(8):619-25. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20695.

Cecr2 mutations causing exencephaly trigger misregulation of
mesenchymal/ectodermal transcription factors.

Fairbridge NA(1), Dawe CE, Niri FH, Kooistra MK, King-Jones K, McDermid HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Over 200 mouse genes are associated with neural tube defects (NTDs), 
including Cecr2, the bromodomain-containing subunit of the CERF chromatin
remodeling complex.
METHODS: Gene-trap mutation Cecr2(Gt45Bic) results in 74% exencephaly (equivalent
of human anencephaly) on the BALB/c strain. Gene expression altered during
cranial neural tube closure by the Cecr2 mutation was identified through
microarray analysis of 11-14 somites stage Cecr2(Gt45Bic)embryos.
RESULTS: Analysis of Affymetrix Mouse 430 2.0 chips detected 60 transcripts
up-regulated and 54 transcripts down-regulated in the Cecr2(Gt45Bic) embryos
(fold > 1.5, p < 0.05). The Cecr2 transcript was reduced only approximately 7- to
14-fold from normal levels, suggesting the Cecr2(Gt45Bic) is a hypomorphic
mutation. We therefore generated a novel Cecr2 null allele (Cecr2 (tm1.1Hemc)).
Resulting mutants displayed a stronger penetrance of exencephaly than
Cecr2(Gt45Bic) in both BALB/c and FVB/N strains, in addition to midline facial
clefts and forebrain encephalocele in the FVB/N strain. The Cecr2 transcript is
reduced 260-fold in the Cecr2(tm1.1Hemc) line. Subsequent qRT-PCR using Cecr2
(tm1.1Hemc) mutant heads confirmed downregulation of transcription factors
Alx1/Cart1, Dlx5, Eya1, and Six1.
CONCLUSIONS: As both Alx1/Cart1 and Dlx5 mouse mutations result in exencephaly,
we hypothesize that changes in expression of these mesenchymal/ectodermal
transcription factors may contribute to NTDs associated with Cecr2.

PMID: 20589882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 May 14;86(5):789-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.04.002. Epub
2010 May 6.

Disruption of ALX1 causes extreme microphthalmia and severe facial clefting:
expanding the spectrum of autosomal-recessive ALX-related frontonasal dysplasia.

Uz E(1), Alanay Y, Aktas D, Vargel I, Gucer S, Tuncbilek G, von Eggeling F,
Yilmaz E, Deren O, Posorski N, Ozdag H, Liehr T, Balci S, Alikasifoglu M, Wollnik
B, Akarsu NA.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Mapping Laboratory, Department of Medical Genetics, Hacettepe University 
Medical Faculty, Sihhiye, Ankara, Turkey.

We present an autosomal-recessive frontonasal dysplasia (FND) characterized by
bilateral extreme microphthalmia, bilateral oblique facial cleft, complete cleft 
palate, hypertelorism, wide nasal bridge with hypoplasia of the ala nasi, and
low-set, posteriorly rotated ears in two distinct families. Using Affymetrix 250K
SNP array genotyping and homozygosity mapping, we mapped this clinical entity to 
chromosome 12q21. In one of the families, three siblings were affected, and CNV
analysis of the critical region showed a homozygous 3.7 Mb deletion containing
the ALX1 (CART1) gene, which encodes the aristaless-like homeobox 1 transcription
factor. In the second family we identified a homozygous donor-splice-site
mutation (c.531+1G > A) in the ALX1 gene, providing evidence that complete loss
of function of ALX1 protein causes severe disruption of early craniofacial
development. Unlike loss of its murine ortholog, loss of human ALX1 does not
result in neural-tube defects; however, it does severely affect the orchestrated 
fusion between frontonasal, nasomedial, nasolateral, and maxillary processes
during early-stage embryogenesis. This study further expands the spectrum of the 
recently recognized autosomal-recessive ALX-related FND phenotype in humans.

Copyright (c) 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2869009
PMID: 20451171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Development. 2010 Apr;137(7):1149-57. doi: 10.1242/dev.048652. Epub 2010 Feb 24.

Activation of the skeletogenic gene regulatory network in the early sea urchin
embryo.

Sharma T(1), Ettensohn CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, 4400 Fifth
Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

The gene regulatory network (GRN) that underlies the development of the embryonic
skeleton in sea urchins is an important model for understanding the architecture 
and evolution of developmental GRNs. The initial deployment of the network is
thought to be regulated by a derepression mechanism, which is mediated by the
products of the pmar1 and hesC genes. Here, we show that the activation of the
skeletogenic network occurs by a mechanism that is distinct from the
transcriptional repression of hesC. By means of quantitative, fluorescent
whole-mount in situ hybridization, we find that two pivotal early genes in the
network, alx1 and delta, are activated in prospective skeletogenic cells prior to
the downregulation of hesC expression. An analysis of the upstream regulation of 
alx1 shows that this gene is regulated by MAPK signaling and by the transcription
factor Ets1; however, these inputs influence only the maintenance of alx1
expression and not its activation, which occurs by a distinct mechanism. By
altering normal cleavage patterns, we show that the zygotic activation of alx1
and delta, but not that of pmar1, is dependent upon the unequal division of
vegetal blastomeres. Based on these findings, we conclude that the widely
accepted double-repression model is insufficient to account for the localized
activation of the skeletogenic GRN. We postulate the existence of additional,
unidentified repressors that are controlled by pmar1, and propose that the
ability of pmar1 to derepress alx1 and delta is regulated by the unequal division
of vegetal blastomeres.

PMID: 20181745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Int J Dev Biol. 2009;53(7):1097-104. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.072489vb.

CBP/p300 and associated transcriptional co-activators exhibit distinct expression
patterns during murine craniofacial and neural tube development.

Bhattacherjee V(1), Horn KH, Singh S, Webb CL, Pisano MM, Greene RM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Louisville Birth Defects Center, Department of Molecular,
Cellular and Craniofacial Biology, ULSD, KY 40292, USA.

Mutations in each of the transcriptional co-activator genes - CBP, p300, Cited2, 
Cart1 and Carm1 - result in neural tube defects in mice. The present study thus
furnishes a complete and comparative temporal and spatial expression map of
CBP/p300 and associated transcriptional co-activators, Cited2, Cart1 and Carm1
during the period of murine neural tube development (embryonic days 8.5 to 10.5).
Each co-activator except Cart1 was expressed in the dorsal neural folds on E8.5. 
Although CBP and p300 are functionally interchangeable in vitro, their respective
expression patterns diverge during embryogenesis before neural fold fusion is
complete. CBP gene expression was lost from the neural folds by E8.75 and was
thereafter weakly expressed in the maxillary region and limb buds, while p300
exhibited strong expression in the first branchial arch, limb bud and
telencephalic regions on E9.5. Cart1 exhibited strong expression in the forebrain
mesenchyme from E9.0 through E10.5. Although CBP, p300, Carm1 and Cited2 share
temporal expression on E8.5, these co-activators have different spatial
expression in mesenchyme and/or the neuroepithelium. Nevertheless,
co-localization to the dorsal neural folds on E8.5 suggests a functional role in 
elevation and/or fusion of the neural folds. Target genes, and pathways that
promote cranial neural tube fusion that are activated by
CBP/p300/Carm1/Cited2/Cart1-containing transcriptional complexes await
elucidation.

PMCID: PMC2746635
PMID: 19598128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mech Dev. 2009 Aug-Sep;126(8-9):611-23. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.06.1083. Epub
2009 Jun 21.

Structure-function correlation of micro1 for micromere specification in sea
urchin embryos.

Yamazaki A(1), Ki S, Kokubo T, Yamaguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan.

The micromeres of sea urchin embryos have two functions: to promote the
autonomous differentiation of skeletogenic cells and to induce endomesodermal
tissues. Micromere specification is controlled by a double-repression gate
consisting of two repressors, Pmar1 and HesC. Micro1/pmar1 encodes a
transcriptional repressor with a paired-type N-terminal homeodomain and two
C-terminal serine-rich repeats, each of which includes a sequence similar to
engrailed homology region 1, which interacts with the co-repressor Groucho. To
understand the molecular mechanisms of the double-repression gate, we examined
the correlation between the structure and function of micro1. Phenotypic and gene
expression pattern analyses of embryos injected with mutated micro1 mRNA revealed
that micro1 consists of five functional domain and motifs; namely, a DNA-binding 
homeodomain, a nuclear localization signal in the C-terminal flanking region of
the homeodomain, and two eh1-like motifs plus a short C-terminal stretch that
together mediate transcriptional repression. Our data suggest that micro1
represses target genes, including hesC, via two redundant means: its eh1-like and
C-terminal motifs. The C-terminal motif requires unidentified sequences for
micro1 function; a micro1 mutant with the motif but lacking the unidentified
sequences failed to trigger the double-repression gate for early micromere
regulatory genes, except for delta, though it did repress hesC. Our results
suggest that the spatial regulation of primary mesenchyme cell specification
genes, including tbr, alx1, and ets1, may be different from that of delta.

PMID: 19549568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Dev Biol. 2008 Oct 15;322(2):425-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.07.036. Epub 2008 
Aug 7.

The surprising complexity of the transcriptional regulation of the spdri gene
reveals the existence of new linkages inside sea urchin's PMC and Oral Ectoderm
Gene Regulatory Networks.

Mahmud AA(1), Amore G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Evolution Group, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Napoli, Villa
Comunale Napoli, Italy.

During sea urchin embryogenesis the spdri gene participates in two separate Gene 
Regulatory Networks (GRNs): the Primary Mesenchyme Cells' (PMCs) and the Oral
Ectoderm's one. In both cases, activation of the gene follows initial
specification events [Amore, G., Yavrouian, R., Peterson, K., Ransick, A.,
McClay, D., Davidson, E., 2003. Spdeadringer, a sea urchin embryo gene required
separately in skeletogenic and oral ectoderm gene regulatory networks. Dev. Biol.
261, 55-81.]. We identified a portion of genomic DNA ("4.7IL" -3456;+389) which
is sufficient to replicate sdpri's expression pattern in experiments of
transgenesis, using a GFP reporter. In our experiments, the activation kinetic of
4.7IL-GFP was similar to that of the endogenous gene and the reporter responded
to known spdri's transcriptional regulators (Ets1, Alx1, Gsc and Dri). Here we
present a dissection of this regulatory region and a description of the modules
involved in spdri's transcriptional regulation. Both in the PMCs' and Oral
Ectoderm's expression phases, activation of spdri is obtained through the
integration of three kinds of inputs: positive and globally distributed ones;
negative ones (that prevent ectopic expression); positive and tissue-specific
ones. Our results allow to expand the map of the regulatory connections at the
spdri node, both in the PMCs and in the Oral Ectoderm Gene Regulatory Networks
(GRNs).

PMID: 18718463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Dev Biol. 2008 Jul 15;319(2):406-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.003. Epub 2008 
Apr 15.

Twist is an essential regulator of the skeletogenic gene regulatory network in
the sea urchin embryo.

Wu SY(1), Yang YP, McClay DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, French Family Science Center, Duke University, Durham, 
NC 27708, USA. simon.wu@vanderbilt.edu

Recent work on the sea urchin endomesoderm gene regulatory network (GRN) offers
many opportunities to study the specification and differentiation of each cell
type during early development at a mechanistic level. The mesoderm lineages
consist of two cell populations, primary and secondary mesenchyme cells (PMCs and
SMCs). The micromere-PMC GRN governs the development of the larval skeleton,
which is the exclusive fate of PMCs, and SMCs diverge into four lineages, each
with its own GRN state. Here we identify a sea urchin ortholog of the Twist
transcription factor, and show that it plays an essential role in the PMC GRN and
later is involved in SMC formation. Perturbations of Twist either by morpholino
knockdown or by overexpression result in defects in progressive phases of PMC
development, including specification, ingression/EMT, differentiation and
skeletogenesis. Evidence is presented that Twist expression is required for the
maintenance of the PMC specification state, and a reciprocal regulation between
Alx1 and Twist offers stability for the subsequent processes, such as PMC
differentiation and skeletogenesis. These data illustrate the significance of
regulatory state maintenance and continuous progression during cell
specification, and the dynamics of the sequential events that depend on those
earlier regulatory states.

PMCID: PMC2517249
PMID: 18495103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Dev Biol. 2008 Jun 15;318(2):360-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.056. Epub 2008
Mar 14.

A new method, using cis-regulatory control, for blocking embryonic gene
expression.

Smith J(1), Davidson EH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 156-29, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA. jsmith1@caltech.edu

Many genes, and particularly regulatory genes, are utilized multiple times in
unrelated phases of development. For studies of gene function during
embryogenesis, there is often need of a method for interfering with expression
only at a specific developmental time or place. Here we show that in sea urchin
embryos cis-regulatory control systems which operate only at specific times and
places can be used to drive expression of short designed sequences targeting
given primary transcripts, thereby effectively taking out the function of the
target genes. The active sequences are designed to be complementary to intronic
sequences of the primary transcript of the target genes. In this work, the target
genes were the transcription factors alx1 and ets1, both required for
skeletogenesis, and the regulatory drivers were from the sm30 and tbr genes. The 
sm30 gene is expressed only after skeletogenic cell ingression. When its
regulatory apparatus was used as driver, the alx1 and ets1 repression constructs 
had the effect of preventing postgastrular skeletogenesis, while not interfering 
with earlier alx1 and ets1 function in promoting skeletogenic mesenchyme
ingression. In contrast, repression constructs using the tbr driver, which is
active in blastula stage, block ingression. This method thus provides the
opportunity to study regulatory requirements of skeletogenesis after ingression, 
and may be similarly useful in many other developmental contexts.

PMCID: PMC3929273
PMID: 18423438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Development. 2007 Mar;134(6):1061-70. Epub 2007 Feb 7.

The Snail repressor is required for PMC ingression in the sea urchin embryo.

Wu SY(1), McClay DR.

Author information: 
(1)DCMB group, Biology Department, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA.

In metazoans, the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial process
for placing the mesoderm beneath the ectoderm. Primary mesenchyme cells (PMCs) at
the vegetal pole of the sea urchin embryo ingress into the floor of the
blastocoele from the blastula epithelium and later become the skeletogenic
mesenchyme. This ingression movement is a classic EMT during which the PMCs
penetrate the basal lamina, lose adherens junctions and migrate into the
blastocoele. Later, secondary mesenchyme cells (SMCs) also enter the blastocoele 
via an EMT, but they accompany the invagination of the archenteron initially, in 
much the same way vertebrate mesenchyme enters the embryo along with endoderm.
Here we identify a sea urchin ortholog of the Snail transcription factor, and
focus on its roles regulating EMT during PMC ingression. Functional knockdown
analyses of Snail in whole embryos and chimeras demonstrate that Snail is
required in micromeres for PMC ingression. Snail represses the transcription of
cadherin, a repression that appears evolutionarily conserved throughout the
animal kingdom. Furthermore, Snail expression is required for endocytosis of
cadherin, a cellular activity that accompanies PMC ingression. Perturbation
studies position Snail in the sea urchin micromere-PMC gene regulatory network
(GRN), downstream of Pmar1 and Alx1, and upstream of several PMC-expressed
proteins. Taken together, our findings indicate that Snail plays an essential
role in PMCs to control the EMT process, in part through its repression of
cadherin expression during PMC ingression, and in part through its role in the
endocytosis that helps convert an epithelial cell to a mesenchyme cell.

PMCID: PMC3045531
PMID: 17287249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Dev Biol. 2005 Jul 15;283(2):384-96.

P16 is an essential regulator of skeletogenesis in the sea urchin embryo.

Cheers MS(1), Ettensohn CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 
15213, USA.

The primary mesenchyme cells (PMCs) of the sea urchin embryo undergo a dramatic
sequence of morphogenetic behaviors that culminates in the formation of the
larval endoskeleton. Recent studies have identified components of a gene
regulatory network that underlies PMC specification and differentiation. In
previous work, we identified novel gene products expressed specifically by PMCs
(Illies, M.R., Peeler, M.T., Dechtiaruk, A.M., Ettensohn, C.A., 2002.
Identification and developmental expression of new biomineralization proteins in 
the sea urchin, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus. Dev. Genes Evol. 212, 419-431).
Here, we show that one of these gene products, P16, plays an essential role in
skeletogenesis. P16 is not required for PMC specification, ingression, migration,
or fusion, but is essential for skeletal rod elongation. We have compared the
predicted sequences of P16 from two species and show that this small, acidic
protein is highly conserved in both structure and function. The predicted amino
acid sequence of P16 and the subcellular localization of a GFP-tagged form of the
protein suggest that P16 is enriched in the plasma membrane. It may function to
receive signals required for skeletogenesis or may play a more direct role in the
deposition of biomineral. Finally, we place P16 downstream of Alx1 in the PMC
gene network, thereby linking the network to a specific "effector" protein
involved in biomineralization.

PMID: 15935341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Development. 2005 Apr;132(7):1601-10. Epub 2005 Feb 23.

Genetics of shoulder girdle formation: roles of Tbx15 and aristaless-like genes.

Kuijper S(1), Beverdam A, Kroon C, Brouwer A, Candille S, Barsh G, Meijlink F.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The diverse cellular contributions to the skeletal elements of the vertebrate
shoulder and pelvic girdles during embryonic development complicate the study of 
their patterning. Research in avian embryos has recently clarified part of the
embryological basis of shoulder formation. Although dermomyotomal cells provide
the progenitors of the scapular blade, local signals appear to have an essential 
guiding role in this process. These signals differ from those that are known to
pattern the more distal appendicular skeleton. We have studied the impact of
Tbx15, Gli3, Alx4 and related genes on formation of the skeletal elements of the 
mouse shoulder and pelvic girdles. We observed severe reduction of the scapula in
double and triple mutants of these genes. Analyses of a range of complex
genotypes revealed aspects of their genetic relationship, as well as functions
that had been previously masked due to functional redundancy. Tbx15 and Gli3
appear to have synergistic functions in formation of the scapular blade. Scapular
truncation in triple mutants of Tbx15, Alx4 and Cart1 indicates essential
functions for Alx4 and Cart1 in the anterior part of the scapula, as opposed to
Gli3 function being linked to the posterior part. Especially in Alx4/Cart1
mutants, the expression of markers such as Pax1, Pax3 and Scleraxis is altered
prior to stages when anatomical aberrations are visible in the shoulder region.
This suggests a disorganization of the proximal limb bud and adjacent flank
mesoderm, and is likely to reflect the disruption of a mechanism providing
positional cues to guide progenitor cells to their destination in the pectoral
girdle.

PMID: 15728667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Przegl Lek. 2003;60(6):418-24.

[Calcimimmetic and calcilytics: new perspectives of correction of abnormal
parathormone (PTH) secretion].

[Article in Polish]

Rybczynska A(1), Hoppe A.

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Zaklad Fizjopatologii, Akademia Medyczna w Gdansku.

Treatment of excessive secretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH) in primary
hyperparathyroidism (I degree HPT) as well as in secondary hyperparathyroidism
(II degree HPT) in chronic renal insufficiency is symptomatic, short-term acting 
and far from expectations. Recognition of properties of calcium receptor (CaR)
expressed on parathyroid principal cell membranes created possibilities to
explore new compounds that could alter directly PTH secretion and provide a novel
therapy for direct correction of increased secretion of the hormone in these
disorders. Ligands that activate this receptor and inhibit PTH secretion are
called calcimimetics. Recently clinical trials with NPS R-568, a calcimimetic of 
the Ist generation, and AMG 073, a representative of calcimimetics of IInd
generation, were completed. Calcimimetics, taken orally, effectively lower
increased secretion of PTH and hypercalcemia in I degree HPT, by "pharmacologic
parathyroidectomy". Such compounds are also safe and effective in dialysed
patients with II degree HPT in chronic renal insufficiency: they decrease PTH
plasma level and prevent parathyroid cell hyperplasia. The other compounds,
called calcilytics and represented by NPS 2143, inhibit CaR resulting therefore
in increase of PTH secretion. Administration of calcilytics would provide a
valuable alternative to inhibit progression of osteoporosis. Subcutaneous,
pulsative low doses of recombinant PTH (ALX1-11) administration induces increase 
of bone formation. Such an effect to some extent was obtained by transient
increase of endogenous PTH secretion induced by oral administration of calcilytic
NPS 2143 to osteopenic ovariectomized rats, especially if it was accompanied by
supplementation of estrogens.

PMID: 14974181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Development. 2004 Mar;131(5):1075-87.

A Raf/MEK/ERK signaling pathway is required for development of the sea urchin
embryo micromere lineage through phosphorylation of the transcription factor Ets.

Röttinger E(1), Besnardeau L, Lepage T.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 7009 CNRS, Université de Paris VI, Observatoire Océanologique, 06230
Villefranche-sur-Mer, France.

Erratum in
    Development. 2004 May;131(4):2233.

In the sea urchin embryo, the skeleton of the larva is built from a population of
mesenchymal cells known as the primary mesenchyme cells (PMCs). These derive from
the large micromeres that originate from the vegetal pole at fourth cleavage. At 
the blastula stage, the 32 cells of this lineage detach from the epithelium and
ingress into the blastocoel by a process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. We
report that shortly before ingression, there is a transient and highly localized 
activation of the MAP-kinase ERK in the micromere lineage. We show that
ingression of the PMCs requires the activity of ERK, MEK and Raf, and depends on 
the maternal Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. Dissociation experiments and injection of 
mRNA encoding a dominant-negative form of Ras indicated that this activation is
probably cell autonomous. We identified the transcription factors Ets1 and Alx1
as putative targets of the phosphorylation by ERK. Both proteins contain a single
consensus site for phosphorylation by the MAP kinase ERK. In addition, the Ets1
protein sequence contains a putative ERK docking site. Overexpression of ets1 by 
injection of synthetic mRNA in the egg caused a dramatic increase in the number
of cells becoming mesenchymal at the blastula stage. This effect could be largely
inhibited by treating embryos with the MEK inhibitor U0126. Moreover, mutations
in the consensus phosphorylation motif substituting threonine 107 by an aspartic 
or an alanine residue resulted respectively in a constitutively active form of
Ets1 that could not be inhibited by U0126 or in an inactive form of Ets1. These
results show that the MAP kinase pathway, working through phosphorylation of
Ets1, is required for full specification of the PMCs and their subsequent
transition from epithelial to mesenchymal state.

PMID: 14973284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 9;279(15):14746-51. Epub 2004 Jan 21.

A novel NADH-linked l-xylulose reductase in the l-arabinose catabolic pathway of 
yeast.

Verho R(1), Putkonen M, Londesborough J, Penttilä M, Richard P.

Author information: 
(1)VTT Biotechnology, P. O. Box 1500, FIN-02044 VTT, Finland.

An NADH-dependent l-xylulose reductase and the corresponding gene were identified
from the yeast Ambrosiozyma monospora. The enzyme is part of the yeast pathway
for l-arabinose catabolism. A fungal pathway for l-arabinose utilization has been
described previously for molds. In this pathway l-arabinose is sequentially
converted to l-arabinitol, l-xylulose, xylitol, and d-xylulose and enters the
pentose phosphate pathway as d-xylulose 5-phosphate. In molds the reductions are 
NADPH-linked, and the oxidations are NAD(+)-linked. Here we show that in A.
monospora the pathway is similar, i.e. it has the same two reduction and two
oxidation reactions, but the reduction by l-xylulose reductase is not performed
by a strictly NADPH-dependent enzyme as in molds but by a strictly NADH-dependent
enzyme. The ALX1 gene encoding the NADH-dependent l-xylulose reductase is
strongly expressed during growth on l-arabinose as shown by Northern analysis.
The gene was functionally overexpressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the
purified His-tagged protein characterized. The reversible enzyme converts
l-xylulose to xylitol. It also converts d-ribulose to d-arabinitol but has no
activity with l-arabinitol or adonitol, i.e. it is specific for sugar alcohols
where, in a Fischer projection, the hydroxyl group of the C-2 is in the
l-configuration and the hydroxyl group of C-3 is in the d-configuration. It also 
has no activity with C-6 sugars or sugar alcohols. The K(m) values for l-xylulose
and d-ribulose are 9.6 and 4.7 mm, respectively. To our knowledge this is the
first report of an NADH-linked l-xylulose reductase.

PMID: 14736891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Bone Miner Res. 2003 Aug;18(8):1419-29.

P300/CBP acts as a coactivator to cartilage homeoprotein-1 (Cart1), paired-like
homeoprotein, through acetylation of the conserved lysine residue adjacent to the
homeodomain.

Iioka T(1), Furukawa K, Yamaguchi A, Shindo H, Yamashita S, Tsukazaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Orthopaedic Pathomechanism, Department of Developmental and
Reconstructive Medicine, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

The paired-like homeoprotein, Cart1, is involved in skeletal development. We
describe here that the general coactivator p300/CBP controls the transcription
activity of Cart1 through acetylation of a lysine residue that is highly
conserved in other homeoproteins. Acetylation of this residue increases the
interaction between p300/CBP and Cart1 and enhances its transcriptional
activation.INTRODUCTION: Cart1 encodes a paired-like homeoprotein expressed
selectively in chondrocyte lineage during embryonic development. Although its
target gene remains unknown, gene disruption studies have revealed that Cart1
plays an important role for craniofacial bone formation as well as limb
development by cooperating with another homeoprotein, Alx4. In this report, we
study the functional involvement of p300/CBP, coactivators with intrinsic histone
acetyltransferase (HAT) activity, in the transcriptional control of Cart1.
METHODS: To study the transcription activity of Cart1, a reporter construct
containing a putative Cart1 binding site was transiently transfected with the
expression vectors of each protein. The interaction between p300/CBP and Cart1
was investigated by glutathione S-transferase (GST) pull-down, yeast two-hybrid, 
and immunoprecipitation assays. In vitro acetylation assay was performed with the
recombinant p300-HAT domain and Cart1 in the presence of acetyl-CoA.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: p300 and CBP stimulate Cart1-dependent transcription
activity, and this transactivation is inhibited by E1A and Tax, oncoproteins that
suppress the activity of p300/CBP. Cart1 binds to p300 in vivo and in vitro, and 
this requires the homeodomain of Cart 1 and N-terminal 139 amino acids of p300.
Confocal microscopy analysis shows that Cart1 recruits overexpressed and
endogenous p300 to a Cart1-specific subnuclear compartment. Cart1 is acetylated
in vivo and sodium butyrate and trichostatin A, histone deacetylase inhibitors,
markedly enhance the transcription activity of Cart1. Deletion and mutagenesis
analysis identifies the 131st lysine that locates immediately adjacent to the
homeodomain as a target of p300-HAT, and a point mutation to this residue
attenuates the binding affinity to p300 as well as p300-dependent transcription
activity. Together, these results indicate that p300/CBP acts as a
cotransactivator to Cart1 through a direct interaction and specific lysine
acetylation. In addition, because 131st lysine is highly conserved in other types
of homeoprotein, this lysine may be a common target for HAT of p300/CBP for these
proteins.

PMID: 12929931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Drugs R D. 2003;4(4):231-5.

ALX 111: ALX1-11, parathyroid hormone (1-84) - NPS Allelix, PREOS, PTH,
recombinant human parathyroid hormone, rhPTH (1-84).

Adis International Ltd.

ALX 111 [parathyroid hormone (1-84) - NPS Allelix, recombinant human parathyroid 
hormone, rhPTH (1-84), PREOS] is a full-length, recombinant human parathyroid
hormone. It has potential as an anti-osteoporotic agent, due to its properties as
a bone formation stimulant. This profile has been selected from R&D Insight, a
pharmaceutical intelligence database produced by Adis International Ltd. It has
been recommended that ALX 111 should be given for 1 to 2 years and may be given
in combination with an antiresorptive agent, such as estrogen or a
bisphosphonate. In December 1999, Allelix Biopharmaceuticals merged with NPS
Pharmaceuticals. This combined company is operating as NPS Pharmaceuticals in the
US and as NPS Allelix in Canada. The merger has enabled a phase III study of ALX 
111 to begin in the US, Europe and South America. NPS harmaceuticals has signed
an agreement with Bio-Imaging Technologies, which will provide all image handling
and analysis for this trial. Until 1994, Allelix Biopharmaceuticals and Glaxo in 
Canada were involved in a joint venture to investigate the efficacy of ALX 111 in
osteoporosis. Allelix was subsequently, until September 1998, collaborating with 
Astra of Sweden in developing ALX 111. Astra had acquired exclusive worldwide
rights to ALX 111 and was responsible for development of the agent. However,
Astra returned all rights to ALX 111 to Allelix as a result of its merger with
Zeneca to form AstraZeneca. In December 1999, Allelix Biopharmaceuticals merged
with NPS Pharmaceuticals. This combined company is operating as NPS
Pharmaceuticals in the US and as NPS Allelix in Canada. The merger has enabled a 
phase III study of ALX 111 to begin in the US, Europe and South America. The
phase III trial of ALX 111 for the treatment of osteoporosis has completed
patient enrolment, and phase II trials have been completed in Canada and the
Netherlands. The 18-month, phase III, multicentre, placebo-controlled trial
(Treatment of Osteoporosis with Parathyroid Hormone; TOP) has been designed to
assess the bone-building and fracture-reducing potential of the drug, and over
2600 postmenopausal women with osteoporosis who have not received previous drug
therapy for osteoporosis have been enrolled. Treatment will be completed in
September 2003, but more than 75% of patients enrolled in the TOP study have
chosen to enrol in an Open Label Extension Study (OLES), which allows for a total
treatment period of up to 24 months. NPS Pharmaceuticals has signed an agreement 
with Bio-Imaging Technologies, which will provide all image handling and analysis
for this trial. In September 2002, NPS Pharmaceuticals announced that it has met 
its patient enrolment target (n > 150) for its POWER (PTH for Osteoporotic Women 
on Estrogen Replacement) study; a 24-month phase III trial initiated in Europe in
November 2001. In this trial, women with osteoporosis receive SC injections of
ALX 111 or placebo, in combination with their existing hormone replacement
therapies, to test the bone building potential of the drug. In addition to the
POWER study, a clinical trial sponsored by the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) is being conducted to evaluate the potential of ALX 111 to build bone in
combination with another osteoporosis medication. The 'PaTH' study
(PTH/alendronate) is designed to assess the effect of various combinations and
sequential uses of ALX 111 and Merck's Fosamax, a drug for slowing the loss of
bone due to osteoporosis. The PaTH study, initiated in May 2000 and scheduled to 
conclude in September 2003, involved 238 patients with postmenopausal
osteoporosis. It is thought that alendronic acid and ALX 111, when administered
in combination, may act in an additive manner to treat osteoporosis because they 
act in different ways; alendronic acid acts to inhibit resorption and ALX 111
speeds up bone formation and resorption, with a net increase in formation.
Results of this study are still being analysed but preliminary results appear to 
be positive. The effect of ALX 111 on bone cell cultures underare still being
analysed but preliminary results appear to be positive. The effect of ALX 111 on 
bone cell cultures under conditions of microgravity was tested in orbit on the
Space Shuttle Columbia, which was launched on 16 January 2003 but did not survive
re-entry. This study was one in a series of studies known as 'OSTEO' and had been
prepared by researchers from NPS Pharmaceuticals using Millenium Biologix' OSTEO 
Mini-Lab System. Under space flight conditions, astronauts experience a loss in
bone density at a rate up to ten times faster than that of earth-bound patients
with osteoporosis, and it was hoped that this study would indicate the mechanism 
of action of ALX 111 at cellular and genetic levels. The results of these studies
were represented by the samples of human bone cells, which were lost during the
re-entry tragedy.

PMID: 12848587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biol Cell. 2003 Mar-Apr;95(2):75-86.

Chondrogenic differentiation during midfacial development in the mouse: in vivo
and in vitro studies.

Pavlov MI(1), Sautier JM, Oboeuf M, Asselin A, Berdal A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire biologie orofaciale et pathologie, Inserm E110, université Paris
7, UFR d'odontologie, institut biomédical des Cordeliers, Esc. E - 2e étage,
15-21, rue de l'Ecole-de-Médecine, 75270 cedex 6, Paris, France.

Because the mouse is now the main model for developmental research of all types, 
it is important to understand the basic developmental pattern of various organs. 
The first aim of the present study was to establish normal prenatal developmental
standards of the cartilaginous nasal capsule during embryonic development of the 
mouse. For this purpose we have performed sagittal and coronal sections ranging
from E12.5 to E18.5 in gestation age. The primordia of the nasal septal cartilage
is recognizable around the 14th embryonic day as demonstrated by the
metachromatic toluidine blue staining and by immunostaining of type II collagen. 
Northern blot analysis of the transcription factors Cart-1 and Sox-9 indicated
maximum mRNA levels at E12.5 then a decreased expression during the following
days of gestation. Type II collagen and aggrecan mRNA levels are constant during 
the embryonic period. In the second part of this study, we have established a
primary culture system where chondrocytes were isolated from E.18 mouse embryo
nasal septum. The purpose of this second part was to assess if chondrocytes could
further differentiate in vitro until the hypertrophic phase and matrix
mineralization. After the condensation phase, the cells synthesize an
extracellular matrix including type II collagen and aggrecan. Progressively,
typical cartilaginous nodules composed of clusters of round cells are visible,
then increase in size and finally mineralize at day 12 of culture. Cart-1 and
Sox-9 mRNA levels remain constant throughout the cultures, whereas type II
collagen and aggrecan gradually decrease. Ultrastructural observations of the
nodules show typical chondrocytes embedded in a dense network of fibers with
matrix vesicles and mineralized foci. Other ultrathin sections revealed the
presence of chondrons, typical of hyaline cartilage. Results from this study
provide useful tools to further investigate morphogenesis and differentiation of 
the cartilaginous nasal capsule, and could in the future serve as a basic
developmental standard.

PMID: 12799063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Development. 2003 Jul;130(13):2917-28.

Alx1, a member of the Cart1/Alx3/Alx4 subfamily of Paired-class homeodomain
proteins, is an essential component of the gene network controlling skeletogenic 
fate specification in the sea urchin embryo.

Ettensohn CA(1), Illies MR, Oliveri P, De Jong DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, 4400 Fifth
Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. ettensohn@andrew.cmu.edu

In the sea urchin embryo, the large micromeres and their progeny function as a
critical signaling center and execute a complex morphogenetic program. We have
identified a new and essential component of the gene network that controls large 
micromere specification, the homeodomain protein Alx1. Alx1 is expressed
exclusively by cells of the large micromere lineage beginning in the first
interphase after the large micromeres are born. Morpholino studies demonstrate
that Alx1 is essential at an early stage of specification and controls downstream
genes required for epithelial-mesenchymal transition and biomineralization.
Expression of Alx1 is cell autonomous and regulated maternally through
beta-catenin and its downstream effector, Pmar1. Alx1 expression can be activated
in other cell lineages at much later stages of development, however, through a
regulative pathway of skeletogenesis that is responsive to cell signaling. The
Alx1 protein is highly conserved among euechinoid sea urchins and is closely
related to the Cart1/Alx3/Alx4 family of vertebrate homeodomain proteins. In
vertebrates, these proteins regulate the formation of skeletal elements of the
limbs, face and neck. Our findings suggest that the ancestral deuterostome had a 
population of biomineral-forming mesenchyme cells that expressed an Alx1-like
protein.

PMID: 12756175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mech Dev. 2003 Feb;120(2):241-52.

The OAR/aristaless domain of the homeodomain protein Cart1 has an attenuating
role in vivo.

Brouwer A(1), ten Berge D, Wiegerinck R, Meijlink F.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Aristaless-related genes encode a structurally defined group of homeoproteins
that share a C-terminal stretch of amino acids known as the OAR- or aristaless
domain. Many aristaless-related genes have been linked to major developmental
functions, but the function of the aristaless domain itself is poorly understood.
Expression and functional studies have shown that a subgroup of these genes,
including Prx1, Prx2, Alx3, Alx4 and Cart1, is essential for correct
morphogenesis of the limbs and cranium. We now demonstrate the function of the
aristaless domain in vivo by ectopically expressing normal and mutated forms of
Cart1 and Alx3. Ectopic expression of Cart1 in transgenic mice does not disturb
development, whereas expression of a Cart1 form from which the aristaless domain 
has been deleted results in severe cranial and vertebral malformations. The Alx3 
protein contains a divergent aristaless domain that appears not to be functional,
as ectopic expression of Alx3 results in an altered phenotype irrespective of the
presence of this aristaless domain. Linking the Cart1 aristaless domain to Alx3
extinguishes teratogenicity. We show that, at the molecular level, the most
important consequence of deleting the aristaless domain is increased DNA binding 
to its palindromic target sequence. This demonstrates that the aristaless domain 
functions as an intra-molecular switch to contain the activity of the
transcription factor that it is part of.

PMID: 12559496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Genes Cells. 2002 Nov;7(11):1135-47.

Functional domains of paired-like homeoprotein Cart1 and the relationship between
dimerization and transcription activity.

Furukawa K(1), Iioka T, Morishita M, Yamaguchi A, Shindo H, Namba H, Yamashita S,
Tsukazaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki
University School of Medicine, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Cart1 encodes the paired-like homeodomain in the central portion of
the gene, and plays a crucial role in the developmental lineage of bone and
cartilage, especially in head formation. However, its transactivation mechanism
is still poorly understood, including the target gene. Here, we report
biochemical dissections of Cart1 functional domains and a relationship between
dimerization and transcription activity.
RESULTS: Deletion studies of GAL4-fused Cart1 indicated that the transactivation 
domain is located in the middle portion of the C-terminal domain, but the
N-terminal is also required for a full activation of the consensus palindromic
binding site (TAATNNNATTA). Analysis of the basic amino acid residues at both
ends of the homeodomain revealed that both sides act as nuclear localization
signals, and are necessary for the cooperative binding to the palindromic
sequence. In this study, two additional Cart1 isoforms that behave as dominant
negatives were identified from rat chondrosarcoma cells. These isoforms
suppressed the transcription activity of the wild-type, despite loss of DNA
binding ability, and could interact with the wild-type in yeast. Finally, we
demonstrated that wild-type Cart1 forms a DNA-independent homodimer in in vivo
conditions, and that the transactivation of wild-type Cart1 was suppressed by the
N- or C-terminal domain which was expressed in the nucleus.
CONCLUSION: These results revealed that homodimerization through direct
interaction is necessary for the potent transcription activity of Cart1.

PMID: 12390248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Development. 2001 Oct;128(20):3975-86.

Severe nasal clefting and abnormal embryonic apoptosis in Alx3/Alx4 double mutant
mice.

Beverdam A(1), Brouwer A, Reijnen M, Korving J, Meijlink F.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology, PO Box
85164, 3508AD Utrecht, The Netherlands.

A group of mouse aristaless-related genes has been implicated in functions in the
development of the craniofacial skeleton. We have generated an Alx3 mutant allele
in which the lacZ coding sequence is inserted in-frame in the Alx3 gene and the
sequences encoding the conserved protein domains are deleted. Mice homozygous for
this null allele are indistinguishable from wild-type mice. Compound mutants of
Alx3 and Alx4, however, show severe craniofacial abnormalities that are absent in
Alx4 single mutants. Alx3/Alx4 double mutant newborn mice have cleft nasal
regions. Most facial bones and many other neural crest derived skull elements are
malformed, truncated or even absent. The craniofacial defects in Alx3/Alx4 double
mutant embryos become anatomically manifest around embryonic day 10.5, when the
nasal processes appear to be abnormally positioned. This most probably leads to a
failure of the medial nasal processes to fuse in the facial midline and
subsequently to the split face phenotype. We detected a significant increase in
apoptosis localised in the outgrowing frontonasal process in embryonic day 10.0
double mutant embryos, which we propose to be the underlying cause of the
subsequent malformations.

PMID: 11641221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Arch Oral Biol. 2000 Oct;45(10):843-56.

Association of enhanced expression of gap junctions with in vitro chondrogenic
differentiation of rat nasal septal cartilage-released cells following their
dedifferentiation and redifferentiation.

Loty S(1), Foll C, Forest N, Sautier JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie-Odontologie, Université Paris VII, Institut Biomédical
des Cordeliers, 15-21, rue de l'Ecole de Médecine, F-75270 06, Paris Cedex,
France. sautier@ccr.jussieu.fr

The nasal septum is an important centre of endochondral ossification during the
development of the facial region. Previous studies have shown that it is possible
to recapitulate the differentiation programme of 21-day-old rat nasal
chondrocytes in vitro. The purpose now was to investigate, in vitro, the cell
condensation phase that represents the earliest morphological event associated
with cartilage differentiation in skeletal development. The study focuses on the 
ability of the cells to form condensations before overt differentiation, with
special emphasis on gap-junction expression. The gap-junction protein connexin 43
was localized by indirect immunofluorescence as primarily intracellular and, on
day 5, at the condensation stage, as spot-like contacts between cells.
Intracellular injection of the permeable dye Lucifer yellow led to the staining
of up to 20 neighbouring cells, indicating functional gap junctions and coupling.
In contrast, treatment of cultures with the gap-junction blocker glycyrrhetinic
acid inhibited dye coupling and reduced cartilage differentiation. Northern
blotting of connexin 43 mRNA showed a faint band during the first days of
culture, with a striking increase after day 4. In addition, the mRNA of the
homeodomain-containing gene Cart-1 began to be expressed in prechondrogenic
condensations and corresponded to the expression of type II collagen mRNA. These 
data indicate that the early stage of in vitro chondrocyte differentiation is the
formation of cell condensations and the ability to establish cell-to-cell
communication. Connexin 43, together with other molecular mechanisms, mediates
the condensation phase of chondrogenesis and sets up the optimal environment in
which nasal septal cells may terminally differentiate into chondrocytes.

PMID: 10973558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Drugs R D. 1999 Mar;1(3):211-2.

ALX 111. ALX1-11, PTH, parathyroid hormone (1-84)-Allelix, recombinant human
parathyroid hormone, rhPTH(1-84).

[No authors listed]

PMID: 10566026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Orthop Res. 1998 Sep;16(5):521-30.

Expression of cartilage extracellular matrix and potential regulatory genes in a 
new human chondrosarcoma cell line.

Chansky H(1), Robbins JR, Cha S, Raskind WH, Conrad EU, Sandell LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, University of Washington, Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Seattle, USA.

A human chondrosarcoma cell line has been established from an aggressive
chondrosarcoma. The cells grow in a monolayer culture (doubling time: 2 days) and
form aggregates. The aggregates consist of a rim of cells surrounding a hollow
core. The cell line exhibits a unique pattern of mRNA expression with several
molecules characteristic of the chondrocyte phenotype. Consistent with the
chondrocyte phenotype, mRNAs encoding types IX and XI collagens were present
along with an abundant expression of mRNAs encoding the core protein of the
cartilage proteoglycans biglycan and aggrecan. No expression of mRNAs encoding
types I or II fibrillar collagens or the proteoglycan decorin was observed.
Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoretic analysis of
[35S]sulfate-radiolabeled material confirmed the translation of proteoglycans
containing glycosaminoglycan chains. The expression of molecules that contribute 
to cartilage development and tumorigenesis was examined. The cell line produces
abundant mRNA that encodes transforming growth factor-beta1, a member of a family
of cartilage and bone inductive proteins. The expression of mRNA encoding two
proteins associated specifically with chondrogenesis was detected: Cart-1, a
homeobox protein involved in cartilage differentiation, and CD-RAP, a secreted
molecule restricted under normal conditions to differentiating chondrocytes and
cartilage. Overexpression of p53, a tumor-suppressor gene, was detected. DNA
analysis revealed a loss of heterozygosity at the chromosomal locus encoding p53,
with the deletion of one p53 allele and the mutation of the remaining allele in
both the parent tumor and the cell line. The malignant chondrosarcoma phenotype
may be related to the unique gene expression pattern that is characteristic in
many ways of differentiating chondroblasts, as well as to the inactivation of the
p53 function that could contribute to the proliferative capacity of the cell
line. This cell line may serve as a biological model for further investigation of
the etiology of human chondrosarcomas and for the synthesis and regulation of
cartilage-specific genes.

PMID: 9820274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Sep 18;250(2):305-11.

Human CART1, a paired-class homeodomain protein, activates transcription through 
palindromic binding sites.

Cai RL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, New Jersey 08544, USA. 
richard.cai@pharma.novartis.com

Homeodomain proteins play important roles in animal development by controlling
the expression of genes involved in determining cell fates. The recently cloned
human Cart1 gene encodes a paired-class homeodomain (hCART1), whose rodent
homolog is mainly expressed in early chondrocytes and in prechondrocytic
mesenchymal cells. To better understand its role as a transcription factor, the
author has selected specific hCART1 binding sites from a random pool of
oligonucleotides. It is reported here that all sites obtained contain a
palindrome consisting of two TAAT sequences separated by three or four base
pairs. In electromobility shift assays, recombinant hCART1 proteins bind to a
palindromic probe as a multimer, possibly a homodimer. In transient transfection 
assays, hCART1 activates transcription from reporter plasmids containing hCART1
binding sites in HeLa cells, demonstrating both site-dependence and
dosage-dependence. It is also shown here that hCART1 localizes to nucleus. These 
data indicate that hCART1 is a sequence-specific transcription activator in HeLa 
cells. In combination with data from previous studies in which hCART1 represses
transcription in different cell types and promoters, they suggest that hCART1 may
be a transcription modulator with both repression and activation activities.

PMID: 9753625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Dev Biol. 1998 Jul 1;199(1):11-25.

Mouse Alx3: an aristaless-like homeobox gene expressed during embryogenesis in
ectomesenchyme and lateral plate mesoderm.

ten Berge D(1), Brouwer A, el Bahi S, Guénet JL, Robert B, Meijlink F.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Mouse Alx3 is a homeobox gene that is related to the Drosophila aristaless gene
and to a group of vertebrate genes including Prx1, Prx2, Cart1, and Alx4. The
protein encoded contains a diverged variant of a conserved peptide sequence
present near the carboxyl terminus of at least 15 different
paired-class-homeodomain proteins. Alx3 is expressed in mouse embryos from 8 days
of gestation onward in a characteristic pattern, predominantly in neural
crest-derived mesenchyme and in lateral plate mesoderm. We detected prominent
expression in frontonasal head mesenchyme and in the first and second pharyngeal 
arches and some of their derivatives. High expression was also seen in the tail
and in many derivatives of the lateral plate mesoderm including the limbs, the
body wall, and the genital tubercle. aristaless-related genes like Alx3, Cart1,
and Prx2 are expressed in overlapping proximodistal patterns in the pharyngeal
arches. Similar, but more lateral patterns have been described for the
Distal-less-related (Dlx) genes. Intriguingly, expression and to some extent
function of aristaless and Distal-less in Drosophila also have overlapping as
well as complementary aspects. Alx3 was localized to chromosome 3, near the
droopy-ear (de) mutation.

PMID: 9676189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. DNA Cell Biol. 1996 Jul;15(7):531-41.

Human Cart-1: structural organization, chromosomal localization, and functional
analysis of a cartilage-specific homeodomain cDNA.

Gordon DF(1), Wagner J, Atkinson BL, Chiono M, Berry R, Sikela J,
Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado, Health Sciences Center, Denver
80262, USA.

Homeoproteins control cell fates during development, specifying pattern formation
and the ontogeny of specific tissues and organs in embryogenesis. Cart-1 cDNA was
recently cloned from a rat chondrosarcoma tumor and it encodes a protein
containing a paired-like homeodomain that is selectively expressed in cartilage
during early chondrocyte differentiation. Here we report the molecular cloning of
the human Cart-1 cDNA from a HeLa cervical carcinoma cDNA library. The human
Cart-1 cDNA sequence is 88% identical and the deduced amino acid sequence is 95% 
identical to the rat sequence, indicating that Cart-1 structure is highly
conserved. Northern and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
analysis revealed Cart-1 mRNA expression in HeLa cervical carcinoma cells and
human cervical tissue, but Cart-1 mRNA was not detected in GH3 rat pituitary
cells and murine 10T1/2 one-half fibroblast cells. The Cart-1 gene was localized 
to human chromosome 12 and regionally mapped to the 12q21.3-q22 by PCR analysis
of rodent-X-human somatic cell hybrid DNA and the CEPH megabase-insert YAC DNA
pools, respectively. The Holt-Oram syndrome, characterized by upper limb and
atrial septal dysplasias, also maps to the 12q21.3-q22 region. Cotransfection
studies show that Cart-1 inhibits the rat prolactin promoter and that this
repression is mediated by footprint II, an AT-rich element that functions as an
inhibitory site of prolactin gene expression in nonpituitary cells and which was 
used to clone Cart-1. Taken together, these data indicate that Cart-1 may also
influence cervix development, identify a putative DNA binding site for Cart-1,
and, begin to define its functional role as modulator of gene expression.

PMID: 8756334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Nat Genet. 1996 Jul;13(3):275-83.

Prenatal folic acid treatment suppresses acrania and meroanencephaly in mice
mutant for the Cart1 homeobox gene.

Zhao Q(1), Behringer RR, de Crombrugghe B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas, Houston 77030, USA.

The paired-class homeobox-containing gene, Cart1, is expressed in forebrain
mesenchyme, branchial arches, limb buds and cartilages during embryogenesis.
Here, we show that Cart1-homozygous mutant mice are born alive with acrania and
meroanencephaly but die soon after birth-a phenotype that strikingly resembles a 
corresponding human syndrome caused by a neural tube closure defect.
Developmental studies suggest that Cart1 is required for forebrain mesenchyme
survival and that its absence disrupts cranial neural tube morphogenesis by
blocking the initiation of closure in the midbrain region that ultimately leads
to the generation of lethal craniofacial defects. Prenatal treatment of Cart1
homozygous mutants with folic acid suppresses the development of the
acrania/meroanencephaly phenotype.

PMID: 8673125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1996 Jun 8;785:206-8.

Elucidation of homeoprotein Cart-1 function during in vitro chondrogenesis of
C3H10T1/2 micromass cultures.

Atkinson BL(1), Ryan ME, Benedict JJ, Huffer WE, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 
80262, USA.

PMID: 8702130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Sep 15;90(18):8633-7.

Cartilage homeoprotein 1, a homeoprotein selectively expressed in chondrocytes.

Zhao GQ(1), Zhou X, Eberspaecher H, Solursh M, de Crombrugghe B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030.

We identified a rat cDNA that encodes cartilage homeoprotein 1 (Cart-1). The
deduced amino acid sequence of Cart-1 contains a paired-type homeodomain.
Northern blot hybridization and RNase protection assay revealed that Cart-1 RNA
was present at high levels in a well-differentiated rat chondrosarcoma tumor and 
in a cell line derived from this tumor. Cart-1 RNA was detected in primary mouse 
and rat chondrocytes but not in various fibroblasts including mouse 10T1/2 cells,
NIH 3T3 cells, BALB 3T3 cells, and rat skin fibroblasts. It was also undetectable
in mouse C2 myoblasts, S194 myeloma cells, and embryonic stem cells. Cart-1 RNA
was present at a very low level in tested but was not detected in other soft
tissues of 8-week-old rats. In situ hybridization of rat embryos between 14.5 and
16.5 days post coitum revealed relatively high levels of Cart-1 RNA in condensed 
prechondrocytic mesenchymal cells and in early chondrocytes of cartilage
primordia. The levels of Cart-1 RNA were lower in mature chondrocytes. No
hybridization was observed in brain, spinal cord, heart, spleen, gastrointestinal
tract, liver, and muscle. We speculate that Cart-1 has a role in chondrocyte
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC47412
PMID: 7690966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


