
1. Colorectal Dis. 2016 Mar 21. doi: 10.1111/codi.13336. [Epub ahead of print]

Hypermethylated DNA, a Biomarker for colorectal cancer: A systematic review.

Rasmussen SL(1,)(2), Krarup HB(3), Sunesen KG(1), Pedersen IS(3), Madsen PH(3),
Thorlacius-Ussing O(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery and Clinical Cancer Research Center,
Aalborg University Hospital, Denmark. (2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg
University, Denmark. (3)Section of Molecular Diagnostics, Clinical Biochemistry
and Clinical Cancer Research Center, Aalborg University Hospital, Denmark.

AIM: In colorectal cancer (CRC), improved methods for early detection are
essential for increasing survival. Hypermethylated DNA in blood or stool has been
proposed as a biomarker for CRC. In recent years, biochemical methods have
improved, and several hypermethylated genes that are sensitive and specific for
CRC have been proposed. Articles describing the use of hypermethylated promoter
regions in blood or stool as biomarkers for CRC were systematically reviewed.
METHOD: The Medline, Web of Science, and Embase databases were used in a
systematic literature search. Studies were included if they analysed
hypermethylated genes from stool or blood samples in correlation with CRC.
Non-English-language studies and studies based on animal models or cell lines
were excluded.
RESULTS: The literature search yielded 72 articles, including 43 addressing blood
samples and 29 addressing stool samples. In blood samples, hypermethylated P16,
HLTF, TMEFF1, ALX4, VIM, and FBN2 were associated with poor prognosis,
hypermethylated APC, TAC1, SEPT9, NEUROG1, RASSF1A, SDC2, and THBD were detected 
in early-stage CRC, and hypermethylated P16 and TFPI2 could detect CRC
recurrence. In stool samples, hypermethylated BMP3, PHACTR3, SFRP2, SPG20, TFPI2,
and TMEFF2 could detect CRC in the early stages.
CONCLUSION: Hypermethylation of the promoters of specific genes measured in blood
or stool samples could be used to detect CRC and could provide prognostic
information. The majority of studies include, however, only a few patients with
poorly defined control groups. Further studies are therefore needed before
hypermethylated DNA can be applied as a clinical biomarker for CRC detection and 
prognosis. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26998585  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Adv Biomed Res. 2015 Nov 30;4:252. doi: 10.4103/2277-9175.170677. eCollection
2015.

Methylation pattern of ALX4 gene promoter as a potential biomarker for
blood-based early detection of colorectal cancer.

Salehi R(1), Atapour N(1), Vatandoust N(1), Farahani N(1), Ahangari F(1), Salehi 
AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Isfahan
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: To develop a non-invasive screening method for colorectal cancer, we 
evaluated the methylation of ALX4 gene promoter in serum samples from patients
with colorectal cancer (CRC) and equal number of healthy individuals.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In serum samples from 25 patients with colorectal cancer
and 25 healthy control subjects, isolated serum free-floating DNA was treated
with sodium bisulfite and analyzed by methylation-specific polymerase chain
reaction (MSP) with primers specific for methylated or unmethylated promoter CpG 
island sequences of the ALX4 gene.
RESULTS: Methylation of the ALX4 gene promoter was present in the serum DNA of
patients with adenoma and colorectal cancer. A sensitivity of 68% and specificity
of 88% were achieved in the detection of promoter methylation in colorectal
neoplasia samples. The difference in methylation status of the ALX4 promoter
between the patients with colorectal neoplasia and the control group was
statistically highly significant (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that this serum free DNA test of methylation of
the ALX4 gene promoter is a sensitive and specific method. Therefore in
combination with other useful markers it seems ALX4 has the potential of a
clinically useful test for the early detection of colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC4746937
PMID: 26918234  [PubMed]


3. Talanta. 2015 Nov 1;144:136-44. doi: 10.1016/j.talanta.2015.05.065. Epub 2015 May
27.

A non-invasive genomic diagnostic method for bladder cancer using size-based
filtration and microchip electrophoresis.

Deng Y(1), Yi L(2), Lin X(1), Lin L(3), Li H(4), Lin JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Beijing Key Laboratory of Microanalytical Methods and
Instrumentation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China; State Key Laboratory
of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology,
Beijing 100029, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, 
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical
Technology, Beijing 100029, China; Department of Bioengineering, School of
Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656,
Japan. (4)Department of Chemistry, Beijing Key Laboratory of Microanalytical
Methods and Instrumentation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Beijing Key Laboratory of Microanalytical Methods and
Instrumentation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. Electronic address: 
jmlin@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

Bladder cancer (BC) cells spontaneously exfoliated in the urine of patients with 
BC. Detection of exfoliated tumor cells has clinical significance in cancer
therapy because it would enable earlier non-invasive screening, diagnosis, or
prognosis of BC. In this research, a method for analyzing genetic abnormalities
of BC cells collected from urine samples was developed. Target BC cells were
isolated by filtration. To find conditions that achieve high cell recovery, we
investigated the effects of filter type, concentration of fixative, and flow
rate. Cells captured on the filter membrane were completely retrieved within 15s.
Selected genes for genomic analysis, mutated genes (FGFR3, TERT and HRAS) and
methylated genes (ALX4, RALL3, MT1A, and RUNX3) were amplified by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR), and subsequently, were identified by microchip
electrophoresis (MCE). Analysis by MCE reduces the risk of contamination, sample 
consumption, and analysis time. Our developed approach is economical, effectively
isolates cancer cells, and permits flexible molecular characterization, all of
which make this approach a promising method for non-invasive BC detection.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26452803  [PubMed - in process]


4. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Dec;167(12):3011-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37344. Epub 2015
Sep 3.

A microdeletion encompassing PHF21A in an individual with global developmental
delay and craniofacial anomalies.

Labonne JD(1,)(2), Vogt J(3), Reali L(3), Kong IK(4), Layman LC(1,)(2,)(5), Kim
HG(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Reproductive Endocrinology, Infertility and Genetics, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia. (3)West Midlands Regional Genetics Service,
Birmingham Women's Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom. (4)Department of Animal 
Science, Division of Applied Life Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju,
Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Physiology, Medical College
of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia.

In Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (PSS), the full phenotypic spectrum is manifested
when deletions are at least 2.1<U+2009>Mb in size at 11p11.2. The PSS-associated genes
EXT2 and ALX4, together with PHF21A, all map to this region flanked by markers
D11S1393 and D11S1319. Being proximal to EXT2 and ALX4, a 1.1<U+2009>Mb region
containing 12 annotated genes had been identified by deletion mapping to explain 
PSS phenotypes except multiple exostoses and parietal foramina. Here, we report a
male patient with partial PSS phenotypes including global developmental delay,
craniofacial anomalies, minor limb anomalies, and micropenis. Using microarray,
qPCR, RT-qPCR, and Western blot analyses, we refined the candidate gene region,
which harbors five genes, by excluding two genes, SLC35C1 and CRY2, which
resulted in a corroborating role of PHF21A in developmental delay and
craniofacial anomalies. This microdeletion contains the least number of genes at 
11p11.2 reported to date. Additionally, we also discuss the phenotypes observed
in our patient with respect to those of published cases of microdeletions across 
the Potocki-Shaffer interval. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26333423  [PubMed - in process]


5. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 15;10(6):e0129208. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129208.
eCollection 2015.

A 20 bp Duplication in Exon 2 of the Aristaless-Like Homeobox 4 Gene (ALX4) Is
the Candidate Causative Mutation for Tibial Hemimelia Syndrome in Galloway
Cattle.

Brenig B(1), Schütz E(1), Hardt M(2), Scheuermann P(2), Freick M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Georg-August-University of Göttingen, 37077 
Göttingen, Germany. (2)Landesuntersuchungsanstalt für das Gesundheits- und
Veterinärwesen Sachsen, 04158 Leipzig, Germany. (3)Veterinary Practice Zettlitz, 
Straße der Jugend 68, 09306 Zettlitz, Germany.

Aristaless-like homeobox 4 (ALX4) gene is an important transcription regulator in
skull and limb development. In humans and mice ALX4 mutations or loss of function
result in a number of skeletal and organ malformations, including polydactyly,
tibial hemimelia, omphalocele, biparietal foramina, impaired mammary epithelial
morphogenesis, alopecia, coronal craniosynostosis, hypertelorism, depressed nasal
bridge and ridge, bifid nasal tip, hypogonadism, and body agenesis. Here we show 
that a complex skeletal malformation of the hind limb in Galloway cattle together
with other developmental anomalies is a recessive autosomal disorder most likely 
caused by a duplication of 20 bp in exon 2 of the bovine ALX4 gene. A second
duplication of 34 bp in exon 4 of the same gene has no known effect, although
both duplications result in a frameshift and premature stop codon leading to a
truncated protein. Genotyping of 1,688 Black/Red/Belted/Riggit Galloway (GA) and 
289 White Galloway (WGA) cattle showed that the duplication in exon 2 has allele 
frequencies of 1% in GA and 6% in WGA and the duplication in exon 4 has
frequencies of 23% in GA and 38% in WGA. Both duplications were not detected in
876 randomly selected German Holstein Friesian and 86 cattle of 21 other breeds. 
Hence, we have identified a candidate causative mutation for tibial hemimelia
syndrome in Galloway cattle and selection against this mutation can be used to
eliminate the mutant allele from the breed.

PMCID: PMC4468193
PMID: 26076463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Clin Genet. 2015 Dec;88(6):593-6. doi: 10.1111/cge.12595. Epub 2015 May 11.

Novel homozygous ALX4 mutation causing frontonasal dysplasia-2 in a patient with 
meningoencephalocele.

Meloni VA(1), Moysés-Oliveira M(1), Melo MC(2), Caneloi TP(1), Dantas AG(1),
Soares MF(3), Fock R(1), Rodrigues de Nicola PD(1), Dias-da-Silva MR(2),
Melaragno MI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology and Genetics, Genetics Division, Universidade Federal
de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Department of Medicine, Division of
Endocrinology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Imaging Diagnosis, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil.

PMID: 25963140  [PubMed - in process]


7. Oncotarget. 2015 May 30;6(15):13359-70.

HOXB13 and ALX4 induce SLUG expression for the promotion of EMT and cell invasion
in ovarian cancer cells.

Yuan H(1), Kajiyama H(1), Ito S(2), Chen D(2), Shibata K(1), Hamaguchi M(2),
Kikkawa F(1), Senga T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan. (2)Division of Cancer Biology, Nagoya
University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.

Homeoproteins, a family of transcription factors that have conserved homeobox
domains, play critical roles in embryonic development in a wide range of species.
Accumulating studies have revealed that homeoproteins are aberrantly expressed in
multiple tumors and function as either tumor promoters or suppressors. In this
study, we show that two homeoproteins, HOXB13 and ALX4, are associated with
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and invasion of ovarian cancer cells. 
HOXB13 and ALX4 formed a complex in cells, and exogenous expression of either
protein promoted EMT and invasion. Conversely, depletion of either protein
suppressed invasion and induced reversion of EMT. SLUG is a C2H2-type zinc-finger
transcription factor that promotes EMT in various cell lines. Knockdown of HOXB13
or ALX4 suppressed SLUG expression, and exogenous expression of either protein
promoted SLUG expression. Finally, we showed that SLUG expression was essential
for the HOXB13- or ALX4-mediated EMT and invasion. Our results show that
HOXB13/SLUG and ALX4/SLUG axes are novel pathways that promote EMT and invasion
of ovarian cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4537020
PMID: 25944620  [PubMed - in process]


8. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2016 Feb;142(2):341-51. doi: 10.1007/s00432-015-1928-z. 
Epub 2015 Feb 17.

Early detection of colorectal cancer: from conventional methods to novel
biomarkers.

Vatandoost N(1), Ghanbari J(1), Mojaver M(1), Avan A(2), Ghayour-Mobarhan M(3),
Nedaeinia R(4), Salehi R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Isfahan
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. (2)Molecular Medicine Group,
Department of Modern Sciences and Technologies, School of Medicine, Mashhad
University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. (3)Biochemistry of Nutrition
Research Center, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences,
Mashhad, Iran. (4)Department of Medical Biotechnology, School of Medicine,
Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. (5)Department of Genetics 
and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. r_salehi@med.mui.ac.ir.

PURPOSE: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the major health problems worldwide
and is often diagnosed at late stage. There is growing body of evidence in early 
detection of this disease with novel screening modalities to reduce compliance
and increase specificity of available methods. The aim of current review is to
give an overview on currently available screening methods (e.g., fecal occult
blood testing (FOBT), flexible sigmoidoscopy, and colonoscopy), with their own
merits and disadvantages, and new genetic/epigenetic/protein markers, as novel
screening modalities.
RESULT: There are several serum and fecal biomarkers that can predict CRC and
polyps. Overall sensitivities for detection by fecal DNA markers ranged from 53
to 87 %, while a panel of serum protein markers provides a
sensitivity/specificity up to 85 % for CRC. In particular, DNA methylation
markers (e.g., SEPT9, SFRP2, and ALX4), circulating microRNAs (e.g., microRNA21),
SNPs in microRNAs binding site (e.g., rs4596 located within a target region of
the predicted miR-518a-5p and miR-527), protein markers (e.g., carcinoembryonic
antigen, N-methyltransferase), or microsatellites instability in tumors with
deficient mismatch repair of some genes are among the most interesting and
promising biomarkers.
CONCLUSION: Increasing evidence supports the use of combined fecal and serum
biomarkers with sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy screening in order to maximize the 
benefits and reduce the number of false-positive tests and patients undergoing
invasive methods, which in turn could overcome the limitations of the current
screening methods for early detection of CRC and adenomas.

PMID: 25687380  [PubMed - in process]


9. Mamm Genome. 2015 Apr;26(3-4):173-80. doi: 10.1007/s00335-015-9557-z. Epub 2015
Feb 12.

A novel allele of Alx4 results in reduced Fgf10 expression and failure of eyelid 
fusion in mice.

Curtain M(1), Heffner CS, Maddox DM, Gudis P, Donahue LR, Murray SA.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main St., Bar Harbor, ME, 04609, USA.

Normal fusion of developing eyelids requires coordination of inductive signals
from the eyelid mesenchyme with migration of the periderm cell layer and
constriction of the eyelids across the eye. Failure of this process results in an
eyelids open at birth (EOB) phenotype in mice. We have identified a novel
spontaneous allele of Alx4 that displays EOB, in addition to polydactyly and
cranial malformations. Alx4 is expressed in the eyelid mesenchyme prior to and
during eyelid fusion in a domain overlapping the expression of genes that also
play a role in normal eyelid development. We show that Alx4 mutant mice have
reduced expression of Fgf10, a key factor expressed in the mesenchyme that is
required for initiation of eyelid fusion by the periderm. This is accompanied by 
a reduced number of periderm cells expressing phosphorylated c-Jun, consistent
with the incomplete ablation of Fgf10 expression. Together, these data
demonstrate that eyelid fusion in mice requires the expression of Alx4,
accompanied by the loss of normal expression of essential components of the
eyelid fusion pathway.

PMCID: PMC4482110
PMID: 25673119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Br J Neurosurg. 2015 Apr;29(2):294. doi: 10.3109/02688697.2014.957651. Epub 2014 
Sep 25.

Enlarged parietal foramina.

deSouza RM(1), Bassi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kings College Hospital , Denmark Hill, London ,
UK.

PMID: 25253662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Dalton Trans. 2014 Oct 21;43(39):14600-11. doi: 10.1039/c4dt02051k.

Phosphine complexes of aluminium(III) halides - preparation and structural and
spectroscopic systematics.

Burt J(1), Levason W, Light ME, Reid G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK.
wxl@soton.ac.uk.

Six-coordinate pseudo-octahedral complexes trans-[AlX2(L-L)2][AlX4] (X = Cl, Br
or I; L-L = o-C6H4(PMe2)2, Me2P(CH2)2PMe2) are produced from reaction of AlX3
with the diphosphine in CH2Cl2 (X = Cl) or toluene (X = Br or I) solution.
Four-coordinate dimers [Cl3Al(µ-L'-L')AlCl3] (L'-L' = Me2P(CH2)2PMe2,
Cy2P(CH2)2PCy2), and the tetrahedral cation [AlCl2{o-C6H4(PPh2)2}][AlCl4] were
also obtained. Both four- and five-coordinate complexes [AlX3(PMe3)] and
[AlX3(PMe3)2] could be isolated with PMe3 depending upon the ratio of reagents
used. These extremely moisture sensitive complexes have been characterised by
microanalysis, IR and multinuclear NMR ((1)H, (31)P{(1)H} and (27)Al)
spectroscopy. X-ray crystal structures are reported for
[AlCl2{o-C6H4(PMe2)2}2][AlCl4], [AlCl2{Me2P(CH2)2PMe2}2][AlCl4],
[Cl3Al{µ-Me2P(CH2)2PMe2}AlCl3], [Cl3Al{µ-Cy2P(CH2)2PCy2}AlCl3], [AlCl3(PMe3)],
[AlCl3(PMe3)2], and for the six-coordinate cation complex
[AlCl2{o-C6H4(PPh2)2}2][AlCl4], although a bulk sample of the last could not be
isolated. Tertiary arsines (AsPh3 or AsEt3) form only 1<U+2009>:<U+2009>1 complexes even with
excess arsine present. The unstable [AlCl2{o-C6H4(AsMe2)2}][AlCl4] is also
described, and shown to decompose rapidly in CH2Cl2 solution to form the
diquaternised diarsine cation [o-C6H4(AsMe2)2(CH2)][AlCl4]2, which was fully
characterised. Comparisons are drawn with the corresponding gallium(iii) systems 
(Cheng et al., Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 7215-7223) and with AlX3 complexes of
Group 16 ligands (George et al., Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 3637-3648), and it is
concluded that the differences between the Al and Ga systems reflect the higher
Lewis acidity of aluminium(iii) towards soft donor ligands.

PMID: 25140820  [PubMed]


12. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 15;9(8):e104285. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104285.
eCollection 2014.

IGFBP3 methylation is a novel diagnostic and predictive biomarker in colorectal
cancer.

Perez-Carbonell L(1), Balaguer F(2), Toiyama Y(1), Egoavil C(3), Rojas E(3),
Guarinos C(4), Andreu M(5), Llor X(6), Castells A(2), Jover R(7), Boland CR(1),
Goel A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Charles Sammons
Cancer Center and Baylor Research Institute, Baylor University Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, United States of America. (2)Gastroenterology Department, Hospital
Clinic, CIBERehd, IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Pathology, Hospital General Universitario de Alicante, Alicante,
Spain. (4)Research Unit, Hospital General Universitario de Alicante, Alicante,
Spain. (5)Gastroenterology Department, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Department of Medicine and Cancer Center, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois, United States of America. (7)Unidad de Gastroenterología,
Hospital General Universitario de Alicante, Alicante, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Aberrant hypermethylation of cancer-related genes has emerged
as a promising strategy for the development of diagnostic, prognostic and
predictive biomarkers in human cancer, including colorectal cancer (CRC). The aim
of this study was to perform a systematic and comprehensive analysis of a panel
of CRC-specific genes as potential diagnostic, prognostic and predictive
biomarkers in a large, population-based CRC cohort.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Methylation status of the SEPT9, TWIST1, IGFBP3, GAS7, ALX4
and miR137 genes was studied by quantitative bisulfite pyrosequencing in a
population-based cohort of 425 CRC patients.
RESULTS: Methylation levels of all genes analyzed were significantly higher in
tumor tissues compared to normal mucosa (p<0.0001); however, cancer-associated
hypermethylation was most frequently observed for miR137 (86.7%) and IGFBP3 (83%)
in CRC patients. Methylation analysis using the combination of these two genes
demonstrated greatest accuracy for the identification of colonic tumors
(sensitivity 95.5%; specificity 90.5%). Low levels of IGFBP3 promoter methylation
emerged as an independent risk factor for predicting poor disease free survival
in stage II and III CRC patients (HR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.49, 95% CI: 0.28-0.85, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01). Our
results also suggest that stage II & III CRC patients with high levels of IGFBP3 
methylation do not benefit from adjuvant 5FU-based chemotherapy.
CONCLUSION: By analyzing a large, population-based CRC cohort, we demonstrate the
potential clinical significance of miR137 and IGFBP3 hypermethylation as
promising diagnostic biomarkers in CRC. Our data also revealed that IGFBP3
hypermethylation may serve as an independent prognostic and predictive biomarker 
in stage II and III CRC patients.

PMCID: PMC4134211
PMID: 25127039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Struct Funct Genomics. 2014 Dec;15(4):201-7. doi: 10.1007/s10969-014-9184-z.
Epub 2014 Jun 19.

Solution NMR structures of homeodomains from human proteins ALX4, ZHX1, and
CASP8AP2 contribute to the structural coverage of the Human Cancer Protein
Interaction Network.

Xu X(1), Pulavarti SV, Eletsky A, Huang YJ, Acton TB, Xiao R, Everett JK,
Montelione GT, Szyperski T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The State University of New York at Buffalo and
Northeast Structural Genomics Consortium, Buffalo, NY, 14260, USA.

High-quality solution NMR structures of three homeodomains from human proteins
ALX4, ZHX1 and CASP8AP2 were solved. These domains were chosen as targets of a
biomedical theme project pursued by the Northeast Structural Genomics Consortium.
This project focuses on increasing the structural coverage of human proteins
associated with cancer.

PMCID: PMC4239167
PMID: 24941917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Aug;164A(8):2054-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36578. Epub 2014
Apr 24.

Mild nasal clefting may be predictive for ALX4 heterozygotes.

Altunoglu U(1), Satkin B, Uyguner ZO, Kayserili H.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, Turkey.

Heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in ALX4 are responsible for enlarged
parietal foramina, whereas patients with biallelic ALX4 mutations display a
phenotypic spectrum of clinical findings, from mild to severe alopecia, cranium
bifidum, hypertelorism, microphthalmia, with alar clefting being the pivotal sign
in all affecteds. We report on four affected individuals in a three-generation
family, displaying a phenotypic spectrum ranging from mild nasal clefting and
broad columella to subtle changes in nasal configuration in addition to parietal 
foramina, caused by a novel ALX4 mutation (c.646C>G, p.Arg216Gly). This is the
second report of a family showing vertical transmission of a dominant ALX4
mutation with facial involvement in addition to parietal foramina, mimicking mild
recessive ALX4 phenotype. We discuss possible pathological mechanisms that may
have lead to phenotypic variation in the family and challenges in genetic
counseling.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24764194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 May;164A(5):1322-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36008. Epub 2014
Mar 25.

Skull defects, alopecia, hypertelorism, and notched alae nasi caused by
homozygous ALX4 gene mutation.

Kariminejad A(1), Bozorgmehr B, Alizadeh H, Ghaderi-Sohi S, Toksoy G, Uyguner ZO,
Kayserili H.

Author information: 
(1)Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran.

PMID: 24668755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cancer Res. 2014 Apr 15;74(8):2351-61. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1523. Epub
2014 Mar 5.

Identification of FoxR2 as an oncogene in medulloblastoma.

Koso H(1), Tsuhako A, Lyons E, Ward JM, Rust AG, Adams DJ, Jenkins NA, Copeland
NG, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, The
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Division of 
Genetics and Genomics, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, Singapore, Singapore; Experimental Cancer
Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom;
and Cancer Research Program, The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Houston, 
Texas.

Medulloblastoma is the most common pediatric brain tumor, and in ~25% of cases,
it is driven by aberrant activation of the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) pathway in
granule neuron precursor (GNP) cells. In this study, we identified novel
medulloblastoma driver genes through a transposon mutagenesis screen in the
developing brain of wild-type and Trp53 mutant mice. Twenty-six candidates were
identified along with established driver genes such as Gli1 and Crebbp. The
transcription factor FoxR2, the most frequent gene identified in the screen, is
overexpressed in a small subset of human medulloblastoma of the SHH subtype.
Tgif2 and Alx4, 2 new putative oncogenes identified in the screen, are strongly
expressed in the SHH subtype of human medulloblastoma. Mutations in these two
genes were mutually exclusive with mutations in Gli1 and tended to cooccur,
consistent with involvement in the SHH pathway. Notably, Foxr2, Tgif2, and Alx4
activated Gli-binding sites in cooperation with Gli1, strengthening evidence that
they function in SHH signaling. In support of an oncogenic function, Foxr2
overexpression transformed NIH3T3 cells and promoted proliferation of GNPs, the
latter of which was also observed for Tgif2 and Alx4. These findings offer
forward genetic and functional evidence associating Foxr2, Tgif2, and Alx4 with
SHH subtype medulloblastoma.

©2014 AACR.

PMID: 24599127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Dalton Trans. 2014 Mar 7;43(9):3637-48. doi: 10.1039/c3dt52991f.

Thio-, seleno- and telluro-ether complexes of aluminium(III) halides: synthesis, 
structures and properties.

George K(1), Jura M, Levason W, Light ME, Reid G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Highfield, Southampton SO17
1BJ, UK. wxl@soton.ac.uk.

The reaction of AlCl3 with Me2E (E = S, Se or Te) or (n)Bu2E (E = Se or Te) in
CH2Cl2 under rigorously anhydrous conditions gave the pseudo-tetrahedral
complexes [AlCl3(R2E)]. The [AlX3(Me2E)] (X = Br or I, E = S; X = Br, E = Te)
were made from toluene solution since attempted syntheses in CH2Cl2 resulted in
substantial chloride incorporation. The synthesis of [(AlCl3)2{o-C6H4(CH2SEt)2}],
in which the ligand bridges two tetrahedral aluminium centres, and of the
six-coordinate trans-[AlX2{MeE(CH2)2EMe}2][AlX4] (X = Cl or Br, E = S, and X =
Cl, E = Se) and cis-[AlI2{MeS(CH2)2SMe}2][AlI4] are reported. The tripodal
thioether forms [AlCl3{MeC(CH2SMe)3}], which is a chain polymer with
<U+03BA>(2)-coordinated ligand and a tbp arrangement at Al(iii). Chalcogenoether
macrocycle complexes [AlCl3([9]aneS3)], [AlCl2([14]aneS4)][AlCl4] and
[AlCl2([16]aneSe4)] [AlCl4] are also described. All complexes were characterised 
by microanalysis, IR and multinuclear NMR ((1)H, (27)Al, (77)Se or (125)Te)
spectroscopy as appropriate. In CH2Cl2 solution [AlCl3(Me2S)] with added Me2S
forms [AlCl3(Me2S)2], and the [AlX2{MeS(CH2)2SMe}2][AlX4] exist as mixtures of
cis and trans isomers which undergo rapid exchange at ambient temperatures. X-Ray
crystal structures are reported for [AlCl3(Me2Se], [AlX3(Me2Te)] (X = Cl or Br), 
trans-[AlCl2{MeE(CH2)2EMe}2][AlCl4] (E = S or Se),
cis-[AlI2{MeS(CH2)2SMe}2][AlI4], [AlCl3{MeC(CH2SMe)3}], and for the sulfonium
salt [Me2SH][AlCl4]. The aluminium halide chalcogenoether chemistry is compared
with the corresponding gallium and indium systems, and the relative Lewis
acidities of the metals discussed. Attempts to use [AlCl3((n)Bu2E)] (E = Se or
Te) as LPCVD reagents to form aluminium chalcogenide films were unsuccessful.

PMID: 24413529  [PubMed]


18. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Feb;164A(2):346-52. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36140. Epub 2013
Dec 13.

Potocki-Shaffer deletion encompassing ALX4 in a patient with frontonasal
dysplasia phenotype.

Ferrarini A(1), Gaillard M, Guerry F, Ramelli G, Heidi F, Keddache CV, Wieland I,
Beckmann JS, Jaquemont S, Martinet D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, San Giovanni Hospital, Bellinzona, Switzerland.

Frontonasal dysplasia (FND) is a genetically heterogeneous malformation spectrum 
with marked hypertelorism, broad nasal tip and bifid nose. Only a small number of
genes have been associated with FND phenotypes until now, the first gene being
EFNB1, related to craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS) with craniosynostosis in
addition, and more recently the aristaless-like homeobox genes ALX3, ALX4, and
ALX1, which have been related with distinct phenotypes named FND1, FND2, and FND3
respectively. We here report on a female patient presenting with severe FND
features along with partial alopecia, hypogonadism and intellectual disability.
While molecular investigations did not reveal mutations in any of the known
genes, ALX4, ALX3, ALX1 and EFNB1, comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) 
techniques showed a large heterozygous de novo deletion at 11p11.12p12,
encompassing the ALX4 gene. Deletions in this region have been described in
patients with Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (PSS), characterized by biparietal
foramina, multiple exostoses, and intellectual disability. Although the patient
reported herein manifests some overlapping features of FND and PPS, it is likely 
that the observed phenotype maybe due to a second unidentified mutation in the
ALX4 gene. The phenotype will be discussed in view of the deleted region
encompassing the ALX4 gene.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24376213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2013 Nov;102(2):117-22. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2013.09.001. Epub 2013 Sep 14.

A replication study of 19 GWAS-validated type 2 diabetes at-risk variants in the 
Lebanese population.

Almawi WY(1), Nemr R, Keleshian SH, Echtay A, Saldanha FL, AlDoseri FA, Racoubian
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Arabian Gulf University, Manama, Bahrain. 
Electronic address: wassim@agu.edu.bh.

AIM: Recent genome-wide association scans (GWAS) and replication studies have
expanded the list of validated type 2 diabetes (T2DM) susceptibility loci. We
replicated T2DM association of 19 SNPs from 15 candidate loci in Lebanese Arabs.
METHODS: Case-control association study, comprising 995 T2DM patients and 1076
control participants. We genotyped by the allelic discrimination method 19 SNPs
in/near ADAM30, NOTCH2, THADA, TMEFF2, COL8A1, ADAMTS9-AS2, WFS1, JAZF1, SLC30A8,
KCNQ1, LOC387761, ALX4, TSPAN8, FTO, and HNF1.
RESULTS: Allele frequencies of the tested SNPs were comparable with those of
Caucasians. COL8A1 rs792837 (P=2.9 × 10(-9)), KCNQ1 rs2237892 (P=1.8 × 10(-18))
and rs2237895 (P=0.002), ALX4 rs729287 (Pc=7.5 × 10(-5)), and HNF1 rs4430796
(P=0.003) were significantly associated with T2DM, with similar effect sizes to
those of Europeans. While FTO rs8050136 and rs17817449, ADAMTS9 rs4607103, and
WFS1 rs10010131 were initially associated with T2DM, this was lost upon multiple 
testing correction. The remaining variants were not associated with T2DM,
possibly resulting from insufficient power to detect smaller allele effects.
CONCLUSION: In addition to previous findings on the association of IGF2BP2,
CDKAL1, TCF7L2 variants with T2DM among Lebanese, here we extend these by
validating the association of five additional loci with T2DM in Lebanese Arabs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24145053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Int J Cancer. 2014 Mar 15;134(6):1311-22. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28472. Epub 2013 Nov
11.

Epigenetic silencing of Aristaless-like homeobox-4, a potential tumor suppressor 
gene associated with lung cancer.

Liu WB(1), Han F, Du XH, Jiang X, Li YH, Liu Y, Chen HQ, Ao L, Cui ZH, Cao J, Liu
JY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, College of Preventive Medicine, Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing, China; Key Laboratory of Medical Protection for
Electromagnetic Radiation, Ministry of Education of China, Chongqing, China.

Using genome-wide methylation screening, we found Aristaless-like homeobox-4
(ALX4) preferentially methylated in lung cancer. ALX4 is a putative transcription
factor that belongs to the family of paired-class homeoproteins involved in
epithelial development. However, the role of ALX4 in tumorigenesis remains
largely unclear. Here, we analyzed its epigenetic regulation, biological
functions and related molecular mechanisms in lung cancer. CpG island methylation
and expression of ALX4 were evaluated by methylation-specific polymerase chain
reaction (PCR), bisulfite genomic sequencing, reverse-transcription PCR and
Western blotting. ALX4 functions were determined by cell viability, colony
formation, flow cytometry and in vivo tumorigenicity assays. ALX4
hypermethylation was detected in 55% (54/98) of primary lung cancers compared to 
none (0/20) of the normal lung tissue samples tested (p < 0.01). ALX4 was readily
expressed in normal lung tissues with an unmethylated status, but downregulated
or silenced in 90% (9/10) of lung cancer cell lines with a hypermethylation
status. Demethylation experiments further confirmed that loss of ALX4 expression 
was regulated by CpG island hypermethylation. Re-expression of ALX4 in lung
cancer cell lines suppressed cell viability, colony formation and migration,
whereas it induced apoptosis and G1/S arrest and restrained the tumorigenicity in
nude mice. These effects were associated with upregulation of proapoptotic
proteins caspase-7, -8 and -9, and downregulation of Bcl-2. On the other hand,
knockdown of ALX4 expression by siRNA increased cell viability and proliferation,
whereas it inhibited apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. In conclusion, our results 
suggest that ALX4 is a novel putative tumor suppressor with epigenetic silencing 
in lung carcinogenesis.

© 2013 UICC.

PMID: 24037716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Genet Mol Res. 2013 Aug 2;12(3):2771-8. doi: 10.4238/2013.August.2.2.

Multiple abnormalities due to a nonsense mutation in the Alx4 gene.

Chen B(1), Chen L, Zhou Y, Mi T, Chen DY, Chen L, Yin J, Xue ZF.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Medicine Center, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.

Patterning of the limb anterior-posterior axes depends on several signals that
derive from the three signaling centers of the limb bud. These signals interact
to constitute a complex and ordered network that critically contributes to the
development of limb buds. Preaxial polydactyly in mouse is predominantly caused
by ectopic expression of the zone of polarizing activity or Sonic hedgehog in the
anterior region of the limb bud. In this study, we describe an
N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea-induced polydactylous mouse (Alx4m1Yzcm) with an extra
digit on the anterior aspect of one or two hinddigits. The mutation was mapped to
chromosome 2, between markers D2Mit45 and D2Mit184. The Alx4 gene was identified 
as a potential candidate gene in this location. Sequence analysis of the Alx4
gene for polydactylous heterozygotes revealed an A/T transversion mutation that
resulted in substitution of a lysine codon with a stop (nonsense) codon at
position 145. Alx4m1Yzcm homozygous mice exhibited multiple abnormalities,
including extensive preaxial polydactyly of all four limbs (up to seven digits)
and the formation of omphalocele.

PMID: 23979902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Mar;22(3):350-7. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.160. Epub 2013 Aug 
14.

Genetic analysis of the role of Alx4 in the coordination of lower body and
external genitalia formation.

Matsumaru D(1), Haraguchi R(2), Moon AM(3), Satoh Y(1), Nakagata N(4), Yamamura
K(5), Takahashi N(6), Kitazawa S(7), Yamada G(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Advanced Medicine,
Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, Japan [2] Institute of Molecular
Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. (2)1] Department
of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama Medical
University, Wakayama, Japan [2] Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan [3] Department of Molecular Pathology, Ehime
University Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime, Japan. (3)Weis Center for
Research, Geisinger Clinic, Danville, PA, USA. (4)Division of Reproductive
Engineering, Center for Animal Resources and Development, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto, Japan. (5)Division of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Resource
Development and Analysis, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. (6)Department of 
Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, 
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Molecular Pathology,
Ehime University Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime, Japan.

Although several syndromes include abnormalities of both the ventral body wall
and external genitalia, the developmental bases of this correlation are largely
unknown. Naturally occurring mutations in Aristaless-like 4 (Alx4, Strong's
luxoid: Alx4Lst) have ventral body wall and pelvic girdle abnormalities. We
sought to determine whether the development of the genital tubercle (GT) and its 
derivatives, the external genitalia, is affected by this mutation. We thus
performed genetic and tissue labeling analyses in mutant mice. Alx4Lst/Lst
mutants displayed hypoplasia of the dorsal GT and reduced expression of
Fibronectin. We analyzed cell migration during GT formation by tissue labeling
experiments and discovered that the cells located in the proximal segment of the 
umbilical cord (infra-umbilical mesenchyme) migrate toward the dorsal part of the
GT. The Alx4Lst/Lst mutants also displayed augmented expression of Hh
signal-related genes. Hence, we analyzed a series of combinatorial mutants for
Alx4, Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and GLI-Kruppel family member 3 (Gli3). These
phenotype-genotype analyses suggested a genetic interaction between Alx4 and Hh
signaling during GT formation. Moreover, Hh gain-of-function mutants phenocopied 
some of these phenotypes. These observations reveal novel information regarding
the pathogenic mechanisms of syndromic lower ventral body malformations, which
are largely unknown.

PMCID: PMC3925283
PMID: 23942202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nature. 2013 Aug 22;500(7463):445-8. doi: 10.1038/nature12336. Epub 2013 Jul 7.

Digit loss in archosaur evolution and the interplay between selection and
constraints.

de Bakker MA(1), Fowler DA, den Oude K, Dondorp EM, Navas MC, Horbanczuk JO, Sire
JY, Szczerbinska D, Richardson MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Zoology, Institute of Biology, Leiden University,
Sylvius Laboratory, Sylviusweg 72, 2333BE Leiden, the Netherlands.

Evolution involves interplay between natural selection and developmental
constraints. This is seen, for example, when digits are lost from the limbs
during evolution. Extant archosaurs (crocodiles and birds) show several instances
of digit loss under different selective regimes, and show limbs with one, two,
three, four or the ancestral number of five digits. The 'lost' digits sometimes
persist for millions of years as developmental vestiges. Here we examine digit
loss in the Nile crocodile and five birds, using markers of three successive
stages of digit development. In two independent lineages under different
selection, wing digit I and all its markers disappear. In contrast, hindlimb
digit V persists in all species sampled, both as cartilage, and as Sox9-
expressing precartilage domains, 250<U+2009>million years after the adult digit
disappeared. There is therefore a mismatch between evolution of the embryonic and
adult phenotypes. All limbs, regardless of digit number, showed similar
expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh). Even in the one-fingered emu wing, expression
of posterior genes Hoxd11 and Hoxd12 was conserved, whereas expression of
anterior genes Gli3 and Alx4 was not. We suggest that the persistence of digit V 
in the embryo may reflect constraints, particularly the conserved posterior gene 
networks associated with the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA). The more rapid
and complete disappearance of digit I may reflect its ZPA-independent
specification, and hence, weaker developmental constraints. Interacting with
these constraints are selection pressures for limb functions such as flying and
perching. This model may help to explain the diverse patterns of digit loss in
tetrapods. Our study may also help to understand how selection on adults leads to
changes in development.

PMID: 23831646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Dent Res. 2013 Jul;92(7):622-8. doi: 10.1177/0022034513487906. Epub 2013 Apr
26.

Expression and function of enamel-related gene products in calvarial development.

Atsawasuwan P(1), Lu X, Ito Y, Chen Y, Gopinathan G, Evans CA, Kulkarni AB,
Gibson CW, Luan X, Diekwisch TG.

Author information: 
(1)Brodie Laboratory for Craniofacial Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Enamel-related gene products (ERPs) are detected in non-enamel tissues such as
bone. We hypothesized that, if functional, ERP expression corresponds with
distinct events during osteoblast differentiation and affects bone development
and mineralization. In mouse calvariae and MC3T3 cells, expression profiles of
enamel-related gene products (ERPs) correlated with key events in post-natal
calvarial development and MC3T3 cell mineralization. Developing skulls from both 
Amel- and Ambn-deficient animals were approximately 15% shorter when compared
with those of wild-type controls, and their sutures remained patent for a longer 
period of time. Analysis of Amel- and Ambn-deficient calvariae and calvarial
osteoblast cultures revealed a dramatic reduction in mineralized nodules, a
significant reduction in Runx2, Sp7, Ibsp, and Msx2 expression, and a reduction
in Alx4 in Amel-deficient calvariae vs. an increase in Alx4 in Ambn-deficient
calvariae. Analysis of these data indicates that ERP expression follows defined
developmental profiles and affects osteoblast differentiation, mineralization,
and calvarial bone development. We propose that, in parallel to their role in the
developing enamel matrix, ERPs have retained an evolutionary conserved function
related to the biomineralization of bones.

PMCID: PMC3684230
PMID: 23625374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58731. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058731. Epub 2013 Mar 7.

Somatic mutations, allele loss, and DNA methylation of the Cub and Sushi Multiple
Domains 1 (CSMD1) gene reveals association with early age of diagnosis in
colorectal cancer patients.

Shull AY(1), Clendenning ML, Ghoshal-Gupta S, Farrell CL, Vangapandu HV, Dudas L,
Wilkerson BJ, Buckhaults PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Georgia Health Sciences University Cancer Center, Georgia Health Sciences
University, Augusta, Georgia, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The Cub and Sushi Multiple Domains 1 (CSMD1) gene, located on the
short arm of chromosome 8, codes for a type I transmembrane protein whose
function is currently unknown. CSMD1 expression is frequently lost in many
epithelial cancers. Our goal was to characterize the relationships between CSMD1 
somatic mutations, allele imbalance, DNA methylation, and the clinical
characteristics in colorectal cancer patients.
METHODS: We sequenced the CSMD1 coding regions in 54 colorectal tumors using the 
454FLX pyrosequencing platform to interrogate 72 amplicons covering the entire
coding sequence. We used heterozygous SNP allele ratios at multiple CSMD1 loci to
determine allelic balance and infer loss of heterozygosity. Finally, we performed
methylation-specific PCR on 76 colorectal tumors to determine DNA methylation
status for CSMD1 and known methylation targets ALX4, RUNX3, NEUROG1, and CDKN2A.
RESULTS: Using 454FLX sequencing and confirming with Sanger sequencing, 16 CSMD1 
somatic mutations were identified in 6 of the 54 colorectal tumors (11%). The
nonsynonymous to synonymous mutation ratio of the 16 somatic mutations was 15:1, 
a ratio significantly higher than the expected 2:1 ratio (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.014). This ratio 
indicates a presence of positive selection for mutations in the CSMD1 protein
sequence. CSMD1 allelic imbalance was present in 19 of 37 informative cases
(56%). Patients with allelic imbalance and CSMD1 mutations were significantly
younger (average age, 41 years) than those without somatic mutations (average
age, 68 years). The majority of tumors were methylated at one or more CpG loci
within the CSMD1 coding sequence, and CSMD1 methylation significantly correlated 
with two known methylation targets ALX4 and RUNX3. C:G>T:A substitutions were
significantly overrepresented (47%), suggesting extensive cytosine methylation
predisposing to somatic mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Deep amplicon sequencing and methylation-specific PCR reveal that
CSMD1 alterations can correlate with earlier clinical presentation in colorectal 
tumors, thus further implicating CSMD1 as a tumor suppressor gene.

PMCID: PMC3591376
PMID: 23505554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Mar;161A(3):600-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35762. Epub 2013
Feb 7.

Vertical transmission of a frontonasal phenotype caused by a novel ALX4 mutation.

Bertola DR(1), Rodrigues MG, Quaio CR, Kim CA, Passos-Bueno MR.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto da Criança - HC/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil. debora.bertola@icr.usp.br

Frontonasal dysplasias (FND) comprise a spectrum of disorders caused by abnormal 
median facial development. Its etiology is still poorly understood but recently
frontonasal dysplasia phenotypes were linked to loss-of-function mutations in the
ALX homeobox gene family, which comprises the ALX1, ALX3, and ALX4 genes. All
ALX-related frontonasal phenotypes till date had been compatible with an
autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. In contrast, heterozygous
loss-of-function mutations in ALX4 had been only associated with isolated
symmetrical parietal ossification defects at the intersection of the sagittal and
lambdoid sutures, known as enlarged parietal foramina. We report a family with
vertical transmission from mother to son of mild frontonasal dysplasia phenotype 
caused by a novel ALX4 gene mutation
(c.1080-1089_delGACCCGGTGCinsCTAAGATCTCAACAGAGATGGCAACT, p.Asp326fsX21).This is
the first report of a frontonasal phenotype related to a heterozygous mutation in
ALX4. This mutation is predicted to cause the loss of the aristaless domain in
the C-terminal region of the protein and preserves the homeodomain. We speculate 
that a different mechanism, a dominant-negative effect, is responsible for the
distinct phenotype in this family.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23401352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jan 15;22(2):239-51. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds423. Epub 2012 Oct
11.

Defective neural crest migration revealed by a Zebrafish model of Alx1-related
frontonasal dysplasia.

Dee CT(1), Szymoniuk CR, Mills PE, Takahashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester
M13 9PT, UK.

Frontonasal dysplasia (FND) refers to a class of midline facial malformations
caused by abnormal development of the facial primordia. The term encompasses a
spectrum of severities but characteristic features include combinations of ocular
hypertelorism, malformations of the nose and forehead and clefting of the facial 
midline. Several recent studies have drawn attention to the importance of Alx
homeobox transcription factors during craniofacial development. Most notably,
loss of Alx1 has devastating consequences resulting in severe orofacial clefting 
and extreme microphthalmia. In contrast, mutations of Alx3 or Alx4 cause milder
forms of FND. Whilst Alx1, Alx3 and Alx4 are all known to be expressed in the
facial mesenchyme of vertebrate embryos, little is known about the function of
these proteins during development. Here, we report the establishment of a
zebrafish model of Alx-related FND. Morpholino knock-down of zebrafish alx1
expression causes a profound craniofacial phenotype including loss of the facial 
cartilages and defective ocular development. We demonstrate for the first time
that Alx1 plays a crucial role in regulating the migration of cranial neural
crest (CNC) cells into the frontonasal primordia. Abnormal neural crest migration
is coincident with aberrant expression of foxd3 and sox10, two genes previously
suggested to play key roles during neural crest development, including migration,
differentiation and the maintenance of progenitor cells. This novel function is
specific to Alx1, and likely explains the marked clinical severity of Alx1
mutation within the spectrum of Alx-related FND.

PMID: 23059813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Hum Mutat. 2012 Dec;33(12):1626-9. doi: 10.1002/humu.22166. Epub 2012 Aug 13.

ALX4 gain-of-function mutations in nonsyndromic craniosynostosis.

Yagnik G(1), Ghuman A, Kim S, Stevens CG, Kimonis V, Stoler J, Sanchez-Lara PA,
Bernstein JA, Naydenov C, Drissi H, Cunningham ML, Kim J, Boyadjiev SA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of California-Davis,
Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.

Craniosynostosis is the early fusion of one or more sutures of the infant skull
and is a common defect occurring in approximately 1 of every 2,500 live births.
Nonsyndromic craniosynostosis (NSC) accounts for approximately 80% of all cases
and is thought to have strong genetic determinants that are yet to be identified.
ALX4 is a homeodomain transcription factor with known involvement in osteoblast
regulation. By direct sequencing of the ALX4 coding region in sagittal or
sagittal-suture-involved nonsyndromic craniosynostosis probands, we identified
novel, nonsynonymous, familial variants in three of 203 individuals with NSC.
Using dual-luciferase assay we show that two of these variants (V7F and K211E)
confer a significant gain-of-function effect on ALX4. Our results suggest that
ALX4 variants may have an impact on the genetic etiology of NSC.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3495992
PMID: 22829454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Oct;64(10):3478-85. doi: 10.1002/art.34573.

Methylation alterations of WT1 and homeobox genes in inflamed muscle biopsy
samples from patients with untreated juvenile dermatomyositis suggest
self-renewal capacity.

Wang M(1), Xie H, Shrestha S, Sredni S, Morgan GA, Pachman LM.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Chicago Research Center and Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of methylation alteration in inflamed muscles 
from children with juvenile dermatomyositis (DM) and other idiopathic
inflammatory myopathies (IIMs).
METHODS: Magnetic resonance imaging-directed diagnostic muscle biopsies yielded
samples from 20 children with juvenile DM, which were used for genome-wide DNA
methylation profiling, as were muscle biopsy samples from 4 healthy controls.
Bisulfite treatment followed by pyrosequencing confirmed methylation status in
juvenile DM and other IIMs. Immunohistochemistry defined localization and
expression levels of WT1.
RESULTS: Comparison of genome-wide DNA methylation profiling between juvenile DM 
muscle and normal control muscle revealed 27 genes with a significant methylation
difference between the groups. These genes were enriched with transcription
factors and/or cell cycle regulators and were unrelated to duration of untreated 
disease. Six homeobox genes were among them; ALX4, HOXC11, HOXD3, and HOXD4 were 
hypomethylated, while EMX2 and HOXB1 were hypermethylated. WT1 was significantly 
hypomethylated in juvenile DM (<U+0394>ß = -0.41, P < 0.001). Bisulfite pyrosequencing
verification in samples from 56 patients with juvenile DM confirmed the
methylation alterations of these genes. Similar methylation alterations were
observed in juvenile polymyositis (n = 5) and other IIMs (n = 9). Concordant with
the other findings, WT1 protein was increased in juvenile DM muscle, with average
positive staining of 11.6%, but was undetectable in normal muscle (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that affected muscles of children with juvenile
DM and IIMs have the capacity to be repaired, and that homeobox and WT1 genes are
epigenetically marked to facilitate this repair process, potentially suggesting
new avenues of therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC3462248
PMID: 22674142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Folia Morphol (Warsz). 2012 May;71(2):78-81.

Foramina parietalia permagna: the ins and outs.

Dharwal K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sri Guru Ram Das Institute of Medical Sciences and Research, Amritsar, India. 
kdharwal@gmail.com

Foramina parietalia permagna or enlarged parietal foramina are a rare variant
estimated to be less than 1 in 25,000 cases. Out of 150 dry macerated skulls
studied one skull showed 2 large parietal foramina measuring 17.38 x 27.67 mm
(right) and 15.31 x 25.46 mm (left) in size. Between them, across the sagittal
suture, was a transverse communicating suture interrupted by 3 very small wormian
bones. There is no denial of the fact that this familial transmitted trait is
caused by erratic ossification due to gene mutations. The clinical importance
lies in these being markers for underlying neural or bone pathology or metabolic 
syndrome. The enlarged parietal foramina as expressed by the eyes at the back
remain a curious anatomical but a definite clinico-pathological entity.

PMID: 22648584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 May;158A(5):1233-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35305. Epub 2012
Apr 11.

Exclusion of mutations in TGIF, ALX3, and ALX4 genes in patients with the
syndrome of frontonasal dysgenesis, callosal agenesis, basal encephalocele, and
eye anomalies.

Ribeiro-Bicudo LA(1), Quiezi RG, Guion-Almeida ML, Legnaro C, Richieri-Costa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Hospital of Rehabilitation of Craniofacial
Anomalies, University of São Paulo, Bauru, SP, Brazil.

PMID: 22496059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Jan;158A(1):236-44. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34390. Epub 2011
Dec 2.

Mild nasal malformations and parietal foramina caused by homozygous ALX4
mutations.

Kayserili H(1), Altunoglu U, Ozgur H, Basaran S, Uyguner ZO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, Turkey. hkayseri@istanbul.edu.tr

We report on a boy born to consanguineous parents, who had hypertelorism, a broad
nasal bridge, ridge and tip, bifid nasal tip, cleft alae nasi, broad columella,
unilateral preauricular tag, shallow labiogingival sulcus, and bilateral large
parietal foramina. Cranial MRI revealed a kinked corpus body and small cerebellar
vermis. Molecular analysis uncovered a homozygous c.673C<U+2009>><U+2009>G (p.Q225E) mutation
in ALX4 gene. We compare the relatively mild phenotype in the patient to the more
marked phenotype described in other patients with homozygous ALX4 mutations, and 
to the phenotypes in patients with mutations in other ALX genes.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22140057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cancer Sci. 2012 Jan;103(1):73-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.02129.x. Epub
2011 Nov 24.

High CpG island methylator phenotype is associated with lymph node metastasis and
prognosis in gastric cancer.

Chen HY(1), Zhu BH, Zhang CH, Yang DJ, Peng JJ, Chen JH, Liu FK, He YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Several studies have found that the promoter CpG island is frequently methylated 
in gastric cancer. The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) defines concordant 
methylation of multiple promoter CpG island loci in a subset of gastric cancer.
However, the relationship between CIMP and lymph node metastasis in gastric
cancer is unknown. Our study aimed to characterize the role of CIMP in lymph node
metastasis. Clinical specimens from 120 patients were analyzed and PCR was used
to detect the methylation status of five genes (ALX4, TMEFF2, CHCHD10, IGFBP3,
and NPR1). We measured the level of mRNA for the five genes by real-time RT-PCR. 
Microsatellite instability and Helicobacter pylori infection status were assayed 
by capillary electrophoresis and real-time PCR, respectively. DNA methylation in 
the five genes was correlated with low expression of the respective mRNA. With
CIMP as the dependent variable, CIMP-high gastric cancer tended to show more
distant lymph node metastasis, higher pathologic tumor classification, more
pathologic metastasis, and higher pathologic TNM status. Microsatellite
instability and H. pylori status were not significant predictors of prognosis.
CIMP-high gastric cancer showed significantly worse survival compared with that
of CIMP-low/CIMP-negative gastric cancer (P < 0.001). Our results show that there
is an association between CIMP status and lymph node metastasis in gastric cancer
and CIMP-high was an independent prognostic factor.

© 2011 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 22017425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2011 Oct;137(10):1571-80. doi:
10.1007/s00432-011-1036-7. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

Genome-wide identification of possible methylation markers chemosensitive to
targeted regimens in colorectal cancers.

Kim JC(1), Lee HC, Cho DH, Choi EY, Cho YK, Ha YJ, Choi PW, Roh SA, Kim SY, Kim
YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. 
jckim@amc.seoul.kr

PURPOSE: Few efficient methylation markers of chemosensitivity have been
discovered. The genome-wide analysis of methylation markers is needed to identify
chemosensitive candidates to targeted therapy.
METHODS: This study describes a two-step process to select chemosensitive
candidates of methylation genes. A genome-wide screening of methylation genes was
performed using a Beadarray and an in vitro chemosensitivity assay of 119
colorectal cancers (CRCs). Ten candidate genes identified during the initial
screening were verified by biological utility assessment using cell viability
assays of transfected CRC cells.
RESULTS: Five methylation genes related to sensitivity to bevacizumab regimens
(RASSF1, MMP25, KCNQ1, ESR1, and GALR2) or cetuximab regimens (SCL18A2, GPX7,
NID2, IGFBP3, and ALX4) were chosen during the first step. A viability assay
revealed that GALR2-overexpressing HCT116 cells were significantly more
chemosensitive to bevacizumab regimens than control cells (P = 0.022 and 0.019
for bevacizumab with FOLFIRI and FOLFOX, respectively), concurrently verified on 
a caspase-3 activity assay. GPX7- or ALX4-overexpressed RKO cells were
significantly less viable to cetuximab regimens compared to control cells (GPX7: 
P = 0.027 each for cetuximab with FOLFIRI and FOLFOX; ALX4: P = 0.049 and 0.003
for cetuximab with FOLFIRI and FOLFOX, respectively), but caspase-3 activity was 
not prominent in GPX7-overexpressed RKO cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Two novel genes, GALR2 and ALX4, have been identified as
chemosensitive methylation candidates to bevacizumab and cetuximab regimens,
respectively. As our study did not include a clinical association study, the two 
candidates should be validated in large clinical cohorts, hopefully predicting
responsive patients to targeted regimens.

PMID: 21850381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Evol Dev. 2011 Jul-Aug;13(4):343-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-142X.2011.00489.x.

Evolution of the Alx homeobox gene family: parallel retention and independent
loss of the vertebrate Alx3 gene.

McGonnell IM(1), Graham A, Richardson J, Fish JL, Depew MJ, Dee CT, Holland PW,
Takahashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction and Development, The Royal Veterinary College, Royal College
Street, London NW1 0TU, UK. imcgonnell@rvc.ac.uk

The Alx gene family is implicated in craniofacial development and comprises two
to four homeobox genes in each vertebrate genome analyzed. Using phylogenetics
and comparative genomics, we show that the common ancestor of jawed vertebrates
had three Alx genes descendent from the two-round genome duplications (Alx1,
Alx3, Alx4), compared with a single amphioxus gene. Later in evolution one of the
paralogues, Alx3, was lost independently from at least three different vertebrate
lineages, whereas Alx1 and Alx4 were consistently retained. Comparison of spatial
gene expression patterns reveals that the three mouse genes have equivalent
craniofacial expression to the two chick and frog genes, suggesting that
redundancy compensated for gene loss. We suggest that multiple independent loss
of one Alx gene was predisposed by extensive and persistent overlap in gene
expression between Alx paralogues. Even so, it is unclear whether it was
coincidence or evolutionary bias that resulted in the same Alx gene being lost on
each occasion, rather than different members of the gene family.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3166657
PMID: 21740507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Am J Gastroenterol. 2011 Jun;106(6):1110-8. doi: 10.1038/ajg.2011.6. Epub 2011
Feb 15.

Methylation of NEUROG1 in serum is a sensitive marker for the detection of early 
colorectal cancer.

Herbst A(1), Rahmig K, Stieber P, Philipp A, Jung A, Ofner A, Crispin A, Neumann 
J, Lamerz R, Kolligs FT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, University of Munich, Munich, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer and a major cause
of cancer-related deaths. Early detection of colonic lesions can reduce the
incidence and mortality of colorectal cancer. Colonoscopy is the screening test
for colorectal cancer with the highest efficacy, but its acceptance in the
general public is rather low. To identify suitable tumor-derived markers that
could detect colorectal cancer in blood samples, we analyzed the methylation
status of a panel of genes in sera of affected patients.
METHODS: Using methylation-specific quantitative PCR, we analyzed the methylation
of ten marker genes in sera of healthy individuals and patients with colorectal
cancer.
RESULTS: Only HLTF, HPP1/TPEF, and NEUROG1 DNA methylation was detectable in at
least 50% of patients with colorectal cancers. Whereas HLTF and HPP1/TPEF
preferentially detected advanced and metastasized colorectal cancers, NEUROG1
methylation was detectable in UICC stages I-IV at a similar rate. Compared with
other methylation markers, such as ALX4, SEPT9, and vimentin, NEUROG1 shows a
higher sensitivity for colorectal cancer at UICC stages I and II. At a
specificity of 91%, NEUROG1 reached a sensitivity of 61% (confidence interval,
50.4-70.6%) for the detection of colorectal cancers. Furthermore, detection of
NEUROG1 methylation was independent of age and gender.
CONCLUSIONS: Methylation of the NEUROG1 gene is frequently found in sera of
patients with colorectal cancers independent of tumor stage. The quantitative
detection of NEUROG1 DNA methylation in serum is a suitable approach for the
non-invasive screening for asymptomatic colorectal cancer.

PMID: 21326223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 20;6(1):e16260. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016260.

Genetic analysis of Hedgehog signaling in ventral body wall development and the
onset of omphalocele formation.

Matsumaru D(1), Haraguchi R, Miyagawa S, Motoyama J, Nakagata N, Meijlink F,
Yamada G.

Author information: 
(1)Global COE, Cell Fate Regulation Research and Education Unit, Department of
Organ Formation, Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: An omphalocele is one of the major ventral body wall malformations
and is characterized by abnormally herniated viscera from the body trunk. It has 
been frequently found to be associated with other structural malformations, such 
as genitourinary malformations and digit abnormalities. In spite of its clinical 
importance, the etiology of omphalocele formation is still controversial.
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is one of the essential growth factor signaling pathways 
involved in the formation of the limbs and urogenital system. However, the
relationship between Hh signaling and ventral body wall formation remains
unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To gain insight into the roles of Hh signaling in
ventral body wall formation and its malformation, we analyzed phenotypes of mouse
mutants of Sonic hedgehog (Shh), GLI-Kruppel family member 3 (Gli3) and
Aristaless-like homeobox 4 (Alx4). Introduction of additional Alx4(Lst) mutations
into the Gli3(Xt/Xt) background resulted in various degrees of severe omphalocele
and pubic diastasis. In addition, loss of a single Shh allele restored the
omphalocele and pubic symphysis of Gli3(Xt/+); Alx4(Lst/Lst) embryos. We also
observed ectopic Hh activity in the ventral body wall region of Gli3(Xt/Xt)
embryos. Moreover, tamoxifen-inducible gain-of-function experiments to induce
ectopic Hh signaling revealed Hh signal dose-dependent formation of omphaloceles.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We suggest that one of the possible causes of
omphalocele and pubic diastasis is ectopically-induced Hh signaling. To our
knowledge, this would be the first demonstration of the involvement of Hh
signaling in ventral body wall malformation and the genetic rescue of omphalocele
phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3024424
PMID: 21283718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Oct 1;202(1):1-10. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.05.018.

Development of a multiplex MethyLight assay for the detection of multigene
methylation in human colorectal cancer.

He Q(1), Chen HY, Bai EQ, Luo YX, Fu RJ, He YS, Jiang J, Wang HQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy & Neurobiology, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, P.R. China.

In peripheral blood, cell-free methylated DNA has been reported to be a useful
biomarker of noninvasive blood screening for the detection of colorectal cancer
(CRC), including the genes ALX homeobox 4 (ALX4), septin 9 (SEPT9), or
transmembrane protein with EGF-like, and two follistatin-like domains 2 (TMEFF2).
Here we report a multiplex MethyLight polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay that 
simultaneously detected the methylation status of ALX4, SEPT9, and TMEFF2, as
well as quantifying methylation level of these genes in a total of 127 fresh
tissue samples and 182 peripheral blood samples from CRC patients. Using the
multiplex MethyLight assay, methylated ALX4, SEPT9, and TMEFF2 occurred in 56,
78, and 75% of CRC tissue samples and in 48, 75, and 71% of peripheral blood
samples from CRC patients. The sensitivities of the combined study using the
three genes as biomarkers for the detection of CRC in primary tissues and
peripheral blood samples were 84 and 81%, with specificities of 87 and 90%,
respectively. Combining the specificity of real-time PCR, the high throughput of 
multiplex PCR, and the high sensitivity of multigene detection, this multiplex
MethyLight PCR assay may allow for future screening programs with large-scale
noninvasive blood testing for early-stage CRC.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20804913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Pediatr Surg Int. 2010 Oct;26(10):1017-23. doi: 10.1007/s00383-010-2658-6.

HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 genes are downregulated in the cadmium-induced omphalocele 
in the chick model.

Doi T(1), Puri P, Bannigan J, Thompson J.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Dublin 12,
Ireland.

PURPOSE: In the chick embryo, administration of cadmium (Cd) induces omphalocele 
phenotype. HoxB2 and HoxB4, expressed in cell types that contribute to ventral
body wall (VBW) formation, act together to mediate proper closure of the VBW,
involving a key downstream transcription factor, Alx4. HoxB2 and HoxB4 knockout
mice display VBW defects with specific downregulation of Alx4 gene expression,
while homozygous Alx4 knockouts show omphalocele phenotype. Although the earliest
histological changes in the Cd chick model occur commencing at 4H post treatment,
the exact timing and molecular mechanism by which Cd acts is still unclear. We
hypothesized that HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 genes are downregulated during the
critical timing of very early embryogenesis in the Cd-induced omphalocele chick
model.
METHODS: After 60H incubation, chick embryos were harvested at 1H, 4H and 8H
after treatment with saline or Cd and divided into controls and Cd group (n = 24 
for each group). RT-PCR was performed to investigate the gene expression of
HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 and statistically analyzed (significance was accepted at p 
< 0.05). Immunohistochemical staining was also performed to evaluate the protein 
expression/distribution of HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 in the chick embryo.
RESULTS: The expression levels of HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 gene at 4H were
significantly downregulated in the Cd group as compared to controls, whereas
there were no significant differences at the other time points. Immunoreactivity 
of HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 at 4H is also markedly decreased in the ectoderm and the
dermomyotome in the Cd chick model as compared to controls.
CONCLUSION: Downregulation of HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 expression during the narrow 
window of early embryogenesis may cause omphalocele in the Cd chick model by
interfering with molecular signaling required for proper VBW formation.
Furthermore, these results support the concept that HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 genes
work together to mediate proper VBW formation.

PMID: 20625746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Vopr Onkol. 2010;56(2):162-8.

[Hypermethylation of the CDH1, SEPT9, HLTF and ALX4 genes and their diagnostic
significance in colorectal cancer].

[Article in Russian]

Kostin PA, Zakharzhevskaia NB, Generozov EV, Govorun VM, Chernyshov SV,
Shchelygin IuA.

Sequential treatment of bisulfate-converted DNA was used to study methylation of 
promoter areas of SEPT9, HLTF, ALX4 and CDH1 genes. Methylation profiles were
evaluated by comparing bioptical findings on colorectal cancer (n=55) and
morphologically intact areas of the large bowel (n=71). Significant differences
between groups were established for SEPT9, HLTF and ALX4 genes (p < or = 10(-9)) 
in evaluating medium-rate methylation of CpG. Diagnostic sensitivity (Se) peaked 
for SEPT9 (78 +/- 7%); specificity--(86 +/- 4%) (Sp). On site CpG (position
"+14"), similar findings were reported: Se=81 +/- 6%, Sp=77 +/- 5%. Therefore,
CpG(14)SEPT9 may be used as a separate marker. As a result of the use of HLTF as 
marker on all 23 sites, Se was 67 +/- 6% and Sp--87 +/- 3%; ALX4 diagnostic
sensitivity--59 +/- 6%. Specificity level was similar to those of the other genes
(88 +/- 3%). Despite the role of CDH1 gene in colorectal cancer, the
group-to-group differences in methylation rates were minimal. Such values of Se
and Sp as 54 +/- 6% and 67 +/- 5%, respectively, could not support methylation of
the CDH1 promoter area for diagnostic purposes. Therefore, combined evaluation of
SEPT9, HLTF and ALX4 genes offered more advantage as far as diagnosis is
concerned. Hypermethylation in two of the three genes was assumed as a criterion 
for diagnosis. Under such conditions, diagnostic sensitivity was 81 +/- 7% (Sp=93
+/- 3%). With such high values, the criterion has a potential of being
instrumental in working out diagnostic tests for colorectal cancer.

PMID: 20552891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Recent Pat DNA Gene Seq. 2010 Jun;4(2):86-93.

Recent patents and advances in genomic biomarker discovery for colorectal
cancers.

Quyun C(1), Ye Z, Lin SC, Lin B.

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Division, Zhejiang-California International Nanosystems
Institute (ZCNI), Zhejiang University, 268 Kaixuan Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang,
310029, China.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer in the world. Early
diagnosis of colorectal cancer is the key to reducing the death rate of CRC
patients. Predicting the response to current therapeutic modalities of CRC will
also have a great impact on patient care. This review summarizes recent advances 
and patents in biomarker discovery in CRC under five major categories; including 
genomic changes, expression changes, mutations, epigenetic changes and microRNAs.
The interesting patents include: 1) a patent for a method to differentiate normal
exfoliated cells from cancer cells based on whether they were subjected to
apoptosis and DNA degradation; 2) A model (PM-33 multiple molecular marker model)
based on expression changes of up-regulation of the MDM2, DUSP6, and NFl genes
down-regulation of the RNF4, MMD and EIF2S3 genes, which achieved an 88%
sensitivity, and an 82% specificity for CRC diagnosis; 3) gene mutations in PTEN,
KRAS, PIK3CA for predicting the response to anti-EGFR therapies, a common drug
used for CRC treatment; 4) patents on epigenetic changes of ITGA4, SEPT9, ALX4,
TFAP2E FOXL2, SARM1, ID4 etc. and many key miRNAs. Finally, future directions in 
the fields were commented on or suggested, including the combination of multiple 
categories of biomarkers and pathway central or network-based biomarker panels.

PMID: 20426761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. West Afr J Med. 2009 May;28(3):182-4.

Foramina parietalia permagna in a Nigerian family.

Bello TO(1), Bajomo AA, Adeniyi TO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, LAUTECH College of Health Sciences, Osogbo, Ogun
State, Nigeria. topebello@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Enlarged parietal foramina are defects in the skull and are believed 
to be benign and familial and caused by variable degree of defective
intramembranous ossification of the parietal bones. They are rare and
asymptomatic, usually associated with ALX4 or MSX2 gene mutations and transmitted
as autosomal dominant.
OBJECTIVE: To highlight the importance of plain radiographs in the diagnosis of
this condition and need for health education in affected families.
METHODS: A four-year-old male presented with a 14-day history of fever, seizures,
and loss of consciousness. Full clinical and radiological evaluation was
undertaken.
RESULTS: Physical examination showed an unconscious boy who was having persistent
twitching of the upper limbs. Investigations of skull X-rays which showed
bilateral parasagital lucencies in the parietal bones. Ultrasound scan showed a
mass in the posterior fourth ventricle. The father admitted to having defects in 
his skull. The patient's elder brother also had defects in his skull.
CONCLUSION: The case illustrates that PFM is usually benign and mostly discovered
accidently. In most cases, health education and reassurance are all that are
necessary.

PMID: 20306736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Enlarged Parietal Foramina.

Wilkie AOM, Mavrogiannis LA.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2004 Mar 30.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Enlarged parietal foramina are characteristic
symmetric, paired radiolucencies of the parietal bones, located close to the
intersection of the sagittal and lambdoid sutures, caused by deficient
ossification around the parietal notch, which is normally obliterated by the
fifth month of fetal development. Enlarged parietal foramina are usually
asymptomatic. Meningeal, cortical, and vascular malformations of the posterior
fossa occasionally accompany the bone defects and may predispose to epilepsy. In 
a minority of individuals, headaches, vomiting, or intense local pain are
sometimes associated with the defects, especially on application of mild pressure
to the unprotected cerebral cortex.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Typically oval or round, enlarged parietal foramina resemble a
pair of spectacles on postero-anterior skull radiographs. They may be less
apparent on lateral skull radiographs because the lucencies are projected
obliquely through normal bone. In young children, the disorder may present as a
persistently enlarged posterior fontanelle caused by a single large central
parietal bone defect (cranium bifidum). 3D CT scanning using bone windows clearly
reveals the defect. MRI is useful in defining associated intracranial anatomic
changes. MSX2 and ALX4 are the two genes in which mutations are known to cause
enlarged parietal foramina.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is generally conservative.
Persistent cranium bifidum may warrant operative closure. Associated headaches or
seizures should be treated appropriately. The risk for penetrating injury to the 
brain is small but may cause anxiety; education of parents, teachers, and the
affected child to avoid risky behaviors that could result in injury suffices in
most circumstances. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Contact sports should be
avoided if a midline bony defect persists.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Enlarged parietal foramina are inherited in an autosomal
dominant manner with high, but not complete, penetrance. Most individuals
diagnosed with enlarged parietal foramina have an affected parent. The proportion
of cases caused by de novo mutations appears to be small. Each child of an
individual with enlarged parietal foramina has a 50% chance of inheriting the
mutation. Careful fetal ultrasound examination at 18 to 20 weeks' gestation can
usually detect the defects in a fetus at risk. Fetal MRI is also an option.
Prenatal diagnosis using molecular genetic testing is possible for families in
which the disease-causing mutation has been identified in an affected family
member.

PMID: 20301307  [PubMed]


44. J Appl Genet. 2010;51(1):37-50. doi: 10.1007/BF03195709.

Transcriptomic signature of cell lines isolated from canine mammary
adenocarcinoma metastases to lungs.

Król M(1), Polanska J, Pawlowski KM, Turowski P, Skierski J, Majewska A, Ugorski 
M, Morty RE, Motyl T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw
University of Life Sciences (SGGW), ul. Nowoursynowska 159, 02-776 Warsaw,
Poland.

Metastasis is a final step in the progression of mammary gland cancer, usually
leading to death. Potentially, a molecular signature of metastasis can be defined
via comparison of primary tumors with their metastases. Currently, there is no
data in the literature regarding the molecular portrait of metastases in dogs and
only few reports regarding human cancer. This is the first report describing the 
transcriptomic signature of canine cancer metastatic cells. Two adenocarcinoma
cell lines isolated from the canine mammary gland (CMT-W1 and CMT-W2) were
compared with cell lines isolated from their lung metastases (CMT-W1M and
CMT-W2M) with regards to the following cytometric parameters: cell cycle, ploidy,
Bcl-2 expression, susceptibility to induced apoptosis, and transcriptomic
profile. Cytometric analyses revealed significant differences in cell cycle and
antiapoptotic potential between the examined cells. Using oligonucleotide
microarrays, we found 104 up-regulated genes in the metastatic cell line CMT-W1M 
and 21 up-regulated genes in the primary CMT-W1 cell line. We also found 83
up-regulated genes in the CMT-W2M cell line and only 21 up-regulated genes in the
CMT-W2 cell line. Among the up-regulated genes in both metastatic cell lines, we 
found 15 common genes. These differently expressed genes are involved mainly in
signal transduction, cell structure and motility, nucleic acid metabolism,
developmental processing, and apoptosis (GHSR, RASSF1, ARF1GAP, WDR74, SMOC2,
SFRP4, DIAPH1, FSCN1, ALX4, SNX15, PLD2, WNT7B, POU6F2, NKG7, and POLR2F). Seven 
of them are involved in a cellular pathway dependent on ghrelin via growth
hormone secretagogue receptor (GHSR). Our results suggest that this pathway may
be essential for mammary cancer cells to have a metastatic potential.

PMID: 20145299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 4;5(2):e9061. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009061.

Performance of epigenetic markers SEPT9 and ALX4 in plasma for detection of
colorectal precancerous lesions.

Tänzer M(1), Balluff B, Distler J, Hale K, Leodolter A, Röcken C, Molnar B,
Schmid R, Lofton-Day C, Schuster T, Ebert MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität,
München, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Screening for colorectal cancer (CRC) has shown to reduce
cancer-related mortality, however, acceptance and compliance to current
programmes are poor. Developing new, more acceptable non-invasive tests for the
detection of cancerous and precancerous colorectal lesions would not only allow
preselection of individuals for colonoscopy, but may also prevent cancer by
removal of precancerous lesions.
METHODS: Plasma from 128 individuals (cohort I - exploratory study: 73 cases / 55
controls) was used to test the performance of a single marker, SEPT9, using a
real-time quantitative PCR assay. To validate performance of SEPT9, plasma of 76 
individuals (cohort II - validation study: 54 cases / 22 controls) was assessed. 
Additionally, improvement of predictive capability considering SEPT9 and
additionally ALX4 methylation was investigated within these patients.
RESULTS: In both cohorts combined, methylation of SEPT9 was observed in 9% of
controls (3/33), 29% of patients with colorectal precancerous lesions (27/94) and
73% of colorectal cancer patients (24/33). The presence of both SEPT9 and ALX4
markers was analysed in cohort II and was observed in 5% of controls (1/22) and
37% of patients with polyps (18/49). Interestingly, also 3/5 (60%) patients with 
colorectal cancer were tested positive by the two marker panel in plasma.
CONCLUSIONS: While these data confirm the detection rate of SEPT9 as a biomarker 
for colorectal cancer, they also show that methylated DNA from advanced
precancerous colorectal lesions can be detected using a panel of two DNA
methylation markers, ALX4 and SEPT9. If confirmed in larger studies these data
indicate that screening for colorectal precancerous lesions with a blood-based
test may be as feasible as screening for invasive cancer.

PMCID: PMC2816214
PMID: 20140221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Scand J Plast Reconstr Surg Hand Surg. 2009;43(5):251-5. doi:
10.3109/02844310903247228.

Germline mutation screening of the Saethre-Chotzen-associated genes TWIST1 and
FGFR3 in families with BRCA1/2-negative breast cancer.

Bergman A(1), Sahlin P, Emanuelsson M, Carén H, Tarnow P, Martinsson T, Grönberg 
H, Stenman G.

Author information: 
(1)Lundberg Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, The
Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University
Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden.

Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is one of the most common craniosynostosis syndromes. It
is an autosomal dominantly inherited disorder with variable expression that is
caused by germline mutations in the TWIST1 gene or more rarely in the FGFR2 or
FGFR3 genes. We have previously reported that patients with Saethre-Chotzen
syndrome have an increased risk of developing breast cancer. Here we have
analysed a cohort of 26 women with BRCA1/2-negative hereditary breast cancer to
study whether a proportion of these families might have mutations in
Saethre-Chotzen-associated genes. DNA sequence analysis of TWIST1 showed no
pathogenic mutations in the coding sequence in any of the 26 patients. MLPA
(multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification)-analysis also showed no
alterations in copy numbers in any of the craniofacial disorder genes MSX2, ALX4,
RUNX2, EFNB1, TWIST1, FGFR1, FGFR2,FGFR3, or FGFR4. Taken together, our findings 
indicate that mutations in Saethre-Chotzen-associated genes are uncommon or
absent in BRCA1/2-negative patients with hereditary breast cancer.

PMID: 19863427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Clin Pathol. 2009 Oct;62(10):908-14. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2009.067298.

Loss of ALX4 expression in epithelial cells and adjacent stromal cells in breast 
cancer.

Chang H(1), Mohabir N, Done S, Hamel PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Loss of the stromally-restricted homeodomain transcription factor,
Alx4, causes defective mouse mammary epithelial morphogenesis.
AIMS: To begin to define the role of ALX4 in the human breast and in breast
cancer, the expression pattern of ALX4 in the normal human breast and changes in 
expression in breast cancer were determined.
METHODS: Cells expressing ALX4 in the human breast were identified by
co-immunofluorescence using alpha-ALX4 antibodies and markers of specific mammary
cell types. ALX4 expression in breast cancer was then determined by
immunohistochemistry on tumour sections that also harboured regions of normal
breast tissue. Using criteria that required ALX4 staining in both stromal and
epithelial cells, changes in ALX4 expression in tumours on a tissue microarray
were determined.
RESULTS: ALX4 was expressed in both stromal and luminal epithelial cells in the
human breast. Scoring tissue sections of duct carcinoma in situ (DCIS) or
invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) that also harboured regions of normal breast
tissue, a loss of ALX4 (p<0.001) in stromal and epithelial cells in breast
tumours was observed. Analysis of ALX4 expression in 123 sections on a tissue
microarray confirmed a highly significant loss (p<0.001) of ALX4 in breast cancer
in the tumours themselves and in adjacent stromal cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show a distinct pattern of expression of ALX4 in the
human breast relative to the murine mammary gland. Furthermore, characterisation 
of ALX4 in breast cancer showed that loss of ALX4 in tumours and the surrounding 
untransformed stroma is a basic characteristic of DCIS and IDC.

PMID: 19783719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Nov 15;18(22):4357-66. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp391. Epub 2009 Aug
19.

ALX4 dysfunction disrupts craniofacial and epidermal development.

Kayserili H(1), Uz E, Niessen C, Vargel I, Alanay Y, Tuncbilek G, Yigit G,
Uyguner O, Candan S, Okur H, Kaygin S, Balci S, Mavili E, Alikasifoglu M, Haase
I, Wollnik B, Akarsu NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, Turkey.

Genetic control of craniofacial morphogenesis requires a complex interaction of
numerous genes encoding factors essential for patterning and differentiation. We 
present two Turkish families with a new autosomal recessive frontofacial
dysostosis syndrome characterized by total alopecia, a large skull defect,
coronal craniosynostosis, hypertelorism, severely depressed nasal bridge and
ridge, bifid nasal tip, hypogonadism, callosal body agenesis and mental
retardation. Using homozygosity mapping, we mapped the entity to chromosome
11p11.2-q12.3 and subsequently identified a homozygous c.793C-->T nonsense
mutation in the human ortholog of the mouse aristaless-like homeobox 4 (ALX4)
gene. This mutation is predicted to result in a premature stop codon (p.R265X) of
ALX4 truncating 146 amino acids of the protein including a part of the highly
conserved homeodomain and the C-terminal paired tail domain. Although the RNA is 
stable and not degraded by nonsense-mediated RNA decay, the mutant protein is
likely to be non-functional. In a skin biopsy of an affected individual, we
observed a hypomorphic interfollicular epidermis with reduced suprabasal layers
associated with impaired interfollicular epidermal differentiation. Hair
follicle-like structures were present but showed altered differentiation. Our
data indicate that ALX4 plays a critical role both in craniofacial development as
in skin and hair follicle development in human.

PMID: 19692347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 May;84(5):698-705. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.04.009. Epub
2009 Apr 30.

Frontorhiny, a distinctive presentation of frontonasal dysplasia caused by
recessive mutations in the ALX3 homeobox gene.

Twigg SR(1), Versnel SL, Nürnberg G, Lees MM, Bhat M, Hammond P, Hennekam RC,
Hoogeboom AJ, Hurst JA, Johnson D, Robinson AA, Scambler PJ, Gerrelli D, Nürnberg
P, Mathijssen IM, Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3
9DS, UK.

We describe a recessively inherited frontonasal malformation characterized by a
distinctive facial appearance, with hypertelorism, wide nasal bridge, short nasal
ridge, bifid nasal tip, broad columella, widely separated slit-like nares, long
philtrum with prominent bilateral swellings, and midline notch in the upper lip
and alveolus. Additional recurrent features present in a minority of individuals 
have been upper eyelid ptosis and midline dermoid cysts of craniofacial
structures. Assuming recessive inheritance, we mapped the locus in three families
to chromosome 1 and identified mutations in ALX3, which is located at band 1p13.3
and encodes the aristaless-related ALX homeobox 3 transcription factor. In total,
we identified seven different homozygous pathogenic mutations in seven families. 
These mutations comprise missense substitutions at critical positions within the 
conserved homeodomain as well as nonsense, frameshift, and splice-site mutations,
all predicting severe or complete loss of function. Our findings contrast with
previous studies of the orthologous murine gene, which showed no phenotype in
Alx3(-/-) homozygotes, apparently as a result of functional redundancy with the
paralogous Alx4 gene. We conclude that ALX3 is essential for normal facial
development in humans and that deficiency causes a clinically recognizable
phenotype, which we term frontorhiny.

PMCID: PMC2681074
PMID: 19409524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Inorg Chem. 2008 Aug 18;47(16):7348-54. doi: 10.1021/ic800863z. Epub 2008 Jul 19.

BX4- and AlX4- superhalogen anions (X = F, Cl, Br): an ab initio study.

Sikorska C(1), Smuczynska S, Skurski P, Anusiewicz I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Gdansk, Sobieskiego 18, Gdansk, Poland.

The vertical electron detachment energies (VDEs) of 30 MX 4 (-) (M = B, Al; X =
F, Cl, Br) anions were calculated at the OVGF level with the 6-311+G(3df) basis
sets. The largest vertical electron binding energy was found for the AlF 4 (-)
system (9.789 eV). The strong VDE dependence on the symmetry of the species,
ligand type, ligand-central atom distance, and bonding/nonbonding/antibonding
character of the highest occupied molecular orbital was observed and discussed.

PMID: 18637677  [PubMed]


51. Dev Biol. 2008 Aug 1;320(1):19-29. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.045. Epub 2008
Apr 15.

TGF-beta type I receptor Alk5 regulates tooth initiation and mandible patterning 
in a type II receptor-independent manner.

Zhao H(1), Oka K, Bringas P, Kaartinen V, Chai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, School of Dentistry, University of 
Southern California, 2250 Alcazar Street, CSA 103, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

TGF-beta superfamily members signal through a heteromeric receptor complex to
regulate craniofacial development. TGF-beta type II receptor appears to bind only
TGF-beta, whereas TGF-beta type I receptor (ALK5) also binds to ligands in
addition to TGF-beta. Our previous work has shown that conditional inactivation
of Tgfbr2 in the neural crest cells of mice leads to severe craniofacial bone
defects. In this study, we examine and compare the defects of TGF-beta type II
receptor (Wnt1-Cre;Tgfbr2(fl/fl)) and TGF-beta type I receptor/Alk5
(Wnt1-Cre;Alk5(fl)(/fl)) conditional knockout mice. Loss of Alk5 in the neural
crest tissue resulted in phenotypes not seen in the Tgfbr2 mutant, including
delayed tooth initiation and development, defects in early mandible patterning
and altered expression of key patterning genes including Msx1, Bmp4, Bmp2, Pax9, 
Alx4, Lhx6/7 and Gsc. Alk5 controls the survival of CNC cells by regulating
expression of Gsc and other genes in the proximal aboral region of the developing
mandible. We conclude that ALK5 regulates tooth initiation and early mandible
patterning through a pathway independent of Tgfbr2. There is an intrinsic
requirement for Alk5 signal in regulating the fate of CNC cells during tooth and 
mandible development.

PMCID: PMC3629921
PMID: 18572160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Diabetes. 2008 Aug;57(8):2220-5. doi: 10.2337/db07-1319. Epub 2008 Apr 28.

Association analysis in african americans of European-derived type 2 diabetes
single nucleotide polymorphisms from whole-genome association studies.

Lewis JP(1), Palmer ND, Hicks PJ, Sale MM, Langefeld CD, Freedman BI, Divers J,
Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Several whole-genome association studies have reported identification 
of type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes in various European-derived study
populations. Little investigation of these loci has been reported in other ethnic
groups, specifically African Americans. Striking differences exist between these 
populations, suggesting they may not share identical genetic risk factors. Our
objective was to examine the influence of type 2 diabetes genes identified in
whole-genome association studies in a large African American case-control
population.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 12 loci
(e.g., TCF7L2, IDE/KIF11/HHEX, SLC30A8, CDKAL1, PKN2, IGF2BP2, FLJ39370, and
EXT2/ALX4) associated with type 2 diabetes in European-derived populations were
genotyped in 993 African American type 2 diabetic and 1,054 African American
control subjects. Additionally, 68 ancestry-informative markers were genotyped to
account for the impact of admixture on association results.
RESULTS: Little evidence of association was observed between SNPs, with the
exception of those in TCF7L2, and type 2 diabetes in African Americans. One
TCF7L2 SNP (rs7903146) showed compelling evidence of association with type 2
diabetes (admixture-adjusted additive P [P(a)] = 1.59 x 10(-6)). Only the
intragenic SNP on 11p12 (rs9300039, dominant P [P(d)] = 0.029) was also
associated with type 2 diabetes after admixture adjustments. Interestingly, four 
of the SNPs are monomorphic in the Yoruba population of the HAPMAP project, with 
only the risk allele from the populations of European descent present.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that these variants do not significantly contribute 
to interindividual susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in African Americans.
Consequently, genes contributing to type 2 diabetes in African Americans may, in 
part, be different from those in European-derived study populations. High
frequency of risk alleles in several of these genes may, however, contribute to
the increased prevalence of type 2 diabetes in African Americans.

PMCID: PMC2494685
PMID: 18443202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Dec 15;13(24):7296-304.

A novel set of DNA methylation markers in urine sediments for sensitive/specific 
detection of bladder cancer.

Yu J(1), Zhu T, Wang Z, Zhang H, Qian Z, Xu H, Gao B, Wang W, Gu L, Meng J, Wang 
J, Feng X, Li Y, Yao X, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics and Gene Therapy Program, The State Key Laboratory for
Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: This study aims to provide a better set of DNA methylation markers in
urine sediments for sensitive and specific detection of bladder cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Fifty-nine tumor-associated genes were profiled in three
bladder cancer cell lines, a small cohort of cancer biopsies and urine sediments 
by methylation-specific PCR. Twenty-one candidate genes were then profiled in
urine sediments from 132 bladder cancer patients (8 cases for stage 0a; 68 cases 
for stage I; 50 cases for stage II; 4 cases for stages III; and 2 cases for stage
IV), 23 age-matched patients with noncancerous urinary lesions, 6 neurologic
diseases, and 7 healthy volunteers.
RESULTS: Despite six incidences of four genes reported in 3 of 23 noncancerous
urinary lesion patients analyzed, cancer-specific hypermethylation in urine
sediments were reported for 15 genes (P < 0.05). Methylation assessment of an
11-gene set (SALL3, CFTR, ABCC6, HPR1, RASSF1A, MT1A, RUNX3, ITGA4, BCL2, ALX4,
MYOD1, DRM, CDH13, BMP3B, CCNA1, RPRM, MINT1, and BRCA1) confirmed the existing
diagnosis of 121 among 132 bladder cancer cases (sensitivity, 91.7%) with 87%
accuracy. Significantly, more than 75% of stage 0a and 88% of stage I disease
were detected, indicating its value in the early diagnosis of bladder cancer.
Interestingly, the cluster of reported methylation markers used in the U.S.
bladder cancers is distinctly different from that identified in this study,
suggesting a possible epigenetic disparity between the American and Chinese
cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Methylation profiling of an 11-gene set in urine sediments provides 
a sensitive and specific detection of bladder cancer.

PMID: 18094410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cell Tissue Res. 2008 Mar;331(3):595-604. Epub 2007 Dec 18.

Avian pelvis originates from lateral plate mesoderm and its development requires 
signals from both ectoderm and paraxial mesoderm.

Malashichev Y(1), Christ B, Pröls F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Zoology, Faculty of Biology and Soil Sciences, St
Petersburg State University, Universitetskaya nab, St Petersburg, Russia.
malashichev@gmail.com

The pelvic girdle is composed of three skeletal elements: ilium, pubis, and
ischium. In comparison with other parts of the postcranial skeleton, its
development is not well known to date. To elucidate the embryonic origin of the
avian pelvic girdle and the signaling centers that control its development, we
have performed extirpation and quail-to-chick grafting experiments. The results
reveal that the entire pelvic girdle originates from the somatopleure at somite
levels 26 to 35. No somitic cell contribution to skeletal elements of the pelvis 
has been detected. Removal of the surface ectoderm covering the lateral plate
mesoderm has revealed that ectodermal signals control the development of the
pelvic girdle, especially the formation of the pubis and ischium. The impaired
development of the ischium and pubis correlates with the downregulation of Pax1
and Alx4, two transcription factors that control the normal development of the
ischium and pubis. Although of somatopleural origin, the development of the ilium
depends on somitic signals. Insertion of a barrier between somites and
somatopleure disrupts the expression of Emx2 and prevents normal development of
the ilium but does not affect the expression of Pax1 or Alx4 and the development 
of the pubis and ischium. Thus, the development of the ilium, but not of the
pubis and ischium, depends on somitic and ectodermal signals.

PMID: 18087724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007 Dec;16(12):2686-96.

Highly methylated genes in colorectal neoplasia: implications for screening.

Zou H(1), Harrington JJ, Shire AM, Rego RL, Wang L, Campbell ME, Oberg AL,
Ahlquist DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905,
USA.

Discriminant markers are required for accurate cancer screening. We evaluated
genes frequently methylated in colorectal neoplasia to identify the most
discriminant ones. Four genes specifically methylated in colorectal cancer [bone 
morphogenetic protein 3 (BMP3), EYA2, aristaless-like homeobox-4 (ALX4), and
vimentin] were selected from 41 candidate genes and evaluated on 74 cancers, 62
adenomas, and 70 normal epithelia. Methylation status was analyzed qualitatively 
and quantitatively and confirmed by bisulfite genomic sequencing. Effect of
methylation on gene expression was evaluated in five colon cancer cell lines.
K-ras and BRAF mutations were detected by sequencing. Methylation of BMP3, EYA2, 
ALX4, or vimentin was detected respectively in 66%, 66%, 68%, and 72% of cancers;
74%, 48%, 89%, and 84% of adenomas; and 7%, 5%, 11%, and 11% of normal epithelia 
(P < 0.01, cancer or adenoma versus normal). Based on area under the curve
analyses, discrimination was not significantly improved by combining markers.
Comethylation was frequent (two genes or more in 72% of cancers and 84% of
adenomas), associated with proximal neoplasm site (P < 0.001), and linked with
both BRAF and K-ras mutations (P < 0.01). Cell line experiments supported
silencing of expression by methylation in all four study genes. This study shows 
BMP3, EYA2, ALX4, and vimentin genes are methylated in most colorectal neoplasms 
but rarely in normal epithelia. Comethylation of these genes is common, and
pursuit of complementary markers for methylation-negative neoplasms is a rational
strategy to optimize screening sensitivity.

PMID: 18086775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Nature. 2007 Feb 22;445(7130):881-5. Epub 2007 Feb 11.

A genome-wide association study identifies novel risk loci for type 2 diabetes.

Sladek R(1), Rocheleau G, Rung J, Dina C, Shen L, Serre D, Boutin P, Vincent D,
Belisle A, Hadjadj S, Balkau B, Heude B, Charpentier G, Hudson TJ, Montpetit A,
Pshezhetsky AV, Prentki M, Posner BI, Balding DJ, Meyre D, Polychronakos C,
Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation
Centre, Montreal H3A 1A4, Canada.

Comment in
    Nature. 2007 Feb 22;445(7130):828-30.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus results from the interaction of environmental factors
with a combination of genetic variants, most of which were hitherto unknown. A
systematic search for these variants was recently made possible by the
development of high-density arrays that permit the genotyping of hundreds of
thousands of polymorphisms. We tested 392,935 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in 
a French case-control cohort. Markers with the most significant difference in
genotype frequencies between cases of type 2 diabetes and controls were
fast-tracked for testing in a second cohort. This identified four loci containing
variants that confer type 2 diabetes risk, in addition to confirming the known
association with the TCF7L2 gene. These loci include a non-synonymous
polymorphism in the zinc transporter SLC30A8, which is expressed exclusively in
insulin-producing beta-cells, and two linkage disequilibrium blocks that contain 
genes potentially involved in beta-cell development or function (IDE-KIF11-HHEX
and EXT2-ALX4). These associations explain a substantial portion of disease risk 
and constitute proof of principle for the genome-wide approach to the elucidation
of complex genetic traits.

PMID: 17293876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Clin Neuropathol. 2007 Jan-Feb;26(1):1-11.

Proximal chromosome 11p contiguous gene deletion syndrome phenotype: case report 
and review of the literature.

Romeike BF(1), Wuyts W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, Saarland University, School of Medicine, 66421
Homburg/Saar, Germany. bernd.romeike@uniklinikum-saarland.de

The proximal chromosome 11p contiguous gene deletion syndrome (P11pDS), also
known as Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (PSS) or DEFECT 11 (OMIM 601224), is a disorder
associated with foramina parietalia permagna and multiple osteochondroma
(exostoses). Additional features include mental retardation, craniofacial
anomalies, seizures and genitourinary abnormalities. Here, clinico-pathological
findings of a unique patient with all of these features and, additionally,
enlarged ventricles, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy and adipositas are
described. The brain showed malformative lesions with hallmarks of disturbed bulk
growth including micrencephaly, periventricular nodular heterotopias and focal
cortical dysplasia in the nodulus of the cerebellar vermis. In addition,
symmetric foci with vacuolation of the underlying neuropil, intermingled
macrophages and large bizarre, partially vacuolated, reactive astrocytes were
found. The proximal short arm of chromosome 11 harbors several candidate genes
that could explain the patient's signs and symptoms including ALX4 and EXT2,
which are always present in the interstitial deletion of the short arm of
chromosome 11 in PSS. In addition, MYBPC3 would be a good candidate for the
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Furthermore, adipositas might be related to the
MAPK8IP1 gene. To the best of our knowledge, the present patient is the oldest
one so far described with PSS phenotype and the only case that has undergone
detailed neuropathological investigation.

PMID: 17290930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Anat. 2002 Nov;201(5):428-9.

P9 Functions of ALX4 and MSX2 in ossification of the skull vault.

Antonopoulou I, Mavrogiannis L, Wilkie A, Morriss-Kay G.

PMCID: PMC1570968
PMID: 17103782  [PubMed]


59. Gastroenterology. 2006 Nov;131(5):1418-30. Epub 2006 Aug 18.

Aristaless-like homeobox-4 gene methylation is a potential marker for colorectal 
adenocarcinomas.

Ebert MP(1), Model F, Mooney S, Hale K, Lograsso J, Tonnes-Priddy L, Hoffmann J, 
Csepregi A, Röcken C, Molnar B, Schulz HU, Malfertheiner P, Lofton-Day C.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenomics Inc, Seattle, Washington; Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, 
Washington, USA. matthias.ebert@lrz.tum.de

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The identification of novel genetic and epigenetic markers
indicative of changes in the pathogenesis of colon cancer, along with
easier-to-use, more sensitive assay methods, may improve the detection,
treatment, and overall prognosis of this malignancy.
METHODS: Using methylation-specific arbitrarily primed polymerase chain reaction,
a fragment of the Aristaless-like homeobox-4 (ALX4) gene that was highly
methylated in colon adenomas and cancer was identified. Methylation of ALX4 was
analyzed in colorectal adenomas and cancers, in the liver metastases of patients 
with colorectal cancer, and in 61 other neoplasias, including gastric,
esophageal, and hepatocellular cancer and cholangiocarcinoma. ALX4 methylation
was also analyzed in the serum of 30 patients with colon cancer.
RESULTS: ALX4 gene methylation was confirmed in colon adenomas (11/13) and more
frequently present in primary colorectal cancers (30/47) compared with the normal
colon mucosa (0/21) (P < .0001). In addition, ALX4 methylation was frequently
observed in adenocarcinomas of the esophagus (12/14), stomach (11/15), and bile
ducts (4/5) compared with all other cancers (P < .001). ALX4 gene methylation was
also more frequently found in sera of patients with colon cancer compared with
noncancer controls (P < .0001). Using a cutoff of 41.4 pg/mL, sensitivity and
specificity were 83.3% and 70%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Apart from colon adenomas and primary and metastatic colorectal
cancers, ALX4 is frequently methylated in adenocarcinomas of the gastrointestinal
tract. ALX4 gene methylation in sera of patients with cancer may thus serve as a 
methylation-specific test for colon and other gastrointestinal cancers.

PMID: 17101318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2006;115(2):123-8.

The bovine aristaless-like homeobox 4 (ALX4) as a candidate gene for syndactyly.

Wöhlke A(1), Kuiper H, Distl O, Drögemüller C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine
Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

The ALX4 (aristaless-like homeobox 4) gene encodes a paired-type homeodomain
transcriptional activator and plays a major role in anterior-posterior pattern
formation during limb development. Here, the cloning, genomic structure and
expression of the bovine ortholog of the ALX4 gene are reported. The bovine ALX4 
gene consists of four exons and is located on BTA15q28-->q29 in a region syntenic
to HSA11p11.2. The transcribed ALX4 mRNA encodes a 397-amino-acid protein showing
a paired-type homeodomain and a C-terminal stretch of amino acids known as the
OAR- or aristaless domain. The predicted protein shares 92.5% identity to human
and mouse ALX4 proteins and all three species share almost complete identity in
the conserved domains. ALX4 expression was detected by reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction in bovine fetal limb bones. The ALX4 gene was evaluated
as a candidate gene for bovine syndactyly which has been mapped on the telomeric 
region of cattle chromosome 15. Sequencing of the four exons with flanking
sequences of the bovine ALX4 gene from a panel of 14 affected animals belonging
to German Holstein, German Fleckvieh and crossbreds, and 27 unaffected
individuals from German Holstein revealed five silent SNPs within the coding
region out of eleven SNPs in total. Four SNPs were polymorphic in the affected
animals, but in comparison to the genotyped unaffected individuals the genotype
distribution showed no evidence for an association to the phenotype. Therefore
our data indicate that the ALX4 gene can probably be excluded as candidate gene
for bovine syndactyly in the examined animals.

Copyright 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17065792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Oct;79(4):668-78. Epub 2006 Aug 30.

Satb2 haploinsufficiency phenocopies 2q32-q33 deletions, whereas loss suggests a 
fundamental role in the coordination of jaw development.

Britanova O(1), Depew MJ, Schwark M, Thomas BL, Miletich I, Sharpe P, Tarabykin
V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology of Neuronal Signals, Max-Plank Institute for
Experimental Medicine, Goettingen, Germany.

The recent identification of SATB2 as a candidate gene responsible for the
craniofacial dysmorphologies associated with deletions and translocations at
2q32-q33, one of only three regions of the genome for which haploinsufficiency
has been significantly associated with isolated cleft palate, led us to
investigate the in vivo functions of murine Satb2. We find that, similar to the
way in which SATB2 is perceived to act in humans, craniofacial defects due to
haploinsufficiency of Satb2, including cleft palate (in approximately 25% of
cases), phenocopy those seen with 2q32-q33 deletions and translocations in
humans. Full functional loss of Satb2 results in amplification of these defects
and leads both to increased apoptosis in the craniofacial mesenchyme where Satb2 
is usually expressed and to changes in the pattern of expression of three genes
implicated in the regulation of craniofacial development in humans and mice:
Pax9, Alx4, and Msx1. The Satb2-dosage sensitivity in craniofacial development is
conspicuous--along with its control of cell survival, pattern of expression, and 
reversible functional modification by SUMOylation, it suggests that Satb2/SATB2
function in craniofacial development may prove to be more profound than has been 
anticipated previously. Because jaw development is Satb2-dosage sensitive, the
regulators of Satb2 expression and posttranslational modification become of
critical importance both ontogenetically and evolutionarily, especially since
such regulators plausibly play undetected roles in jaw and palate development and
in the etiology of craniofacial malformations.

PMCID: PMC1592575
PMID: 16960803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Dev Biol. 2006 Sep 1;297(1):284-94. Epub 2006 Jun 2.

Loss of Alx4, a stromally-restricted homeodomain protein, impairs mammary
epithelial morphogenesis.

Joshi PA(1), Chang H, Hamel PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Room 6318, Medical
Sciences Building, 1 King's College Circle, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5S 1A8.

Postnatal development of the mammary gland is determined by reciprocal
interactions between the ductal epithelia and adjacent stroma. Alx4 is a
mesenchymally restricted homeodomain transcription factor expressed in a number
of developing tissues, including skin appendages such as hair follicles, whiskers
and teeth. We show here that Alx4 is expressed in a subset of ERalpha-expressing 
mammary stromal cells adjacent to terminal end buds and alveoli during puberty
and pregnancy, respectively. Alx4 expression is induced in mammary stromal cells 
at the onset of puberty and can be induced in prepubescent mice by administration
of 17beta-estradiol. In order to determine the role of Alx4 during mammary gland 
development, we characterized mammary gland development of mice homozygous for
the null allele of Alx4, lst(D). Mammary glands from animals lacking Alx4
activity exhibit profound alterations in ductal morphogenesis. Overall
development is delayed, ducts being grossly distorted in size and structure.
Terminal end buds are also disoriented, displaying aberrant architecture during
bifurcation. Despite the developmental delay, the ductal network typically
reaches the limits of the fat pad. However, during puberty and in the adult
virgin mice, the frequency and density of branch points is significantly reduced.
We show further that the defective ductal morphogenesis is due to defects in
stromal cells. Specifically, when injected into the cleared fat pad of wild-type 
recipients, mixed populations of wild-type epithelial cells and Alx4-deficient
stromal cells give rise to retarded ductal morphogenesis. Wild-type stromal cells
mixed with Alx4-deficient epithelial cells result in normal progression of ductal
development. Defective branching morphogenesis in Alx4-deficient females is not
due to a loss in expression of HGF, since the level of HGF message in mammary
stromal cells is similar in mutant and wild-type littermates. MMP3 is similarly
expressed while a 40% increase in MMP2 and a 50% decrease in MMP9 message levels 
in Alx4-deficient mice relative to their wild-type littermates is observed. Thus,
the activity of the stromally restricted homeodomain factor, Alx4, is required
for normal branching morphogenesis of the ductal epithelia during pubescent
mammary gland development.

PMID: 16916507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Int J Dev Biol. 2006;50(7):601-10.

Genetic interaction between Lef1 and Alx4 is required for early embryonic
development.

Boras-Granic K(1), Grosschedl R, Hamel PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada.

Lymphoid Enhancer Factor-1 (Lef1) facilitates the assembly of transcriptional
regulatory complexes and mediates nuclear responses to Wnt signals. We determined
previously that the mesenchymally restricted, paired-like homeodomain protein
Aristaless-like 4 (Alx4) interacts with Lef1 and together alters promoter
activity of candidate genes. In order to define their overlapping functions, mice
deficient for both Lef1 and Alx4 activity (Lef1-/-/Alx4lstD/lstD) were produced. 
Whereas embryos lacking either Lef1 or Alx4 activity remain viable up to or after
birth, early embryonic lethality results when both factors were absent. No viable
Lef1-/-/Alx4lstD/lstD embryos were recovered beyond 9.5 dpc. Between E8.5 and
E10, viable Lef1-/-/Alx4lstD/lstD embryos were developmentally delayed 0.5 days
relative to littermates of all other genotypes. Principle among the alterations
seen in Lef1-/-/Alx4lstD/lstD animals was defective vasculature in both embryonic
and extra-embryonic tissues. In the yolk sac, while the vascular network is
present, it were greatly diminished and large vitelline vessels were largely
absent. Platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule (PECAM) staining revealed
that the major vessels in the head of compound mutant embryos were absent, while 
the other vessels were finer than those seen in normal littermates. Pools of
blood and pericardial effusion were also apparent in Lef1-/-/Alx4lstD/lstD
animals, further indicative of a defective vasculature. These data confirm
genetically the interaction between Lef1 and Alx4 and further reveal unknown,
overlapping roles for these transcription factors in embryonic vasculogenesis.

PMID: 16892173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Genomics. 2006 Nov;88(5):610-21. Epub 2006 Jul 21.

Identification of a doublet missense substitution in the bovine LRP4 gene as a
candidate causal mutation for syndactyly in Holstein cattle.

Duchesne A(1), Gautier M, Chadi S, Grohs C, Floriot S, Gallard Y, Caste G, Ducos 
A, Eggen A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Biochimique et de Cytogénétique, Département de
Génétique Animale, INRA-CRJ, 78350 Jouy-en-Josas, France.

Syndactyly in Holstein cattle is an autosomal recessive abnormality characterized
by the fusion of the functional digits. This disorder has been previously mapped 
to the telomeric part of bovine chromosome 15. Here, we describe the fine-mapping
of syndactyly in Holstein cattle to a 3.5-Mb critical interval using a
comparative mapping approach and an extended pedigree generated by embryo
transfer. We report genetic evidence for the exclusion of two genes previously
suggested as candidates (EXT2 and ALX4) and describe the identification of a
doublet mutation in complete linkage disequilibrium with syndactyly in one gene
of the critical interval: LRP4. Finally, based on recent discoveries concerning
the mouse mutants dan and mdig and a mouse knockout for Lrp4, we present solid
evidence that the subsequent substitution in LRP4 exon 33 is a strong candidate
causal mutation for syndactyly in Holstein cattle.

PMID: 16859890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Med Genet. 2006 Jul;43(7):598-608. Epub 2006 Jan 13.

High throughput SNP and expression analyses of candidate genes for non-syndromic 
oral clefts.

Park JW(1), Cai J, McIntosh I, Jabs EW, Fallin MD, Ingersoll R, Hetmanski JB,
Vekemans M, Attie-Bitach T, Lovett M, Scott AF, Beaty TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent work suggests that multiple genes and several environmental
risk factors influence risk for non-syndromic oral clefts, one of the most common
birth defects in humans. Advances in high-throughput genotyping technology now
make it possible to test multiple markers in many candidate genes simultaneously.
METHODS: We present findings from family based association tests of single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers in 64 candidate genes genotyped using the
BeadArray approach in 58 case-parent trios from Maryland (USA) to illustrate how 
multiple markers in multiple genes can be analysed. To assess whether these genes
were expressed in human craniofacial structures relevant to palate and lip
development, we also analysed data from the Craniofacial and Oral Gene Expression
Network (COGENE) consortium, and searched public databases for expression
profiles of these genes.
RESULTS: Thirteen candidate genes showed significant evidence of linkage in the
presence of disequilibrium, and ten of these were found to be expressed in
relevant embryonic tissues: SP100, MLPH, HDAC4, LEF1, C6orf105, CD44, ALX4,
ZNF202, CRHR1, and MAPT. Three other genes showing statistical evidence (ADH1C,
SCN3B, and IMP5) were not expressed in the embryonic tissues examined here.
CONCLUSIONS: This approach demonstrates how statistical evidence on large numbers
of SNP markers typed in case-parent trios can be combined with expression data to
identify candidate genes for complex disorders. Many of the genes reported here
have not been previously studied as candidates for oral clefts and warrant
further investigation.

PMCID: PMC2564555
PMID: 16415175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Eur J Hum Genet. 2006 Feb;14(2):151-8.

Enlarged parietal foramina caused by mutations in the homeobox genes ALX4 and
MSX2: from genotype to phenotype.

Mavrogiannis LA(1), Taylor IB, Davies SJ, Ramos FJ, Olivares JL, Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

Heterozygous mutations of the homeobox genes ALX4 and MSX2 cause skull defects
termed enlarged parietal foramina (PFM) and cranium bifidum (CB); a single MSX2
mutation has been documented in a unique craniosynostosis (CRS) family. However, 
the relative mutational contribution of these genes to PFM/CB and CRS is not
known and information on genotype-phenotype correlations is incomplete. We
analysed ALX4 and MSX2 in 11 new unrelated cases or families with PFM/CB, 181
cases of CRS, and a single family segregating a submicroscopic deletion of
11p11.2, including ALX4. We explored the correlations between skull defect size
and age, gene, and mutation type, and reviewed additional phenotypic
manifestations. Four PFM cases had mutations in either ALX4 or MSX2; including
previous families, we have identified six ALX4 and six MSX2 mutations, accounting
for 11/13 familial, but only 1/6 sporadic cases. The deletion family confirms the
delineation of a mental retardation locus to within 1.1 Mb region of 11p11.2.
Overall, no significant size difference was found between ALX4- and MSX2-related 
skull defects, but the ALX4 mutation p.R218Q tends to result in persistent CB and
is associated with anatomical abnormalities of the posterior fossa. We conclude
that PFM caused by mutations in ALX4 and MSX2 have a similar prevalence and are
usually clinically indistinguishable. Mutation screening has a high pickup rate
in PFM, especially in familial cases, but is not indicated in CRS.

PMCID: PMC1477589
PMID: 16319823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Nov 15;139(1):45-7.

A novel mutation in the MSX2 gene in a family with foramina parietalia permagna
(FPP).

Spruijt L(1), Verdyck P, Van Hul W, Wuyts W, de Die-Smulders C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Maastricht, PO Box 5800, 
6202 AZ Maastricht, The Netherlands. liesbeth.spruijt@freeler.nl

PMID: 16222674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Development. 2005 Nov;132(22):4927-36. Epub 2005 Oct 12.

Temporal requirement of Hoxa2 in cranial neural crest skeletal morphogenesis.

Santagati F(1), Minoux M, Ren SY, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, UMR 7104, BP 10142, CU de Strasbourg, 67404 Illkirch Cedex,
France.

Little is known about the spatiotemporal requirement of Hox gene patterning
activity in vertebrates. In Hoxa2 mouse mutants, the hyoid skeleton is replaced
by a duplicated set of mandibular and middle ear structures. Here, we show that
Hoxa2 is selectively required in cranial neural crest cells (NCCs). Moreover, we 
used a Cre-ERT2 recombinase system to induce a temporally controlled Hoxa2
deletion in the mouse. Hoxa2 inactivation after cranial NCC migration into
branchial arches resulted in homeotic transformation of hyoid into mandibular
arch skeletal derivatives, reproducing the conventional Hoxa2 knockout phenotype,
and induced rapid changes in Alx4, Bapx1, Six2 and Msx1 expression patterns.
Thus, hyoid NCCs retain a remarkable degree of plasticity even after their
migration in the arch, and require Hoxa2 as an integral component of their
morphogenetic program. Moreover, subpopulations of postmigratory NCCs required
Hoxa2 at discrete time points to pattern distinct derivatives. This study
provides the first temporal inactivation of a vertebrate Hox gene and illustrates
Hox requirement during late morphogenetic processes.

PMID: 16221728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Development. 2005 Nov;132(21):4755-64. Epub 2005 Oct 5.

FGFR1 function at the earliest stages of mouse limb development plays an
indispensable role in subsequent autopod morphogenesis.

Li C(1), Xu X, Nelson DK, Williams T, Kuehn MR, Deng CX.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, NIDDK, NIH, 10/9N105, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) and their receptors have been implicated in limb
development. However, because of early post-implantation lethality associated
with fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) deficiency, the role of this
receptor in limb development remains elusive. To overcome embryonic lethality, we
have performed a conditional knockout of Fgfr1 using the Cre-LoxP approach. We
show that Cre-mediated deletion of Fgfr1 in limb mesenchyme, beginning at a time 
point slightly after the first sign of initial budding, primarily affects
formation of the first one or two digits. In contrast, deletion of Fgfr1 at an
earlier stage, prior to thickening of limb mesenchyme, results in more severe
defects, characterized by malformation of the AER, diminished Shh expression and 
the absence of the majority of the autopod skeletal elements. We show that FGFR1 
deficiency does not affect cell proliferation. Instead, it triggers cell death
and leads to alterations in expression of a number of genes involved in apoptosis
and digit patterning, including increased expression of Bmp4, Dkk1 and Alx4, and 
downregulation of MKP3. These data demonstrate that FGF/FGFR1 signals play
indispensable roles in the early stages of limb initiation, eliciting a profound 
effect on the later stages of limb development, including cell survival, autopod 
formation and digit patterning.

PMID: 16207751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Dev Biol. 2005 Sep 15;285(2):533-44. Epub 2005 Jul 21.

Function and regulation of Alx4 in limb development: complex genetic interactions
with Gli3 and Shh.

Kuijper S(1), Feitsma H, Sheth R, Korving J, Reijnen M, Meijlink F.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The role of the aristaless-related homeobox gene Alx4 in antero-posterior (AP-)
patterning of the developing vertebrate limb has remained somewhat elusive.
Polydactyly of Alx4 mutant mice is known to be accompanied by ectopic anterior
expression of genes like Shh, Fgf4 and 5'Hoxd. We reported previously that
polydactyly in Alx4 mutant mice requires SHH signaling, but we now show that in
early Alx4-/- limb buds the anterior ectopic expression of Fgf4 and Hoxd13, and
therefore disruption of AP-patterning, occurs independently of SHH signaling. To 
better understand how Alx4 functions in the pathways that regulate AP-patterning,
we also studied genomic regulatory sequences that are capable of directing
expression of a reporter gene in a pattern corresponding to endogenous Alx4
expression in anterior limb bud mesenchyme. We observed, as expected for
authentic Alx4 expression, expansion of reporter construct expression in a Shh-/-
background. Total lack of reporter expression in a Gli3-/- background confirms
the existence of Gli3-dependent and -independent Alx4 expression in the limb bud.
Apparently, these two modules of Alx4 expression are linked to dissimilar
functions.

PMID: 16039644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Int J Dev Biol. 2005;49(4):443-8.

Genetic interaction of Gli3 and Alx4 during limb development.

Panman L(1), Drenth T, Tewelscher P, Zuniga A, Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. lia.panman@licr.ki.se

The Gli3 and Alx4 transcriptional regulators are expressed in the anterior limb
bud mesenchyme and their disruption in mice results in preaxial polydactyly.
While the polydactylous phenotype of Alx4 deficient limb buds depends on SHH, the
one of Gli3 deficient limb buds is completely independent of SHH signalling,
suggesting that these genes act in parallel pathways. Analysis of limb buds
lacking both Gli3 and Alx4 now shows that these two genes interact during limb
skeletal morphogenesis. In addition to the defects in single mutants, the
stylopod is severely malformed and the anterior element of the zeugopod is lost
in double mutant limbs. However, limb bud patterning in Gli3-/-; Alx4-/- double
mutant embryos is not affected more than in single mutants as the expression
domains of key regulators remain the same. Most interestingly, the loss of the
severe preaxial polydactyly characteristic of Gli3-/- limbs in double mutant
embryos establishes that this type of polydactyly requires Alx4 function.

PMID: 15968591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Jul;77(1):161-8. Epub 2005 May 27.

Characterization of a new syndrome that associates craniosynostosis, delayed
fontanel closure, parietal foramina, imperforate anus, and skin eruption: CDAGS.

Mendoza-Londono R(1), Lammer E, Watson R, Harper J, Hatamochi A,
Hatamochi-Hayashi S, Napierala D, Hermanns P, Collins S, Roa BB, Hedge MR, Wakui 
K, Nguyen D, Stockton DW, Lee B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. blee@bcm.tmc.edu

We describe the clinical characterization, molecular analyses, and genetic
mapping of a distinct genetic condition characterized by craniosynostosis,
delayed closure of the fontanel, cranial defects, clavicular hypoplasia, anal and
genitourinary malformations, and skin eruption. We have identified seven patients
with this phenotype in four families from different geographic regions and ethnic
backgrounds. This is an autosomal recessive condition that brings together
apparently opposing pathophysiologic and developmental processes, including
accelerated suture closure and delayed ossification. Selected candidate
genes--including RUNX2, CBFB, MSX2, ALX4, TWIST1, and RECQL4--were screened for
mutations, by direct sequencing of their coding regions, and for microdeletions, 
by fluorescent in situ hybridization. No mutations or microdeletions were
detected in any of the genes analyzed. A genomewide screen yielded the maximum
estimated LOD score of +2.38 for markers D22S283 and D22S274 on chromosome
22q12-q13. We hypothesize that the gene defect in this condition causes novel
context-dependent dysregulation of multiple signaling pathways, including RUNX2, 
during osteoblast differentiation and craniofacial morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1226190
PMID: 15924278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 May;13(5):528-40.

Construction of a natural panel of 11p11.2 deletions and further delineation of
the critical region involved in Potocki-Shaffer syndrome.

Wakui K(1), Gregato G, Ballif BC, Glotzbach CD, Bailey KA, Kuo PL, Sue WC,
Sheffield LJ, Irons M, Gomez EG, Hecht JT, Potocki L, Shaffer LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.

Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (PSS) is a contiguous gene deletion syndrome that
results from haploinsufficiency of at least two genes within the short arm of
chromosome 11[del(11)(p11.2p12)]. The clinical features of PSS can include
developmental delay, mental retardation, multiple exostoses, parietal foramina,
enlarged anterior fontanel, minor craniofacial anomalies, ophthalmologic
anomalies, and genital abnormalities in males. We constructed a natural panel of 
11p11.2-p13 deletions using cell lines from 10 affected individuals, fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH), microsatellite analyses, and array-based
comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH). We then compared the deletion
sizes and clinical features between affected individuals. The full spectrum of
PSS manifests when deletions are at least 2.1 Mb in size, spanning from D11S1393 
to D11S1385/D11S1319 (44.6-46.7 Mb from the 11p terminus) and encompassing EXT2, 
responsible for multiple exostoses, and ALX4, causing parietal foramina. Yet one 
subject with parietal foramina whose deletion does not include ALX4 indicates
that ALX4 in this subject may be rendered functionally haploinsufficient by a
position effect. Based on comparative deletion mapping of eight individuals with 
the full PSS syndrome including mental retardation and two PSS families with no
mental retardation, at least one gene related to mental retardation is likely
located between D11S554 and D11S1385/D11S1319, 45.6-46.7 Mb from the 11p
terminus.

PMID: 15852040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Development. 2005 Apr;132(7):1601-10. Epub 2005 Feb 23.

Genetics of shoulder girdle formation: roles of Tbx15 and aristaless-like genes.

Kuijper S(1), Beverdam A, Kroon C, Brouwer A, Candille S, Barsh G, Meijlink F.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The diverse cellular contributions to the skeletal elements of the vertebrate
shoulder and pelvic girdles during embryonic development complicate the study of 
their patterning. Research in avian embryos has recently clarified part of the
embryological basis of shoulder formation. Although dermomyotomal cells provide
the progenitors of the scapular blade, local signals appear to have an essential 
guiding role in this process. These signals differ from those that are known to
pattern the more distal appendicular skeleton. We have studied the impact of
Tbx15, Gli3, Alx4 and related genes on formation of the skeletal elements of the 
mouse shoulder and pelvic girdles. We observed severe reduction of the scapula in
double and triple mutants of these genes. Analyses of a range of complex
genotypes revealed aspects of their genetic relationship, as well as functions
that had been previously masked due to functional redundancy. Tbx15 and Gli3
appear to have synergistic functions in formation of the scapular blade. Scapular
truncation in triple mutants of Tbx15, Alx4 and Cart1 indicates essential
functions for Alx4 and Cart1 in the anterior part of the scapula, as opposed to
Gli3 function being linked to the posterior part. Especially in Alx4/Cart1
mutants, the expression of markers such as Pax1, Pax3 and Scleraxis is altered
prior to stages when anatomical aberrations are visible in the shoulder region.
This suggests a disorganization of the proximal limb bud and adjacent flank
mesoderm, and is likely to reflect the disruption of a mechanism providing
positional cues to guide progenitor cells to their destination in the pectoral
girdle.

PMID: 15728667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 Apr;13(4):409-13.

Combination of WAGR and Potocki-Shaffer contiguous deletion syndromes in a
patient with an 11p11.2-p14 deletion.

Brémond-Gignac D(1), Crolla JA, Copin H, Guichet A, Bonneau D, Taine L, Lacombe
D, Baumann C, Benzacken B, Verloes A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Robert Debré Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France.

Aniridia, Wilms tumor, genitourinary abnormalities, growth and mental retardation
are the cardinal features of the WAGR 11p13 deletion syndrome. The
Potocki-Schaffer syndrome or proximal 11p deletion syndrome (previously DEFECT11 
syndrome) is a contiguous gene syndrome associated with deletions in 11p11.2,
principal features of which are multiple exostoses and enlarged parietal
foramina. Mental handicap, facial dysmorphism and craniosynostosis may also be
associated. We report a patient with combined WAGR and Potocki-Shaffer syndromes,
and obesity. She presented with aniridia, cataract, nystagmus, corneal ulcers and
bilateral congenital ptosis. A left nephroblastoma was detected at 15 months.
Other features included moderate developmental delay, growth deficiency, facial
dysmorphism, multiple exostoses and cranial lacunae. High-resolution and
molecular cytogenetics confirmed a del(11)(p11.2p14.1) deletion with a proximal
breakpoint between the cosmid DO8153 and the BAC RP11-104M24 to a distal
breakpoint between cosmids CO8160 (D11S151) and F1238 (D11S1446). The deletion
therefore includes EXT2, ALX4, WT1 and PAX6. This case appears to be the second
patient reported with this combined deletion syndrome and confirms the
association of obesity in the WAGR spectrum, a feature previously reported in
four cases, and for which the acronym WAGRO has been suggested. Molecular and
follow-up data on the original WAGRO case are briefly presented.

PMID: 15702131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Dec 28;101(52):18058-63. Epub 2004 Dec 13.

Molecular origins of rapid and continuous morphological evolution.

Fondon JW 3rd(1), Garner HR.

Author information: 
(1)Eugene McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development and Department of
Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390-8591, USA. john.fondon@utsouthwestern.edu

Mutations in cis-regulatory sequences have been implicated as being the
predominant source of variation in morphological evolution. We offer a hypothesis
that gene-associated tandem repeat expansions and contractions are a major source
of phenotypic variation in evolution. Here, we describe a comparative genomic
study of repetitive elements in developmental genes of 92 breeds of dogs. We find
evidence for selection for divergence at coding repeat loci in the form of both
elevated purity and extensive length polymorphism among different breeds.
Variations in the number of repeats in the coding regions of the Alx-4
(aristaless-like 4) and Runx-2 (runt-related transcription factor 2) genes were
quantitatively associated with significant differences in limb and skull
morphology. We identified similar repeat length variation in the coding repeats
of Runx-2, Twist, and Dlx-2 in several other species. The high frequency and
incremental effects of repeat length mutations provide molecular explanations for
swift, yet topologically conservative morphological evolution.

PMCID: PMC539791
PMID: 15596718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2004 Nov-Dec;25(10):1836-9.

Malformation of cortical and vascular development in one family with parietal
foramina determined by an ALX4 homeobox gene mutation.

Valente M(1), Valente KD, Sugayama SS, Kim CA.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Neuroradiology Division, University of São Paulo School of Medicine,
São Paulo, Brazil.

Vascular and cortical anomalies have been found in a family with parietal
foramina type 2 (PFM2), which is determined by the ALX4 gene. It is believed that
ALX4 has a bone-restricted expression. We report a case of PFM with age-related
size variation in a 4-year-old boy, as well as in his mother, aunt and
grandfather. MR imaging of the child demonstrates prominent malformations of
cortical (polymicrogyric cortex with an unusual infolding pattern) and vascular
development (persistence median prosencephalic vein), associated with high
tentorial incisure periatrial white matter changes.

PMID: 15569759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2004 Nov;75(11):1648-9.

Epilepsy in one family with parietal foramina: an incidental finding?

Valente KD, Valente M.

PMCID: PMC1738821
PMID: 15489411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Anat. 2004 Jun;204(6):487-99.

Alx4 and Msx2 play phenotypically similar and additive roles in skull vault
differentiation.

Antonopoulou I(1), Mavrogiannis LA, Wilkie AO, Morriss-Kay GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Alx4 and Msx2 encode homeodomain-containing transcription factors that show a
clear functional overlap. In both mice and humans, loss of function of either
gene is associated with ossification defects of the skull vault, although the
major effect is on the frontal bones in mice and the parietal bones in humans.
This study was undertaken to discover whether Alx4 and Msx2 show a genetic
interaction in skull vault ossification, and to test the hypothesis that they
interact with the pathway that includes the Fgfr genes, Twist1 and Runx2. We
generated Alx4(+/-)/Msx2(+/-) double heterozygous mutant mice, interbred them to 
produce compound genotypes and analysed the genotype-phenotype relationships.
Loss of an increasing number of alleles correlated with an incremental
exacerbation of the skull vault defect; loss of Alx4 function had a marginally
greater effect than loss of Msx2 and also affected skull thickness. In situ
hybridization showed that Alx4 and Msx2 are expressed in the cranial skeletogenic
mesenchyme and in the growing calvarial bones. Studies of the coronal suture
region at embryonic day (E)16.5 revealed that Alx4 expression was decreased, but 
not abolished, in Msx2(-/-) mutants, and vice versa; expression of Fgfr2 and
Fgfr1, but not Twist1, was reduced in both mutants at the same stage. Runx2
expression was unaffected in the coronal suture; in contrast, expression of the
downstream ossification marker Spp1 was delayed. Double homozygous pups showed
substantial reduction of alkaline phosphatase expression throughout the
mineralized skull vault; they died at birth due to defects of the heart, lungs
and diaphragm not previously associated with Alx4 or Msx2. Our observations
suggest that Alx4 and Msx2 are partially functionally redundant, acting within a 
network of transcription factors and signalling events that regulate the rate of 
osteogenic proliferation and differentiation at a stage after the commitment of
mesenchymal stem cells to osteogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1571319
PMID: 15198690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2004 May-Aug;17(2):145-56.

Opposing regulation of interleukin-8 and NF-kappaB responses by lipoxin A4 and
serum amyloid A via the common lipoxin A receptor.

Sodin-Semrl S(1), Spagnolo A, Mikus R, Barbaro B, Varga J, Fiore S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Dept Med, COM, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL
60607-7171, USA.

Lipoxin A4 (LXA4) is a potent eicosanoid that inhibits IL-1beta-induced
activation of human fibroblast like synoviocytes (FLS) via the ALX4 receptor.
Serum amyloid A (SAA) is an acute phase reactant with cytokine-like properties.
SAA has been shown to bind the same seven transmembrane G protein-coupled
receptor ligated by LXA4. Here we compared the inflammatory responses of lipid
(LXA4) and peptide (SAA) ligands in human FLS via the shared ALX, and
characterized their downstream signaling. LXA4 induced stimulation of tissue
inhibitors of metalloproteinase-2, whereas SAA induced interleukin-8 and matrix
metalloproteinase-3 production. SAA up-regulated NF-kappaB and AP-1 DNA binding
activity, while LXA4 markedly inhibited these responses after IL-1beta
stimulation. A human IL-8 promoter luciferase construct was transfected into CHO 
cells stably expressing ALXR in order to determine the role of NF-kappaB and/or
AP-1 in the regulation of IL-8 gene expression. The NF-kappaB pathway proved to
be the preeminent for the biological responses elicited by both ligands. These
findings suggest that two endogenous molecules, targeting a common receptor,
could participate in the pathogenesis of inflammatory arthritis by differentially
regulating inflammatory responses in tissues expressing the ALXR.

PMID: 15171815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Jun 1;127A(2):186-90.

Clinical, cytogenetic, and molecular characterization of a patient with a de novo
interstitial 22q12 duplication.

Gentile M(1), Wuyts W, Grittani S, Di Carlo A, Cariola F, Verdyck P, Margari L,
Perniola T, Buonadonna AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, I.R.C.C.S. Saverio de Bellis, via della
Resistenza, 70013 Castellana Grotte (BA), Italy. mattiagentile@libero.it

We report a 19-year-old woman with minor craniofacial anomalies, mild mental
retardation, and foramina parietalia permagna (FPP) (OMIM 168500). Cytogenetic
analysis showed a de novo interstitial chromosome 22 long arm duplication. FISH
with a panel of chromosome 22q12-q13 bands-specific BAC clones refined the
cytogenetic investigation, and restricted the duplicated segment to the q12
region. Mutation analysis of FPP genes identified an insertion mutation in the
ALX4 gene (344insC) in the proband and her father with loss of function of the
gene. The patient's phenotype is considered in the light of the results of the
cytogenetic, FISH, and molecular investigations, and her features are compared
with those of other patients with similar duplications. Finally, variable
phenotypic findings due to different 22q duplicated chromosomal segments are
discussed. Our report indicates that 22q12 interstitial duplications are
associated with craniofacial anomalies and mild mental retardation, while life
threatening malformations are usually not present. Although these phenotypic
changes are common and non-specific, molecular study of our patient established
more precise relationships between clinical findings and 22q duplicated
region(s). This approach fosters better counseling of the families of patients
with newly diagnosed, similar duplications.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15108208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Clin Dysmorphol. 2004 Apr;13(2):63-9.

Tibial aplasia, lower extremity mirror image polydactyly, brachyphalangy,
craniofacial dysmorphism and genital hypoplasia: further delineation and
mutational analysis.

Wechsler SB(1), Lehoczky JA, Hall JG, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA.

Congenital anomalies involving tibial aplasia are rare. Recently, four children
with an unusual combination of limb anomalies, facial dysmorphism and genital
hypoplasia have been reported. All affected children reported were male. One case
noted father to son transmission, implying autosomal dominant inheritance. We
report the first female patient with this syndrome. The patient had tibial
aplasia, mirror image preaxial polydactyly involving her feet, brachyphalangy,
genital hypoplasia as well as facial dysmorphism including telecanthus,
blepharophimosis, a flat nasal bridge with a small nose and a small mouth.
Consistent with reports in males of a micropenis and hypoplastic scrotum, our
patient had absent labia minora and a very small clitoris. Her father had very
minor anomalies suggestive of somatic mosaicism or marked variability. Mouse
models affecting limb development are powerful tools in the study of human
syndromes. The clinical phenotype of patients with this syndrome is reminiscent
of some luxoid mouse mutants suggesting Alx4 and related members of the paired
homeodomain class as candidate genes. ALX4 haploinsufficiency in humans causes
parietal foramina, which one patient with this syndrome was reported to have.
Sequencing of coding exons of ALX4 and its related homologue, ALX3, in the
proband failed to reveal coding sequence alterations. Our father/daughter pair is
the second family reported, supporting a dominant mode of inheritance. Moreover, 
the very mild phenotype in the father suggests the need for very careful
attention to parental examination in such cases.

PMID: 15057119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Dev Biol. 2003 Oct 1;262(1):75-87.

Progression of calvarial bone development requires Foxc1 regulation of Msx2 and
Alx4.

Rice R(1), Rice DP, Olsen BR, Thesleff I.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Programme, Institute of Biotechnology, P.O. Box 56,
00014 University of Helsinki, Finland. rharonen@operoni.helsinki.fi

Calvarial bones form by direct ossification of mesenchyme. This requires
condensation of mesenchymal cells which then proliferate and differentiate into
osteoblasts. Congenital hydrocephalus (ch) mutant mice lack the forkhead/winged
helix transcription factor Foxc1. In ch mutant mice, calvarial bones remain
rudimentary at the sites of initial osteogenic condensations. In this study, we
have localized the ossification defect in ch mutants to the calvarial mesenchyme,
which lacks the expression of transcription factors Msx2 and Alx4. This lack of
expression is associated with a reduction in the proliferation of osteoprogenitor
cells. We have previously shown that BMP induces Msx2 in calvarial mesenchyme
(Development 125, 1241-1251, 1998). Here, we show that BMP also induces Alx4 in
this tissue. We also show that BMP-induced expression of Msx2 and Alx4 requires
Foxc1. We therefore suggest that Foxc1 regulates BMP-mediated osteoprogenitor
proliferation and that this regulation is required for the progression of
osteogenesis beyond the initial condensations in calvarial bone development.

PMID: 14512019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Bone Miner Res. 2003 Aug;18(8):1419-29.

P300/CBP acts as a coactivator to cartilage homeoprotein-1 (Cart1), paired-like
homeoprotein, through acetylation of the conserved lysine residue adjacent to the
homeodomain.

Iioka T(1), Furukawa K, Yamaguchi A, Shindo H, Yamashita S, Tsukazaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Orthopaedic Pathomechanism, Department of Developmental and
Reconstructive Medicine, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

The paired-like homeoprotein, Cart1, is involved in skeletal development. We
describe here that the general coactivator p300/CBP controls the transcription
activity of Cart1 through acetylation of a lysine residue that is highly
conserved in other homeoproteins. Acetylation of this residue increases the
interaction between p300/CBP and Cart1 and enhances its transcriptional
activation.INTRODUCTION: Cart1 encodes a paired-like homeoprotein expressed
selectively in chondrocyte lineage during embryonic development. Although its
target gene remains unknown, gene disruption studies have revealed that Cart1
plays an important role for craniofacial bone formation as well as limb
development by cooperating with another homeoprotein, Alx4. In this report, we
study the functional involvement of p300/CBP, coactivators with intrinsic histone
acetyltransferase (HAT) activity, in the transcriptional control of Cart1.
METHODS: To study the transcription activity of Cart1, a reporter construct
containing a putative Cart1 binding site was transiently transfected with the
expression vectors of each protein. The interaction between p300/CBP and Cart1
was investigated by glutathione S-transferase (GST) pull-down, yeast two-hybrid, 
and immunoprecipitation assays. In vitro acetylation assay was performed with the
recombinant p300-HAT domain and Cart1 in the presence of acetyl-CoA.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: p300 and CBP stimulate Cart1-dependent transcription
activity, and this transactivation is inhibited by E1A and Tax, oncoproteins that
suppress the activity of p300/CBP. Cart1 binds to p300 in vivo and in vitro, and 
this requires the homeodomain of Cart 1 and N-terminal 139 amino acids of p300.
Confocal microscopy analysis shows that Cart1 recruits overexpressed and
endogenous p300 to a Cart1-specific subnuclear compartment. Cart1 is acetylated
in vivo and sodium butyrate and trichostatin A, histone deacetylase inhibitors,
markedly enhance the transcription activity of Cart1. Deletion and mutagenesis
analysis identifies the 131st lysine that locates immediately adjacent to the
homeodomain as a target of p300-HAT, and a point mutation to this residue
attenuates the binding affinity to p300 as well as p300-dependent transcription
activity. Together, these results indicate that p300/CBP acts as a
cotransactivator to Cart1 through a direct interaction and specific lysine
acetylation. In addition, because 131st lysine is highly conserved in other types
of homeoprotein, this lysine may be a common target for HAT of p300/CBP for these
proteins.

PMID: 12929931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Hum Genet. 2003;48(8):420-4. Epub 2003 Aug 7.

A novel locus for parietal foramina maps to chromosome 4q21-q23.

Chen G(1), Zhang D, Feng G, Liu W, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Research Center of Life Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai, China.

Parietal foramina [PFM], inherited usually in an autosomal dominant mode, is an
extremely rare developmental defect characterized by a symmetrical, oval hole in 
the parietal bone. It can be present as either an isolated or a syndromic
feature. PFM types 1 and 2 (PFM1 and PFM2) have been found to be caused by
mutations in the MSX2 and ALX4 genes, located to chromosomes 5 and 11,
respectively. After exclusion of both the above loci in a large Chinese pedigree 
with autosomal dominant PFM, a genome-wide search revealed a linkage of the PFM
to markers at the 4q21-q23 region. The maximum LOD score from two-point linkage
analysis is 3.87 for marker D4S2961. Analysis of co-segregated haplotype
localized the region to a 20-cM interval that flanks D4S392 and D4S2945.
Therefore, we concluded that the PFM in the family is a new PFM locus. Although
three genes, BMPR1B, PP1 and IBSP, are located to 4q21-q25 and their functions
are related to bone morphogenesis, no mutations were identified by sequencing
analysis of their exons.

PMID: 12905082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Eur J Hum Genet. 2003 Jun;11(6):457-63.

Clinical and molecular analysis of nine families with Adams-Oliver syndrome.

Verdyck P(1), Holder-Espinasse M, Hul WV, Wuyts W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is defined by the combination of limb abnormalities
and scalp defects, often accompanied by skull ossification defects. We studied
nine families affected with AOS, eight of which have not been clinically
described before. In our patients, scalp abnormalities were most often found,
followed by limb and skull defects. The most common limb abnormalities appeared
to be brachydactyly, syndactyly of toes 2 and 3 and hypoplastic toenails.
Additional features observed were cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita,
cryptorchidism and cardiac abnormalities. In an attempt to identify the
disease-causing mutations in our families, we selected two genes, ALX4 and MSX2, 
which were considered serious candidates based on their known function in skull
and limb development. Mutation analysis of both genes, performed by direct
sequencing, identified several polymorphisms, but no disease-causing mutations.
Therefore, we can conclude that the AOS in our set of patients is not caused by
mutations in ALX4 or MSX2.

PMID: 12774039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Development. 2003 Jul;130(13):2917-28.

Alx1, a member of the Cart1/Alx3/Alx4 subfamily of Paired-class homeodomain
proteins, is an essential component of the gene network controlling skeletogenic 
fate specification in the sea urchin embryo.

Ettensohn CA(1), Illies MR, Oliveri P, De Jong DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, 4400 Fifth
Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. ettensohn@andrew.cmu.edu

In the sea urchin embryo, the large micromeres and their progeny function as a
critical signaling center and execute a complex morphogenetic program. We have
identified a new and essential component of the gene network that controls large 
micromere specification, the homeodomain protein Alx1. Alx1 is expressed
exclusively by cells of the large micromere lineage beginning in the first
interphase after the large micromeres are born. Morpholino studies demonstrate
that Alx1 is essential at an early stage of specification and controls downstream
genes required for epithelial-mesenchymal transition and biomineralization.
Expression of Alx1 is cell autonomous and regulated maternally through
beta-catenin and its downstream effector, Pmar1. Alx1 expression can be activated
in other cell lineages at much later stages of development, however, through a
regulative pathway of skeletogenesis that is responsive to cell signaling. The
Alx1 protein is highly conserved among euechinoid sea urchins and is closely
related to the Cart1/Alx3/Alx4 family of vertebrate homeodomain proteins. In
vertebrates, these proteins regulate the formation of skeletal elements of the
limbs, face and neck. Our findings suggest that the ancestral deuterostome had a 
population of biomineral-forming mesenchyme cells that expressed an Alx1-like
protein.

PMID: 12756175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mech Dev. 2003 Feb;120(2):241-52.

The OAR/aristaless domain of the homeodomain protein Cart1 has an attenuating
role in vivo.

Brouwer A(1), ten Berge D, Wiegerinck R, Meijlink F.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Aristaless-related genes encode a structurally defined group of homeoproteins
that share a C-terminal stretch of amino acids known as the OAR- or aristaless
domain. Many aristaless-related genes have been linked to major developmental
functions, but the function of the aristaless domain itself is poorly understood.
Expression and functional studies have shown that a subgroup of these genes,
including Prx1, Prx2, Alx3, Alx4 and Cart1, is essential for correct
morphogenesis of the limbs and cranium. We now demonstrate the function of the
aristaless domain in vivo by ectopically expressing normal and mutated forms of
Cart1 and Alx3. Ectopic expression of Cart1 in transgenic mice does not disturb
development, whereas expression of a Cart1 form from which the aristaless domain 
has been deleted results in severe cranial and vertebral malformations. The Alx3 
protein contains a divergent aristaless domain that appears not to be functional,
as ectopic expression of Alx3 results in an altered phenotype irrespective of the
presence of this aristaless domain. Linking the Cart1 aristaless domain to Alx3
extinguishes teratogenicity. We show that, at the molecular level, the most
important consequence of deleting the aristaless domain is increased DNA binding 
to its palindromic target sequence. This demonstrates that the aristaless domain 
functions as an intra-molecular switch to contain the activity of the
transcription factor that it is part of.

PMID: 12559496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Int J Dev Biol. 2002;46(7):975-82.

The mouse polydactylous mutation, luxate (lx), causes anterior shift of the
anteroposterior border in the developing hindlimb bud.

Yada Y(1), Makino S, Chigusa-Ishiwa S, Shiroishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan.

Pattern formation along the anterior-posterior axis of the vertebrate limb is
established upon activation of Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) in the zone of polarizing
activity (ZPA). Since many mouse mutants with preaxial polydactyly show ectopic
expression of Shh at the anterior margin of the limb buds, it has been thought to
be a primary defect caused by these mutations. We show here that the mouse
mutation luxate (lx) exhibits dose-dependent reduction in the size of the Fgf8
expression domain in the ectoderm from the initial stage of limb development.
This aberration was independent of Fgf10 expression in the limb mesenchyme. Shh
was induced in the mesenchyme underlying the posterior end of the Fgf8 expression
domain, indicating an anterior shift of Shh expression in lx hindlimb buds. Prior
to the ectopic induction of Shh, the expression domains of genes downstream from 
Shh, namely dHAND, Gli1, Ptc and Gre, which are normally expressed in posterior
mesenchyme of limb buds, expanded anteriorly on the lx hindlimb buds. Conversely,
the expression domains of anterior mesenchymal markers such as Gli3and Alx4
decreased in size. Thus, ectopic Shh is not a primary defect of the lx mutation. 
Rather, our results indicate that the lx mutation affects the positioning of the 
anteroposterior border in developing hindlimb buds.

PMID: 12455637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Neuroscience. 2002;114(4):883-9.

Survey for paired-like homeodomain gene expression in the hypothalamus:
restricted expression patterns of Rx, Alx4 and goosecoid.

Asbreuk CH(1), van Schaick HS, Cox JJ, Smidt MP, Burbach JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Pharmacology, Rudolf Magnus Institute for Neurosciences,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, The Netherlands.

Homeobox genes are important regulators of cellular identity. Several homeobox
genes are known to be specifically expressed in subsets of neurons in the
forebrain, exclusively, or in distinct combinations. In this study, we explored
the expression of homeobox genes in the forebrain of the adult rat by a
degenerate polymerase chain reaction cloning strategy. We identified the
expression of 12 homeobox genes, several of which display a remarkable restricted
expression pattern in the adult brain. We demonstrated the expression of
goosecoid in a very small set of neurons in the hypothalamus. By using Otp as a
marker, these goosecoid-positive cells were found to constitute a small area just
beside the paraventricular nucleus. Furthermore, we found expression of Rx in the
pineal gland, along with Alx4. Rx was additionally found in the posterior
pituitary and in cells aligning the bottom of the third ventricle. These findings
form a starting point to reveal functions of the described homeobox genes in the 
forebrain.

PMID: 12379244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Science. 2002 Oct 25;298(5594):827-30. Epub 2002 Sep 5.

Progression of vertebrate limb development through SHH-mediated counteraction of 
GLI3.

te Welscher P(1), Zuniga A, Kuijper S, Drenth T, Goedemans HJ, Meijlink F, Zeller
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Faculty of Biology, Utrecht University,
Padualaan 8, NL-3584 CH Utrecht, Netherlands.

Distal limb development and specification of digit identities in tetrapods are
under the control of a mesenchymal organizer called the polarizing region. Sonic 
Hedgehog (SHH) is the morphogenetic signal produced by the polarizing region in
the posterior limb bud. Ectopic anterior SHH signaling induces digit duplications
and has been suspected as a major cause underlying congenital malformations that 
result in digit polydactyly. Here, we report that the polydactyly of
Gli3-deficient mice arises independently of SHH signaling. Disruption of one or
both Gli3 alleles in mouse embryos lacking Shh progressively restores limb distal
development and digit formation. Our genetic analysis indicates that SHH
signaling counteracts GLI3-mediated repression of key regulator genes, cell
survival, and distal progression of limb bud development.

PMID: 12215652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Dev Biol. 2002 Aug 1;248(1):143-56.

Twist plays an essential role in FGF and SHH signal transduction during mouse
limb development.

O'Rourke MP(1), Soo K, Behringer RR, Hui CC, Tam PP.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Wentworthville, NSW
2145, Australia.

Loss of Twist gene function arrests the growth of the limb bud shortly after its 
formation. In the Twist(-/-) forelimb bud, Fgf10 expression is reduced, Fgf4 is
not expressed, and the domain of Fgf8 and Fgfr2 expression is altered. This is
accompanied by disruption of the expression of genes (Shh, Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, and 
Ptch) associated with SHH signalling in the limb bud mesenchyme, the
down-regulation of Bmp4 in the apical ectoderm, the absence of Alx3, Alx4, Pax1, 
and Pax3 activity in the mesenchyme, and a reduced potency of the limb bud
tissues to differentiate into osteogenic and myogenic tissues. Development of the
hindlimb buds in Twist(-/-) embryos is also retarded. The overall activity of
genes involved in SHH signalling is reduced.Fgf4 and Fgf8 expression is lost or
reduced in the apical ectoderm, but other genes (Fgf10, Fgfr2) involved with FGF 
signalling are expressed in normal patterns. Twist(+/-);Gli3(+/XtJ) mice display 
more severe polydactyly than that seen in either Twist(+/-) or Gli3(+/XtJ) mice, 
suggesting that there is genetic interaction between Twist and Gli3 activity.
Twist activity is therefore essential for the growth and differentiation of the
limb bud tissues as well as regulation of tissue patterning via the modulation of
SHH and FGF signal transduction.

PMID: 12142027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Genesis. 2002 Jul;33(3):103-13.

Isolation of differentially expressed genes from wild-type and Twist mutant mouse
limb buds.

Loebel DA(1), O'Rourke MP, Steiner KA, Banyer J, Tam PP.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, New South
Wales, Australia.

In the mouse, Twist is required for normal limb and craniofacial development. We 
show that the aristaless-like transcription factors, Alx3 and Alx4 are
downregulated in the Twist(-/-) mutant and may be potential targets of Twist. By 
suppression subtractive hybridization we isolated 31 and 18 unique clones
representing mRNAs that are putatively downregulated and upregulated respectively
in Twist(-/-) forelimb buds. These included genes encoding cytoskeletal
components, metabolic enzymes, hemoglobin molecules, membrane transport proteins,
components of transcription and translation complexes, protein modification
enzymes and proteins related to cell proliferation and apoptosis. Differential
expression of selected clones was validated by whole mount in situ hybridization 
to E10.5 wild-type and Twist(-/-) embryos. We show that four novel clones are
expressed in the Twist-expressing craniofacial tissues and paraxial mesoderm and 
downregulated in Twist(-/-) embryos, raising the possibility that they are, in
addition to genes of the Alx family, downstream targets of Twist.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12124942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Clin Genet. 2001 Nov;60(5):356-9.

Familial case of Potocki-Shaffer syndrome associated with microdeletion of EXT2
and ALX4.

Hall CR(1), Wu Y, Shaffer LG, Hecht JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston
77030, USA.

Multiple exostosis, biparietal foramina, minor craniofacial abnormalities, and
mental retardation are characteristic of the syndrome associated with a proximal 
deletion of 11p (MIM # 601224), which has been shown to be a true contiguous gene
deletion syndrome. The presence of multiple exostosis is associated with deletion
of the EXT2 gene. Similarly, the presence of biparietal foramina has been shown
to be associated with the deletion of ALX4 located proximally to EXT2. Specific
genes related to mental retardation and craniofacial abnormalities, however, have
yet to be identified. We report on a family with a microdeletion of
11(pll.2p11.2) with multiple exostosis and biparietal foramina without mental
retardation or craniofacial abnormalities. Our results suggest that genes related
to mental retardation and craniofacial development must be located outside of the
D11S1785-D11S1385 region.

PMID: 11903336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Winter;106(4):258-71.

Transcriptional dysregulation in skeletal malformation syndromes.

Hermanns P(1), Lee B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Normal skeletal development requires coordinated temporal and spatial gene
expression patterns that specify the functions of various cell types.
Transcription factors by definition coordinate this process and are themselves
subject to hierarchical levels of regulation. Together they determine the
context-dependent function of each transcription factor. Hence, loss-of-function 
and gain-of-function mutations within specific transcription factors cause
dysregulation of broad transcriptional networks. Consequences are usually
dominantly inherited skeletal malformation syndromes that can be broadly viewed
as consequences of defects of cellular differentiation, proliferation, and
survival versus defects in pattern formation. The study of human phenotypes and
mutations can lead to hypotheses about targets within the respective
transcriptional network. These targets can then be confirmed by combining mouse
genetic and in vitro studies. Although this has been successful in a small group 
of skeletal dysplasias, the majority of transcriptional networks during
skeletogenesis remain to be elucidated.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11891677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Genes Dev. 2002 Feb 15;16(4):421-6.

Mutual genetic antagonism involving GLI3 and dHAND prepatterns the vertebrate
limb bud mesenchyme prior to SHH signaling.

te Welscher P(1), Fernandez-Teran M, Ros MA, Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Faculty of Biology, Utrecht University,
3584CH Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The bHLH transcription factor dHAND is required for establishment of SHH
signaling by the limb bud organizer in posterior mesenchyme, a step crucial to
development of vertebrate paired appendages. We show that the transcriptional
repressor GLI3 restricts dHAND expression to posterior mesenchyme prior to
activation of SHH signaling in mouse limb buds. dHAND, in turn, excludes anterior
genes such as Gli3 and Alx4 from posterior mesenchyme. Furthermore, genetic
interaction of GLI3 and dHAND directs establishment of the SHH/FGF signaling
feedback loop by restricting the BMP antagonist GREMLIN posteriorly. These
interactions polarize the nascent limb bud mesenchyme prior to SHH signaling.

PMCID: PMC155343
PMID: 11850405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 11;277(2):1120-7. Epub 2001 Nov 5.

Alx4 binding to LEF-1 regulates N-CAM promoter activity.

Boras K(1), Hamel PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.

During murine embryogenesis, expression of the paired-like homeodomain protein
Alx4 is restricted to tissues whose development depends on the expression of
lymphoid enhancer factor-1 (LEF-1). Given the defects seen in hair follicle
development in both LEF-1 and Alx4 knockout and mutant animals and the
overlapping expression patterns, we predicted that LEF-1 and Alx4 might form
physical complexes. We demonstrate here the interaction between LEF-1 and Alx4.
This interaction is mediated through a specific proline-rich domain in the
N-terminal region of Alx4 and requires the DNA-binding domain (HMG-box) of LEF-1.
We also demonstrate that LEF-1 and Alx4 can bind simultaneously to adjacent sites
on the neural cell adhesion molecule (N-CAM) promoter and that this binding
alters N-CAM promoter activity. Furthermore, when expressed in primary mammary
stromal cells, Alx4 decreases the expression of endogenous N-CAM protein. These
results reveal a potential mechanism that gives rise to mesenchymal-specific
activities of LEF-1.

PMID: 11696550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Development. 2001 Oct;128(20):3975-86.

Severe nasal clefting and abnormal embryonic apoptosis in Alx3/Alx4 double mutant
mice.

Beverdam A(1), Brouwer A, Reijnen M, Korving J, Meijlink F.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology, PO Box
85164, 3508AD Utrecht, The Netherlands.

A group of mouse aristaless-related genes has been implicated in functions in the
development of the craniofacial skeleton. We have generated an Alx3 mutant allele
in which the lacZ coding sequence is inserted in-frame in the Alx3 gene and the
sequences encoding the conserved protein domains are deleted. Mice homozygous for
this null allele are indistinguishable from wild-type mice. Compound mutants of
Alx3 and Alx4, however, show severe craniofacial abnormalities that are absent in
Alx4 single mutants. Alx3/Alx4 double mutant newborn mice have cleft nasal
regions. Most facial bones and many other neural crest derived skull elements are
malformed, truncated or even absent. The craniofacial defects in Alx3/Alx4 double
mutant embryos become anatomically manifest around embryonic day 10.5, when the
nasal processes appear to be abnormally positioned. This most probably leads to a
failure of the medial nasal processes to fuse in the facial midline and
subsequently to the split face phenotype. We detected a significant increase in
apoptosis localised in the outgrowing frontonasal process in embryonic day 10.0
double mutant embryos, which we propose to be the underlying cause of the
subsequent malformations.

PMID: 11641221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Dev Biol. 2001 Sep 1;237(1):130-44.

Hoxb2 and hoxb4 act together to specify ventral body wall formation.

Manley NR(1), Barrow JR, Zhang T, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA. nmanley@mail.mcg.edu

Three different alleles of the Hoxb4 locus were generated by gene targeting in
mice. Two alleles contain insertions of a selectable marker in the first exon in 
either orientation, and, in the third, the selectable marker was removed,
resulting in premature termination of the protein. Presence and orientation of
the selectable marker correlated with the severity of the phenotype, indicating
that the selectable marker induces cis effects on neighboring genes that
influence the phenotype. Homozygous mutants of all alleles had cervical skeletal 
defects similar to those previously reported for Hoxb4 mutant mice. In the most
severe allele, Hoxb4(PolII), homozygous mutants died either in utero at
approximately E15.5 or immediately after birth, with a severe defect in ventral
body wall formation. Analysis of embryos showed thinning of the primary ventral
body wall in mutants relative to control animals at E11.5, before secondary body 
wall formation. Prior to this defect, both Alx3 and Alx4 were specifically down
regulated in the most ventral part of the primary body wall in Hoxb4(PolII)
mutants. Hoxb4(loxp) mutants in which the neo gene has been removed did not have 
body wall or sternum defects. In contrast, both the Hoxb4(PolII) and the
previously described Hoxb2(PolII) alleles that have body wall defects have been
shown to disrupt the expression of both Hoxb2 and Hoxb4 in cell types that
contribute to body wall formation. Our results are consistent with a model in
which defects in ventral body wall formation require the simultaneous loss of at 
least Hoxb2 and Hoxb4, and may involve Alx3 and Alx4.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11518511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Nat Genet. 2001 Jan;27(1):17-8.

Haploinsufficiency of the human homeobox gene ALX4 causes skull ossification
defects.

Mavrogiannis LA(1), Antonopoulou I, Baxová A, Kutílek S, Kim CA, Sugayama SM,
Salamanca A, Wall SA, Morriss-Kay GM, Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, The John Radcliffe, Headington, Oxford, UK.

Inherited defects of skull ossification often manifest as symmetric parietal
foramina (PFM; MIM 168500). We previously identified mutations of MSX2 in
non-syndromic PFM and demonstrated genetic heterogeneity. Deletions of 11p11-p12 
(proximal 11p deletion syndrome, P11pDS; MIM 601224) are characterized by
multiple exostoses, attributable to haploinsufficiency of EXT2 and PFM. Here we
identify ALX4, which encodes a paired-related homeodomain transcription factor,
as the PFM disease gene in P11pDS.

PMID: 11137991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Nov;67(5):1327-32. Epub 2000 Oct 3.

Haploinsufficiency of ALX4 as a potential cause of parietal foramina in the
11p11.2 contiguous gene-deletion syndrome.

Wu YQ(1), Badano JL, McCaskill C, Vogel H, Potocki L, Shaffer LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Heterozygous mutations in MSX2 are responsible for an autosomal dominant form of 
parietal foramina (PFM). PFM are oval defects of the parietal bones that are also
a characteristic feature of a contiguous gene-deletion syndrome caused by a
proximal deletion in the short arm of chromosome 11 (Potocki-Shaffer syndrome).
We have identified a human bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clone mapping to
chromosome 11, containing a region homologous to the human homeobox gene MSX2.
Further sequence analysis demonstrated that the human orthologue (ALX4) of the
mouse Aristaless-like 4 gene (Alx4) is contained within this 11p clone. We used
FISH to test for the presence-or for the heterozygous deletion-of this clone in
two patients with the 11p11.2-deletion syndrome and showed that this clone is
deleted in these patients. ALX4 and Alx4 were shown to be expressed in bone and
to be absent from all other tissues tested. The involvement of Alx4 in murine
skull development, its bone-specific expression pattern, the fact that Alx4 is a 
dosage-sensitive gene in mice, and the localization of a human genomic clone
containing ALX4 to 11p11.2, with hemizygosity in patients with deletion of
11p11.2 who have biparietal foramina, support the contention that ALX4 is a
candidate gene for the PFM in the 11p11.2-deletion syndrome.

PMCID: PMC1288575
PMID: 11017806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Med Genet. 2000 Dec;37(12):916-20.

The ALX4 homeobox gene is mutated in patients with ossification defects of the
skull (foramina parietalia permagna, OMIM 168500).

Wuyts W(1), Cleiren E, Homfray T, Rasore-Quartino A, Vanhoenacker F, Van Hul W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1,
2610 Antwerp, Belgium. wwuyts@uia.ua.ac.be

Foramina parietalia permagna (FPP) (OMIM 168500) is caused by ossification
defects in the parietal bones. Recently, it was shown that loss of function
mutations in the MSX2 homeobox gene on chromosome 5 are responsible for the
presence of these lesions in some FPP patients. However, the absence of MSX2
mutations in some of the FPP patients analysed and the presence of FPP associated
with chromosome 11p deletions in DEFECT 11 (OMIM 601224) patients or associated
with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome suggests genetic heterogeneity for this disorder.
Starting from a BAC/P1/cosmid contig of the DEFECT 11 region on chromosome 11, we
have now isolated the ALX4 gene, a previously unidentified member of the ALX
homeobox gene family in humans. Mutation analysis of the ALX4 gene in three
unrelated FPP families without the MSX2 mutation identified mutations in two
families, indicating that mutations in ALX4 could be responsible for these skull 
defects and suggesting further genetic heterogeneity of FPP.

PMCID: PMC1734509
PMID: 11106354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 5;274(45):32325-32.

Site-specific heterodimerization by paired class homeodomain proteins mediates
selective transcriptional responses.

Tucker SC(1), Wisdom R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232,
USA.

Alx4 is a paired class homeodomain protein involved in defining
anterior/posterior polarity in the developing limb bud. The paired class of
homeodomain proteins cooperatively bind palindromic DNA elements as homodimers or
as heterodimers with other paired homeodomain proteins. Previous characterization
demonstrates that the strength of the cooperativity as well as the preference for
targets is dictated largely by the identity of amino acid 50 of the homeodomain. 
Here we compare and contrast the DNA binding properties of a glutamine 50 paired 
homeodomain protein, Alx4, and a lysine 50 paired homeodomain protein, Goosecoid.
We demonstrate that Alx4 homodimers, Gsc homodimers, and Alx4/Gsc heterodimers
each have distinct DNA binding properties, and each can discriminate between
highly related palindromic elements. Using reporter gene assays, we show that
Alx4 activates transcription in a site-specific manner, and that Gsc is capable
of antagonizing Alx4-mediated activation only from promoter elements that support
heterodimer formation. These data demonstrate that paired homeodomain proteins
with different DNA binding properties are able to form heterodimeric complexes
with unique DNA binding and transcriptional activities. Thus, heterodimerization 
regulates the DNA binding specificity of these transcription factors and may
partially explain how paired homeodomain proteins direct specific developmental
functions.

PMID: 10542273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Development. 1999 Jan;126(2):359-69.

Physical and genetic interactions between Alx4 and Cart1.

Qu S(1), Tucker SC, Zhao Q, deCrombrugghe B, Wisdom R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Alx4 and Cart1 are closely related members of the family of transcription factors
that contain the paired-type homeodomain. In contrast to other types of
homeodomains, the paired-type homeodomain has been shown to mediate high-affinity
sequence-specific DNA binding to palindromic elements as either homodimers or as 
heterodimers with other family members. Alx4 and Cart1 are co-expressed at
several sites during development, including the craniofacial mesenchyme, the
mesenchymal derivatives of neural crest cells in the first branchial arch and the
limb bud mesenchyme. Because of the molecular similarity and overlapping
expression pattern, we have analyzed the functional and genetic relationships
between Alx4 and Cart1. The two proteins have similar DNA-binding activity in
vitro and can form DNA-binding heterodimers; furthermore, they activate
transcription of reporter genes that contain high-affinity DNA-binding sites in
cell culture in a similar manner. Therefore, at least by these criteria, the two 
proteins are functionally redundant. Analysis of double mutant animals reveals
several genetic interactions. First, mutation of Cart1 exacerbates Alx4-dependent
polydactyly in a manner that is dependent on gene dosage. Second, there are
complex genetic interactions in the craniofacial region that reveal a role for
both genes in the fusion of the nasal cartilages and proper patterning of the
mandible, as well as other craniofacial structures. Third, double mutant mice
show a split sternum that is not detected in mice with any other genotype.
Interpreted in the context of the biochemical characterization, the genetic
analysis suggests that Alx4 and Cart1 are indeed functionally redundant, and
reveal both unique and redundant functions for these genes in development.

PMID: 9847249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Dev Dyn. 1998 Oct;213(2):159-69.

Alx-4, a transcriptional activator whose expression is restricted to sites of
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions.

Hudson R(1), Taniguchi-Sidle A, Boras K, Wiggan O, Hamel PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

We have recently demonstrated that the retinoblastoma family of negative cell
cycle regulators can form complexes with a class of developmental factors which
contain paired-like (PL) homeodomains (Wiggan et al. [1998] Oncogene 16:227-236).
Our screens led to the isolation of a novel PL-homeodomain protein which had been
isolated independently by another group and called Alx-4 (Qu et al. [1997]
Development 124:3999-4008). Mice homozygous for a targeted null mutation of Alx-4
have several abnormalities, including preaxial polydactyly, suggesting that Alx-4
plays a role in pattern formation in limb buds. In data that we present here, we 
show that Alx-4 is expressed in mesenchymal condensations of a diverse group of
tissues whose development is dependent on epithelial-mesenchymal interactions,
many of which are additionally dependent on expression of the HMG-box-containing 
protein, LEF-1. Alx-4-expressing tissues include osteoblast precursors of most
bones, the dermal papilla of hair and whisker follicles, the dental papilla of
teeth, and a subset of mesenchymal cells in pubescent mammary glands. We show
further that Alx-4 strongly activates transcription from a promoter containing
the homeodomain binding site, P2. Optimal activation requires specific sequences 
in the N-terminal portion of Alx-4 as well as a proline-rich region downstream of
the PL-homeodomain, but not the paired-tail at the C terminus. Taken together,
our results demonstrate that Alx-4 is a potent transcriptional activator that is 
expressed at sites of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions during murine embryonic
development.

PMID: 9786416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Development. 1998 Nov;125(22):4417-25.

The role of Alx-4 in the establishment of anteroposterior polarity during
vertebrate limb development.

Takahashi M(1), Tamura K, Büscher D, Masuya H, Yonei-Tamura S, Matsumoto K,
Naitoh-Matsuo M, Takeuchi J, Ogura K, Shiroishi T, Ogura T, Izpisúa Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Gene Expression Laboratory, La
Jolla, CA 92037-1099, USA.

Erratum in
    Development 1998 Dec;125(23):preceding 4595.

We have determined that Strong's Luxoid (lstJ) [corrected] mice have a 16 bp
deletion in the homeobox region of the Alx-4 gene. This deletion, which leads to 
a frame shift and a truncation of the Alx-4 protein, could cause the polydactyly 
phenotype observed in lstJ [corrected] mice. We have cloned the chick homologue
of Alx-4 and investigated its expression during limb outgrowth. Chick Alx-4
displays an expression pattern complementary to that of shh, a mediator of
polarizing activity in the limb bud. Local application of Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
and Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF), in addition to ectodermal apical ridge
removal experiments suggest the existence of a negative feedback loop between
Alx-4 and Shh during limb outgrowth. Analysis of polydactylous mutants indicate
that the interaction between Alx-4 and Shh is independent of Gli3, a negative
regulator of Shh in the limb. Our data suggest the existence of a negative
feedback loop between Alx-4 and Shh during vertebrate limb outgrowth.

PMID: 9778501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Dev Biol. 1998 Jul 1;199(1):11-25.

Mouse Alx3: an aristaless-like homeobox gene expressed during embryogenesis in
ectomesenchyme and lateral plate mesoderm.

ten Berge D(1), Brouwer A, el Bahi S, Guénet JL, Robert B, Meijlink F.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Mouse Alx3 is a homeobox gene that is related to the Drosophila aristaless gene
and to a group of vertebrate genes including Prx1, Prx2, Cart1, and Alx4. The
protein encoded contains a diverged variant of a conserved peptide sequence
present near the carboxyl terminus of at least 15 different
paired-class-homeodomain proteins. Alx3 is expressed in mouse embryos from 8 days
of gestation onward in a characteristic pattern, predominantly in neural
crest-derived mesenchyme and in lateral plate mesoderm. We detected prominent
expression in frontonasal head mesenchyme and in the first and second pharyngeal 
arches and some of their derivatives. High expression was also seen in the tail
and in many derivatives of the lateral plate mesoderm including the limbs, the
body wall, and the genital tubercle. aristaless-related genes like Alx3, Cart1,
and Prx2 are expressed in overlapping proximodistal patterns in the pharyngeal
arches. Similar, but more lateral patterns have been described for the
Distal-less-related (Dlx) genes. Intriguingly, expression and to some extent
function of aristaless and Distal-less in Drosophila also have overlapping as
well as complementary aspects. Alx3 was localized to chromosome 3, near the
droopy-ear (de) mutation.

PMID: 9676189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Development. 1998 Jul;125(14):2711-21.

Mutations in mouse Aristaless-like4 cause Strong's luxoid polydactyly.

Qu S(1), Tucker SC, Ehrlich JS, Levorse JM, Flaherty LA, Wisdom R, Vogt TF.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Mutations that affect vertebrate limb development provide insight into pattern
formation, evolutionary biology and human birth defects. Patterning of the limb
axes depends on several interacting signaling centers; one of these, the zone of 
polarizing activity (ZPA), comprises a group of mesenchymal cells along the
posterior aspect of the limb bud that express sonic hedgehog (Shh) and plays a
key role in patterning the anterior-posterior (AP) axis. The mechanisms by which 
the ZPA and Shh expression are confined to the posterior aspect of the limb bud
mesenchyme are not well understood. The polydactylous mouse mutant Strong's
luxoid (lst) exhibits an ectopic anterior ZPA and expression of Shh that results 
in the formation of extra anterior digits. Here we describe a new
chlorambucil-induced deletion allele, lstAlb, that uncovers the lst locus.
Integration of the lst genetic and physical maps suggested the mouse
Aristaless-like4 (Alx4) gene, which encodes a paired-type homeodomain protein
that plays a role in limb patterning, as a strong molecular candidate for the
Strong's luxoid gene. In genetic crosses, the three lst mutant alleles fail to
complement an Alx4 gene-targeted allele. Molecular and biochemical
characterization of the three lst alleles reveal mutations of the Alx4 gene that 
result in loss of function. Alx4 haploinsufficiency and the importance of
strain-specific modifiers leading to polydactyly are indicative of a critical
threshold requirement for Alx4 in a genetic program operating to restrict
polarizing activity and Shh expression in the anterior mesenchyme of the limb
bud, and suggest that mutations in Alx4 may also underlie human polydactyly.

PMID: 9636085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Gene. 1997 Dec 12;203(2):217-23.

Alx-4: cDNA cloning and characterization of a novel paired-type homeodomain
protein.

Qu S(1), Li L, Wisdom R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Homeodomain containing transcription factors serve important functions in
patterning the embryo during vertebrate development. We have isolated cDNA clones
encoding a novel protein, named Alx-4, that contains a paired-type homeodomain.
Analysis of the homeodomain sequence shows that Alx-4 belongs to a family of
genes that are related to the Drosophila gene aristaless, and includes the
mammalian genes Alx3, Cart-1, MHox, and S8. We have analyzed the expression of
Alx-4 during development by Northern blot and whole mount in situ hybridization. 
In addition, we have generated antibodies to recombinant Alx-4 protein and
identified Alx-4 protein in nuclear extracts prepared from mouse embryos. The
expression pattern of Alx-4 suggests that it may play a role in the patterning of
structures derived from craniofacial mesenchyme, the first branchial arch, and
the limb bud. Our results provide a starting point for the analysis of a new
member of the family of paired type homeodomain proteins.

PMID: 9426253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Development. 1997 Oct;124(20):3999-4008.

Polydactyly and ectopic ZPA formation in Alx-4 mutant mice.

Qu S(1), Niswender KD, Ji Q, van der Meer R, Keeney D, Magnuson MA, Wisdom R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Correct development of the limb is dependent on coordination between three
distinct signaling centers. Recently, fibroblast growth factor-4 has been
identified as a crucial determinant of AER function, which directs limb bud
outgrowth, and Sonic hedgehog has been identified as a signaling molecule that
mediates ZPA function, which specifies anterior-posterior patterning in the
developing limb bud. In addition, Shh and FGF-4 reciprocally reinforce each
other's expression via a positive feedback loop, providing a molecular basis for 
the coordination of limb bud outgrowth and anterior-posterior patterning. The
mechanisms by which these signaling centers come to occupy their normal positions
in the posterior limb bud during development are not understood. Here we identify
and characterize Alx-4, a gene that encodes a paired-type homeodomain protein.
Alx-4 is expressed in several populations of mesenchymal cells, including
mesenchymal cells in the anterior limb bud, and mice homozygous for targeted
disruption of the Alx-4 gene have multiple abnormalities, including preaxial
polydactyly. The polydactyly is associated with the formation of an ectopic
anterior ZPA, as indicated by anterior expression of Sonic hedgehog, HoxD13 and
fibroblast growth factor-4. The expression of other candidate regulators of
anterior-posterior positional information in the limb bud, including HoxB8 and
Gli3, is not altered in Alx-4 mutant embryos. By chromosomal mapping experiments,
Alx-4 is tightly linked to Strong's luxoid, a polydactylous mouse mutant. The
results identify Alx-4 as a determinant of anterior-posterior positional identity
in the limb and a component of a regulatory program that restricts ZPA formation 
to the posterior limb bud mesenchyme.

PMID: 9374397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Dev Biol. 1997 Aug 15;188(2):235-47.

Haploinsufficient phenotypes in Bmp4 heterozygous null mice and modification by
mutations in Gli3 and Alx4.

Dunn NR(1), Winnier GE, Hargett LK, Schrick JJ, Fogo AB, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical School, Nashville,
Tennessee, 37232-2175, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein 4 (Bmp4), a vertebrate homolog of Drosophila
decapentaplegic (dpp), encodes a signaling protein with multiple functions during
embryogenesis. Most mouse embryos homozygous for the Bmp4(tm1blh) null allele die
around the time of gastrulation, with little or no mesoderm. Two independently
derived Bmp4(tm1) mutations were backcrossed onto the C57BL/6 genetic background.
Several independently expressed, incompletely penetrant abnormalities were
observed in heterozygotes, including cystic kidney, craniofacial malformations,
microphthalmia, and preaxial polydactyly of the right hindlimb. In addition,
heterozygotes were consistently underrepresented at weaning. These results
indicate that Bmp4 gene dosage is essential for the normal development of a
variety of organs and for neonatal viability. Two mutations that enhance the
penetrance and expressivity of the polydactylous phenotype were identified:
Gli3(XtJ), a deletion mutation involving a gene encoding a zinc-finger protein
related to Drosophila cubitus interruptus, and Alx4(tm1rwm), a targeted null
mutation in a gene encoding a paired class homeoprotein related to Drosophila
aristaless. All double Bmp4(tm1); Gli3(XtJ) heterozygotes have extensive anterior
digit abnormalities of both fore- and hindlimbs, while all double Bmp4(tm1);
Alx4(tm1) heterozygotes display ectopic anterior digits only on the hindlimbs.
These genetic interactions suggest a model for the multigenic control of anterior
digit patterning during vertebrate limb development.

PMID: 9268572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Gen Genet. 1979;177(1):57-64.

Allele specific, gene unspecific suppressors in Aspergillus nidulans.

Roberts T, Martinelli S, Scazzocchio C.

Seven suppressor mutations have been isolated in Aspergillus nidulans by
coreversion of alleles in physiologically unrelated genes namely, alX, sB, alcA, 
putative structural genes for allantoinase, sulphate permease and alcohol
dehydrogenase respectively. The suppressors are allele specific, gene unspecific.
Those described map in four loci, suaA, B, C, D. suaA and suaB are on linkage
group III, suaC and suaD on VII. suaB111, suaD103 and suaD108 are semi-dominant
in their suppression of alX4 and sB43, suaA101, suaA105 and suaC10. are recessive
and have a pleiotropic effect on morphology. SuaC109 is cold sensitive for growth
as is sua115, an unmapped mutation on linkage group III which is similar in
morphology to suaC109. The two mutations, suaA101 and suaA105 have different
spectra of suppression and morphologies. suaA105 weakly suppresses alX4 and sB43 
whereas suaA101 strongly suppresses these and alcA125. suaD103 and suaD108 have
the same spectrum of suppression. The properties of these suppressors are
consistent with their being informational suppressors are consistent with their
being informational suppressors of the nonsense type.

PMID: 395416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


