
1. Reproduction. 2015 Apr;149(4):R159-67. doi: 10.1530/REP-14-0481. Epub 2014 Dec
12.

Regulation of spermatogonial stem cell self-renewal and spermatocyte meiosis by
Sertoli cell signaling.

Chen SR(1), Liu YX(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive BiologyInstitute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Reproductive BiologyInstitute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100101, China liuyx@ioz.ac.cn.

Spermatogenesis is a continuous and productive process supported by the
self-renewal and differentiation of spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs), which arise
from undifferentiated precursors known as gonocytes and are strictly controlled
in a special 'niche' microenvironment in the seminiferous tubules. Sertoli cells,
the only somatic cell type in the tubules, directly interact with SSCs to control
their proliferation and differentiation through the secretion of specific
factors. Spermatocyte meiosis is another key step of spermatogenesis, which is
regulated by Sertoli cells on the luminal side of the blood-testis barrier
through paracrine signaling. In this review, we mainly focus on the role of
Sertoli cells in the regulation of SSC self-renewal and spermatocyte meiosis,
with particular emphasis on paracrine and endocrine-mediated signaling pathways. 
Sertoli cell growth factors, such as glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor 
(GDNF) and fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), as well as Sertoli cell
transcription factors, such as ETS variant 5 (ERM; also known as ETV5),
nociceptin, neuregulin 1 (NRG1), and androgen receptor (AR), have been identified
as the most important upstream factors that regulate SSC self-renewal and
spermatocyte meiosis. Other transcription factors and signaling pathways
(GDNF-RET-GFRA1 signaling, FGF2-MAP2K1 signaling, CXCL12-CXCR4 signaling,
CCL9-CCR1 signaling, FSH-nociceptin/OPRL1, retinoic acid/FSH-NRG/ERBB4, and
AR/RB-ARID4A/ARID4B) are also addressed.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 25504872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2014 Aug;173(7):1618-39. doi: 10.1007/s12010-014-0947-6.
Epub 2014 Jun 14.

Gene expression analysis in MCF-7 breast cancer cells treated with recombinant
bromelain.

Fouz N(1), Amid A, Hashim YZ.

Author information: 
(1)Bioprocess and Molecular Engineering Research Unit (BPMERU), Department of
Biotechnology Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, International Islamic
University Malaysia, P.O. Box 10, 50728, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,
nour.fouz@gmail.com.

The contributing molecular pathways underlying the pathogenesis of breast cancer 
need to be better characterized. The principle of our study was to better
understand the genetic mechanism of oncogenesis for human breast cancer and to
discover new possible tumor markers for use in clinical practice. We used
complimentary DNA (cDNA) microarrays to compare gene expression profiles of
treated Michigan Cancer Foundation-7 (MCF-7) with recombinant bromelain and
untreated MCF-7. SpringGene analysis was carried out of differential expression
followed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), to understand the underlying
consequence in developing disease and disorders. We identified 1,102 known genes 
differentially expressed to a significant degree (p<0.001) changed between the
treatment. Within this gene set, 20 genes were significantly changed between
treated cells and the control cells with cutoff fold change of more than 1.5.
These genes are RNA-binding motif, single-stranded interacting protein 1 (RBMS1),
ribosomal protein L29 (RPL29), glutathione S-transferase mu 2 (GSTM2), C15orf32, 
Akt3, B cell translocation gene 1 (BTG1), C6orf62, C7orf60, kinesin-associated
protein 3 (KIFAP3), FBXO11, AT-rich interactive domain 4A (ARID4A), COPS2,
TBPL1|SLC2A12, TMEM59, SNORD46, glioma tumor suppressor candidate region gene 2
(GLTSCR2), and LRRFIP. Our observation on gene expression indicated that
recombinant bromelain produces a unique signature affecting different pathways,
specific for each congener. The microarray results give a molecular mechanistic
insight and functional effects, following recombinant bromelain treatment. The
extent of changes in genes is related to and involved significantly in gap
junction signaling, amyloid processing, cell cycle regulation by BTG family
proteins, and breast cancer regulation by stathmin1 that play major roles.

PMID: 24928548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 May;164A(5):1310-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36452. Epub 2014
Mar 24.

Multiple congenital anomalies-intellectual disability (MCA-ID) and neuroblastoma 
in a patient harboring a de novo 14q23.1q23.3 deletion.

Lehalle D(1), Sanlaville D, Guimier A, Plouvier E, Leblanc T, Galmiche L, Radford
I, Romana S, Colleaux L, de Pontual L, Lyonnet S, Amiel J.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Génétique Histologie-Embryologie-Cytogénétique, Hôpital
Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France; INSERM U781, Université Sorbonne Paris
Cité, Institut IMAGINE, Paris, France.

Neuroblastoma is the most frequent extra cranial solid tumor in infants and
children. Genetic predisposition to neuroblastoma has been suspected previously
due to familial cases of sporadic NB and predisposition to NB in several
syndromes. Here, we report on a de novo 14q23.1-q23.3 microdeletion in a male
presenting with a neuroblastoma diagnosed at 9 months, and spherocytosis,
congenital heart defect, cryptorchidism, hypoplasia of corpus callosum, epilepsy,
and developmental delay. Myc-associated-factor X (MAX) haploinsufficiency could
be regarded as the predisposing factor to NB. Indeed 14q deletion is a recurrent 
somatic rearrangement in NB and MAX somatic and germline loss of function
mutation have recently been described in pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma.
However, MAX was expressed in the tumor of the patient we report on and,
accordingly, loss of heterozygosity, mutation, or promoter methylation were
excluded. In addition, we discuss the potential involvement in the clinical
spectrum presented by the patient of five of the deleted genes, namely DAAM1,
PLEKHG3, SPTB, AKAP5, and ARID4A.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24665034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Int J Cancer. 2014 Aug 1;135(3):611-23. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28705. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Exome sequencing reveals frequent inactivating mutations in ARID1A, ARID1B, ARID2
and ARID4A in microsatellite unstable colorectal cancer.

Cajuso T(1), Hänninen UA, Kondelin J, Gylfe AE, Tanskanen T, Katainen R, Pitkänen
E, Ristolainen H, Kaasinen E, Taipale M, Taipale J, Böhm J, Renkonen-Sinisalo L, 
Mecklin JP, Järvinen H, Tuupanen S, Kilpivaara O, Vahteristo P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics Genome-Scale Biology Research Program,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

ARID1A has been identified as a novel tumor suppressor gene in ovarian cancer and
subsequently in various other tumor types. ARID1A belongs to the ARID domain
containing gene family, which comprises of 15 genes involved, for example, in
transcriptional regulation, proliferation and chromatin remodeling. In this
study, we used exome sequencing data to analyze the mutation frequency of all the
ARID domain containing genes in 25 microsatellite unstable (MSI) colorectal
cancers (CRCs) as a first systematic effort to characterize the mutation pattern 
of the whole ARID gene family. Genes which fulfilled the selection criteria in
this discovery set (mutations in at least 4/25 [16%] samples, including at least 
one nonsense or splice site mutation) were chosen for further analysis in an
independent validation set of 21 MSI CRCs. We found that in addition to ARID1A,
which was mutated in 39% of the tumors (18/46), also ARID1B (13%, 6/46), ARID2
(13%, 6/46) and ARID4A (20%, 9/46) were frequently mutated. In all these genes,
the mutations were distributed along the entire length of the gene, thus
distinguishing them from typical MSI target genes previously described. Our
results indicate that in addition to ARID1A, other members of the ARID gene
family may play a role in MSI CRC.

© 2013 UICC.

PMID: 24382590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Gene. 2013 Dec 1;531(2):444-50. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.08.082. Epub 2013 Sep
11.

Identification of novel target genes involved in Indian Fanconi anemia patients
using microarray.

Shyamsunder P(1), Ganesh KS, Vidyasekar P, Mohan S, Verma RS.

Author information: 
(1)Stem cell and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology,
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600 036, India.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a genetic disorder characterized by progressive bone
marrow failure and a predisposition to cancers. Mutations have been documented in
15 FA genes that participate in the FA-BRCA DNA repair pathway, a fundamental
pathway in the development of the disease and the presentation of its
characteristic symptoms. Certain symptoms such as oxygen sensitivity,
hematological abnormalities and impaired immunity suggest that FA proteins could 
participate in or independently control other pathways as well. In this study, we
identified 9 DNA repair genes that were down regulated in a genome wide analysis 
of 6 Indian Fanconi anemia patients. Functional clustering of a total of 233
dysregulated genes identified key biological processes that included regulation
of transcription, DNA repair, cell cycle and chromosomal organization. Microarray
data revealed the down regulation of ATXN3, ARID4A and ETS-1, which were
validated by RTPCR in a subsequent sample set of 9 Indian FA patients. Here we
report for the first time a gene expression profile of Fanconi anemia patients
from the Indian population and a pool of genes that might aid in the acquisition 
and progression of the FA phenotype.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24036430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Int J Hyg Environ Health. 2014 Mar;217(2-3):239-47. doi:
10.1016/j.ijheh.2013.06.004. Epub 2013 Jun 28.

Health effects in the Flemish population in relation to low levels of mercury
exposure: from organ to transcriptome level.

Croes K(1), De Coster S(2), De Galan S(1), Morrens B(3), Loots I(3), Van de
Mieroop E(4), Nelen V(4), Sioen I(5), Bruckers L(6), Nawrot T(7), Colles A(8),
Den Hond E(8), Schoeters G(8), van Larebeke N(2), Baeyens W(1), Gao Y(9).

Author information: 
(1)Free University of Brussels (VUB), Department of Analytical and Environmental 
Chemistry (ANCH), Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium. (2)Ghent University
Hospital, Study Centre for Carcinogenesis and Primary Prevention of Cancer, De
Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. (3)University of Antwerp, Faculty of
Political and Social Sciences, Department of Sociology, Sint Jacobstraat 2, 2000 
Antwerp, Belgium. (4)Provincial Institute for Hygiene, Kronenburgstraat 45, 2000 
Antwerp, Belgium. (5)Ghent University, Department of Public Health, UZ-2 Blok A, 
De Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent, Belgium; Research Foundation - Flanders,
Egmontstraat 5, 1000 Brussels, Belgium. (6)Interuniversity Institute for
Biostatistics and Statistical Bioinformatics, Hasselt University, Martelarenlaan 
42, 3500 Hasselt, Belgium. (7)School of Public Health, Occupational &
Environmental Medicine, K.U. Leuven, Herestraat 49 (O&N 706), 3000 Leuven,
Belgium; Centre for Environmental Sciences, Hasselt University, Agoralaan Gebouw 
D, 3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium. (8)Flemish Institute for Technological Research
(VITO), Environmental Health and Risk, Boeretang 200, 2400 Mol, Belgium. (9)Free 
University of Brussels (VUB), Department of Analytical and Environmental
Chemistry (ANCH), Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address:
yue.gao@vub.ac.be.

Due to possible health risks, quantification of mercury accumulation in humans
was included in the Flemish biomonitoring programmes FLEHS I (2002-2006) and
FLEHS II (2007-2011). The general objective of FLEHS I was to assess regional
exposure levels in order to link possible differences in these internal exposure 
levels to different types of local environmental pressure. Therefore, Hg and MMHg
(methylmercury) were only measured in pooled blood samples per region and per age
class. In FLEHS II, mercury concentrations were measured in hair of each
participant. About 200 adolescents and 250 mothers (reference group) and two
times 200 adolescents (2 hotspots) were screened. The main objectives of the
FLEHS II study were: (1) to determine reference levels of mercury in hair for
Flanders; (2) to assess relations between mercury exposure and possible sources
like fish consumption; (3) to assess dose-effect relations between mercury
exposure and health effect markers. The results showed that mercury
concentrations in the Flemish population were rather low compared to other
studies. Mercury levels in the Flemish populations were strongly related to the
age of the participants and consumption of fish. Significant negative
associations were observed between mercury in hair and asthma, having received
breast feeding as a newborn, age at menarche in girls, allergy for animals and
free testosterone levels. Significant correlations were also observed between
mercury in hair and genes JAK2, ARID4A, Hist1HA4L (boys) and HLAdrb5, PIAS2,
MANN1B1, GIT and ABCA1 (girls).

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23920476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Mar 19;110(12):4616-21. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1218318110. Epub 2013 Mar 4.

ARID4A and ARID4B regulate male fertility, a functional link to the AR and RB
pathways.

Wu RC(1), Jiang M, Beaudet AL, Wu MY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, The George Washington
University, Washington, DC 20037, USA. rwu@gwu.edu

ARID4A and ARID4B are homologous members of the ARID (AT-rich interaction domain)
gene family. ARID4A and ARID4B physically interact with each other. ARID4A is a
retinoblastoma (RB)-binding protein. Biological function of these interactions is
still unknown. Here, we report that mice with complete deficiency of Arid4a,
combined with haploinsufficiency of Arid4b (Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-)), showed
progressive loss of male fertility, accompanied by hypogonadism and seminal
vesicle agenesis/hypodysplasia. Arid4a and Arid4b are expressed mainly in Sertoli
cells of testes, which implies that their roles in Sertoli cell function are to
support spermatogenesis and create the impermeable blood-testis barrier. In fact,
evaluation of germ cell development in the Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) mice showed
spermatogenic arrest at the stages of meiotic spermatocytes and postmeiotic
haploid spermatids. Analysis of the integrity of the blood-testis barrier showed 
increased permeability of seminiferous tubules in the Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-)
testes. Interestingly, phenotypic Sertoli cell dysfunction in the
Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) mice, including spermatogenic failures and the impaired
blood-testis barrier, recapitulated the defects found in the Sertoli
cell-specific androgen receptor (AR) knockout mice and the Sertoli cell-specific 
RB knockout mice. Investigation of the molecular mechanism identified several AR-
and RB-responsive genes as downstream targets of ARID4A and ARID4B. Our results
thus indicate that ARID4A and ARID4B function as transcriptional coactivators for
AR and RB and play an integral part in the AR and RB regulatory pathways involved
in the regulation of Sertoli cell function and male fertility.

PMCID: PMC3606970
PMID: 23487765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Aug 15;53(4):974-82. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.06.019. Epub 2012 Jun 23.

Reactive oxygen species mediate microRNA-302 regulation of AT-rich interacting
domain 4a and C-C motif ligand 5 expression during transitions between quiescence
and proliferation.

Kumar MG(1), Patel NM, Nicholson AM, Kalen AL, Sarsour EH, Goswami PC.

Author information: 
(1)Free Radical and Radiation Biology Division, B180 Medical Laboratories,
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242-1181,
USA.

Normal cell growth consists of two distinct phases, quiescence and proliferation.
Quiescence, or G(0), is a reversible growth arrest in which cells retain the
ability to reenter the proliferative cycle (G(1), S, G(2), and M). Although not
actively dividing, quiescent cells are metabolically active and quiescence is
actively maintained. Our results from microRNA PCR arrays and Taqman PCR assays
showed a significant decrease (4-fold) in miR-302 levels during quiescence
compared to proliferating normal human fibroblasts, suggesting that miR-302 could
regulate cellular proliferation. Results from a Q-RT-PCR and
dual-luciferase-3'-UTR reporter assays identified ARID4a (AT-rich interacting
domain 4a, also known as RBP1) and CCL5 (C-C motif ligand 5) as targets for
miR-302. Ionizing radiation decreased miR-302 levels, which was associated with
an increase in its target mRNA levels, ARID4a and CCL5. Such an inverse
correlation was also observed in cells treated with hydrogen peroxide as well as 
SOD2-overexpressing cells. Overexpression of miR-302 suppresses ARID4a and CCL5
mRNA levels, and increased the percentage of S-phase cells. These results
identified miR-302 as an ROS-sensitive regulator of ARID4a and CCL5 mRNAs as well
as demonstrate a regulatory role of miR-302 during quiescence and proliferation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3418417
PMID: 22732186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 9;287(11):8531-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.299149. Epub 2012 
Jan 12.

Structural insight into recognition of methylated histone tails by
retinoblastoma-binding protein 1.

Gong W(1), Zhou T, Mo J, Perrett S, Wang J, Feng Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Retinoblastoma-binding protein 1 (RBBP1), also named AT-rich interaction domain
containing 4A (ARID4A), is a tumor and leukemia suppressor involved in epigenetic
regulation in leukemia and Prader-Willi/Angelman syndromes. Although the
involvement in epigenetic regulation is proposed to involve its chromobarrel
and/or Tudor domains because of their potential binding to methylated histone
tails, the structures of these domains and their interactions with methylated
histone tails are still uncharacterized. In this work, we first found that RBBP1 
contains five domains by bioinformatics analysis. Three of the five domains, i.e.
chromobarrel, Tudor, and PWWP domains, are Royal Family domains, which
potentially bind to methylated histone tails. We further purified these domains
and characterized their interaction with methylated histone tails by NMR
titration experiments. Among the three Royal Family domains, only the
chromobarrel domain could recognize trimethylated H4K20 (with an affinity of ~3
mm), as well as recognizing trimethylated H3K9, H3K27, and H3K36 (with lower
affinities). The affinity could be further enhanced up to 15-fold by the presence
of DNA. The structure of the chromobarrel domain of RBBP1 determined by NMR
spectroscopy has an aromatic cage. Mutagenesis analysis identified four aromatic 
residues of the cage as the key residues for methylated lysine recognition. Our
studies indicate that the chromobarrel domain of RBBP1 is responsible for
recognizing methylated histone tails in chromatin remodeling and epigenetic
regulation, which presents a significant advance in our understanding of the
mechanism and relationship between RBBP1-related gene suppression and epigenetic 
regulation.

PMCID: PMC3318718
PMID: 22247551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. BMC Med Genomics. 2010 May 4;3:14. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-3-14.

Genomics and proteomics approaches to the study of cancer-stroma interactions.

Rodrigues-Lisoni FC(1), Peitl P Jr, Vidotto A, Polachini GM, Maniglia JV,
Carmona-Raphe J, Cunha BR, Henrique T, Souza CF, Teixeira RA, Fukuyama EE,
Michaluart P Jr, de Carvalho MB, Oliani SM; Head and Neck Genome Project GENCAPO,
Tajara EH, Cury PM, de Carvalho MB, Dias-Neto E, Figueiredo DL, Fukuyama EE,
Góis-Filho JF, Leopoldino AM, Mamede RC, Michaluart-Junior P, Moyses RA, Nóbrega 
FG, Nóbrega MP, Nunes FD, Ojopi EF, Serafini LN, Severino P, Silva AM, Silva WA
Jr, Silveira NJ, Souza SC, Tajara EH, Wünsch-Filho V, Amar A, Bandeira CM,
Braconi MA, Brandão LG, Brandão RM, Canto AL, Cerione M, Cicco R, Chagas MJ,
Chedid H, Costa A, Cunha BR, Curioni OA, Fortes CS, Franzi SA, Frizzera AP,
Gazito D, Guimarães PE, Kaneto CM, López RV, Macarenco R, Magalhães MR, Meneses
C, Mercante AM, Pinheiro DG, Polachini GM, Rapoport A, Rodini CO,
Rodrigues-Lisoni FC, Rodrigues RV, Rossi L, Santos AR, Santos M, Settani F, Silva
FA, Silva IT, Souza TB, Stabenow E, Takamori JT, Valentim PJ, Vidotto A, Xavier
FC, Yamagushi F, Cominato ML, Correa PM, Mendes GS, Paiva R, Ramos O, Silva C,
Silva MJ, Tarlá MV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Medicine (FAMERP), São José do Rio 
Preto, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The development and progression of cancer depend on its genetic
characteristics as well as on the interactions with its microenvironment.
Understanding these interactions may contribute to diagnostic and prognostic
evaluations and to the development of new cancer therapies. Aiming to investigate
potential mechanisms by which the tumor microenvironment might contribute to a
cancer phenotype, we evaluated soluble paracrine factors produced by stromal and 
neoplastic cells which may influence proliferation and gene and protein
expression.
METHODS: The study was carried out on the epithelial cancer cell line (Hep-2) and
fibroblasts isolated from a primary oral cancer. We combined a conditioned-medium
technique with subtraction hybridization approach, quantitative PCR and
proteomics, in order to evaluate gene and protein expression influenced by
soluble paracrine factors produced by stromal and neoplastic cells.
RESULTS: We observed that conditioned medium from fibroblast cultures (FCM)
inhibited proliferation and induced apoptosis in Hep-2 cells. In neoplastic
cells, 41 genes and 5 proteins exhibited changes in expression levels in response
to FCM and, in fibroblasts, 17 genes and 2 proteins showed down-regulation in
response to conditioned medium from Hep-2 cells (HCM). Nine genes were selected
and the expression results of 6 down-regulated genes (ARID4A, CALR, GNB2L1,
RNF10, SQSTM1, USP9X) were validated by real time PCR.
CONCLUSIONS: A significant and common denominator in the results was the
potential induction of signaling changes associated with immune or inflammatory
response in the absence of a specific protein.

PMCID: PMC2881110
PMID: 20441585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008 Sep 3;100(17):1247-59. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djn253. Epub
2008 Aug 26.

Identification of chromatin remodeling genes Arid4a and Arid4b as leukemia
suppressor genes.

Wu MY(1), Eldin KW, Beaudet AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Leukemia evolves through a multistep process from premalignancy to
malignancy. Epigenetic alterations, including histone modifications, have been
proposed to play an important role in tumorigenesis. The involvement of two
chromatin remodeling genes, retinoblastoma-binding protein 1 (Rbbp1/Arid4a) and
Rbbp1-like 1 (Rbbp1l1/Arid4b), in leukemogenesis was not characterized.
METHODS: The leukemic phenotype of mice deficient for Arid4a with or without
haploinsufficiency for Arid4b was investigated by serially monitoring complete
blood counts together with microscopic histologic analysis and flow cytometric
analysis of bone marrow and spleen from the Arid4a(-/-) mice or
Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) mice. Regulation in bone marrow cells of downstream genes 
important for normal hematopoiesis was analyzed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Genotypic effects on histone
modifications were examined by western blotting and immunofluorescence analysis. 
All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Young (2-5 months old) Arid4a-deficient mice had ineffective blood cell 
production in all hematopoietic lineages. Beyond 5 months of age, the Arid4a(-/-)
mice manifested monocytosis, accompanied by severe anemia and thrombocytopenia.
These sick Arid4a(-/-) mice showed bone marrow failure with myelofibrosis
associated with splenomegaly and hepatomegaly. Five of 42 Arid4a(-/-) mice and 10
of 12 Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) mice progressed to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and 
had rapid further increases of leukocyte counts. Expression of Hox genes (Hoxb3, 
Hoxb5, Hoxb6, and Hoxb8) was decreased in Arid4a-deficient bone marrow cells with
or without Arid4b haploinsufficiency, and FoxP3 expression was reduced in
Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) bone marrow. Increases of histone trimethylation of H3K4, 
H3K9, and H4K20 (fold increases in trimethylation = 32, 95% confidence interval
[CI] = 27 to 32; 45, 95% CI = 41 to 49; and 2.2, 95% CI = 1.7 to 2.7,
respectively) were observed in the bone marrow of Arid4a-deficient mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Arid4a-deficient mice initially display ineffective hematopoiesis,
followed by transition to chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML)-like
myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative disorder, and then transformation to AML. The 
disease processes in the Arid4a-deficient mice are very similar to the course of 
events in humans with CMML and AML. This mouse model has the potential to furnish
additional insights into the role of epigenetic alterations in leukemogenesis,
and it may be useful in developing novel pharmacological approaches to treatment 
of preleukemic and leukemic states.

PMCID: PMC2528019
PMID: 18728284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 21;283(12):7438-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709446200. Epub 2008 
Jan 22.

Alterations of BRMS1-ARID4A interaction modify gene expression but still suppress
metastasis in human breast cancer cells.

Hurst DR(1), Xie Y, Vaidya KS, Mehta A, Moore BP, Accavitti-Loper MA, Samant RS, 
Saxena R, Silveira AC, Welch DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama 35294,
USA.

The BRMS1 metastasis suppressor interacts with the protein AT-rich interactive
domain 4A (ARID4A, RBBP1) as part of SIN3.histone deacetylase chromatin
remodeling complexes. These transcriptional co-repressors regulate diverse cell
phenotypes depending upon complex composition. To define BRMS1 complexes and
their roles in metastasis suppression, we generated BRMS1 mutants (BRMS1(mut))
and mapped ARID4A interactions. BRMS1(L174D) disrupted direct interaction with
ARID4A in yeast two-hybrid genetic screens but retained an indirect association
with ARID4A in MDA-MB-231 and -435 human breast cancer cell lines by
co-immunoprecipitation. Deletion of the first coiled-coil domain
(BRMS1(DeltaCC1)) did not disrupt direct interaction in yeast two-hybrid screens 
but did prevent association by co-immunoprecipitation. These results suggest
altered complex composition with BRMS1(mut). Although basal transcription
repression was impaired and the pro-metastatic protein osteopontin was
differentially down-regulated by BRMS1(L174D) and BRMS1(DeltaCC1), both
down-regulated the epidermal growth factor receptor and suppressed metastasis in 
MDA-MB-231 and -435 breast cancer xenograft models. We conclude that BRMS1(mut), 
which modifies the composition of a SIN3.histone deacetylase chromatin remodeling
complex, leads to altered gene expression profiles. Because metastasis requires
the coordinate expression of multiple genes, down-regulation of at least one
important gene, such as the epidermal growth factor receptor, had the ability to 
suppress metastasis. Understanding which interactions are necessary for
particular biochemical/cellular functions may prove important for future
strategies targeting metastasis.

PMCID: PMC2293288
PMID: 18211900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Appl Toxicol. 2008 May;28(4):491-508.

Gene expression changes associated with altered growth and differentiation in
benzo[a]pyrene or arsenic exposed normal human epidermal keratinocytes.

Perez DS(1), Handa RJ, Yang RS, Campain JA.

Author information: 
(1)Quantitative and Computational Toxicology Group, Center for Environmental
Toxicology and Technology, Department of Environmental and Radiological Health
Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA. perez.damon@mayo.edu 
<perez.damon@mayo.edu>

Both arsenic and benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) inhibit terminal differentiation and alter 
growth potential in normal human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEK) in vitro. To
identify molecular alterations that may be involved in these cellular processes, 
microarray analysis was carried out on NHEK treated with BaP or arsenic. The gene
expression microarray results measuring mRNA levels were as follows: (1) in
total, the expression of 85 genes was induced and 17 genes was suppressed by 2.0 
microm BaP. (2) Arsenic at an equitoxic dose (5.0 microm) induced the expression 
of 106 and suppressed 15 genes. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR was used
subsequently to confirm microarray findings on selected genes involved in
keratinocyte growth and differentiation pathways. These studies confirmed
increased mRNA levels in NHEK by BaP of alpha-integrin binding protein 63
(AIBP63) (2.48-fold), retinoic acid- and interferon-inducible protein (IFIT5)
(2.74-fold), interleukin-1 alpha (IL1A) (2.64-fold), interleukin-1 beta (IL1B)
(2.84-fold) and Ras guanyl releasing protein 1 (RASGRP1) (3.14-fold). Real-time
RT-PCR confirmed that arsenic increased mRNA levels of the following genes:
retinoblastoma 1 (RB1) (5.4-fold), retinoblastoma-binding protein 1 (ARID4A)
(6.8-fold), transforming growth factor beta-stimulated protein (TSC22D1)
(6.84-fold), MAX binding protein (MNT) (2.44-fold), and RAD50 (4.24-fold).
Collectively, these results indicate that these chemicals target different genes 
and molecular pathways involved in the regulatory processes controlling NHEK
proliferation and differentiation. Mechanistic studies with a subset of genes may
allow the correlation of alterations in these molecular markers with
chemical-specific blocks to differentiation in NHEK.

Copyright (c) 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 17879257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Genes Dev. 2006 Oct 15;20(20):2859-70.

Deficiency of Rbbp1/Arid4a and Rbbp1l1/Arid4b alters epigenetic modifications and
suppresses an imprinting defect in the PWS/AS domain.

Wu MY(1), Tsai TF, Beaudet AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) and Angelman syndrome (AS) are caused by deficiency
of imprinted gene expression from paternal or maternal chromosome 15q11-q13,
respectively. Genomic imprinting of the PWS/AS domain is regulated through a
bipartite cis-acting imprinting center (PWS-IC/AS-IC) within and upstream of the 
SNRPN promoter. Here, we show that two Rb-binding protein-related genes,
Rbbp1/Arid4a and Rbbp1l1/Arid4b, are involved in the regulation of imprinting of 
the IC. We recovered these two genes from gene trap mutagenesis selecting for
altered expression of an Snrpn-EGFP fusion gene strategy. RBBP1/ARID4A is an
Rb-binding protein. RBBP1/ARID4A interacts with RBBP1L1/ARID4B and with the Snrpn
promoter, implying that both are part of a protein complex. To further elucidate 
their roles on regulation of imprinting, we deleted the Rbbp1/Arid4a and
Rbbp1l1/Arid4b genes in mice. Combined homozygous deficiency for Rbbp1/Arid4a and
heterozygous deficiency for Rbbp1l1/Arid4b altered epigenetic modifications at
the PWS-IC with reduced trimethylation of histone H4K20 and H3K9 and reduced DNA 
methylation, changing the maternal allele toward a more paternal epigenotype.
Importantly, mutations of Rbbp1/Arid4a, Rbbp1l1/Arid4b, or Rb suppressed an AS
imprinting defect caused by a mutation at the AS-IC. These data identify
Rbbp1/Arid4a and Rbbp1l1/Arid4b as new members of epigenetic complexes regulating
genomic imprinting at the PWS/AS domain.

PMCID: PMC1619944
PMID: 17043311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(8):3124-34.

CtIP activates its own and cyclin D1 promoters via the E2F/RB pathway during G1/S
progression.

Liu F(1), Lee WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, 839 Medical Science Court, 124 Sprague
Hall, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Cell cycle progression from G(1) to S phase is mainly controlled by E2F
transcription factors and RB family proteins. Previously we showed that the
presence of CtIP is essential for G(1)/S transition in primary mouse blastocysts,
as well as in NIH 3T3 cells. However, how CtIP executes this function remains to 
be elucidated. Here we show that in NIH 3T3 cells the expression of CtIP is
regulated by the E2F/RB pathway during late G(1) and S phases. The presence of
wild-type CtIP, but not the E157K mutant form, which failed to interact with RB, 
enhanced its own promoter activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis
indicated that the recruitment of CtIP to its promoter occurs concomitantly with 
TFIIB, a component of the RNA polymerase II complex, and with dissociation of RB 
from the promoter during late G(1) and G(1)/S transition. Similar positive
regulation of cyclin D1 expression by CtIP was also observed. Consistently, cells
expressing the CtIP(E157K) protein alone exhibited growth retardation, an
increase in the G(1) population, and a decrease in the S-phase population. Taken 
together, these results suggest that, contrary to the postulated universal
corepressor role, CtIP activates a subset of E2F-responsive promoters by
releasing RB-imposed repression and therefore promotes G(1)/S progression.

PMCID: PMC1446954
PMID: 16581787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 9;279(2):1562-9. Epub 2003 Oct 26.

Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) forms complexes with
retinoblastoma-binding protein 1 (RBP1) and the mSin3 histone deacetylase complex
and represses transcription.

Meehan WJ(1), Samant RS, Hopper JE, Carrozza MJ, Shevde LA, Workman JL, Eckert
KA, Verderame MF, Welch DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jake Gittlen Cancer Research Institute, The
Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania
17033-0850, USA.

Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) suppresses metastasis of multiple
human and murine cancer cells without inhibiting tumorigenicity. By yeast
two-hybrid and co-immunoprecipitation, BRMS1 interacts with retinoblastoma
binding protein 1 and at least seven members of the mSin3 histone deacetylase
(HDAC) complex in human breast and melanoma cell lines. BRMS1
co-immunoprecipitates enzymatically active HDAC proteins and represses
transcription when recruited to a Gal4 promoter in vivo. BRMS1 exists in large
mSin3 complex(es) of approximately 1.4-1.9 MDa, but also forms smaller complexes 
with HDAC1. Deletion analyses show that the carboxyl-terminal 42 amino acids of
BRMS1 are not critical for interaction with much of the mSin3 complex and that
BRMS1 appears to have more than one binding point to the complex. These results
further show that BRMS1 may participate in transcriptional regulation via
interaction with the mSin3.HDAC complex and suggest a novel mechanism by which
BRMS1 might suppress cancer metastasis.

PMID: 14581478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Oct;23(19):6725-38.

Role of metalloprotease disintegrin ADAM12 in determination of quiescent reserve 
cells during myogenic differentiation in vitro.

Cao Y(1), Zhao Z, Gruszczynska-Biegala J, Zolkiewska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506, 
USA.

Skeletal myoblasts grown in vitro and induced to differentiate either form
differentiated multinucleated myotubes or give rise to quiescent,
undifferentiated "reserve cells" that share several characteristics with muscle
satellite cells. The mechanism of determination of reserve cells is poorly
understood. We find that the expression level of the metalloprotease disintegrin 
ADAM12 is much higher in proliferating C2C12 myoblasts and in reserve cells than 
in myotubes. Inhibition of ADAM12 expression in differentiating C2C12 cultures by
small interfering RNA is accompanied by lower expression levels of both
quiescence markers (retinoblastoma-related protein p130 and cell cycle inhibitor 
p27) and differentiation markers (myogenin and integrin alpha7A isoform).
Overexpression of ADAM12 in C2C12 cells under conditions that promote cell cycle 
progression leads to upregulation of p130 and p27, cell cycle arrest, and
downregulation of MyoD. Thus, enhanced expression of ADAM12 induces a
quiescence-like phenotype and does not stimulate differentiation. We also show
that the region extending from the disintegrin to the transmembrane domain of
ADAM12 and containing cell adhesion activity as well as the cytoplasmic domain of
ADAM12 are required for ADAM12-mediated cell cycle arrest, while the
metalloprotease domain is not essential. Our results suggest that ADAM12-mediated
adhesion and/or signaling may play a role in determination of the pool of reserve
cells during myoblast differentiation.

PMCID: PMC193919
PMID: 12972593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Genome Res. 2003 Jun;13(6B):1416-29.

Identification and analysis of chromodomain-containing proteins encoded in the
mouse transcriptome.

Tajul-Arifin K(1), Teasdale R, Ravasi T, Hume DA, Mattick JS; RIKEN GER Group;
GSL Members.

Author information: 
(1)ARC Special Research Centre for Functional and Applied Genomics, Institute for
Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St.Lucia, Queensland 4072,
Australia.

The chromodomain is 40-50 amino acids in length and is conserved in a wide range 
of chromatic and regulatory proteins involved in chromatin remodeling.
Chromodomain-containing proteins can be classified into families based on their
broader characteristics, in particular the presence of other types of domains,
and which correlate with different subclasses of the chromodomains themselves.
Hidden Markov model (HMM)-generated profiles of different subclasses of
chromodomains were used here to identify sequences encoding
chromodomain-containing proteins in the mouse transcriptome and genome. A total
of 36 different loci encoding proteins containing chromodomains, including 17
novel loci, were identified. Six of these loci (including three apparent
pseudogenes, a novel HP1 ortholog, and two novel Msl-3 transcription factor-like 
proteins) are not present in the human genome, whereas the human genome contains 
four loci (two CDY orthologs and two apparent CDY pseudogenes) that are not
present in mouse. A number of these loci exhibit alternative splicing to produce 
different isoforms, including 43 novel variants, some of which lack the
chromodomain. The likely functions of these proteins are discussed in relation to
the known functions of other chromodomain-containing proteins within the same
family.

PMCID: PMC403676
PMID: 12819141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Jul 1;29(13):2789-94.

E2F-1 represses transcription of the human telomerase reverse transcriptase gene.

Crowe DL(1), Nguyen DC, Tsang KJ, Kyo S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, University of Southern California, 
2250 Alcazar Street, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. dcrowe@hsc.usc.edu

The ends of human chromosomes (telomeres) lose up to 200 bp of DNA per cell
division. Chromosomal shortening ultimately leads to senescence and death in
normal cells. Many human carcinoma lines are immortal in vitro, suggesting that
these cells have a mechanism for maintaining the ends of their chromosomes.
Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein complex that synthesizes telomeric DNA onto
chromosomes using its RNA component as template. Telomerase activity is found in 
most tumor cells, but is absent from normal cells. Little is known about how
normal human cells repress telomerase (hTERT) gene expression. Mice carrying an
E2F-1 null mutation develop a variety of malignant tumors, suggesting that this
transcription factor has a tumor suppressor function. To determine mechanisms by 
which E2F-1 suppresses tumor formation, we examined the role of this
transcription factor in regulation of the hTERT promoter in human cells. We
identified two putative E2F-1-binding sites proximal to the transcriptional start
site of the hTERT promoter. Mutation of these sites produced dramatic increases
in promoter activity. Overexpression of E2F-1 but not a mutant E2F-1 repressed
hTERT promoter activity in reporter gene assays. This repression was abolished by
mutation of the E2F-1-binding sites in the hTERT promoter. Human cancer cell
lines stably overexpressing E2F-1 exhibited decreased hTERT mRNA expression and
telomerase activity. We conclude that E2F-1 has an atypical function as a
transcriptional repressor of the hTERT gene in human cells.

PMCID: PMC55771
PMID: 11433024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jul;21(14):4684-99.

Role for E2F in control of both DNA replication and mitotic functions as revealed
from DNA microarray analysis.

Ishida S(1), Huang E, Zuzan H, Spang R, Leone G, West M, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

We have used high-density DNA microarrays to provide an analysis of gene
regulation during the mammalian cell cycle and the role of E2F in this process.
Cell cycle analysis was facilitated by a combined examination of gene control in 
serum-stimulated fibroblasts and cells synchronized at G(1)/S by hydroxyurea
block that were then released to proceed through the cell cycle. The latter
approach (G(1)/S synchronization) is critical for rigorously maintaining cell
synchrony for unambiguous analysis of gene regulation in later stages of the cell
cycle. Analysis of these samples identified seven distinct clusters of genes that
exhibit unique patterns of expression. Genes tend to cluster within these groups 
based on common function and the time during the cell cycle that the activity is 
required. Placed in this context, the analysis of genes induced by E2F proteins
identified genes or expressed sequence tags not previously described as regulated
by E2F proteins; surprisingly, many of these encode proteins known to function
during mitosis. A comparison of the E2F-induced genes with the patterns of cell
growth-regulated gene expression revealed that virtually all of the E2F-induced
genes are found in only two of the cell cycle clusters; one group was regulated
at G(1)/S, and the second group, which included the mitotic activities, was
regulated at G(2). The activation of the G(2) genes suggests a broader role for
E2F in the control of both DNA replication and mitotic activities.

PMCID: PMC87143
PMID: 11416145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cancer Radiother. 2001 Apr;5(2):109-29.

[Molecular mechanisms controlling the cell cycle: fundamental aspects and
implications for oncology].

[Article in French]

Viallard JF(1), Lacombe F, Belloc F, Pellegrin JL, Reiffers J.

Author information: 
(1)Service de médecine interne et maladies infectieuses, centre
François-Magendie, hôpital du Haut-Lévêque, 5, avenue Magellan, 33604 Pessac,
France. jean-françois.viallard@chu-bordeaux.fr

INTRODUCTION: Comprehension of cell cycle regulation mechanisms has progressed
very quickly these past few years and regulators of the cell cycle have gained
widespread importance in cancer. This review first summarizes major advances in
the understanding of the control of cell cycle mechanisms. Examples of how this
control is altered in tumoral cells are then described.
CURRENT KNOWLEDGE AND KEY POINTS: The typical mammalian cell cycle consists of
four distinct phases occurring in a well-defined order, each of which should be
completed successfully before the next begins. Progression of eukaryotic cells
through major cell cycle transitions is mediated by sequential assembly and
activation of a family of serine-threonine protein kinases, the cyclin dependent 
kinases (CDK). The timing of their activation is determined by their
post-translational modifications (phosphorylations/dephosphorylations), and by
the association of a protein called cyclin, which is the regulatory subunit of
the kinase complex. The cyclin family is divided into two main classes. The 'G1
cyclins' include cyclins C, D1-3, and E, and their accumulation is rate-limiting 
for progression from the G1 to S phase. The 'mitotic or G2 cyclins', which
include cyclin A and cyclin B, are involved in the control of G2/M transition and
mitosis. The cyclins bind to and activate the CDK, which leads to phosphorylation
(and then inhibition) of the tumor suppressor protein, pRb. pRb controls
commitment to progress from the G1 to S phase, at least in part by repressing the
activity of the E2F transcription factors known to promote cell proliferation.
Both the D-type cyclins and their partner kinases CDK4/6 have proto-oncogenic
properties, and their activity is carefully regulated at multiple levels
including negative control by two families of CDK inhibitors. While members of
the INK4 family (p16INK4A, p15INK4B, p18INK4C, p19INK4D) interact specifically
with CDK4 and CDK6, the CIP/KIP inhibitors p21CIP1/WAF1, p27KIP1 and p57KIP2
inhibit a broader spectrum of CDK. The interplay between p16INK4A, cyclin D/CDK, 
and pRb/E2F together constitute a functional unit collectively known as the 'pRb 
pathway'. Each of the major components of this mechanism may become deregulated
in cancer, and accumulating evidence points to the 'pRb pathway' as a candidate
obligatory target in multistep oncogenesis of possibly all human tumor types.
FUTURE PROSPECTS AND PROJECTS: Major advances in the understanding of cell cycle 
regulation mechanisms provided a better knowledge of the molecular interactions
involved in human cancer. This progress has led to the promotion of new
therapeutic agents presently in clinical trials or under development. Moreover,
the components of the cell cycle are probably involved in other non-cancerous
diseases and their role must be defined.

PMID: 11355576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jun;21(11):3789-806.

c-Myc is a critical target for c/EBPalpha in granulopoiesis.

Johansen LM(1), Iwama A, Lodie TA, Sasaki K, Felsher DW, Golub TR, Tenen DG.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha) is an integral factor in the
granulocytic developmental pathway, as myeloblasts from C/EBPalpha-null mice
exhibit an early block in differentiation. Since mice deficient for known
C/EBPalpha target genes do not exhibit the same block in granulocyte maturation, 
we sought to identify additional C/EBPalpha target genes essential for myeloid
cell development. To identify such genes, we used both representational
difference analysis and oligonucleotide array analysis with RNA derived from a
C/EBPalpha-inducible myeloid cell line. From each of these independent screens,
we identified c-Myc as a C/EBPalpha negatively regulated gene. We mapped an E2F
binding site in the c-Myc promoter as the cis-acting element critical for
C/EBPalpha negative regulation. The identification of c-Myc as a C/EBPalpha
target gene is intriguing, as it has been previously shown that down-regulation
of c-Myc can induce myeloid differentiation. Here we show that stable expression 
of c-Myc from an exogenous promoter not responsive to C/EBPalpha-mediated
down-regulation forces myeloblasts to remain in an undifferentiated state.
Therefore, C/EBPalpha negative regulation of c-Myc is critical for allowing early
myeloid precursors to enter a differentiation pathway. This is the first report
to demonstrate that C/EBPalpha directly affects the level of c-Myc expression
and, thus, the decision of myeloid blasts to enter into the granulocytic
differentiation pathway.

PMCID: PMC87031
PMID: 11340171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. EMBO J. 2001 May 1;20(9):2273-85.

TRIP-Br: a novel family of PHD zinc finger- and bromodomain-interacting proteins 
that regulate the transcriptional activity of E2F-1/DP-1.

Hsu SI(1), Yang CM, Sim KG, Hentschel DM, O'Leary E, Bonventre JV.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

We report the isolation of TRIP-Br1, a transcriptional regulator that interacts
with the PHD-bromodomain of co-repressors of Krüppel-associated box
(KRAB)-mediated repression, KRIP-1(TIF1beta) and TIF1alpha, as well as the
co-activator/adaptor p300/CBP. TRIP-Br1 and the related protein TRIP-Br2 possess 
transactivation domains. Like MDM2, which has a homologous transactivation
domain, TRIP-Br proteins functionally contact DP-1, stimulating E2F-1/DP-1
transcriptional activity. KRIP-1 potentiates TRIP-Br protein co-activation of
E2F-1/DP-1. TRIP-Br1 is a component of a multiprotein complex containing E2F-1
and DP-1. Co-expression of the retinoblastoma gene product (RB) abolishes
baseline E2F-1/DP-1 transcriptional activity as well as TRIP-Br/KRIP-1
co-activation, both of which are restored by the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein.
These features suggest that TRIP-Br proteins function at E2F-responsive promoters
to integrate signals provided by PHD- and/or bromodomain- containing
transcription factors. TRIP-Br1 is identical to the cyclin-dependent kinase 4
(cdk4)-binding protein p34(SEI-1), which renders the activity of cyclin D/cdk4
resistant to the inhibitory effect of p16(INK4a) during late G(1).
TRIP-Br1(p34(SEI-1)) is differentially overexpressed during the G(1) and S phases
of the cell cycle, consistent with a dual role for TRIP-Br1(p34(SEI-1)) in the
regulation of cell cycle progression through sequential effects on the
transcriptional activity of E2F-responsive promoters during G(1) and S phases.

PMCID: PMC125435
PMID: 11331592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 22;20(8):910-20.

E2F-1 induces the stabilization of p53 but blocks p53-mediated transactivation.

Nip J(1), Strom DK, Eischen CM, Cleveland JL, Zambetti GP, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

E2F-1 induces p53 accumulation and E2F-1 and p53 form a physical complex, which
affects the ability of E2F-1 to activate transcription. We mapped the domains on 
E2F-1 that interact with p53 and found two p53-binding domains. To understand the
functional consequences of the E2F-1/p53 association on p53 activities we
identified the domains of E2F-1 that were responsible for the accumulation of
p53. Unexpectedly, we found that the E2F-1 transactivation domain was dispensable
for p53 induction. By contrast, further deletion of the DP-1 interaction/'marked'
box domain eliminated p53 accumulation. Radiolabeling pulse/chase analysis
demonstrated that E2F-1 caused post-translational stabilization of p53. Although 
E2F-1 caused the stabilization of p53, E2F-1 expression impaired p53-dependent
transactivation. Thus, the E2F-1 : p53 interaction may provide a checkpoint
function to inactivate overactive E2F-1, but the association may also inactivate 
p53 transactivation to allow cell cycle progression.

PMID: 11314026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 1;20(5):543-50.

Regulation of the Cdc25A gene by the human papillomavirus Type 16 E7 oncogene.

Katich SC(1), Zerfass-Thome K, Hoffmann I.

Author information: 
(1)Angewandte Tumorvirologie (F0400), Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 242, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Cdc25A is a tyrosine phosphatase that is involved in the regulation of the G1/S
phase transition by activating cyclin E/Cdk2 and cyclin A/Cdk2 complexes through 
removal of inhibitory phosphorylations. The E6 and E7 oncoproteins of the
high-risk human papillomaviruses (HPV) interact with and functionally abrogate
the p53 and pRB proteins, respectively. In the present study we have investigated
the regulation of the Cdc25A promoter during G1 and S-phases of the cell cycle
and by the HPV-16 E7 oncoprotein. Serum induction leads to a derepression of the 
Cdc25A promoter and can be mediated through two E2F binding sites, E2F-A and
E2F-C. While E2F-A is by both E2F1 and E2F4, E2F-C is regulated only by E2F1. The
Cdc25A promoter is transactivated by the E7 oncogene of HPV-16. Furthermore,
Cdc25A levels are highly increased in E7-expressing cell lines. Inducible
expression of E7 leads to an immediate increase in Cdc25A protein levels. These
data suggest that Cdc25A may be a critical target of HPV-16 E7 in the disruption 
of the G1/S phase transition.

PMID: 11313986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;21(8):2847-57.

The insert region of Rac1 is essential for membrane ruffling but not cellular
transformation.

Karnoub AE(1), Der CJ, Campbell SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 
27599, USA.

The Rho family of Ras-related proteins, which includes Rac1, RhoA, and Cdc42, is 
distinguished from other members of the Ras superfamily of small GTPases in that 
its members possess additional sequences positioned between beta-strand 5 and
alpha-helix 4, designated the insert region. Previous studies have established
the importance of an intact insert region for the transforming, but not actin
cytoskeletal reorganization, activities of Cdc42 and RhoA. Similarly, the insert 
region was determined to be essential for Rac1-mediated mitogenesis.
Additionally, an intact insert region was also determined to be required for the 
antiapoptotic activity of Rac1 as well as for Rac1 activation of reactive oxygen 
species and the NF-kappaB transcription factor. However, it has not been
determined whether the insert region is important for Rac1-mediated growth
transformation. In this study, we assessed the requirement for the insert region 
in Rac1 transformation and signaling in NIH 3T3 cells. Unexpectedly, we found
that a mutant of constitutively activated Rac1 that lacked the insert region
retained potent transforming activity. The insert region of Rac1 was dispensable 
for Rac1 stimulation of transcription from the cyclin D1 promoter and for
activation of the c-Jun, NF-kappaB, and E2F-1 transcription factors but was
essential for Rac1 induction of serum response factor activity. While an intact
insert region was dispensable for inducing reactive oxygen species production in 
vivo, it was required for Rac1 induction of lamellipodia. When taken together,
these results show that the insert region of Rac1 serves roles in regulating
actin organization and cell growth that are distinct from those of the analogous 
regions of Cdc42 and RhoA and support its involvement in regulating specific
downstream effector interactions.

PMCID: PMC86914
PMID: 11283263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Brain Res Bull. 2001 Jan 15;54(2):187-98.

Expression of the E2F and retinoblastoma families of proteins during neural
differentiation.

Kusek JC(1), Greene RM, Pisano MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Craniofacial Biology, ULSD, University
of Louisville, Birth Defects Center, Louisville, KY, USA.

Development of the brain is determined by a strictly orchestrated program of
proliferation, migration, apoptosis, differentiation, synaptogenesis, tract
formation, and myelination. The E2F family of transcription factors, whose
activity and functions are regulated in large part through interactions with the 
retinoblastoma (Rb) family of tumor suppressor proteins, has been implicated as a
key regulator of proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis in a variety of
tissues. We have examined levels of the E2F and Rb families of proteins during
both brain development and neural differentiation of P19 cells, and found the
expression profiles during these two processes of neural development and
maturation to be quite similar, i.e., strong up-regulation of p130, pronounced
down-regulation of p107, moderate up-regulation of pRb, and significant
down-regulation of most species of E2F and dimerization protein (DP). However,
several specific isoforms, namely a 30 kDa form of DP-2, a 57 kDa species of
E2F-3, a 59 kDa form of E2F-5 and the isoforms of E2F-1 recognized by the E2F-1
(KH-95) antibody were up-regulated suggesting that these particular isoforms of
E2F and DP play a tissue-specific function in differentiation and maturation of
nervous tissue. The potential role of the E2F/DP family of transcription factors 
in aspects of neural development and differentiation are considered.

PMID: 11275408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Mar 19;1518(1-2):1-6.

Rb and E2F-1 regulate telomerase activity in human cancer cells.

Crowe DL(1), Nguyen DC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, University of Southern California, 
2250 Alcazar Street, 90033, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

The ends of human chromosomes (telomeres) lose up to 200 bp of DNA per cell
division. Chromosomal shortening ultimately leads to senescence and death in
normal cells. Many human carcinoma lines are immortal in vitro, suggesting that
these cells have a mechanism for maintaining the ends of their chromosomes.
Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein complex that synthesizes telomeric DNA onto
chromosomes using its RNA component as a template. Recent studies have shown that
inactivation of the retinoblastoma gene product pRb and the cyclin dependent
kinase inhibitor p16(INK4A) is required for telomerase activity in epithelial
cells. We have demonstrated previously that restoration of functional
retinoblastoma (Rb) expression is sufficient to downregulate telomerase activity 
in carcinoma cells. To determine mechanisms by which Rb regulates telomerase
expression, we examined the effects of cyclin dependent kinase (cdk) mediated Rb 
inactivation and the release of E2F-1 on telomerase activity in human carcinoma
cells. Overexpression of cdk2 and cdk4 but not a dominant negative cdk2 rescued
Rb mediated downregulation of telomerase activity. Overexpression of the cdk
regulatory subunit cyclin D1 also rescued telomerase downregulation and p16
expression alone was sufficient to ablate activity. E2F-1 overexpression was
sufficient to rescue Rb mediated reduction of telomerase activity, but an E2F-1
mutant defective in DNA and Rb binding activities failed to produce this effect. 
Tumor tissue from E2F-1 -/- mice was negative for telomerase activity, indicating
a key regulatory role for this transcription factor.

PMID: 11267653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Breast Cancer Res. 2001;3(2):122-33. Epub 2000 Dec 22.

Mechanisms of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid inhibition of mammary cell growth.

Said TK(1), Moraes RC, Sinha R, Medina D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. tsaid@bcm.tmc.edu

The mechanism of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid in cell growth inhibition
involved induction of pRb-2/p130 interaction and nuclear translocation with
E2F-4, followed by significant repression in E2F-1 and PCNA nuclear levels, which
led to inhibition in DNA synthesis in mammary epithelial cell lines.

PMCID: PMC13923
PMID: 11250759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2000 Oct-Dec;14(4):263-8.

Differential induction of the 200-family proteins in Daudi Burkitt's lymphoma
cells by interferon-alpha.

Geng Y(1), Choubey D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola
University Chicago, Maywood, IL 60153, USA.

Interferon (IFN)-inducible "effector" proteins mediate the biological activities 
of the IFNs. Therefore, the identification of the functional role(s) of IFN
inducible proteins in IFN action is important to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms by which IFNs inhibit cell growth. One family (the "200-family") of
IFN-inducible proteins includes structurally related murine (p202a, p202b, p203, 
p204 and D3) and human (MNDA, IFI-16 and AIM2) proteins. However, their role in
IFN action remains to be established. Here we report that IFN-alpha treatment of 
Daudi Burkitt's lymphoma cells resulted in differential induction of MNDA, IFI
16, and a p202-related protein (p202RP). Interestingly, IFN induction of p202RP
preceded the induction of MNDA and IFI 16 proteins and the growth inhibition by
IFN. Additionally, the induction of these proteins by IFN was accompanied by: (i)
a transient increase in p21(WAF1/CIP1) levels; (ii) an increase in the functional
form of pRb and p130; (iii) an inhibition of the sequence-specific DNA binding
activity of E2F complexes; and (iv) a marked decrease in c-Myc levels. Our
observations reported herein provide support to the hypothesis that IFN-inducible
p202RP and MNDA proteins from the 200-family contribute to the growth inhibitory 
activities of the IFNs.

PMID: 11215814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2001 Feb;17(2):342-53.

Regulation of the retinoblastoma-dependent Mdm2 and E2F-1 signaling pathways
during neuronal apoptosis.

Trinh E(1), Boutillier AL, Loeffler JP.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 7519 CNRS-21, rue René Descartes, Strasbourg Cedex, 67 084, France.

We have previously demonstrated that the apoptotic signaling pathway in
K(+)-deprived cerebellar granule neurons involves a caspase-dependent cleavage of
the retinoblastoma protein (Rb). Here, we have further investigated the
functional consequences of this cleavage on two Rb-binding partners: the
oncoprotein Mdm2 and the transcription factor E2F-1. A K(+) deprivation time
course leads to a caspase inhibitor-sensitive degradation of Mdm2. Experimental
blockade of Mdm2 expression with antisense oligodeoxynucleotides (ODN) results in
neuronal death, suggesting an active role of Mdm2 in neuroprotection. By
contrast, the E2F-1 protein accumulates in a caspase-independent manner following
K(+) withdrawal, a consequence of increased gene transcription. This is likely to
result from the rapid cyclin-dependent kinase 4 activation observed in LK, that
correlates with a transient Rb phosphorylation. Counteracting E2F-1 upregulation 
with antisense ODNs prevents neuronal loss. Taken together, these data
demonstrate that Rb is a central player in regulating both caspase-dependent and 
-independent events leading to apoptosis.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11178871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Genes Cells. 2001 Jan;6(1):57-70.

E2F regulates growth-dependent transcription of genes encoding both catalytic and
regulatory subunits of mouse primase.

Nishikawa N(1), Izumi M, Yokoi M, Miyazawa H, Hanaoka F.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Physiology Laboratory, RIKEN (The Institute of Physical and Chemical 
Research), Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

DNA polymerase alpha-primase is one of the principal enzymes involved in
eukaryotic chromosomal DNA replication. Mouse DNA polymerase alpha-primase
consists of four subunits with molecular masses of 180, 68, 54 and 46 kDa.
Protein and mRNA expression levels of the four subunits are up-regulated in a
coordinated manner in response to growth stimulation. We have previously analysed
the transcription of the 180 kDa (p180) and 68 kDa (p68) subunits, which form the
DNA polymerase catalytic complex, and found that growth-dependent regulation of
transcription of the mouse p180 and p68 genes is mediated by a common factor,
E2F, while the basal transcription of the genes is regulated by different
transcription factors. We characterized the transcriptional regulation of the 54 
kDa (p54) and 46 kDa (p46) subunits, which form the DNA primase catalytic
complex. We isolated genomic clones spanning the 5'-flanking regions of the p54
and p46 genes and showed, using transient expression and gel mobility shift
assays, that the basal transcription of p54 is controlled by Sp1 and GA-binding
protein, as is the basal transcription of the p180 gene. The basal transcription 
of p46 is controlled by unknown factor(s) which were bound to the upstream
sequence. The variant E2F sites close to the transcription initiation sites of
the p54 and p46 genes had no basal promoter activity, but were essential for the 
growth-dependent transcription of both genes. The promoter regions of the four
subunits of mouse DNA polymerase d-primase complex share several common features.
The coordinated transcription of all four subunits in response to growth
stimulation appears to be controlled by E2F.

PMID: 11168597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2001 Jan;125(1):99-104.

Hoechst 33342-induced apoptosis is associated with intracellular accumulation of 
E2F-1 protein in BC3H-1 myocytes and HL-60 cells.

Zhang X(1), Kiechle FL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, William Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak, Mich
48073-6769, USA.

CONTEXT: Hoechst 33342 induces apoptosis, inhibits topoisomerase I, and disrupts 
TATA box-binding protein/TATA box element binding in BC3H-1 myocytes and HL-60
cells. In contrast, Hoechst 33258 does not have any of these actions.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if Hoechst 33342 or Hoechst 33258 treatment of BC3H-1
myocytes or HL-60 cells is associated with the intracellular accumulation of the 
nuclear transcription factor E2F-1, known to induce apoptosis.
METHODS: The gel mobility shift assay was used to study the effect of the 2
compounds on the binding capacity of nuclear proteins extracted from the 2 cell
lines to a 30-base pair double-stranded oligonucleotide that contained an
E2F-1-binding element. The DNA sequence of the protein-binding region was
determined by the protection footprinting method and the Maxam-Gilbert guanosine 
plus adenosine chemical sequencing reaction.
RESULTS: Nuclear extracts from each cell line treated with 26.7 micromol/L
Hoechst 33342 or Hoechst 33258 for 3 to 24 hours were incubated with
[32P]-labeled 30-base pair oligonucleotide (5'GGCGCGGAGACTTGGAGAAATTTGGCGCGG3'). 
Three protein and DNA bands were altered by Hoechst 33342, but not by Hoechst
33258: band I, increased, then decreased in both cell lines; band II (2 adjacent 
bands) markedly decreased in both cell lines; band III markedly increased only in
HL-60 cells. Footprinting and sequencing demonstrated that the nuclear
protein-binding sequence was TTTGGCGC, an E2F-1 binding site. Hoechst 33342
treatment increased the concentration of E2F-1 protein after a 3-hour incubation 
in both cell lines.
CONCLUSION: Hoechst 33342-induced apoptosis is associated with intracellular
accumulation of E2F-1 protein, another step in this specific apoptotic pathway.

PMID: 11151061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Nat Cell Biol. 2001 Jan;3(1):1-7.

DAP kinase activates a p19ARF/p53-mediated apoptotic checkpoint to suppress
oncogenic transformation.

Raveh T(1), Droguett G, Horwitz MS, DePinho RA, Kimchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

DAP kinase is a pro-apoptotic calcium-regulated serine/threonine kinase, whose
expression is frequently lost in human tumours. Here we show that DAP kinase
counteracts oncogene-induced transformation by activating a p19ARF/p53-dependent 
apoptotic checkpoint. Ectopic expression of DAP kinase suppressed oncogenic
transformation of primary embryonic fibroblasts by activating p53 in a
p19ARF-dependent manner. Consequently, the fibroblasts underwent apoptosis,
characterized by caspase activation and DNA fragmentation. In response to c-Myc
or E2F-1, the endogenous DAP kinase protein was upregulated. Furthermore,
functional or genetic inactivation of the endogenous DAP kinase reduced the
extent of induction of p19ARF/p53 and weakened the subsequent apoptotic responses
to c-Myc or E2F-1. These results establish a role for DAP kinase in an early
apoptotic checkpoint designed to eliminate pre-malignant cells during cancer
development.

PMID: 11146619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 7;19(52):6065-73.

E2F1 mediates ectopic proliferation and stage-specific p53-dependent apoptosis
but not aberrant differentiation in the ocular lens of Rb deficient fetuses.

Liu Y(1), Zacksenhaus E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Toronto General Hospital Research Institute,
University Health Network, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor, Rb, is a transcription cofactor that
controls cell proliferation, survival and differentiation. Mutant mouse embryos
lacking Rb exhibit ectopic proliferation and apoptosis that are mediated in some 
tissues by E2F1, a major partner of Rb, and by the p53 tumor suppressor. Whether 
E2F1 and p53 also mediate the differentiation defects in Rb mutant embryos is,
however, not clear. Here we show that partially rescued mgRb:Rb-/- mutant fetuses
exhibit ectopic lens epithelial cell proliferation, apoptosis and severe
cataract. The abnormal cell proliferation and apoptosis were significantly
suppressed in the lens of compound mutant fetuses lacking both Rb and E2F1 at
embryonic day (E) E15.5. Interestingly however, at E18.5, only ectopic
proliferation, not apoptosis, was dramatically reduced in mgRb:Rb-/-:E2F1-/-
lenses. In contrast, p53 did not exert such a stage-specific effect and apoptosis
was invariably suppressed in mgRb:Rb-/-:p53-/- composite mutant lenses throughout
embryogenesis. Using RT-PCR and in situ hybridization analyses, we identified a
subset of lens specific genes, most notably the late differentiation marker
filensin, which were not properly induced during lens development in
mgRb:Rb-/-fetuses. Remarkably, despite the inhibition of cell proliferation and
apoptosis, the degeneration of lens fibers and aberrant expression of filensin
were only marginally corrected in mgRb:Rb-/-:E2F1-/- fetuses at E15.5 but not at 
all at E18.5 or in mgRb:Rb-/-:p53-/mutant fetuses. Thus, inactivation of E2F1
reduces ectopic cell proliferation and stage-specific p53-dependent apoptosis but
does not rescue the differentiation defects associated with loss of Rb during
lens development.

PMID: 11146559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Cell Biol. 2000 Dec 25;151(7):1413-22.

Dual stimulation of Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase and RhoA by cell
adhesion to fibronectin supports growth factor-stimulated cell cycle progression.

Danen EH(1), Sonneveld P, Sonnenberg A, Yamada KM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066 CX Amsterdam,
The Netherlands. edanen@nki.nl

In cellular transformation, activated forms of the small GTPases Ras and RhoA can
cooperate to drive cells through the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Here, we show
that a similar but substrate-regulated mechanism is involved in the
anchorage-dependent proliferation of untransformed NIH-3T3 cells. Among several
extracellular matrix components tested, only fibronectin supported growth
factor-induced, E2F-dependent S phase entry. Although all substrates supported
the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) response to growth factors, RhoA
activity was specifically enhanced on fibronectin. Moreover, induction of cyclin 
D1 and suppression of p21(Cip/Waf) occurred specifically, in a Rho-dependent
fashion, in cells attached to fibronectin. This ability of fibronectin to
stimulate both Ras/MAPK- and RhoA-dependent signaling can explain its potent
cooperation with growth factors in the stimulation of cell cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC2150684
PMID: 11134071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Blood. 2001 Jan 1;97(1):227-34.

Overexpression of E2F-1 leads to cytokine-independent proliferation and survival 
in the hematopoietic cell line BaF-B03.

Gala S(1), Marreiros A, Stewart GJ, Williamson P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Westmead Hospital, University of Sydney, Sydney,
Australia.

Cytokine receptors activate signals that regulate the transcription factor E2F-1,
which then coordinates the expression of genes essential for DNA synthesis and
cell cycle progression. Overexpression of E2F-1 most often induces S-phase entry 
followed by apoptosis, but in some cell types it leads to continuous
proliferation and transformation. Here, it is shown that constitutive expression 
of E2F-1 promotes cytokine-independent proliferation in the murine pro-B cell
line BaF-B03. There was no enhancement of apoptosis following cytokine withdrawal
in these cells, despite the presence of intact p53-dependent apoptotic pathways. 
Notwithstanding the continuous presence of E2F-1, the cell cycle-dependent
expression of cyclin A, cyclin B1, cyclin D1, cyclin E, and proliferating-cell
nuclear antigen was restored with a pattern equivalent to that associated with
cytokine stimulation. These findings provide evidence that, in the absence of
cytokine, constitutive expression of E2F-1 can promote cell cycle progression and
prevent apoptosis.

PMID: 11133765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nat Genet. 2000 Dec;26(4):464-9.

Role of the p53-homologue p73 in E2F1-induced apoptosis.

Stiewe T(1), Pützer BM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology (Cancer Research), University of Essen, Medical
School, Essen, Germany (FRG).

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2000 Dec;26(4):391-2.

Most human cancers harbour aberrations of cell-cycle control, which result in
deregulated activity of the E2F transcription factors with concomitant enhanced
cell-cycle progression. Oncogenic signalling by E2F1 has recently been linked to 
stabilization and activation of the tumour suppressor p53 (refs 1,3,4). The p73
protein shares substantial sequence homology and functional similarity with p53
(refs 5-7 ). Hence, several previously considered p53-independent cellular
activities may be attributable to p73. Here we provide evidence that E2F1
directly activates transcription of TP73, leading to activation of p53-responsive
target genes and apoptosis. Disruption of p73 function by a tumour-derived p53
mutant reduced E2F1-mediated apoptosis. Thus, p73 activation by deregulated E2F1 
activity might constitute a p53-independent, anti-tumorigenic safeguard
mechanism.

PMID: 11101847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Nat Genet. 2000 Dec;26(4):391-2.

p53 and p73: seeing double?

Soengas MS, Lowe SW.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2000 Dec;26(4):464-9.

PMID: 11101828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2000 Dec;41(13):4223-31.

Induction of cell cycle entry and cell death in postmitotic lens fiber cells by
overexpression of E2F1 or E2F2.

Chen Q(1), Hung FC, Fromm L, Overbeek PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE: Previous studies have shown that inactivation of the retinoblastoma
tumor suppressor protein (pRb) can cause lens fiber cell proliferation and
apoptosis. Because pRb is thought to block cell cycle progression by inhibition
of E2F transcription factors, experiments were conducted to test whether
overexpression of different E2F family members would be sufficient to induce
fiber cell proliferation and subsequent apoptosis. The in vivo functions of the
transcription factor E2F2 have not previously been analyzed or described in
transgenic mice.
METHODS: Human E2F1 and E2F2 cDNAs were linked to the alphaA-crystallin promoter.
Transgenic mice were generated by microinjection. Changes in cell cycle
regulation were assayed by immunohistochemistry for 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine
(BrdU) incorporation and by in situ hybridization. Cell death was assayed using
the TdT-dUTP terminal nick-end labeling (TUNEL) assay.
RESULTS: At embryonic day (E)15.5, strong expression of the E2F1 and E2F2
transgenes was detected in lens fiber cells with little or no expression in
epithelial cells. BrdU incorporation and TUNEL assays showed that overexpression 
of either E2F1 or E2F2 in lens fiber cells was sufficient to cause cell cycle
entry and subsequent apoptosis. Expression of either E2F1 or E2F2 was sufficient 
to induce the transcription of cyclins (A2, B1, and E), as well as p53 and Bax in
the lens fibercells.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of either E2F1 or E2F2 can induce postmitotic lens fiber 
cells to re-enter the cell cycle. Inappropriate cell cycle entry is recognized by
p53 in each case, and programmed cell death ensues.

PMID: 11095619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Circ Res. 2000 Nov 24;87(11):1063-8.

Gene therapy for attenuating cardiac allograft arteriopathy using ex vivo E2F
decoy transfection by HVJ-AVE-liposome method in mice and nonhuman primates.

Kawauchi M(1), Suzuki J, Morishita R, Wada Y, Izawa A, Tomita N, Amano J, Kaneda 
Y, Ogihara T, Takamoto S, Isobe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Cardiac allograft arteriopathy, which limits the long-term survival of
recipients, is characterized by diffuse intimal thickening composed of
proliferative smooth muscle cells. The transcription factor E2F plays a pivotal
role in the coordinated transcription of cell-cycle regulatory genes. To test the
hypothesis that double-stranded DNA with specific affinity for E2F (E2F decoy) is
effective in preventing intimal hyperplasia, we performed ex vivo single
intraluminal delivery of E2F decoy into cardiac allografts of mice and Japanese
monkeys using the hemagglutinating virus of Japan (HVJ) artificial viral
envelope-liposome method. In murine models, antisense cyclin-dependent kinase 2
(cdk2) kinase oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) and no transfers were performed to
compare the effects. Severe intimal thickening was observed, and multiple
cell-cycle regulatory genes were enhanced in untreated allografts. E2F decoy
prevented neointimal formation and suppressed these genes for up to 8 weeks,
whereas antisense cdk2 kinase ODN had limited effects. In primate models, E2F
decoy dramatically prevented neointimal thickening and suppressed multiple
cell-cycle regulatory genes, whereas intimal thickening developed in the
nontransfected or mismatch decoy-transfected allografts. Gel mobility shift assay
proved the specific effects of E2F decoy, and reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction documented that neither complication nor dissemination of HVJ into
other organs was observed. We demonstrate that ex vivo gene delivery to
allografts is a potent strategy to modify allograft gene expression, resulting in
prevention of graft arteriopathy without systemic adverse effects.

PMID: 11090553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Cancer Res. 2000 Nov 1;60(21):5972-6.

E2F-1 gene transfer enhances invasiveness of human head and neck carcinoma cell
lines.

Zhang SY(1), Liu SC, Johnson DG, Klein-Szanto AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, For Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19111, USA.

The transcription factor E2F-1, a downstream regulator of the p16-cyclinD-Rb
pathway, is required for cell cycle progression. Evidence shows that
overexpression of E2F-1 can either promote or inhibit development of tumors,
depending on tissue or experimental conditions. To study whether the E2F-1 gene
plays a role in tumor progression, the expression of E2F-1 protein was evaluated 
in 10 human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines using Western blot
analysis. In addition, the invasive ability of these cell lines was determined by
evaluating the penetration of cell lines into the tracheal wall in an in vivo
invasion assay using deepithelialized tracheas transplanted into the s.c. tissue 
of Scid mice. This study showed that the aggressive cell lines had higher
expression of E2F-1 than the less invasive cell lines. To evaluate the hypothesis
that E2F-1 enhances invasiveness, we selected two cell lines, SCC9 and SCC12, for
a gene transfer experiment. These cell lines exhibited low invasive ability with 
low expression of E2F-1. Two stable clones with overexpression of transfected
E2F-1 gene and two clones with their respective vector-alone control were
selected from each cell line for in vivo invasion evaluation. The clones
containing the transfected E2F-1 gene had significantly higher invasive ability
than their respective vector-alone clones. Flow cytometry showed that parental,
transfected E2F-1, and vector-alone cells had a similar proliferation pattern
under normal culture conditions. Nevertheless, transfected E2F-1 cells exhibited 
a higher portion of cells in S phase than the control cells after
serum-starvation and refeeding. The results indicated that overexpression of
E2F-1 plays a positive role in cell cycle reentry from quiescence and is
associated with increased in vivo invasiveness.

PMID: 11085515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Dev Biol. 2000 Nov 1;227(1):8-41.

E2F1 and p53 are dispensable, whereas p21(Waf1/Cip1) cooperates with Rb to
restrict endoreduplication and apoptosis during skeletal myogenesis.

Jiang Z(1), Liang P, Leng R, Guo Z, Liu Y, Liu X, Bubnic S, Keating A, Murray D, 
Goss P, Zacksenhaus E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Toronto General Hospital Research Institute,
University Health Network, University of Toronto, 67 College Street, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

We describe temporal and genetic analyses of partially rescued Rb mutant fetuses,
mgRb:Rb-/-, that survive to birth and reveal specific defects in skeletal muscle 
differentiation. We show that in the absence of Rb, these fetuses exhibit
increased apoptosis, bona fide endoreduplication, and incomplete differentiation 
throughout terminal myogenesis. These defects were further augmented in composite
mutant fetuses, mgRb:Rb-/-:p21-/-, lacking both Rb and the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor p21(Waf1/Cip1). Although E2F1 and p53 mediate ectopic DNA
synthesis and cell death in several tissues in Rb mutant embryos, both
endoreduplication and apoptosis persisted in mgRb:Rb-/-:E2F1-/- and
mgRb:Rb-/-:p53-/- compound mutant muscles. Thus, combined inactivation of Rb and 
p21(Waf1/Cip1) augments endoreduplication and apoptosis, whereas E2F1 and p53 are
dispensable during aberrant myogenesis in Rb-deficient fetuses.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11076674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Nat Genet. 2000 Nov;26(3):291-9.

Senescence bypass screen identifies TBX2, which represses Cdkn2a (p19(ARF)) and
is amplified in a subset of human breast cancers.

Jacobs JJ(1), Keblusek P, Robanus-Maandag E, Kristel P, Lingbeek M, Nederlof PM, 
van Welsem T, van de Vijver MJ, Koh EY, Daley GQ, van Lohuizen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, The Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

To identify new immortalizing genes with potential roles in tumorigenesis, we
performed a genetic screen aimed to bypass the rapid and tight senescence arrest 
of primary fibroblasts deficient for the oncogene Bmi1. We identified the T-box
member TBX2 as a potent immortalizing gene that acts by downregulating Cdkn2a
(p19(ARF)). TBX2 represses the Cdkn2a (p19(ARF)) promoter and attenuates E2F1,
Myc or HRAS-mediated induction of Cdkn2a (p19(ARF)). We found TBX2 to be
amplified in a subset of primary human breast cancers, indicating that it might
contribute to breast cancer development.

PMID: 11062467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. EMBO J. 2000 Nov 1;19(21):5813-23.

Induction of cyclin E-cdk2 kinase activity, E2F-dependent transcription and cell 
growth by Myc are genetically separable events.

Beier R(1), Bürgin A, Kiermaier A, Fero M, Karsunky H, Saffrich R, Möröy T,
Ansorge W, Roberts J, Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumour Research, Emil-Mannkopff-Strabetae
2, 35033 Marburg, Germany.

The c-myc gene has been implicated in three distinct genetic programs regulating 
cell proliferation: control of cyclin E-cdk2 kinase activity, E2F-dependent
transcription and cell growth. We have now used p27(-/-) fibroblasts to dissect
these downstream signalling pathways. In these cells, activation of Myc
stimulates transcription of E2F target genes, S-phase entry and cell growth
without affecting cyclin E-cdk2 kinase activity. Both cyclin D2 and E2F2,
potential direct target genes of Myc, are induced in p27(-/-) MycER cells.
Ectopic expression of E2F2, but not of cyclin D2, induces S-phase entry, but, in 
contrast to Myc, does not stimulate cell growth. Our results show that
stimulation of cyclin E-cdk2 kinase, of E2F-dependent transcription and of cell
growth by Myc can be genetically separated from each other.

PMCID: PMC305784
PMID: 11060032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Oncogene. 2000 Oct 19;19(44):5054-62.

Dual functions of E2F-1 in a transgenic mouse model of liver carcinogenesis.

Conner EA(1), Lemmer ER, Omori M, Wirth PJ, Factor VM, Thorgeirsson SS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Division of Basic Sciences,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, MD 
20892, USA.

Deregulation of E2F transcriptional control has been implicated in oncogenic
transformation. Consistent with this idea, we recently demonstrated that during
hepatocarcinogenesis in c-myc/TGFalpha double transgenic mice, there is increased
expression of E2F-1 and E2F-2, as well as induction of putative E2F target genes.
Therefore, we generated transgenic mice expressing E2F-1 under the control of the
albumin enhancer/promoter to test the hypothesis that E2F family members may
contribute to liver tumor development. Overexpression of E2F-1 resulted in mild
but persistent increases in cell proliferation and death during postnatal liver
growth, and no increases in hepatic regenerative growth in response to partial
hepatectomy. Nevertheless, from 2 months postnatally E2F-1 transgenic mice
exhibited prominent hepatic histological abnormalities including preneoplastic
foci adjacent to portal tracts and pericentral large cell dysplasia. From 6 to 8 
months onward, there was an abrupt increase in the number of neoplastic nodules
('adenomas') with 100% incidence by 10 months. Some adenomas showed evidence of
malignant transformation, and two of six mice killed at 12 months showed
trabecular hepatocellular carcinoma. Endogenous c-myc was up-regulated in the
early stages of E2F-1 hepatocarcinogenesis, whereas p53 was overexpressed in the 
tumors, suggesting that both E2F-1-mediated proliferation and apoptosis are
operative but at different stages of hepatocarcinogenesis. In conclusion, E2F-1
overexpression in the liver causes dysplasia and tumors and suggests a
cooperation between E2F-1 and c-myc oncogenes during liver oncogenesis.

PMID: 11042693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Oncogene. 2000 Oct 5;19(42):4822-7.

p27kip1-independent cell cycle regulation by MYC.

Berns K(1), Martins C, Dannenberg JH, Berns A, te Riele H, Bernards R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis and Center for Biomedical Genetics, The
Netherlands' Cancer Institute, Amsterdam.

MYC transcription factors are potent stimulators of cell proliferation. It has
been suggested that the CDK-inhibitor p27kip1 is a critical G1 phase cell cycle
target of c-MYC. We show here that mouse embryo fibroblasts deficient for both
p27kip1 and the related p21cip1 are still responsive to stimulation by c-MYC and 
can be arrested in G1 by a dominant negative mutant of c-MYC. This growth arrest 
can be overruled by ectopic expression of E2F or adenovirus E1A, but not by a
mutant of E1A defective for binding to retinoblastoma family proteins. We show
that fibroblasts with a genetic disruption of all three retinoblastoma family
members (pRb, p107 and p130) are unresponsive to a dominant negative c-MYC
mutant. These data indicate that p27kip1 is not the only rate limiting cell cycle
target of c-MYC and suggest that regulation of E2F is also essential for c-MYC's 
mitogenic activity.

PMID: 11039898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nature. 2000 Oct 5;407(6804):645-8.

Role for the p53 homologue p73 in E2F-1-induced apoptosis.

Irwin M(1), Marin MC, Phillips AC, Seelan RS, Smith DI, Liu W, Flores ER, Tsai
KY, Jacks T, Vousden KH, Kaelin WG Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Brigham and Womens Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The transcription factor E2F-1 induces both cell-cycle progression and, in
certain settings, apoptosis. E2F-1 uses both p53-dependent and p53-independent
pathways to kill cells. The p53-dependent pathway involves the induction by E2F-1
of the human tumour-suppressor protein p14ARF, which neutralizes HDM2 (human
homologue of MDM2) and thereby stabilizes the p53 protein. Here we show that
E2F-1 induces the transcription of the p53 homologue p73. Disruption of p73
function inhibited E2F-1-induced apoptosis in p53-defective tumour cells and in
p53-/- mouse embryo fibroblasts. We conclude that activation of p73 provides a
means for E2F-1 to induce death in the absence of p53.

PMID: 11034215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Nature. 2000 Oct 5;407(6804):642-5.

A common E2F-1 and p73 pathway mediates cell death induced by TCR activation.

Lissy NA(1), Davis PK, Irwin M, Kaelin WG, Dowdy SF.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Pathology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis Missouri 63110, USA.

Strong stimulation of the T-cell receptor (TCR) on cycling peripheral T cells
causes their apoptosis by a process called TCR-activation-induced cell death
(TCR-AICD). TCR-AICD occurs from a late G1 phase cell-cycle check point
independently of the 'tumour suppressor' protein p53. Disruption of the gene for 
the E2F-1 transcription factor, an inducer of apoptosis, causes significant
increases in T-cell number and splenomegaly. Here we show that T cells undergoing
TCR-AICD induce the p53-related gene p73, another mediator of apoptosis, which is
hypermethylated in lymphomas. Introducing a dominant-negative E2F-1 protein or a 
dominant-negative p73 protein into T cells protects them from TCR-mediated
apoptosis, whereas dominant-negative E2F-2, E2F-4 or p53 does not. Furthermore,
E2F-1-null or p73-null primary T cells do not undergo TCR-mediated apoptosis
either. We conclude that TCR-AICD occurs from a late G1 cell-cycle checkpoint
that is dependent on both E2F-1 and p73 activities. These observations indicate
that, unlike p53, p73 serves to integrate receptor-mediated apoptotic stimuli.

PMID: 11034214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mech Dev. 2000 Oct;97(1-2):211-5.

E2F transcription factors are differentially expressed in murine gametes and
early embryos.

Palena A(1), Mangiacasale R, Magnano AR, Barberi L, Giordano R, Spadafora C,
Lavia P.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Genetica Evoluzionistica CNR, c/o Dipartimento di Genetica e
Biologia Molecolare, Università "La Sapienza", Via degli Apuli 4, 00185, Roma,
Italy.

We have examined the murine genes encoding transcription factors E2F1, -3, -5 and
-6 in gametes and early embryos. All genes are expressed as maternal transcripts 
and all are efficiently transcribed after the blastocyst stage. Between those two
stages, each E2F mRNA is transcribed with a distinctive and unique pattern. E2F
proteins are also differentially expressed and compartmentalized in
pre-implantation embryos.

PMID: 11025228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Jul 24;1492(2-3):341-52.

Transcription of the catalytic 180-kDa subunit gene of mouse DNA polymerase alpha
is controlled by E2F, an Ets-related transcription factor, and Sp1.

Izumi M(1), Yokoi M, Nishikawa NS, Miyazawa H, Sugino A, Yamagishi M, Yamaguchi
M, Matsukage A, Yatagai F, Hanaoka F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radioisotope Technology, RIKEN (The Institute of Physical and
CHemical Research), Saitama, Japan. mizumi@postman.riken.go.jp

We have isolated a genomic DNA fragment spanning the 5'-end of the gene encoding 
the catalytic subunit of mouse DNA polymerase alpha. The nucleotide sequence of
the upstream region was G/C-rich and lacked a TATA box. Transient expression
assays in cycling NIH 3T3 cells demonstrated that the GC box of 20 bp (at
nucleotides -112/-93 with respect to the transcription initiation site) and the
palindromic sequence of 14 bp (at nucleotides -71/-58) were essential for basal
promoter activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that Sp1 binds to
the GC box. We also purified a protein capable of binding to the palindrome and
identified it as GA-binding protein (GABP), an Ets- and Notch-related
transcription factor. Transient expression assays in synchronized NIH 3T3 cells
revealed that three variant E2F sites near the transcription initiation site (at 
nucleotides -23/-16, -1/+7 and +17/+29) had no basal promoter activity by
themselves, but were essential for growth-dependent stimulation of the gene
expression. These data indicate that E2F, GABP and Sp1 regulate the gene
expression of this principal replication enzyme.

PMID: 11004506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Oct;20(20):7751-63.

RB-dependent S-phase response to DNA damage.

Knudsen KE(1), Booth D, Naderi S, Sever-Chroneos Z, Fribourg AF, Hunton IC,
Feramisco JR, Wang JY, Knudsen ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio
45267-0521, USA. Erik.Knudsen@UC.edu

The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (RB) is a potent inhibitor of cell
proliferation. RB is expressed throughout the cell cycle, but its
antiproliferative activity is neutralized by phosphorylation during the G(1)/S
transition. RB plays an essential role in the G(1) arrest induced by a variety of
growth inhibitory signals. In this report, RB is shown to also be required for an
intra-S-phase response to DNA damage. Treatment with cisplatin, etoposide, or
mitomycin C inhibited S-phase progression in Rb(+/+) but not in Rb(-/-) mouse
embryo fibroblasts. Dephosphorylation of RB in S-phase cells temporally preceded 
the inhibition of DNA synthesis. This S-phase dephosphorylation of RB and
subsequent inhibition of DNA replication was observed in p21(Cip1)-deficient
cells. The induction of the RB-dependent intra-S-phase arrest persisted for days 
and correlated with a protection against DNA damage-induced cell death. These
results demonstrate that RB plays a protective role in response to genotoxic
stress by inhibiting cell cycle progression in G(1) and in S phase.

PMCID: PMC86358
PMID: 11003670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Oct;20(20):7624-33.

Loss of p19(ARF) eliminates the requirement for the pRB-binding motif in simian
virus 40 large T antigen-mediated transformation.

Chao HH(1), Buchmann AM, DeCaprio JA.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

At least three domains of simian virus 40 large T antigen (TAg) participate in
cellular transformation. The LXCXE motif of TAg binds to all members of the
retinoblastoma protein (pRB) family of tumor suppressors. The N-terminal 70
residues of TAg have significant homology to the J domain of Hsp40/DnaJ and
cooperate with the LXCXE motif to inactivate the pRB family. A bipartite
C-terminal domain of TAg binds to p53 and thereby disrupts the ability of p53 to 
act as a sequence-specific transcription factor. The contribution of these three 
domains of TAg to cellular transformation was evaluated in cells that contained
inactivating mutations in the pRB and p53 pathways. Cells that stably expressed
wild-type or selected mutant forms of TAg were generated in mouse embryo
fibroblasts (MEFs) containing homozygous deletions in the RB, INK4a, and ARF
loci. It was determined that the J domain, the LXCXE motif, and the p53-binding
domain of TAg were required for full transformation of wild-type and RB(-/-)
MEFs. In contrast, INK4a(-/-) MEFs that lacked expression of p16(INK4a) and
p19(ARF) and ARF(-/-) MEFs that lacked p19(ARF) but expressed p16(INK4a) acquired
anchorage-independent growth when expressing wild-type TAg or mutant derivatives 
that disrupted either the pRB-binding or p53-binding domain. The expression and
function of the pRB family members were not overly disrupted in ARF(-/-) MEFs
expressing LXCXE mutants of TAg. These results suggest that inactivating
mutations of p19(ARF) can relieve the requirement for the LXCXE motif in
TAg-mediated transformation and that TAg may have additional functions in
transformation.

PMCID: PMC86324
PMID: 11003658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Sep 26;97(20):10820-5.

Combinatorial roles for pRB, p107, and p130 in E2F-mediated cell cycle control.

Classon M(1), Salama S, Gorka C, Mulloy R, Braun P, Harlow E.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Building 149, 13th Street,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. Classon@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

Numerous studies have implicated the pRB family of nuclear proteins in the
control of cell cycle progression. Although over-expression experiments have
revealed that each of these proteins, pRB, p107, and p130, can induce a G(1) cell
cycle arrest, mouse knockouts demonstrated distinct developmental requirements
for these proteins, as well as partial functional redundancy between family
members. To study the mechanism by which the closely related pRB family proteins 
contribute to cell cycle progression, we generated 3T3 fibroblasts derived from
embryos that lack one or more of these proteins (pRB(-/-), p107(-/-), p130(-/-), 
pRB(-/-)/p107(-/-), pRB(-/-)/p130(-/-), and p107(-/-)/p130(-/-)). By comparing
the growth and cell cycle characteristics of these cells, we have observed clear 
differences in the manner in which they transit through the G(1) and S phases as 
well as exit from the cell cycle. Deletion of Rb, or more than one of the family 
members, results in a shortening of G(1) and a lengthening of S phase, as well as
a reduction in growth factor requirements. In addition, the individual cell lines
showed differential regulation of a subset of E2F-dependent gene promoters, as
well as differences in cell cycle-dependent kinase activity. Taken together,
these observations suggest that the closely related pRB family proteins affect
cell cycle progression through distinct biochemical mechanisms and that their
coordinated action may contribute to their diverse functions in various
physiological settings.

PMCID: PMC27107
PMID: 10995475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Gynecol Oncol. 2000 Sep;78(3 Pt 1):293-301.

Retrovirus-mediated delivery of HPV16 E7 antisense RNA inhibited tumorigenicity
of CaSki cells.

Choo CK(1), Ling MT, Suen CK, Chan KW, Kwong YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Cancer Research Centre, Queen
Mary Hospital, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR, China. 
ckchoo@hkucc.hku.hk

OBJECTIVE: In cervical cancer, high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) genes are
expressed solely in cancerous cells and have been proposed to be the most
important etiological factors for cervical cancer, thus making them suitable
targets for gene therapy. In this study, we aim to inactivate the HPV16 E7 in
CaSki cells and test the possibility of reducing the tumorigenicity of these
cells.
METHODS: The full-length HPV16 E7 cDNA was cloned in the pBabe-puro or pWZL-Hygro
retrovirus vector in reverse orientation and was stably transfected into CaSki
cells by replication-defective retrovirus infection giving rise to CaSki-E7AS and
CaSki-E7AS2X cells. Immunoprecipitation/Western analysis and real-time RT-PCR
were performed to document the levels of HPV16 E7 gene product. Flow cytometry
was performed to study changes in the cell cycle in response to reduced E7
protein. The expression of bcl-2, RB, and E2F-1 was studied using Western blot
analysis. Tumorigenicity of CaSki, CaSki-E7AS, and CaSki-E7AS2X cells was assayed
with subepidermal tumor growth in nude mice.
RESULTS: We have documented that the delivery of the antisense gene construct
resulted in the reduction of HPV16 E7 protein expression and cell proliferation
in CaSki cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated that these changes were accompanied 
by cell cycle arrest, up-regulation of RB, and down-regulation of E2F-1 and bcl-2
proteins. More importantly, dose-dependent transduction of the antisense HPV16E7 
construct was able to inhibit and/or retard the tumorigenicity of CaSki cells in 
vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Down-regulation of HPV16 E7 with antisense RNA is beneficial in
reducing the tumorigenicity of CaSki cells and can potentially be useful for
HPV-associated malignancy gene therapy.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10985883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Cell Growth Differ. 2000 Aug;11(8):417-24.

RING3 kinase transactivates promoters of cell cycle regulatory genes through E2F.

Denis GV(1), Vaziri C, Guo N, Faller DV.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Massachusetts
02118, USA. gdenis@bu.edu

RING3 is a novel, nuclear-localized, serine-threonine kinase that has elevated
activity in human leukemias. RING3 transforms NIH/3T3 cells and is activated by
mitogenic signals, all of which suggest that it may play a role in cell
cycle-responsive transcription. We tested this hypothesis with transient
transfection of RING3 into fibroblasts and assayed transactivation of the
promoters of cyclin D11 cyclin A, cyclin E, and dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr)
genes. RING3 transactivates these promoters in a manner dependent on ras
signaling. A kinase-deficient point mutant of RING3 does not transactivate.
Mutational analysis of the dhfr promoter reveals that transactivation also
depends on the presence of a functional E2F binding site. Furthermore, ectopic
expression of Rb protein, a negative regulator of E2F activity, suppresses the
RING3-dependent transactivation of this promoter. Consistent with a potential
role of E2F in RING3-dependent transcription, anti-RING3 immunoaffinity
chromatography or recombinant RING3 protein affinity chromatography of nuclear
extracts copurified a protein complex that contains E2F-1 and E2F-2. These data
suggest that RING3 is a potentially important regulator of E2F-dependent cell
cycle genes.

PMCID: PMC3968681
PMID: 10965846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Oncogene. 2000 Jul 6;19(29):3330-4.

A genetic screen to identify genes that rescue the slow growth phenotype of c-myc
null fibroblasts.

Berns K(1), Hijmans EM, Koh E, Daley GQ, Bernards R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, and Center for Biomedical Genetics, The 
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam.

The c-myc gene is frequently over-expressed in human cancers and is involved in
regulation of proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. c-Myc is a
transcription factor that acts primarily by regulating the expression of other
genes. However, it has been very difficult to identify bona fide c-Myc target
genes that explain its diverse biological activities. The recent generation of
c-myc deficient Rat1A fibroblasts with a profound and stable growth defect
provides a new system to search for genes that can substitute for c-myc in
proliferation. In this study, we have attempted to identify genes that rescue the
slow growth phenotype of c-myc null cells through introduction of a series of
potent cell cycle regulatory genes and several retroviral cDNA expression
libraries. None of the candidate genes tested, including SV40 T-antigen and
adenovirus E1A, caused reversal of the c-myc null growth defect. Furthermore,
extensive screens with high-complexity retroviral cDNA libraries from three
different tissue sources revealed that only c-myc and N-myc rescued the c-myc
null slow-growth phenotype. Our data support the notion that there are no
functional equivalents of the myc family of proto-oncogenes and also suggest that
there are no c-Myc-activated genes that alone can substitute for c-Myc in control
of cell proliferation.

PMID: 10918589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Gene Ther. 2000 Aug;7(15):1317-25.

Improved safety through tamoxifen-regulated induction of cytotoxic genes
delivered by Ad vectors for cancer gene therapy.

Pützer BM(1), Stiewe T, Crespo F, Esche H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology (Cancer Research), University of Essen, Medical
School, Germany.

The transfer of pro-apoptotic genes to tumors is one of the most promising
strategies for anticancer gene therapy. However, the use of potentially toxic
genes, such as tumor suppressor genes or apoptotic genes, needs controllable
transgene activation. To achieve regulation of the transgene at a desired time,
we developed an adenovirus (Ad) vector, in which the apoptotic activity of the
target gene has been made 4-OHT-dependent by fusion to the ligand binding-domain 
of the estrogen receptor (ER). For evaluation of the system in human tumor cells,
we used the E2F1 gene which encodes a transcription factor that triggers massive 
apoptosis in several human cancers. AdER-E2F1 expressed high levels of transgene 
over at least 1 week. Upon activation of E2F1 by the ligand 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen
(4-OHT) the ER-E2F1 fusion protein correctly translocated from the cytosol to the
nucleus, transactivated E2F-dependent promoters, and rapidly induced substantial 
E2F1-related toxicity. Finally, experiments in nude mice showed tightly regulated
tumor growth suppression in vivo. Taken together, our system represents a
powerful approach for tight regulation and rapid induction of cytotoxicity as the
major criteria for safe gene delivery.

PMID: 10918503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 29;275(39):30520-4.

A role for nuclear phospholipase Cbeta 1 in cell cycle control.

Faenza I(1), Matteucci A, Manzoli L, Billi AM, Aluigi M, Peruzzi D, Vitale M,
Castorina S, Suh PG, Cocco L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences, Cellular Signalling Laboratory, University 
of Bologna, Via Irnerio 48, I-40126 Bologna, Italy.

Phosphoinositide signaling resides in the nucleus, and among the enzymes of the
cycle, phospholipase C (PLC) appears as the key element both in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae and in mammalian cells. The yeast PLC pathway produces multiple
inositol polyphosphates that modulate distinct nuclear processes. The mammalian
PLCbeta(1), which localizes in the nucleus, is activated in insulin-like growth
factor 1-mediated mitogenesis and undergoes down-regulation during murine
erythroleukemia differentiation. PLCbeta(1) exists as two polypeptides of 150 and
140 kDa generated from a single gene by alternative RNA splicing, both of them
containing in the COOH-terminal tail a cluster of lysine residues responsible for
nuclear localization. These clues prompted us to try to establish the critical
nuclear target(s) of PLCbeta(1) subtypes in the control of cell cycle
progression. The results reveal that the two subtypes of PLCbeta(1) that localize
in the nucleus induce cell cycle progression in Friend erythroleukemia cells. In 
fact when they are overexpressed in the nucleus, cyclin D3, along with its kinase
(cdk4) but not cyclin E is overexpressed even though cells are serum-starved. As 
a consequence of this enforced expression, retinoblastoma protein is
phosphorylated and E2F-1 transcription factor is activated as well. On the whole 
the results reveal a direct effect of nuclear PLCbeta(1) signaling in G(1)
progression by means of a specific target, i.e. cyclin D3/cdk4.

PMID: 10913438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;20(16):5986-97.

C/EBPalpha inhibits cell growth via direct repression of E2F-DP-mediated
transcription.

Slomiany BA(1), D'Arigo KL, Kelly MM, Kurtz DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
South Carolina 29425, USA.

Using an inducible transcription system which allows the regulated expression of 
C/EBP isoforms in tissue culture cells, we have found that the ectopic expression
of C/EBPalpha, at a level comparable to that found in normal liver tissue, has a 
pronounced antimitogenic effect in mouse L cells and NIH 3T3 cells. The
inhibition of cell division by C/EBPalpha in mouse cells cannot be reversed by
simian virus 40 T antigen, by oncogenic ras, or by adenovirus E1a protein. When
expressed in thymidine kinase-deficient L cells or 3T3 cells, C/EBPalpha is
detected in a protein complex which binds to the E2F binding sites found in the
promoters of the genes for E2F-1 and dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR). Bacterially 
expressed C/EBPalpha has no affinity for these E2F sites, but when recombinant
C/EBPalpha is added to nuclear extracts from mouse fibroblasts, a new E2F binding
activity appears, which contains the C/EBPalpha protein. Using an
E2F-DP1-responsive promoter linked to a reporter gene, it can be shown that
C/EBPalpha directly inhibits the induction of this promoter by E2F-DP1 in
transient-transfection assays. Furthermore, C/EBPalpha can be shown to inhibit
the S-phase induction of the E2F and DHFR promoters in permanent cell lines.
These findings delineate a straightforward mechanism for C/EBPalpha-mediated cell
growth arrest through repression of E2F-DP-mediated S-phase transcription.

PMCID: PMC86075
PMID: 10913181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;20(16):5797-807.

Target gene specificity of E2F and pocket protein family members in living cells.

Wells J(1), Boyd KE, Fry CJ, Bartley SM, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

E2F-mediated transcription is thought to involve binding of an E2F-pocket protein
complex to promoters in the G(0) phase of the cell cycle and release of the
pocket protein in late G(1), followed by release of E2F in S phase. We have
tested this model by monitoring protein-DNA interactions in living cells using a 
formaldehyde cross-linking and immunoprecipitation assay. We find that E2F target
genes are bound by distinct E2F-pocket protein complexes which change as cells
progress through the cell cycle. We also find that certain E2F target gene
promoters are bound by pocket proteins when such promoters are transcriptionally 
active. Our data indicate that the current model applies only to certain E2F
target genes and suggest that Rb family members may regulate transcription in
both G(0) and S phases. Finally, we find that a given promoter can be bound by
one of several different E2F-pocket protein complexes at a given time in the cell
cycle, suggesting that cell cycle-regulated transcription is a stochastic, not a 
predetermined, process.

PMCID: PMC86057
PMID: 10913163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Exp Cell Res. 2000 Jul 10;258(1):53-64.

Transcriptional control elements of the rat thymidylate synthase promoter:
evolutionary conservation of regulatory features.

Lee Y(1), Johnson LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus 43210,
USA.

The sequence elements that are important for the transcription and regulation of 
the rat thymidylate synthase (TS) gene were analyzed. The rat TS promoter lacks a
TATA box and directs transcriptional initiation at multiple sites between 60 and 
20 nt upstream of the AUG translational start codon. Promoter deletion analyses
showed that the region between -100 and -42 nt relative to the AUG codon was both
necessary and sufficient for high level promoter activity and was designated the 
essential promoter region. The essential region also had bidirectional promoter
activity. Site-directed mutagenesis revealed that four elements were especially
important for promoter activity. These include Ets motifs at -85 and -50, an Sp1 
motif at -80, and an LSF motif that overlapped the upstream Ets and Sp1 motifs.
Inactivation of E2F motifs that are upstream and downstream of the essential
promoter region had no measurable effect on promoter activity in transient
transfection assays. The rat TS promoter region directed S-phase-specific
expression of a stably transfected minigene if a spliceable intron was included
in the transcribed region. When the intron was deleted or the E2F motifs were
inactivated, expression of the minigene changed very little during the G1 to S
transition.

PMID: 10912787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;20(15):5571-80.

Establishment of irreversible growth arrest in myogenic differentiation requires 
the RB LXCXE-binding function.

Chen TT(1), Wang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and the Cancer Center, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0322, USA.

The crystal structure of the A-B domain of RB has defined the binding pocket for 
the LXCXE peptide motif. Using the crystal structure as a guide, we have
inactivated the LXCXE-binding pocket by replacing N757 with Phe [to obtain
RB(N757F)]. RB(N757F) does not bind to viral oncoproteins but retains the ability
to bind and inhibit E2F. RB(N757F) is less effective than the wild-type RB
[RB(WT)] in repressing E2F-regulated transcription, and its repression activity
is not affected by trichostatin A, an inhibitor of histone deacetylases. However,
RB(N757F) is as effective as RB(WT) in suppressing cell growth. Interestingly,
RB(N757F) cannot establish an irreversible growth arrest in differentiated
myocytes. Differentiated myocytes with RB(WT) become refractory to serum. By
contrast, differentiated myocytes with RB(N757F) undergo DNA synthesis and
phosphorylate RB(N757F) in response to serum, despite a high level of p21Cip1
expression. Mutation of the phosphorylation sites in RB(N757F) rescued its defect
and allowed myocytes to permanently withdraw from the cell cycle. These results
demonstrate that it is possible to inactivate the LXCXE-binding pocket without
compromising the overall integrity of RB. Moreover, the LXCXE-binding pocket is
dispensable for the intrinsic growth suppression function of RB. However, the
LXCXE-binding function is essential for RB to establish the serum-refractory
state in differentiated myocytes.

PMCID: PMC86015
PMID: 10891495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Nat Genet. 2000 Jul;25(3):338-42.

DNMT1 forms a complex with Rb, E2F1 and HDAC1 and represses transcription from
E2F-responsive promoters.

Robertson KD(1), Ait-Si-Ali S, Yokochi T, Wade PA, Jones PL, Wolffe AP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Embryology, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Methylation of CpG islands is associated with transcriptional silencing and the
formation of nuclease-resistant chromatin structures enriched in hypoacetylated
histones. Methyl-CpG-binding proteins, such as MeCP2, provide a link between
methylated DNA and hypoacetylated histones by recruiting histone deacetylase, but
the mechanisms establishing the methylation patterns themselves are unknown.
Whether DNA methylation is always causal for the assembly of repressive chromatin
or whether features of transcriptionally silent chromatin might target
methyltransferase remains unresolved. Mammalian DNA methyltransferases show
little sequence specificity in vitro, yet methylation can be targeted in vivo
within chromosomes to repetitive elements, centromeres and imprinted loci. This
targeting is frequently disrupted in tumour cells, resulting in the improper
silencing of tumour-suppressor genes associated with CpG islands. Here we show
that the predominant mammalian DNA methyltransferase, DNMT1, co-purifies with the
retinoblastoma (Rb) tumour suppressor gene product, E2F1, and HDAC1 and that
DNMT1 cooperates with Rb to repress transcription from promoters containing
E2F-binding sites. These results establish a link between DNA methylation,
histone deacetylase and sequence-specific DNA binding activity, as well as a
growth-regulatory pathway that is disrupted in nearly all cancer cells.

PMID: 10888886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Blood. 2000 Jul 15;96(2):475-82.

Deregulated E2F-1 blocks terminal differentiation and loss of leukemogenicity of 
M1 myeloblastic leukemia cells without abrogating induction of p15(INK4B) and
p16(INK4A).

Amanullah A(1), Hoffman B, Liebermann DA.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology and Department of
Biochemistry, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

The transcription factor E2F-1 has been postulated to play a crucial role in the 
control of cell cycle progression because of its ability to be bound and
regulated by the retinoblastoma gene product (pRb). Exogenous expression of
E2F-1, under growth restrictive conditions, was shown to result in p53-dependent 
programmed cell death. The consequences of deregulated expression of E2F-1 on
terminal differentiation of hematopoietic cells in the absence of E2F-1-mediated 
apoptosis, as well as mechanistic insights into how deregulated E2F-1 may affect 
terminal differentiation, have not been established. The autonomously
proliferating M1 myeloblastic leukemia cell line, which is null for p53
expression and can be induced by interleukin-6 (IL-6) to undergo terminal
macrophage differentiation with concomitant loss of leukemogenicity, provides a
particularly attractive model system to address these issues. Deregulated and
continued expression of E2F-1 blocked the IL-6-induced terminal differentiation
program at an early blast stage, giving rise to immature cells, which continued
to proliferate without undergoing apoptosis and retained their leukemogenic
phenotype. Although E2F-1 blocked IL-6-mediated terminal differentiation and its 
associated growth arrest, it did not prevent the rapid induction of both
p15(INK4B) and p16(INK4A), inhibition of cdk4 kinase activity, and subsequent
hypophosphorylation of pRb. The results obtained imply that genetic alterations
that both impair p53 function and deregulate E2F-1 expression may render
hematopoietic cells refractory to the induction of differentiation and are,
thereby, likely to play a major role in the progression of leukemias. (Blood.
2000;96:475-482)

PMID: 10887108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(14):5129-39.

Selection of a dominant negative retinoblastoma protein (RB) inhibiting satellite
myoblast differentiation implies an indirect interaction between MyoD and RB.

Li FQ(1), Coonrod A, Horwitz M.

Author information: 
(1)Markey Molecular Medicine Center, Division of Medical Genetics, Department of 
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-7720, USA.

Satellite myoblasts serve as stem cells in postnatal skeletal muscle, but the
genes responsible for choosing between growth versus differentiation are largely 
undefined. We have used a novel genetic approach to identify genes encoding
proteins whose dominant negative inhibition is capable of interrupting the in
vitro differentiation of C2C12 murine satellite myoblasts. The screen is based on
fusion of a library of cDNA fragments with the lysosomal protease cathepsin B
(CB), such that the fusion protein intracellularly diverts interacting factors to
the lysosome. Among other gene fragments selected in this screen, including those
of known and novel sequence, is the retinoblastoma protein (RB) pocket domain.
This unique dominant negative form of RB allows us to genetically determine if
MyoD and RB associate in vivo. The dominant negative CB-RB fusion produces a
cellular phenotype indistinguishable from recessive loss of function RB
mutations. The fact that the dominant negative RB inhibits myogenic
differentiation in the presence of nonlimiting concentrations of either RB or
MyoD suggests that these two proteins do not directly interact. We further show
that the dominant negative RB inhibits E2F1 but cannot inhibit a forced E2F1-RB
dimer. Therefore, E2F1 is a potential mediator of the dominant negative
inhibition of MyoD by CB-RB during satellite cell differentiation. We propose
this approach to be generally suited to the investigation of gene function, even 
when little is known about the pathway being studied.

PMCID: PMC85962
PMID: 10866669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Neurochem. 2000 Jul;75(1):91-100.

The transcription factor E2F1 modulates apoptosis of neurons.

Hou ST(1), Callaghan D, Fournier MC, Hill I, Kang L, Massie B, Morley P, Murray
C, Rasquinha I, Slack R, MacManus JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biological Sciences, National Research Council Canada.
Neuroscience Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
sheng.hou.nrc.ca

The transcription factor E2F1 is known to mediate apoptosis in isolated quiescent
and postmitotic cardiac myocytes, and its absence decreases the size of brain
infarction following cerebral ischemia. To demonstrate directly that E2F1
modulates neuronal apoptosis, we used cultured cortical neurons to show a
temporal association of the transcription and expression of E2F1 in neurons with 
increased neuronal apoptosis. Cortical neurons lacking E2F1 expression (derived
from E2F1 -/- mice) were resistant to staurosporine-induced apoptosis as
evidenced by the significantly lower caspase 3-like activity and a lesser number 
of cells with apoptotic morphology in comparison with cortical cultures derived
from wild-type mice. Furthermore, overexpressing E2F1 alone using
replication-deficient recombinant adenovirus was sufficient to cause neuronal
cell death by apoptosis, as evidenced by the appearance of hallmarks of
apoptosis, such as the threefold increase in caspase 3-like activity and
increased laddered DNA fragmentation, in situ endlabeled DNA fragmentation, and
numbers of neuronal cells with punctate nuclei. Taken together, we conclude that 
E2F1 plays a key role in modulating neuronal apoptosis.

PMID: 10854251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Int J Dev Biol. 2000 Apr;44(3):267-77.

Expression of the E2F family of transcription factors during murine development.

Kusek JC(1), Greene RM, Nugent P, Pisano MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Craniofacial Biology, ULSD, University
of Louisville Birth Defects Center, KY 40292, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors plays a crucial role in the control of
cell cycle progression and regulation of cellular proliferation, both processes
fundamental to mammalian development. In the present study, we have examined the 
levels of expression of the six currently identified E2F proteins in murine
embryos/fetuses as a function of gestational age, compared the expression of
these six proteins in selected developing and adult tissues, and examined E2F
expression in the embryonic murine palate, a tissue in which perturbation of
proliferation is associated with induction of cleft palate. Our results indicate 
that: 1) multiple forms of individual E2F family members are present in
embryonic, fetal and adult cells/tissues; 2) each of the six E2Fs is expressed in
a tissue specific manner in both adult and embryonic/fetal organs; 3) certain
forms of individual E2F family members are preferentially detected in adult
tissues, whereas others are preferentially expressed in embryonic/fetal tissues; 
4) expression of the various E2Fs and their isoforms follows distinct temporal
patterns during murine gestation; and 5) individual E2F family members also
exhibit differential patterns of temporal expression during murine palatogenesis.

PMID: 10853823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 18;275(33):25358-64.

Induction and modulation of cerebellar granule neuron death by E2F-1.

O'Hare MJ(1), Hou ST, Morris EJ, Cregan SP, Xu Q, Slack RS, Park DS.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Growing evidence suggests that certain cell cycle regulators also mediate
neuronal death. Of relevance, cyclin D1-associated kinase activity is increased
and the retinoblastoma protein (Rb), a substrate of the cyclin D1-Cdk4/6 complex,
is phosphorylated during K(+) deprivation-evoked death of cerebellar granule
neurons (CGNs). Cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors block this death,
suggesting a requirement for the cyclin D1/Cdk4/6-Rb pathway. However, the
downstream target(s) of this pathway are not well defined. The transcription
factor E2F-1 is regulated by Rb and is reported to evoke death in proliferating
cells when overexpressed. Accordingly, we examined whether E2F-1 was sufficient
to evoke death of CGNs and whether it was required for death evoked by low K(+). 
We show that adenovirus-mediated expression of E2F-1 in CGNs results in apoptotic
death, which is independent of p53, dependent upon Bax, and associated with
caspase 3-like activity. In addition, we demonstrate that levels of E2F-1 mRNA
and protein increase during K(+) deprivation-evoked death. The increase in E2F-1 
protein is blocked by the CDK inhibitor flavopiridol. Finally, E2F-1-deficient
neurons are modestly resistant to death induced by low K(+). These results
indicate that E2F-1 expression is sufficient to promote neuronal apoptosis and
that endogenous E2F-1 modulates the death of CGNs evoked by low K(+).

PMID: 10851232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(13):4745-53.

Bcl-2 retards cell cycle entry through p27(Kip1), pRB relative p130, and altered 
E2F regulation.

Vairo G(1), Soos TJ, Upton TM, Zalvide J, DeCaprio JA, Ewen ME, Koff A, Adams JM.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne
Hospital, Victoria, Australia.

Independent of its antiapoptotic function, Bcl-2 can, through an undetermined
mechanism, retard entry into the cell cycle. Cell cycle progression requires the 
phosphorylation by cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) of retinoblastoma protein
(pRB) family members to free E2F transcription factors. We have explored whether 
retarded cycle entry is mediated by the Cdk inhibitor p27 or the pRB family. In
quiescent fibroblasts, enforced Bcl-2 expression elevated levels of both p27 and 
the pRB relative p130. Bcl-2 still slowed G(1) progression in cells deficient in 
pRB but not in those lacking p27 or p130. Hence, pRB is not required, but both
p27 and p130 are essential mediators. The ability of p130 to form repressive
complexes with E2F4 is implicated, because the retardation by Bcl-2 was
accentuated by coexpressed E2F4. A plausible relevant target of p130/E2F4 is the 
E2F1 gene, because Bcl-2 expression delayed E2F1 accumulation during G(1)
progression and overexpression of E2F1 overrode the Bcl-2 inhibition. Hence,
Bcl-2 appears to retard cell cycle entry by increasing p27 and p130 levels and
maintaining repressive complexes of p130 with E2F4, perhaps to delay E2F1
expression.

PMCID: PMC85901
PMID: 10848600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Oncogene. 2000 May 11;19(20):2430-7.

CBP/p300 histone acetyl-transferase activity is important for the G1/S
transition.

Ait-Si-Ali S(1), Polesskaya A, Filleur S, Ferreira R, Duquet A, Robin P, Vervish 
A, Trouche D, Cabon F, Harel-Bellan A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire 'Oncogenèse, Différenciation et Transduction du Signal' CNRS
IFC-01, 7 rue Guy Moquet, 94801 Villejuif, France.

Transforming viral proteins such as E1A which force quiescent cells into S phase 
have two essential cellular target proteins, Rb and CBP/p300. Rb regulates the
G1/S transition by controlling the transcription factor E2F. CBP/p300 is a
transcriptional co-activator with intrinsic histone acetyl-transferase activity. 
This activity is regulated in a cell cycle dependent manner and shows a peak at
the G1/S transition, suggesting a function for CBP/p300 in this crucial step of
the cell cycle. Here, we have artificially modulated CBP/p300 levels in
individual cells through microinjection of specific antibodies and expression
vectors. We show that CBP/p300 is required for cell proliferation and has an
essential function during the G1/S transition. Using the same microinjection
system and GFP-reporter vectors, we demonstrate that CBP/p300 is essential for
the activity of E2F, a transcription factor that controls the G1/S transition. In
addition, our results suggest that CBP HAT activity is required both for the G1/S
transition and for E2F activity. Thus CBP/p300 seems to be a versatile protein
involved in opposing cellular processes, which raises the question of how its
multiple activities are regulated.

PMID: 10828885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Adv Enzyme Regul. 2000;40:183-215.

Roles of poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation and PARP in apoptosis, DNA repair, genomic
stability and functions of p53 and E2F-1.

Smulson ME(1), Simbulan-Rosenthal CM, Boulares AH, Yakovlev A, Stoica B, Iyer S, 
Luo R, Haddad B, Wang ZQ, Pang T, Jung M, Dritschilo A, Rosenthal DS.

Author information: 
(1)Georgetown University School of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, 3900 Reservoir Rd, NW, Washington, DC 20007, USA.
smulson@bc.georgetown.edu

PMID: 10828352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Jun 6;97(12):6481-6.

CpG methylation as a mechanism for the regulation of E2F activity.

Campanero MR(1), Armstrong MI, Flemington EK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Harvard Medical School and
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney Street, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.

Regulation of gene expression in mammals through methylation of cytosine residues
at CpG dinucleotides is involved in the development and progression of tumors.
Because many genes that are involved in the control of cell proliferation are
regulated by members of the E2F family of transcription factors and because some 
E2F DNA-binding sites are methylated in vivo, we have investigated whether CpG
methylation can regulate E2F functions. We show here that methylation of E2F
elements derived from the dihydrofolate reductase, E2F1, and cdc2 promoters
prevents the binding of all E2F family members tested (E2F1 through E2F5). In
contrast, methylation of the E2F elements derived from the c-myc and c-myb
promoters minimally affects the binding of E2F2, E2F3, E2F4, and E2F5 but
significantly inhibits the binding of E2F1. Consistent with these studies, E2F3, 
but not E2F1, activates transcription through methylated E2F sites derived from
the c-myb and c-myc genes whereas both E2F1 and E2F3 fail to transactivate a
reporter gene that is under the control of a methylated dihydrofolate reductase
E2F site. Together, these data illustrate a means through which E2F activity can 
be controlled.

PMCID: PMC18629
PMID: 10823896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Oncogene. 2000 Apr 27;19(18):2257-68.

Exogenous E2F expression is growth inhibitory before, during, and after cellular 
transformation.

Lee TA(1), Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of 
Wisconsin Medical School, Madison 53706, USA.

To gain insight into the tumor suppressor properties of E2F1, we investigated
growth inhibition by the E2F family of transcription factors using a tissue
culture model system. We first show that exogenous E2F expression causes an 80%
decrease in NIH3T3 colony formation and activated c-Ha-Ras-mediated focus
formation. Inhibition of Ras-mediated transformation was dependent upon E2F DNA
binding activity but did not require amino- or carboxy-terminal E2F1 protein
interaction domains. Because E2F upregulation has been suggested to be associated
with a neoplastic phenotype, it was possible that increased E2F activity would
not be inhibitory to previously transformed cells. However, we found that
exogenous E2F was also inhibitory to growth of NIH3T3 cells previously
transformed by Ras or Neu. Further characterization revealed that exogenous E2F
expression is inhibitory at very early times after transfection, causing dramatic
losses in transfected cell populations. Interestingly, those few cells which do
establish appear to be unaffected by the overexpressed E2F. Therefore, we propose
that increased E2F activity may only be tolerated in a subset of cells which have
acquired specific alterations that are dominant over E2F-mediated growth
inhibition.

PMID: 10822376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Curr Biol. 2000 May 4;10(9):543-6.

The retinoblastoma-like protein p130 is involved in the determination of reserve 
cells in differentiating myoblasts.

Carnac G(1), Fajas L, L'honoré A, Sardet C, Lamb NJ, Fernandez A.

Author information: 
(1)IGH UPR 1142, Cell Biology Unit, Montpellier cedex 5, 34396, France.

During skeletal muscle differentiation, a subset of myoblasts remains quiescent
and undifferentiated but retains the capacity to self-renew and give rise to
differentiating myoblasts [1] [2] [3]: this sub-population of muscle cells was
recently termed 'reserve cells' [3]. In order to characterise genes that can
regulate the ratio between reserve cells and differentiating myoblasts, we
examined members of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor family - Rb, p107 and
p130 - an important family of negative regulators of E2F transcription factors
and cell cycle progression [4]. Although pRb and p107 positively regulate muscle 
cell differentiation [5] [6] [7], the role of p130 in muscle cells remains
unknown. We show here that p130 (protein and mRNA), but neither pRb nor p107,
preferentially accumulates during muscle differentiation in reserve cells. Also, 
p130 is the major Rb-family protein present in E2F complexes in this
sub-population of cells. Although forced expression of either p130 or pRb in
mouse C2 myoblasts efficiently blocked cell cycle progression, only p130
inhibited the differentiation program. Furthermore, muscle cells overexpressing
p130 had reduced levels of the muscle-promoting factor MyoD. In addition, p130
repressed the transactivation capacity of MyoD, an effect abolished by
co-transfection of pRb. Thus, we propose that p130, by blocking cell cycle
progression and differentiation, could be part of a specific pathway that defines
a pool of reserve cells during terminal differentiation.

PMID: 10801445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 May 17;1470(3):R49-59.

Molecular horizons of cancer therapeutics: 11th Pezcoller symposium.

Avantaggiati ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Elm and Carlton Street, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA. mla1@acsu.buffalo.edu

PMID: 10799750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Virol. 2000 Jun;74(11):4979-87.

Murine cytomegalovirus stimulates cellular thymidylate synthase gene expression
in quiescent cells and requires the enzyme for replication.

Gribaudo G(1), Riera L, Lembo D, De Andrea M, Gariglio M, Rudge TL, Johnson LF,
Landolfo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Microbiology, University of Turin, Turin,
Italy. gribaudo@molinette.unito.it

Herpesviruses accomplish DNA replication either by expressing their own
deoxyribonucleotide biosynthetic genes or by stimulating the expression of the
corresponding cellular genes. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) has adopted the latter
strategy to allow efficient replication in quiescent cells. In the present
report, we show that murine CMV (MCMV) infection of quiescent fibroblasts induces
both mRNA and protein corresponding to the cellular thymidylate synthase (TS)
gene, which encodes the enzyme that catalyzes the de novo synthesis of thymidylic
acid. The increase in TS gene expression was due to an increase in gene
transcription, since the activity of a reporter gene driven by the mouse TS
promoter was induced following MCMV infection. Mutagenesis of the potential
E2F-responsive element immediately upstream from the TS essential promoter region
abolished the virus-mediated stimulation of the TS promoter, suggesting that the 
transactivating activity of MCMV infection was E2F dependent. Cotransfection
experiments revealed that expression of the viral immediate-early 1 protein was
sufficient to mediate the increase in TS promoter activity. Finally, MCMV
replication and viral DNA synthesis were found to be inhibited by ZD1694, a
quinazoline-based folate analog that inhibits TS activity. These results
demonstrate that upregulation of cellular TS expression is required for efficient
MCMV replication in quiescent cells.

PMCID: PMC110849
PMID: 10799571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(10):3417-24.

E2F4 and E2F1 have similar proliferative properties but different apoptotic and
oncogenic properties in vivo.

Wang D(1), Russell JL, Johnson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, Science Park-Research Division, University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

Loss of retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor suppressor function, as occurs in many cancers,
leads to uncontrolled proliferation, an increased propensity to undergo
apoptosis, and tumorigenesis. Rb negatively regulates multiple E2F transcription 
factors, but the role of the different E2F family members in manifesting the
cellular response to Rb inactivation is unclear. To study the effect of
deregulated E2F4 activity on cell growth control and tumorigenesis, transgenic
mouse lines expressing the E2F4 gene under the control of a keratin 5 (K5)
promoter were developed, and their phenotypes were compared to those of
previously generated K5 E2F1 transgenic mice. In contrast to what has been
observed in vitro, ectopically expressed E2F4 was found to localize to the
nucleus and induce proliferation to an extent similar to that induced by E2F1 in 
transgenic tissue. Unlike E2F1, E2F4 does not induce apoptosis, and this
correlates with the differential abilities of these two E2F species to stimulate 
p19(ARF) expression in vivo. To examine the role of E2F4 in tumor development,
the mouse skin two-stage carcinogenesis model was utilized. Unlike E2F1
transgenic mice, E2F4 transgenic mice developed skin tumors with a decreased
latency and increased incidence compared to those characteristics in wild-type
controls. These findings demonstrate that while the effects of E2F1 and E2F4 on
cell proliferation in vivo are similar, their apoptotic and oncogenic properties 
are quite different.

PMCID: PMC85634
PMID: 10779331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Neurosci. 2000 May 1;20(9):3104-14.

Involvement of retinoblastoma family members and E2F/DP complexes in the death of
neurons evoked by DNA damage.

Park DS(1), Morris EJ, Bremner R, Keramaris E, Padmanabhan J, Rosenbaum M,
Shelanski ML, Geller HM, Greene LA.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, K1H
8M5, Canada. dpark@uottawa.ca

Neuronal death evoked by DNA damage requires cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (Cdk4) and
6 activity and is accompanied by elevation of cyclin D1-associated kinase
activity. Because Cdk4/6 phosphorylates retinoblastoma protein (pRb) family
members that then modulate the transcriptional activity of E2F/DP1 complexes, we 
examined the involvement of these components in DNA damage-evoked neuronal death.
Camptothecin induced rapid pRb and p107 phosphorylation at a Cdk4/6
phosphorylation site followed by selective loss of Rb and p107. The CDK inhibitor
flavopiridol suppressed pRb and p107 phosphorylation and loss, implicating CDK
activity in these events. Moreover, the loss of pRb and p107 appeared to be
mediated by caspases because it was blocked by general caspase inhibitors. The
role of phosphorylation and pRb and p107 loss in the death pathway was indicated 
by observations that virally mediated expression of pRb mutated at sites of
phosphorylation, including the Cdk4/6 site, inhibited death. Finally, expression 
of dominant-negative versions of DP1, known to compromise E2F transcriptional
activity, protects cortical neurons from death induced by camptothecin and
sympathetic neurons from death evoked by UV treatment. Taken together, these
results implicate the CDK-pRb/E2F/DP pathway as a required element in the
neuronal death evoked by DNA damage.

PMID: 10777774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Biol Chem. 2000 Apr 21;275(16):11553-60.

E2F1 mediates death of B-amyloid-treated cortical neurons in a manner independent
of p53 and dependent on Bax and caspase 3.

Giovanni A(1), Keramaris E, Morris EJ, Hou ST, O'Hare M, Dyson N, Robertson GS,
Slack RS, Park DS.

Author information: 
(1)Hoechst Marion Roussel, Neuroscience, Bridgewater, New Jersey 08807, USA.

Although B-amyloid (AB) is suggested to play an important role in Alzheimer's
disease, the mechanisms that control AB-evoked toxicity are unclear. We
demonstrated previously that the cell cycle-related cyclin-dependent kinase
4/6/retinoblastoma protein pathway is required for AB-mediated death. However,
the downstream target(s) of this pathway are unknown. We show here that neurons
lacking E2F1, a transcription factor regulated by the retinoblastoma protein, are
significantly protected from death evoked by AB. Moreover, p53 deficiency does
not protect neurons from death, indicating that E2F1-mediated death occurs
independently of p53. Neurons protected by E2F1 deficiency have reduced
Bax-dependent caspase 3-like activity. However, protection afforded by E2F1, Bax,
or caspase 3 deficiency is transient. In the case of E2F1, but not with Bax or
caspase 3 deficiency, delayed death is accompanied by DEVD-AFC cleavage activity.
Taken together, these results demonstrate the required role of E2F1, Bax, and
caspase 3 in AB evoked death, but also suggest the participation of elements
independent of these apoptosis regulators.

PMID: 10766769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cell Tissue Res. 2000 Feb;299(2):185-92.

Horizontal basal cell proliferation in the olfactory epithelium of transforming
growth factor-alpha transgenic mice.

Getchell TV(1), Narla RK, Little S, Hyde JF, Getchell ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, USA.

Transgenic mice in which overexpression of the transforming growth factor alpha
(TGF-alpha) gene was directed by the keratin-14 promoter were used to study the
regulation of cell cycle progression and proliferation in vivo in the olfactory
epithelium. The level of TGF-alpha protein was 73% greater in the nasal-olfactory
epithelium of the transgenic mice than in that of nontransgenic littermate
controls. Increased levels of TGF-alpha protein were accompanied by a 5.8-fold
selective increase in the proliferation of phenotypically characterized
horizontal basal cells in the transgenics compared with nontransgenics; in
contrast, globose basal cells exhibited a similar low level of proliferation in
both transgenics and nontransgenics. The level of expression of epidermal growth 
factor receptor protein, the receptor for TGF-alpha, was also upregulated in the 
transgenics, indicating a role for the ErbB tyrosine kinase receptor family in
the response to TGF-alpha in the olfactory epithelium. TGF-alpha overexpression
was also associated with increased expression of several early
cell-cycle-associated proteins, including the growth factor sensor cyclin D1,
retinoblastoma, E2F-1 transcription factor, and cyclin E, indicating the
progression of relatively quiescent progenitor cells in the G1 phase of the cell 
cycle toward the G1/S restriction point, after which the cells become refractive 
to mitogens. These results demonstrate a role for the growth factor TGF-alpha in 
the in vivo regulation of cell cycle progression and proliferation in the
mitotically active olfactory epithelium in these transgenic mice.

PMID: 10741459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Genes Dev. 2000 Mar 15;14(6):704-18.

PERP, an apoptosis-associated target of p53, is a novel member of the PMP-22/gas3
family.

Attardi LD(1), Reczek EE, Cosmas C, Demicco EG, McCurrach ME, Lowe SW, Jacks T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139 USA.

Erratum in
    Genes Dev 2000 Jul 15;14(14):1835.

The p53 tumor suppressor activates either cell cycle arrest or apoptosis in
response to cellular stress. Mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) provide a powerful
primary cell system to study both p53-dependent pathways. Specifically, in
response to DNA damage, MEFs undergo p53-dependent G(1) arrest, whereas MEFs
expressing the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein undergo p53-dependent apoptosis. As the
p53-dependent apoptosis pathway is not well understood, we sought to identify
apoptosis-specific p53 target genes using a subtractive cloning strategy. Here,
we describe the characterization of a gene identified in this screen, PERP, which
is expressed in a p53-dependent manner and at high levels in apoptotic cells
compared with G(1)-arrested cells. PERP induction is linked to p53-dependent
apoptosis, including in response to E2F-1-driven hyperproliferation. Furthermore,
analysis of the PERP promoter suggests that PERP is directly activated by p53.
PERP shows sequence similarity to the PMP-22/gas3 tetraspan membrane protein
implicated in hereditary human neuropathies such as Charcot-Marie-Tooth. Like
PMP-22/gas3, PERP is a plasma membrane protein, and importantly, its expression
causes cell death in fibroblasts. Taken together, these data suggest that PERP is
a novel effector of p53-dependent apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC316461
PMID: 10733530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Genes Dev. 2000 Mar 15;14(6):690-703.

E2f3 is critical for normal cellular proliferation.

Humbert PO(1), Verona R, Trimarchi JM, Rogers C, Dandapani S, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139 USA.

E2F is a family of transcription factors that regulate both cellular
proliferation and differentiation. To establish the role of E2F3 in vivo, we
generated an E2f3 mutant mouse strain. E2F3-deficient mice arise at one-quarter
of the expected frequency, demonstrating that E2F3 is important for normal
development. To determine the molecular consequences of E2F3 deficiency, we
analyzed the properties of embryonic fibroblasts derived from E2f3 mutant mice.
Mutation of E2f3 dramatically impairs the mitogen-induced, transcriptional
activation of numerous E2F-responsive genes. We have been able to identify a
number of genes, including B-myb, cyclin A, cdc2, cdc6, and DHFR, whose
expression is dependent on the presence of E2F3 but not E2F1. We further show
that a critical threshold level of one or more of the E2F3-regulated genes
determines the timing of the G(1)/S transition, the rate of DNA synthesis, and
thereby the rate of cellular proliferation. Finally, we show that E2F3 is not
required for cellular immortalization but is rate limiting for the proliferation 
of the resulting tumor cell lines. We conclude that E2F3 is critical for the
transcriptional activation of genes that control the rate of proliferation of
both primary and tumor cells.

PMCID: PMC316459
PMID: 10733529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 1999;18(3):333-43.

Melanoma cell autonomous growth: the Rb/E2F pathway.

Halaban R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA. ruth.halaban@yale.edu

Transformation of normal melanocytes to metastatic melanoma cells is
characterized by loss of dependency on external growth factors required for the
viability and proliferation of normal melanocytes. The molecular events that lead
to melanoma cell autonomous growth are not well defined, but are likely to
include sustained activity of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK2, CDK4 and CDK6) as a
result of loss of CDK inhibitors (such as p16INK4a and possibly p27KIP1), and
persistent upregulation of several cyclins (cyclin D1, cyclin A and cyclin E),
the positive regulators of CDKs. CDKs phosphorylate, and consequently, inactivate
the retinoblastoma family of tumor suppressor proteins (pRb, p107 and p130),
termed pocket proteins. The inactivation of pocket proteins liberates E2F
transcription factors from suppressive complexes ('free' E2F) that, in turn,
induces the continuous expression of target genes whose products promote cell
cycle progression. In normal melanocytes, external growth factors suppress the
activity of all three pocket proteins, allowing E2F activity to accumulate and
sustain transcription of target genes required for cell proliferation. In
contrast, in melanoma cells from advanced lesions, all three pocket proteins are 
highly phosphorylated and inactive, even in the absence of environmental
mitogens, and free E2F activity is constitutively high. Manipulations of normal
mouse melanocytes in vitro, and in vivo in transgenic mouse expressing ectopic
genes, further support the notion that growth rate, and release from dependency
on external mitogens, positively correlate with inactivation of pocket proteins. 
The latter has been accomplished by sustained cell surface receptor stimulation, 
such as constitutive high expression of a growth factor, or by sequestration with
dominantly acting viral proteins. Taken together, chronic
hyperphosphorlyation/inactivation of pRb, p107 and p130 is probably one of the
key events in converting growth-factor dependent normal melanocytes, to
autonomously growing melanoma cells. Since all pocket proteins are regulated by
CDKs activity, it is likely that agents that inhibit this class of enzymes will
be effective in treating melanoma patients.

PMID: 10721488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cell Growth Differ. 2000 Feb;11(2):91-8.

A role for E2F1 in the induction of apoptosis during thymic negative selection.

García I(1), Murga M, Vicario A, Field SJ, Zubiaga AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Sciences, University of 
the Basque Country, Spain.

Thymic negative selection is the process in which maturing thymocytes that
express T-cell receptors recognizing self are eliminated by apoptotic cell death.
The molecular mechanism by which this occurs is poorly understood. Notably, genes
involved in cell death, even thymocyte death, such as Fas, Fas-ligand, p53,
caspase-1, caspase-3, and caspase-9, and Bcl-2 have been found to not be required
for normal thymic negative selection. We have demonstrated previously that
E2F1-deficient mice have a defect in thymocyte apoptosis. Here we show that E2F1 
is required for normal thymic negative selection. Furthermore, we observed an
E2F1-dependent increase of p53 protein levels during the process of thymic clonal
deletion, which suggests that E2F1 regulates activation-induced apoptosis of
self-reactive thymocytes by a p53-dependent mechanism. In contrast, other
apoptotic pathways operating on developing thymocytes, such as
glucocorticoid-induced cell death, are not mediated by E2F1. The T lymphocytes
that escape thymic negative selection migrate to the peripheral immune system but
do not appear to be autoreactive, indicating that there may exist
E2F1-independent mechanisms of peripheral tolerance, which protect mice from
developing an autoimmune response. We expect that E2F1-deficient mice will
provide a useful tool for understanding the molecular mechanism of and the
immunological importance of thymic negative selection.

PMID: 10714765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Oncogene. 2000 Mar 2;19(10):1307-17.

Cell cycle basis for the onset and progression of c-Myc-induced,
TGFalpha-enhanced mouse mammary gland carcinogenesis.

Liao DJ(1), Natarajan G, Deming SL, Jamerson MH, Johnson M, Chepko G, Dickson RB.

Author information: 
(1)Vincent T Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center, 3970
Reservoir Road NW, Washington DC 20007, USA.

Using single and double transgenic mouse models, we investigated how c-Myc
modulates the mammary epithelial cell cycle to induce cancer and how TGFalpha
enhanced the process. In c-myc transgenic mice, c-myc expression was high in the 
hyperplastic mammary epithelium and in the majority of tumor areas. However, the 
tumors displayed focal areas of low expression of c-myc but high rates of
proliferation. In contrast to E2F1 and cyclin A2, which were induced and
co-localized with c-myc expression, induction of cyclins D1 and E occurred only
in these tumor foci. Overexpression of cyclin D1 also occurred in the
hyperplastic epithelium of tgfalpha-single and tgfalpha/c-myc-double transgenic
mice. In tgfalpha/c-myc tumors, cells positive for cyclins D1 and E were randomly
spread, without showing a reciprocal relationship to c-myc expression. In
contrast to c-myc tumors, most tgfalpha/c-myc tumors showed undetectable levels
of retinoblastoma protein (pRB), and the loss of pRB occurred in some cases at
the mRNA level. These results suggest that E2F1 and cyclin A2 may be induced by
c-Myc to mediate the onset of mammary cancer, whereas overexpression of cyclins
D1 and E may occur later to facilitate tumor progression. TGFalpha may play its
synergistic role, at least in part, by inducing cyclin D1 and facilitating the
loss of pRB.

PMID: 10713672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Apr 1;28(7):1525-34.

Cloning and characterization of the 5'-upstream sequence governing the cell
cycle-dependent transcription of mouse DNA polymerase alpha 68 kDa subunit gene.

Nishikawa NS(1), Izumi M, Uchida H, Yokoi M, Miyazawa H, Hanaoka F.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Physiology Laboratory, Wako, Japan.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res 2000 Jun 15;28(12):following 2454.

We have isolated the genomic DNA fragment spanning the 5-end and the first four
exons encoding the 68 kDa subunit (p68) of the mouse DNA polymerase alpha-primase
complex [corrected]. The p68 promoter region lacks TATA and CAAT boxes, but
contains a GC-rich sequence, two palindrome sequences and two putative
E2F-binding sites [corrected]. A series of transient expression assays using a
luciferase reporter gene indicated that a region from nucleotide position -89 to 
-30 (-89/-30) with respect to the transcription initiation site is crucial for
basal transcription of the p68 gene in proliferating NIH 3T3 cells. In
particular, part of the GC-rich sequence (-57/-46) and the palindrome (-81/-62)
elements were necessary for promoter activity, both of which share homology with 
the E-box sequence. Gel mobility shift assays using NIH 3T3 nuclear extracts
revealed that the upstream stimulatory factor, known as an E-box-binding protein,
binds to these sites. Moreover, we observed binding of E2F to two sites near the 
transcription initiation site (-11/-3 and +9/+16). A transient luciferase
expression assay using synchronized NIH 3T3 cells in G(0)phase revealed that
these E2F sites are essential for transcription induction of the p68 gene after
serum stimulation, but are dispensable for basal transcription. These results
indicate that growth-dependent regulation of transcription of the mouse p68 and
p180 genes is mediated by a common factor, E2F; however, basal transcription of
the genes, interestingly, is regulated by different transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC102782
PMID: 10710418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Carcinog. 2000 Mar;27(3):151-7.

The paradox of E2F1: oncogene and tumor suppressor gene.

Johnson DG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park-Research Division, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

Cancer cells often contain mutations that lead to the loss of retinoblastoma
tumor suppressor (Rb) function and the activation of E2F-dependent transcription.
As a result, proliferation is deregulated, and sensitivity to apoptotic stimuli
is increased. In cell culture studies, the transcription factor E2F1 has been
shown to be equally adept at inducing proliferation and apoptosis. Several groups
using mouse models have been examining how these E2F1-regulated processes impact 
the development of cancer. The conclusion from these studies is that E2F1 can
function as both oncogene and tumor suppressor gene and that both positive and
negative effects on tumorigenesis can be observed whether E2F1 is absent or
overexpressed. These findings are discussed in the context of a model in which
pathways controlling cell-cycle progression and apoptosis are intimately linked.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10708476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Oncogene. 2000 Feb 17;19(7):961-4.

A role for E2F1 in Ras activation of p21(WAF1/CIP1) transcription.

Gartel AL(1), Najmabadi F, Goufman E, Tyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois College of Medicine, Department of Genetics, M/C 669,
900 South Ashland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

We recently reported that E2F1 could transactivate the p21 promoter via
cis-acting elements between -119 to +16 bp of the p21 gene. Here we show that
activated V12-H-Ras can induce the p21 promoter through the same region of the
p21 promoter by a p53-independent mechanism in NIH3T3 cells. In contrast,
activated Ras was not able to induce the p21 promoter in E2F1-/- fibroblasts,
suggesting that E2F1 is required for induction of the p21 promoter by activated
Ras. Cotransfection of increasing concentrations of dominant negative E2F1 alone,
or with dominant negative DP1 into NIH3T3 cells suppressed induction of the p21
promoter by activated Ras. These data suggest that p53-independent induction of
the p21 promoter by activated Ras is mediated at least in part by E2F1. Oncogene 
(2000) 19, 961 - 964.

PMID: 10702805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Oncogene. 2000 Feb 10;19(6):801-9.

v-Abl utilizes multiple mechanisms to drive G1/S progression in fibroblasts.

Coutts M(1), Zou X, Calame K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Transformation of 3T3 fibroblasts by the v-Abl tyrosine kinase replaces mitogenic
and adhesion signals normally required for cell cycle progression. A 3T3 cell
line conditionally transformed with v-Abl has been used to study v-Abl's effects 
on cell cycle in the context of either serum depletion or absence of adhesion
signals. We show that E2F-dependent mRNAs, encoding proteins required for cell
cycle progression, are induced by v-Abl. In addition, we identify two previously 
unknown targets of v-Abl signaling: (1) cyclin D1 and D2 mRNAs are induced upon
v-Abl activation; and (2) the CDK inhibitor p27 is decreased upon v-Abl
activation.

PMID: 10698498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 3;275(9):6337-45.

Cdk2-dependent and -independent pathways in E2F-mediated S phase induction.

Arata Y(1), Fujita M, Ohtani K, Kijima S, Kato JY.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, 8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0101, Japan.

The transcription factor E2F plays an important role in G(1) to S phase
transition in the higher eukaryotic cell cycle. Although a number of
E2F-inducible genes have been identified, the biochemical cascades from E2F to
the S phase entry remain to be investigated. In this study, we generated stably
transfected mouse NIH3T3 cells that express exogenous human E2F-1 under the
control of a heavy metal-inducible metallothionein promoter and analyzed the
molecular mechanism of the E2F-1-mediated initiation of chromosomal DNA
replication. Ectopic E2F-1 expression in cells arrested in G(0)/G(1) by serum
deprivation enabled them to progress through G(1) and to enter S phase. During
the G(1) progression, mouse cyclin E, but little of cyclin D1, was induced to
express, which subsequently activated Cdk2. Experiments using the Cdk inhibitory 
proteins p27, p18, and p19 proved that the activity of Cdk2, but not of Cdk4, was
required for S phase entry mediated by E2F-1. Minichromosome maintenance proteins
(MCM) 4 and 7, the components of the DNA-replication initiation complex (RC),
were constitutively expressed during the cell cycle, although the MCM genes are
well known E2F-inducible genes. However, tight association of these two proteins 
with chromatin depended upon ectopic E2F-1 expression. In contrast, the Cdc45
protein, another RC component, which turned out to be a transcriptional target of
E2Fs, was induced to express and subsequently bound to chromatin in response to
E2F-1. Experiments utilizing a chemical Cdk-specific inhibitor, butyrolactone I, 
revealed that Cdk2 activity was required only for chromatin binding of the Cdc45 
proteins, and not for the expression of Cdc45 or chromatin binding of MCM4 and
-7. These results indicate that at least two separate pathways function
downstream of E2F to initiate S phase; one depends upon the activity of Cdk2 and 
the other does not.

PMID: 10692433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Mar;20(6):2186-97.

Apoptotic and growth-promoting activity of E2F modulated by MDM2.

Loughran O(1), La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, United
Kingdom.

E2F integrates and coordinates cell cycle progression with the transcription
apparatus through its cyclical interactions with important regulators of cellular
proliferation, such as pRb, cyclins, and cdk's. Physiological E2F is a
heterodimeric transcription factor composed of an E2F and a DP family member, and
while E2F proteins can stimulate proliferation, certain members of the family are
known to be endowed with growth-inhibitory and tumor suppressor-like activity. We
have investigated the product of the human mdm2 oncogene, hDM2, and report on its
ability to regulate E2F-dependent apoptosis in a fashion that is independent of
p53. hDM2 can prevent p53(-/-) cells from entering E2F-dependent apoptosis, an
outcome that is dependent upon the presence of the DP subunit. Cells rescued from
apoptosis possess lower levels of E2F subunits, although the rescued cells show
an increase in DNA synthesis and possess enhanced viability that reflects
cooperation between E2F-DP and hMD2. Furthermore, the regulation of E2F activity 
correlates with an hDM2-dependent effect on the intracellular distribution of
DP-1, since hDM2 causes the nuclear accumulation of DP-1. The control of E2F by
hDM2 therefore has certain parallels with the targeted degradation by MDM2 of
p53. However, the domains in hDM2 required for the regulation of E2F activity can
be distinguished from those necessary for p53 degradation, suggesting that
control of E2F and p53 by hDM2 may be mechanistically distinct. These experiments
define a new level of interplay between E2F and hDM2 whereby hDM2 has a profound 
impact on the physiological consequences of E2F activation. They suggest that the
oncogenic properties of hDM2 may in part be mediated by an antiapoptotic activity
that converts E2F from a negative to a positive regulator of cell cycle
progression and thereby retains E2F at a level that contributes to a continual
state of growth stimulation.

PMCID: PMC110835
PMID: 10688665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 11;275(6):4532-6.

Regulation of BRCA1 expression by the Rb-E2F pathway.

Wang A(1), Schneider-Broussard R, Kumar AP, MacLeod MC, Johnson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

Inheritance of a mutant allele of the breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA1
confers increased risk of developing breast and ovarian cancers. Likewise,
inheritance of a mutant allele of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene (RB1)
results in the development of retinoblastoma and/or osteosarcoma, and both
alleles are often mutated or inactivated in sporadic forms of these and other
cancers. We now demonstrate that the product of the RB1 gene, Rb, regulates the
expression of the murine Brca1 and human BRCA1 genes through its ability to
modulate E2F transcriptional activity. The Brca1 gene is identified as an in vivo
target of E2F1 in a transgenic mouse model. The Brca1 promoter contains E2F
DNA-binding sites that mediate transcriptional activation by E2F1 and repression 
by Rb. Moreover, ectopic expression of cyclin D1 and Cdk4 can stimulate the Brca1
promoter in an E2F-dependent manner, and this is inhibited by coexpression of the
p16(INK4a) cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor. The human BRCA1 promoter also
contains a conserved E2F site and is similarly regulated by E2F1 and Rb. This
functional link between the BRCA1 and Rb tumor suppressors may provide insight
into the mechanism by which BRCA1 inactivation contributes to cancer development.

PMID: 10660629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 11;275(6):4435-44.

Stable expression of a dominant negative mutant of CCAAT binding factor/NF-Y in
mouse fibroblast cells resulting in retardation of cell growth and inhibition of 
transcription of various cellular genes.

Hu Q(1), Maity SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The heterotrimeric CCAAT-binding factor CBF specifically interacts with the CCAAT
motif present in the proximal promoters of numerous mammalian genes. To
understand the in vivo function of CBF, a dominant negative mutant of CBF-B
subunit that inhibits DNA binding of wild type CBF was stably expressed in mouse 
fibroblast cells under control of tetracycline-responsive promoter. Expression of
the mutant CBF-B but not the wild-type CBF-B resulted in retardation of
fibroblast cell growth. The analysis of cell growth using bromodeoxyuridine
labeling showed that expression of the mutant CBF-B decreased the number of cells
entering into S phase, and also delayed induction of S phase in the quiescent
cells after serum stimulation, thus indicating that the inhibition of CBF binding
prolonged the progression of S phase in fibroblasts. These results provide direct
evidence for the first time that CBF is an important regulator of fibroblast
growth. The inhibition of CBF binding reduced expression of various cellular
genes including the alpha2(1) collagen, E2F1, and topoisomerase IIalpha genes
which promoters contain the CBF-binding site. This result implied that expression
of many other genes which promoters contain CBF-binding site was also decreased
by the inhibition of CBF binding, and that the decreased expression of multiple
cellular genes possibly caused the retardation of fibroblast cell growth.

PMID: 10660616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Feb 14;1470(1):R21-8.

Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology: 'The molecular basis of
cancer'. Organizers: Carol L. Prives and George F. Vande Woude, Taos, NM, 15-21
March 1999.

Wang JY(1), Kolodner RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and the Cancer Center, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0322, USA. jywang@ucsd.edu

The Keystone Symposium on the Molecular Basis of Cancer was an excellent meeting,
which stimulated the exchange of a great deal of information. This report was
prepared to organize some of the results that provided new insights into the
regulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis. We were unable to report on all
of the talks and posters due mostly to our limited capacity to absorb and digest 
the large amount of results presented at the meeting. We apologize to those whose
results were not covered in this report.

PMID: 10656992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 28;275(4):2943-50.

Aromatic hydrocarbon receptor interaction with the retinoblastoma protein
potentiates repression of E2F-dependent transcription and cell cycle arrest.

Puga A(1), Barnes SJ, Dalton TP, Chang Cy, Knudsen ES, Maier MA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Genetics, Department of Environmental Health,
University of Cincinnati Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0056, USA.
Alvaro.Puga@UC.EDU

Polyhalogenated aromatic hydrocarbons, of which 2,3,7, 8-tetrachloro-p-dioxin
(TCDD) is the prototype compound, elicit a variety of toxic, teratogenic, and
carcinogenic responses in exposed animals and in humans. In cultured cells, TCDD 
shows marked effects on the regulation of cell cycle progression, including
thymocyte apoptosis, induction of keratinocyte proliferation and terminal
differentiation, and inhibition of estrogen-dependent proliferation in breast
cancer cells. The presence of an LXCXE domain in the dioxin aromatic hydrocarbon 
receptor (AHR), suggested that the effects of TCDD on cell cycle regulation might
be mediated by protein-protein interactions between AHR and the retinoblastoma
protein (RB). Using the yeast two-hybrid system, AHR and RB were in fact shown to
bind to each other. In vitro pull-down experiments with truncated AHR peptides
indicated that at least two separate AHR domains form independent complexes with 
hypophosphorylated RB. Coimmunoprecipitation of whole cell lysates from human
breast carcinoma MCF-7 cells, which express both proteins endogenously, revealed 
that AHR associates with RB in vivo only after receptor transformation and
nuclear translocation. However, the AHR nuclear translocator and transcriptional 
heterodimerization partner, is not required for (nor is it a part of) the AHR.RB 
complexes detected in vitro. Ectopic expression of AHR and RB in human
osteosarcoma SAOS-2 cells, which lack endogenous expression of both proteins,
showed that AHR synergizes with RB to repress E2F-dependent transcription and to 
induce cell cycle arrest. Furthermore, AHR partly blocked T-antigen-mediated
reversal of RB-dependent transcriptional repression. These results uncover a
potential function for the AHR in cell cycle regulation and suggest that this
function may be that of serving as an environmental sensor that signals cell
cycle arrest when cells are exposed to certain environmental toxicants.

PMID: 10644764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 21;275(3):1715-22.

A novel DNA damage checkpoint involving post-transcriptional regulation of cyclin
A expression.

Guo N(1), Faller DV, Vaziri C.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

The intracellular metabolism of many carcinogenic polycyclic aryl hydrocarbons
(PAHs, typified by the ubiquitous pollutant benzo[a]pyrene or B[a]P) generates
electrophilic products that react covalently with genomic DNA. Cells that acquire
PAH-induced DNA damage undergo growth arrest in a p53-independent manner (Vaziri,
C., and Faller, D. V. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 2762-2769). In this report we
have investigated the molecular basis of PAH-induced cell cycle arrest. Mitogenic
signaling events involving cyclins D and E, Rb phosphorylation, and
transcriptional activation of E2F-responsive genes (including cyclin E and cyclin
A) were unaffected in cells containing PAH-damaged DNA. However, PAH-induced
growth arrest was associated with post-transcriptional decreases in cyclin A
expression. Mitogen-induced expression of cyclin B, an event that is temporally
distal to cyclin A expression, was also inhibited in PAH-treated cells. The
PAH-induced cell cycle block was transient, and arrested cells resumed DNA
synthesis after a prolonged ( approximately 20 h) delay. Resumption of DNA
synthesis in PAH-treated cells occurred concomitant with elevated expression of
cyclins A and B. PAH-induced cell cycle arrest was overcome by ectopically
expressed cyclin A (encoded by a recombinant adenovirus in transiently infected
cells). Overall, our results suggest the existence of a DNA damage checkpoint
pathway that arrests cell cycle progression via post-transcriptional control of
cyclin A expression.

PMID: 10636867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cell Growth Differ. 1999 Dec;10(12):829-38.

A role for E2F1 in the induction of ARF, p53, and apoptosis during thymic
negative selection.

Zhu JW(1), DeRyckere D, Li FX, Wan YY, DeGregori J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver 80262, USA.

E2F transcriptional activity controls the expression of many of the genes
required for G1 to S phase progression. E2F1, one member of the E2F family, plays
an important role in the induction of apoptosis. We have examined the role of the
E2F1 transcription factor in apoptosis during T-cell maturation in the thymus. We
show that E2F1 is required for the apoptosis of autoimmune immature T cells
during thymic negative selection in vivo. This T-cell receptor-mediated apoptosis
coincides with the E2F1-dependent increase of p19-ARF mRNA and p53 protein
levels. In contrast, E2F1 is not required for the induction of apoptosis by
glucocorticoids or DNA damage. These results demonstrate a specific role for
E2F1, which triggers a pathway leading to ARF and p53 induction, in a
physiological apoptosis pathway that is uncoupled from a normal proliferative
event.

PMID: 10616908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Mol Cell. 1999 Nov;4(5):771-81.

E2F-1 potentiates cell death by blocking antiapoptotic signaling pathways.

Phillips AC(1), Ernst MK, Bates S, Rice NR, Vousden KH.

Author information: 
(1)ABL Basic Research Program, National Cancer Institute-Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors plays an essential role in promoting cell
cycle progression, and one member of the family, E2F-1, is also capable of
inducing apoptosis. We show here that E2F-1 can induce apoptosis by a death
receptor-dependent mechanism, by downregulating TRAF2 protein levels and
inhibiting activation of antiapoptotic signals including NF-kappa B. In this way,
E2F-1 expression can lead to the sensitization of cells to apoptosis by a number 
of agents independently of p53. Deregulation of E2F-1 activity occurs in the
majority of human tumors, and the ability of E2F-1 to inhibit antiapoptotic
signaling may contribute to the enhanced sensitivity of transformed cells to
chemotherapeutic agents.

PMID: 10619024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jan;20(2):672-83.

Cyclin D1 is required for transformation by activated Neu and is induced through 
an E2F-dependent signaling pathway.

Lee RJ(1), Albanese C, Fu M, D'Amico M, Lin B, Watanabe G, Haines GK 3rd, Siegel 
PM, Hung MC, Yarden Y, Horowitz JM, Muller WJ, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, The Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

The neu (c-erbB-2) proto-oncogene encodes a tyrosine kinase receptor that is
overexpressed in 20 to 30% of human breast tumors. Herein, cyclin D1 protein
levels were increased in mammary tumors induced by overexpression of wild-type
Neu or activating mutants of Neu in transgenic mice and in MCF7 cells
overexpressing transforming Neu. Analyses of 12 Neu mutants in MCF7 cells
indicated important roles for specific C-terminal autophosphorylation sites and
the extracellular domain in cyclin D1 promoter activation. Induction of cyclin D1
by NeuT involved Ras, Rac, Rho, extracellular signal-regulated kinase, c-Jun
N-terminal kinase, and p38, but not phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. NeuT induction
of the cyclin D1 promoter required the E2F and Sp1 DNA binding sites and was
inhibited by dominant negative E2F-1 or DP-1. Neu-induced transformation was
inhibited by a cyclin D1 antisense or dominant negative E2F-1 construct in Rat-1 
cells. Growth of NeuT-transformed mammary adenocarcinoma cells in nude mice was
blocked by the cyclin D1 antisense construct. These results demonstrate that
E2F-1 mediates a Neu-signaling cascade to cyclin D1 and identify cyclin D1 as a
critical downstream target of neu-induced transformation.

PMCID: PMC85165
PMID: 10611246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Oncogene. 1999 Nov 4;18(46):6209-21.

Granulocytic differentiation of myeloid progenitor cells by p130, the
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor homologue.

Mori A(1), Higashi H, Hoshikawa Y, Imamura M, Asaka M, Hatakeyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer
Research, Tokyo, Japan.

The retinoblastoma protein (pRB) and the related pocket proteins, p107 and p130, 
play crucial roles in mammalian cell cycle control. Recent studies indicate that 
these pocket proteins are also involved in cellular differentiation processes. We
demonstrate in this work that the pRB-related p130 selectively accumulates during
the in vitro differentiation of the myeloid progenitor cell, 32Dcl3, into
granulocyte in response to granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF). This
G-CSF-dependent granulocytic differentiation is blocked by the adenovirus E1A
oncoprotein, which binds to and inactivates the pRB family of pocket proteins
including p130. Furthermore, enforced overexpression of p130 but not pRB inhibits
the myeloid cell proliferation that is concomitantly associated with granulocytic
differentiation morphologically characterized by nuclear segmentation. However,
simple G1-cell cycle arrest induced by cytokine deprivation or ectopic
overexpression of the p27 cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, or inhibition of E2F
activities by dominant negative DP-1 is not sufficient to trigger granulocytic
differentiation. The differentiation-promoting activity of p130 in myeloid cells 
requires both the pocket domain and the spacer domain. Our results indicate that 
the pRB-related p130 plays a critical role in myeloid cell differentiation and
suggest that coupling of cell cycle exit with the cellular differentiation
program may be specifically achieved by p130.

PMID: 10597219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Dec;19(12):8442-50.

Distinct cellular factors regulate the c-myb promoter through its E2F element.

Campanero MR(1), Armstrong M, Flemington E.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard University and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Most E2F-driven promoters are transiently activated around the G(1)/S transition.
Although the promoter for the c-myb proto-oncogene harbors an E2F element, it is 
induced early in G(1) following entry into the cell cycle. Furthermore, this
promoter remains active throughout subsequent cell cycles. Since E2F sites
function as repressor elements during G(1) (due to the association of pRb with
E2F factors), we investigated whether the E2F element in the c-myb promoter is
regulated differently than E2F elements in promoters that are repressed during
G(1). By gel shift analysis, the E2F element from the c-myb promoter was found to
form a unique complex, referred to as E2Fmyb-sp, which was not observed with E2F 
elements from several other promoters. Antibodies to DP-1, E2F1 to -5, p107, or
pRb failed to either supershift or block E2Fmyb-sp complex formation. Methylation
interference experiments indicate that the DNA contact residues for the E2Fmyb-sp
complex are distinct from but overlapping with residues required for the binding 
of E2F proteins. In addition to the identification of E2Fmyb-sp, we have found
that SP-1 binds to the c-myb E2F element. Functional studies revealed that
E2Fmyb-sp and/or SP-1 are required to achieve full activation of the c-myb
promoter in different cell types and to maintain elevated expression of the c-myb
promoter during G(1) in NIH 3T3 cells. These studies demonstrate that E2F
elements can be regulated differently through the binding of unique sets of
proteins.

PMCID: PMC84947
PMID: 10567569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Nat Cell Biol. 1999 May;1(1):14-9.

Interaction between ubiquitin-protein ligase SCFSKP2 and E2F-1 underlies the
regulation of E2F-1 degradation.

Marti A(1), Wirbelauer C, Scheffner M, Krek W.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institut, Basel, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 1999 May;1(1):E5-7.

The transcription factor E2F-1 is important in the control of cell proliferation.
Its activity must be tightly regulated in a cell-cycle-dependent manner to enable
programs of gene expression to be coupled closely with cell-cycle position. Here 
we show that, following its accumulation in the late G1 phase of the cell cycle, 
E2F-1 is rapidly degraded in S/G2 phase. This event is linked to a specific
interaction of E2F-1 with the F-box-containing protein p45SKP2, which is the
cell-cycle-regulated component of the ubiquitin-protein ligase SCFSKP2 that
recognizes substrates for this ligase. Disruption of the interaction between
E2F-1 and p45SKP2 results in a reduction in ubiquitination of E2F-1 and the
stabilization and accumulation of transcriptionally active E2F-1 protein. These
results indicate that an SCFSKP2-dependent ubiquitination pathway may be involved
in the downregulation of E2F-1 activity in the S/G2 phase of the cell cycle, and 
suggest a link between SCFSKP2 and cell-cycle-dependent gene control.

PMID: 10559858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Virol. 1999 Dec;73(12):10095-103.

Induction of transformation and p53-dependent apoptosis by adenovirus type 5
E4orf6/7 cDNA.

Yamano S(1), Tokino T, Yasuda M, Kaneuchi M, Takahashi M, Niitsu Y, Fujinaga K,
Yamashita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, Chuo-ku, Japan.

Adenovirus (Ad) E4orf6/7, one of the early gene products of human Ads, forms a
stable complex with the cellular transcription factor E2F to activate
transcription from the Ad E2 promoter. E2F cDNAs have growth-promoting and
apoptosis-inducing activities when overexpressed in cells. We cloned Ad5 E4orf6/7
cDNA in both simian virus 40- and human cytomegalovirus-based expression vectors 
to examine its transforming and apoptotic activities. The cloned E4orf6/7
collaborated with a retinoblastoma protein (RB)-nonbinding and therefore
E2F-nonreleasing mutant of Ad5 E1A (dl922/947) to morphologically transform
primary rat cells, suggesting that E2F is an important cellular protein
functioning downstream of E1A for transformation. In a G418 colony formation
assay, E4orf6/7 was shown to suppress growth of untransformed rat cells.
Moreover, a recombinant Ad expressing Ad5 E4orf6/7 induced apoptosis in rat cells
when coinfected with wild-type p53-expressing Ad. Mutational analysis of E4orf6/7
revealed that both of the domains required for growth inhibition and
transformation by E4orf6/7 lay in the C-terminal region, which is essential for
transactivation from the upstream sequence of an E2a promoter containing
E2F-binding sites. However, the smallest mutant of E4orf6/7, encoding the
C-terminal 59 amino acids, failed to complement the RB-nonbinding dl922/947
mutant despite showing growth inhibition and E2F transactivation activities.
Thus, it is suggested that a subregion of E4orf6/7 which is required for growth
inhibition and transformation in collaboration with dl922/947 overlaps the
transactivation domain of E4orf6/7.

PMCID: PMC113061
PMID: 10559324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Mol Biol. 1999 Nov 12;293(5):1005-15.

Transcription factors of the Sp1 family: interaction with E2F and regulation of
the murine thymidine kinase promoter.

Rotheneder H(1), Geymayer S, Haidweger E.

Author information: 
(1)Vienna Biocenter, University of Vienna, Austria. jr@mol.univie.ac.at

Promoters of growth and cell cycle regulated genes frequently carry binding sites
for transcription factors of the E2F and Sp1 families. We have demonstrated
recently that direct interaction between Sp1 and a subgroup of the E2F factors is
essential for the regulation of certain promoters. We show here that the amino
acids necessary for this interaction in both cases are located within the DNA
binding domain. This is in line with the assumption, that the interaction between
E2F and Sp-factors contributes to promoter-specificity. Cyclin A, which binds to 
E2F-1 in close vicinity to Sp1 does not interfere with this interaction. Moreover
we have investigated the ability of other members of the Sp1 family to interact
with E2F-1 and to regulate the activity of the E2F and Sp1 dependent murine
thymidine kinase promoter. All four factors of the Sp1 family are able to bind
E2F-1 in co-immunoprecipitation and GST-pull down experiments. Mobility shift
assays with oligonucleotides comprising the Sp1, or both the Sp1 and the E2F
binding site suggest that Sp1 and Sp3 supply most if not all activity binding to 
the GC-box of the thymidine kinase promoter in murine fibroblasts. Reporter gene 
assays in Drosophila melanogaster SL2 cells and murine fibroblast 3T6 cells
demonstrate that the thymidine kinase promoter is activated strongly by Sp1 and
Sp3, weakly by Sp4, and not at all by Sp2. Co-expression of E2F-1 results in
synergistic activation in 3T6 but not in SL2 cells.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10547281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Eur J Immunol. 1999 Oct;29(10):3380-9.

Modulation of E2F activity in primary mouse B cells following stimulation via
surface IgM and CD40 receptors.

Lam EW(1), Glassford J, van der Sman J, Banerji L, Pizzey AR, Shaun N, Thomas B, 
Klaus GG.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research and Section of Virology and Cell Biology 
Imperial College School of Medicine at St Mary's, London, GB. eric.lam@ic.ac.uk

Since signals via CD40 and the B cell receptor are known to synergize to induce B
cell activation, we have analyzed the pocket protein/E2F complexes in mouse B
lymphocytes following stimulation by anti-IgM, anti-CD40, alone or together. We
find that E2F4 and DP1 form the predominant E2F heterodimers in the G0 and G1
phases of the cell cycle, complexed with hypophosphorylated p130. During late G1 
and S phase this complex is replaced by at least three different E2F complexes,
one of which is an E2F complex containing p107 or pRB as well as two "free" E2F
complexes consisting of E2F4/DP1 and E2F1-3/DP1. These effects were mirrored by
the levels and phosphorylation status of the three pocket proteins. We also
observed an increase in electrophoretic mobility of DP1 and E2F4 as B cells
progressed from G0 into early G1, resulting from their dephosphorylation. This is
known to correlate with a decrease in DNA binding capacity of these proteins and 
could also be important for derepression of genes negatively regulated through
E2F sites in their promoters. These results therefore indicate that the pRB/E2F
pathway integrates proliferative signals emanating from the sIgM and CD40
receptors.

PMID: 10540350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Nov;19(11):7724-32.

The retinoblastoma protein is linked to the activation of Ras.

Lee KY(1), Ladha MH, McMahon C, Ewen ME.

Author information: 
(1)The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The inner membrane-bound protein Ras integrates various extracellular signals
that are subsequently communicated from the cytoplasm to the nucleus via the
Raf/MEK/MAPK cascade. Here we show that the retinoblastoma protein pRb,
previously reported to be a nuclear target of this pathway, can in turn influence
the activation state of Ras. Rb-deficient fibroblasts display elevated levels (up
to 30-fold) of activated Ras during G(1). Expression of wild-type pRb or a number
of pRb mutants defective in E2F regulation reverses this effect. We provide
evidence that the mid-G(1) activation of Ras in Rb-deficient cells, which occurs 
at the level of guanine nucleotide binding, differs from that of epidermal growth
factor-induced stimulation of Ras, being dependent on protein synthesis. The
aberrant levels of Ras activity associated with loss of pRb may be responsible
for the differentiation defects in Rb-deficient cells, because suppression of Ras
activity in Rb(-/-) fibroblasts restores the transactivation function of MyoD and
the expression of a late marker of skeletal muscle differentiation. These data
suggest that nuclear-cytoplasmic communication between pRb and Ras is
bidirectional.

PMCID: PMC84819
PMID: 10523661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Neuroreport. 1999 Sep 9;10(13):2711-4.

Decreased brain infarct following focal ischemia in mice lacking the
transcription factor E2F1.

MacManus JP(1), Koch CJ, Jian M, Walker T, Zurakowski B.

Author information: 
(1)Apoptosis Research Group, Institute for Biological Sciences, National Research
Council of Canada, Ottawa, ON. John.MacManus@NRC.CA

E2F1+/- mice subjected to 2 h middle cerebral artery occlusion developed an
infarct of 77.0 +/- 3.2 mm3 (mean +/- s.e.m., n = 15) in the ischemic hemisphere 
after 24 h reperfusion. A significantly smaller infarct of 58.8 +/- 4.8 mm3 (n = 
15; p < 0.01) was found in E2F1-/- animals. Both deficient and normal mice had
similar cerebral angioarchitecture and intra-ischemic decreases in regional blood
flow. Similar areas of hypoxia in both groups of ischemic animals were
demonstrated directly by immunohistochemical detection of nitroimidazole adducts.
It was concluded that all animals received the same ischemic insult, yet the
subsequent damage was different in the mutant mice. This is the first indication 
that the E2F1 gene plays a role in ischemic death of post-mitotic neurons.

PMID: 10511428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 9;18(36):5054-62.

E2F activates late-G1 events but cannot replace E1A in inducing S phase in
terminally differentiated skeletal muscle cells.

Pajalunga D(1), Tognozzi D, Tiainen M, D'Angelo M, Ferrantelli F, Helin K, Sacchi
A, Crescenzi M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncogenesis Laboratory, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.

We have previously shown that the adenovirus E1A oncogene can reactivate the cell
cycle in terminally differentiated cells. Current models imply that much or all
of this E1A activity is mediated by the release of the E2F transcription factors 
from pocket-protein control. In contrast, we show here that overexpression of
E2F-1, E2F-2 and E2F-4, or a chimeric E2F-4 tethered to a nuclear localization
signal cannot reactivate postmitotic skeletal muscle cells (myotubes). This is
not due to lack of transcriptional activity, as demonstrated on both a reporter
construct and a number of endogenous target genes. Although cyclin E was strongly
overexpressed in E2F-transduced myotubes, it lacked associated kinase activity,
possibly explaining the inability of the myotubes to enter S phase and accumulate
cyclin A. Although E2F is not sufficient to trigger DNA synthesis in myotubes,
its activity is necessary even in the presence of E1A, as dominant-negative DP-1 
mutants inhibit E1A-mediated cell cycle reentry. Our data show that, to
reactivate myotubes, E1A must exert other functions, in addition to releasing
E2F. They also establish mouse myotubes as an experimental system uniquely suited
to study the most direct E2F functions in the absence of downstream cell cycle
effects.

PMID: 10490842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 9;18(36):5015-23.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase upregulates E2F-1 promoter activity and DNA pol alpha
expression during early S phase.

Simbulan-Rosenthal CM(1), Rosenthal DS, Luo R, Smulson ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Georgetown University School of Medicine, Basic
Science Building, Room 351, 3900 Reservoir Road NW, Washington DC 20007, USA.

E2F-1, a transcription factor implicated in the activation of genes required for 
S phase such as DNA pol alpha, is regulated by interactions with Rb and by
cell-cycle dependent alterations in E2F-1 abundance. We have shown that depletion
of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) by antisense RNA expression downregulates
pol alpha and E2F-1 expression during early S phase. To examine the role of PARP 
in the regulation of pol alpha and E2F-1 gene expression, we utilized
immortalized mouse fibroblasts derived from wild-type and PARP knockout (PARP-/-)
mice as well as PARP-/- cells stably transfected with PARP cDNA [PARP-/-(+PARP)].
After release from serum deprivation, wild-type and PARP-/-(+PARP) cells, but not
PARP-/- cells, exhibited a peak of cells in S phase by 16 h and had progressed
through the cell cycle by 22 h. Whereas [3H]thymidine incorporation remained
negligible in PARP-/- cells, in vivo DNA replication maximized after 18 h in
wild-type and PARP-/-(+PARP) cells. To investigate the effect of PARP on E2F-1
promoter activity, a construct containing the E2F-1 gene promoter fused to a
luciferase reporter gene was transiently transfected into these cells. E2F-1
promoter activity in control and PARP-/-(+PARP) cells increased eightfold after 9
h, but not in PARP-/- cells. PARP-/- cells did not show the marked induction of
E2F-1 expression during early S phase apparent in control and PARP-/-(+PARP)
cells. RT - PCR analysis and pol alpha activity assays revealed the presence of
pol alpha transcripts and a sixfold increase in activity in both wild-type and
PARP-/-(+PARP) cells after 20 h, but not in PARP-/- cells. These results suggest 
that PARP plays a role in the induction of E2F-1 promoter activity, which then
positively regulates both E2F-1 and pol alpha expression, when quiescent cells
reenter the cell cycle upon recovery from aphidicolin exposure or removal of
serum.

PMID: 10490838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Clin Cancer Res. 1999 Aug;5(8):2242-50.

Adenovirus-mediated E2F-1 gene transfer inhibits MDM2 expression and efficiently 
induces apoptosis in MDM2-overexpressing tumor cells.

Yang HL(1), Dong YB, Elliott MJ, Liu TJ, Atienza C Jr, Stilwell A, McMasters KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of
Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA.

The oncoprotein MDM2 binds and inactivates p53. MDM2 also binds to the tumor
suppressor pRB, as well as E2F-1. E2F-1 is a transcription factor that regulates 
S phase entry and has been shown to cause apoptosis in some cell types when
overexpressed. To investigate the effect of adenovirus-mediated E2F-1
overexpression, MDM2-overexpressing tumor cell lines were treated by mock
infection, infection with an adenoviral vector expressing beta galactosidase, or 
E2F-1 (Ad5CMV-E2F-1). Western blot analysis confirmed significant overexpression 
of E2F-1 in Ad5CMV-E2F-1-infected cells. E2F-1 overexpression resulted in marked 
growth inhibition and rapid loss of cell viability. Ad5CMV-E2F-1 infection
resulted in early S phase entry, followed by apoptotic cell death. E2F-1
overexpression was associated with a marked decrease in MDM2 levels and no
evidence of increased Bax levels, whereas p53 and Bcl-2 levels remained
undetectable. Cleavage of poly-ADP-ribose polymerase and caspase 3/CPP32
implicated activation of the caspase cascade in E2F-1-mediated apoptosis. These
results indicate that adenovirus-mediated E2F-1 overexpression in
MDM2-overexpressing tumor cells results in decreased MDM2 expression and
widespread apoptosis. Because MDM2-overexpressing tumors are often resistant to
p53 gene therapy, adenovirus-mediated E2F-1 gene therapy may be a promising
alternative strategy.

PMID: 10473112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Sep 15;251(2):442-51.

Regulation and deregulation of E2F1 in postmitotic neurons differentiated from
embryonal carcinoma P19 cells.

Azuma-Hara M(1), Taniura H, Uetsuki T, Niinobe M, Yoshikawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Regulation of Macromolecular Functions, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Yamadaoka 3-2, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

Neurons withdraw from the cell cycle immediately after differentiation from their
proliferative precursors. E2F1, a principal transcription factor that promotes
cell cycle progression, must be silenced in neurons. We investigated the E2F1
system in postmitotic neurons derived from murine embryonal carcinoma P19 cells. 
P19 cells highly expressed the E2F1 gene during neural differentiation, and
enriched neurons contained a high abundance of E2F1 mRNA. In contrast,
postmitotic neurons possessed extremely low levels of E2F1 protein as assessed by
the electrophoretic mobility shift assay and Western blotting. A recombinant E2F1
fusion protein was ubiquitinated in vitro when incubated with neuronal lysates.
In addition, treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 increased the
endogenous level of E2F1 protein in neurons. These results suggest that the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway contributes, at least in part, to the downregulation
of E2F1 protein in postmitotic neurons. Adenovirus-mediated transfer of E2F1 cDNA
into postmitotic neurons induced both bromodeoxyuridine incorporation and
chromatin condensation, suggesting that deregulated E2F1 expression causes both
aberrant S-phase entry and apoptosis of postmitotic neurons. Thus, downregulation
of endogenous E2F1 protein in postmitotic neurons may be indispensable for the
prevention of their reentry into the cell cycle.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10471329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Gen Virol. 1999 Aug;80 ( Pt 8):2103-13.

Regulation of cyclin E gene expression by the human papillomavirus type 16 E7
oncoprotein.

Vogt B(1), Zerfass-Thome K, Schulze A, Botz JW, Zwerschke W, Jansen-Dürr P.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte
Tumorvirologie, Heidelberg, Germany.

In this study, we characterized the 5' regulatory region of the murine cyclin E
gene and analysed activation of the gene by the E7 oncogene of human
papillomavirus type 16 in transfection experiments. We found that the murine
cyclin E promoter is composed of multiple regulatory elements, and we present
evidence for at least two independent transcription units, designated P1 and P2. 
Overlapping binding sites for the cellular transcription factors Sp1 and E2F were
identified in both promoters, and we found that E2F-mediated activation of
transcription is inhibited by Sp1 in cotransfection experiments. The E2F/Sp1
binding sites contribute to transcriptional activation by E7, and the data
suggest that the cyclin E gene is rendered E7-inducible through the combination
of several cis-acting elements which display only weak intrinsic responsiveness
to E7.

PMID: 10466809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Sep;19(9):6458-68.

Disruption of retinoblastoma protein family function by human papillomavirus type
16 E7 oncoprotein inhibits lens development in part through E2F-1.

McCaffrey J(1), Yamasaki L, Dyson NJ, Harlow E, Griep AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Complexes between the retinoblastoma protein (pRb) and the transcription factor
E2F-1 are thought to be important for regulating cell proliferation. We have
shown previously that the E7 oncoprotein from human papillomavirus type 16,
dependent upon its binding to pRb proteins, induces proliferation, disrupts
differentiation, and induces apoptosis when expressed in the differentiating, or 
fiber, cells of the ocular lenses in transgenic mice. Mice that carry a null
mutation in E2F-1 do not exhibit any defects in proliferation and differentiation
in the lens. By examining the lens phenotype in mice that express E7 on an E2F-1 
null background, we now show genetic evidence that E7's ability to alter the fate
of fiber cells is partially dependent on E2F-1. On the other hand, E2F-1 status
does not affect E7-induced proliferation in the undifferentiated lens epithelium.
These data provide genetic evidence that E2F-1, while dispensible for normal
fiber cell differentiation, is one mediator of E7's activity in vivo and that the
requirement for E2F-1 is context dependent. These data suggest that an important 
role for pRb-E2F-1 complex during fiber cell differentiation is to negatively
regulate cell cycle progression, thereby allowing completion of the
differentiation program to occur.

PMCID: PMC84615
PMID: 10454591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Sep;19(9):6408-14.

E2F1 has both oncogenic and tumor-suppressive properties in a transgenic model.

Pierce AM(1), Schneider-Broussard R, Gimenez-Conti IB, Russell JL, Conti CJ,
Johnson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, Science Park-Research Division, The University
of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

Using a transgenic mouse model expressing the E2F1 gene under the control of a
keratin 5 (K5) promoter, we previously demonstrated that increased E2F1 activity 
can promote tumorigenesis by cooperating with either a v-Ha-ras transgene to
induce benign skin papillomas or p53 deficiency to induce spontaneous skin
carcinomas. We now report that as K5 E2F1 transgenic mice age, they are
predisposed to develop spontaneous tumors in a variety of K5-expressing tissues, 
including the skin, vagina, forestomach, and odontogenic epithelium. On the other
hand, K5 E2F1 transgenic mice are found to be resistant to skin tumor development
following a two-stage carcinogenesis protocol. Additional experiments suggest
that this tumor-suppressive effect of E2F1 occurs at the promotion stage and may 
involve the induction of apoptosis. These findings demonstrate that increased
E2F1 activity can either promote or inhibit tumorigenesis, dependent upon the
experimental context.

PMCID: PMC84610
PMID: 10454586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mol Carcinog. 1999 Aug;25(4):295-303.

No effect of loss of E2F1 on liver regeneration or hepatocarcinogenesis in
C57BL/6J or C3H/HeJ mice.

Lukas ER(1), Bartley SM, Graveel CR, Diaz ZM, Dyson N, Harlow E, Yamasaki L,
Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison
53706, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors regulates the expression of genes needed 
for DNA synthesis and cell-cycle control. However, the individual contributions
of the different E2F family members in regulating proliferation in various
tissues have not been well characterized. Mouse liver is an excellent system for 
investigating proliferation because its growth state can be experimentally
manipulated. As observed in cell culture systems, E2F1 protein is present at low 
levels in the quiescent liver, with an increase in expression during
proliferation. Therefore, we expected that E2F1 may play an important role in
cell-growth control during periods of robust proliferation. Using
E2F1-nullizygous mice, we performed partial hepatectomies to investigate the role
of E2F1 in the synchronous proliferation of adult hepatocytes. We found that E2F1
deficiency resulted in only minor changes in gene expression and that the timing 
of liver regeneration was not altered in E2F1 nullizygous mice. E2F1 has
displayed properties of both a tumor suppressor and an oncogene in different
model systems. Therefore, we investigated the role of E2F1 in rapidly growing
liver tumor cells in strains of mice that have high (C3H/HeJ) and low (C57BL/6J) 
rates of hepatocarcinogenesis. We observed no significant differences in the
number of liver tumors that developed after diethylnitrosamine treatment of wild 
type versus E2F1-nullizygous mice. We suggest that abundant levels of E2F4 in the
mouse liver compensate for loss of E2F1.

PMID: 10449036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Sep 1;27(17):3621-30.

E2F/p107 and E2F/p130 complexes are regulated by C/EBPalpha in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Timchenko NA(1), Wilde M, Iakova P, Albrecht JH, Darlington GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging, Department of Pathology, Baylor College of
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA. nikolait@bcm.tmc.edu

We have previously found that loss of C/EBPalpha in hepatocytes of newborn livers
leads to increased proliferation, to a reduction in p21 protein levels and to an 
induction of S phase-specific E2F/p107 complexes. In this paper, we investigated 
C/EBPalpha-dependent regulation of E2F complexes in a well-characterized cell
line, 3T3-L1, and in stable transformants that conditionally express C/EBPalpha. 
C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta proteins are induced in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes during
differentiation with different kinetics and potentially may regulate E2F/Rb
family complexes. In pre-differentiated cells, three E2F complexes are observed: 
cdk2/E2F/p107, E2F/p130 and E2F4. cdk2/E2F/p107 complexes are induced in nuclear 
extracts of 3T3-L1 cells during mitotic expansion, but are not detectable in
nuclear extracts at later stages of 3T3-L1 differentiation. The reduction in
E2F/p107 complexes is associated with elevation of C/EBPalpha, but is independent
of C/EBPbeta expression. Bacterially expressed, purified His-C/EBPalpha is able
to disrupt E2F/p107 complexes that are observed at earlier stages of 3T3-L1
differentiation. C/EBPbeta, however, does not disrupt E2F/p107 complexes. A short
C/EBPalpha peptide with homology to E2F is sufficient to bring about the
disruption of E2F/p107 complexes from 3T3-L1 cells in vitro. Induction of
C/EBPalpha in stable 3T3-L1 clones revealed that C/EBPalpha causes disruption of 
p107/E2F complexes in these cells. In contrast, E2F/p130 complexes are induced in
cells expressing C/EBPalpha. Our data suggest that induction of p130/E2F
complexes by C/EBPalpha occurs via up-regulation of p21, which, in turn, leads to
association with and inhibition of, cdk2 kinase activity. The reduction in cdk2
kinase activity correlates with alterations of p130 phosphorylation and with
induction of p130/E2F complexes in 3T3-L1 stable clones. Our data suggest two
pathways of C/EBPalpha-dependent regulation of E2F/Rb family complexes:
disruption of S phase-specific E2F/p107 complexes and induction of E2F/p130
complexes.

PMCID: PMC148609
PMID: 10446255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 20;274(34):23777-86.

The adenovirus oncoprotein E1a stimulates binding of transcription factor ETF to 
transcriptionally activate the p53 gene.

Hale TK(1), Braithwaite AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dunedin School of Medicine, University of Otago, P.
O. Box 913, Dunedin 9000, New Zealand. tracy.hale@stonebow.otago.az.nz

Expression of the tumor suppressor protein p53 plays an important role in
regulating the cellular response to DNA damage. During adenovirus infection,
levels of p53 protein also increase. It has been shown that this increase is due 
not only to increased stability of the p53 protein but to the transcriptional
activation of the p53 gene during infection. We demonstrate here that the E1a
proteins of adenovirus are responsible for activating the mouse p53 gene and that
both major E1a proteins, 243R and 289R, are required for complete activation. E1a
brings about the binding of two cellular transcription factors to the mouse p53
promoter. One of these, ETF, binds to three upstream sites in the p53 promoter
and one downstream site, whereas E2F binds to one upstream site in the presence
of E1a. Our studies indicate that E2F binding is not essential for activation of 
the p53 promoter but that ETF is. Our data indicate the ETF site located
downstream of the start site of transcription is the key site in conferring E1a
responsiveness on the p53 promoter.

PMID: 10446138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 1999 Apr;10(2):197-203.

Histone acetylation in signal transduction by growth regulatory signals.

Magnaghi-Jaulin L(1), Ait-Si-Ali S, Harel-Bellan A.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR 9079, IRC, 7 rue Guy Moquet, Villejuif, 94800, France.

Comment in
    Semin Cell Dev Biol. 1999 Apr;10(2):165-7.

Cell fate is determined by extracellular signals which are transmitted to the
nucleus and result in the transcriptional regulation of specific subsets of
genes. Transcriptional regulation has been recently linked to enzymatic
activities which are able to acetylate or deacetylate core histone tails. A
number of transcriptional co-regulators are histone acetyl-transferases or
histone deacetylases. Here, we discuss the involvement of these enzymes in
critical steps of cell proliferation or cell differentiation control

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10441073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 1999 Apr;10(2):189-95.

The mammalian SWI/SNF complex and the control of cell growth.

Muchardt C(1), Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Unite@a3 des Virus Oncoge@a4nes, URA1644 du CNRS, De@a3partement des
Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Docteur Roux, Paris, Cedex 15,
75724, France.

Comment in
    Semin Cell Dev Biol. 1999 Apr;10(2):165-7.

The mammalian SWI/SNF complex is a chromatin remodelling complex that uses the
energy of ATP hydrolysis to facilitate access of transcription factors to
regulatory DNA sequences. This complex, that was initially described as a
co-factor for nuclear receptors, has recently been associated with the control of
cell growth. Two of the subunits known as BRG-1 and brm can associate with the
Retinoblastoma tumour suppressor gene product and co-operate with this protein
for repression of E2F activity. In addition, expression of brm is frequently
down-regulated upon cellular transformation and re-introduction of this protein
into fibroblasts transformed by activated ras induces partial reversion of the
transformed phenotype. Finally, the hSNF5/INI1 gene, encoding another subunit of 
the SWI/SNF complex, is subject to bi-allelic mutations in rhabdoid tumours, a
very aggressive form of paediatric cancers. These observations provide a novel
link between malignant transformation and chromatin remodelling machineries.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10441072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Aug;19(8):5504-11.

Histone deacetylase 1 can repress transcription by binding to Sp1.

Doetzlhofer A(1), Rotheneder H, Lagger G, Koranda M, Kurtev V, Brosch G,
Wintersberger E, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Vienna Biocenter, University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.

The members of the Sp1 transcription factor family can act as both negative and
positive regulators of gene expression. Here we show that Sp1 can be a target for
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)-mediated transcriptional repression. The histone
deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A activates the chromosomally integrated
murine thymidine kinase promoter in an Sp1-dependent manner.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments with Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts and 293 cells
demonstrate that Sp1 and HDAC1 can be part of the same complex. The interaction
between Sp1 and HDAC1 is direct and requires the carboxy-terminal domain of Sp1. 
Previously we have shown that the C terminus of Sp1 is necessary for the
interaction with the transcription factor E2F1 (J. Karlseder, H. Rotheneder, and 
E. Wintersberger, Mol. Cell. Biol. 16:1659-1667, 1996). Coexpression of E2F1
interferes with HDAC1 binding to Sp1 and abolishes Sp1-mediated transcriptional
repression. Our results indicate that one component of Sp1-dependent gene
regulation involves competition between the transcriptional repressor HDAC1 and
the transactivating factor E2F1.

PMCID: PMC84392
PMID: 10409740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Int J Oncol. 1999 Aug;15(2):387-90.

Upregulation of E2F transcription factors in chemically induced mouse skin
tumors.

Balasubramanian S(1), Ahmad N, Mukhtar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
44106, USA.

E2F family of transcription factors plays an important role in cell cycle
regulation, oncogenesis and differentiation. E2Fs are a family of heterodimeric
transcription factors composed of E2F-like and DP-like subunits. They regulate
expression of specific genes controlling cellular proliferation by binding to
specific sequences within the promoter regions of these target genes and
affecting their transcription in a cell cycle dependent manner. Recent studies
have suggested an essential role of Rb/E2F pathway in the passage of cells
through the G1 phase of the cell cycle. To better understand the role of these
transcription factors in epithelial tumorigenesis, we compared the expression of 
various proteins involved in the Rb/E2F pathway in epidermis and
7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA)-initiated and
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) promoted papillomas on SENCAR mouse
skin. Western blot analysis data showed 3.0- to 7.6-fold upregulation of E2F-1,
E2F-2, E2F-3, E2F-4 and E2F-5 in tumors compared to normal epidermis. In tumors, 
the protein expression of DP-1 did not show significant change whereas that of
DP-2 showed a 2.2-fold increase. Compared to normal epidermis, a significant
upregulation of pRb (6.3-fold) and p107 (13-fold) was also observed in tumors.
The protein expression of p130 was not detectable either in normal epidermis or
in tumors. These data suggest that the overexpression of E2F proteins may be
involved in the G1-S phase dysregulation that occurs during mouse skin
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 10402252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Jul 15;27(14):2852-9.

Cytosine methylation transforms an E2F site in the retinoblastoma gene promoter
into a binding site for the general repressor methylcytosine-binding protein 2
(MeCP2).

Di Fiore B(1), Palena A, Felsani A, Palitti F, Caruso M, Lavia P.

Author information: 
(1)CNR Centre of Evolutionary Genetics, c/o University 'La Sapienza', Via degli
Apuli 4, Rome 00185, Italy.

The CpG-rich promoter of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor gene (Rb-1) is
normally unmethylated. However, aberrant methylation of CpG dinucleotides within 
the Rb-1 promoter has been depicted in certain tumors, which determines
transcriptional inactivity of the gene and absence of the pRb retinoblastoma
protein. Here we have concentrated on an E2F-binding site in the Rb-1 promoter.
We show that the E2F site is required for cell-cycle regulated Rb-1 transcription
in non-transformed cells. The function of the E2F site is associated with its
ability to interact with several activating factors of the E2F family. In
contrast, in vitro methylation of two tandemly arranged CpGs in the E2F
recognition site prevents binding by E2F factors, and determines instead the
recruitment of the general repressor methylcytosine-binding protein 2 (MeCP2).
These results suggest that the interaction of MeCP2 with the methylated version
of the E2F site may represent a step towards Rb-1 promoter inactivity in tumor
cells.

PMCID: PMC148498
PMID: 10390525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jul 2;274(27):19011-6.

Involvement of cell cycle elements, cyclin-dependent kinases, pRb, and E2F x DP, 
in B-amyloid-induced neuronal death.

Giovanni A(1), Wirtz-Brugger F, Keramaris E, Slack R, Park DS.

Author information: 
(1)Hoechst Marion Roussel, Neuroscience, Bridgewater, New Jersey 08807, USA.

Previous evidence by others has indicated that a variety of cell cycle-related
molecules are up-regulated in brains of Alzheimer's disease patients. The
significance of this increase, however, is unclear. Accordingly, we examined the 
obligate nature of cyclin-dependent kinases and select downstream targets of
these kinases in death of neurons evoked by B-amyloid (AB) protein. We present
pharmacological and molecular biological evidence that cyclin-dependent kinases, 
in particular Cdk4/6, are required for such neuronal death. In addition, we
demonstrate that the substrate of Cdk4/6, pRb/p107, is phosphorylated during AB
treatment and that one target of pRb/p107, the E2F x DP complex, is required for 
AB-evoked neuronal death. These results provide evidence that cell cycle elements
play a required role in death of neurons evoked by AB and suggest that these
elements play an integral role in Alzheimer's disease-related neuronal death.

PMID: 10383401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Oncogene. 1999 Jun 10;18(23):3501-10.

Prohibitin, a potential tumor suppressor, interacts with RB and regulates E2F
function.

Wang S(1), Nath N, Adlam M, Chellappan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein and its family members, p107 and
p130, are major regulators of the mammalian cell cycle. They exert their growth
suppressive effects at least in part by binding the E2F family of transcription
factors and inhibiting their transcriptional activity. Agents that disrupt the
interaction between Rb family proteins and E2F promote cell proliferation. Here
we describe the characterization of a novel interaction between Rb family
proteins and a potential tumor suppressor protein, prohibitin. Prohibitin
physically interacts with all three Rb family proteins in vitro and in vivo, and 
was very effective in repressing E2F-mediated transcription. Prohibitin could
inhibit the activity of E2Fs 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, but could not affect the activity 
of promoters lacking an E2F site. Surprisingly, prohibitin-mediated repression of
E2F could not be reversed by adenovirus E1A protein. A prohibitin mutant that
could not bind to Rb was impaired in its ability to repress E2F activity and
inhibit cell proliferation. We believe that prohibitin is a novel regulator of
E2F activity that responds to specific signaling cascades.

PMID: 10376528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jul;19(7):4695-702.

Serum-induced expression of the cdc25A gene by relief of E2F-mediated repression.

Chen X(1), Prywes R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York
10027, USA.

The cdc25A gene encodes a tyrosine phosphatase which activates cyclin-dependent
kinase activity in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. cdc25A RNA levels are induced 
from 3 to 6 h after serum induction of serum-starved NIH 3T3 cells, suggesting
that the cdc25A gene is a delayed-early gene. Analysis of cdc25A promoter
constructs showed that the cdc25A promoter is sufficient for serum induction.
Surprisingly for a gene expressed in early to mid-G1, serum induction of the
promoter requires an E2F site at position -62 in the promoter. Deletion or point 
mutation of the E2F site resulted in activation of expression in serum-starved
cells and no further induction by serum treatment. E2F factors were found to bind
to the cdc25A E2F site along with the retinoblastoma protein (Rb) family members 
p130 and p107. A shift in mobility of the E2F-p107 complex in extracts of cells
induced for 6 h correlated with induction of cdc25A expression. These results
suggest that serum induction of cdc25A expression is mediated by inactivation of 
p107 or p130, both of which repress transcription when bound to the promoter
through E2F.

PMCID: PMC84267
PMID: 10373518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jun 8;96(12):6626-31.

Collaborative role of E2F transcriptional activity and G1 cyclindependent kinase 
activity in the induction of S phase.

Leone G(1), DeGregori J, Jakoi L, Cook JG, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

A considerable body of evidence points to a role for both cyclin
E/cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk)2 activity and E2F transcription activity in the
induction of S phase. We show that overexpression of cyclin E/cdk2 in quiescent
cells induces S phase, that this coincides with an induction of E2F activity, and
that coexpression of E2F enhances the cyclin E/cdk2-mediated induction of S
phase. Likewise, E2F overexpression can induce S phase and does so in the
apparent absence of cyclin E/cdk2 activity. In addition, although the inhibition 
of cyclin E/cdk2 activity blocks the induction of S phase after growth
stimulation of normal mouse embryo fibroblasts, inhibition of cyclin E/cdk2 does 
not block S phase induction in Rb-/- cells where E2F activity is deregulated.
These results point to the important roles for E2F and cyclin E/cdk2 in the
induction of S phase. Moreover, the nature of the E2F targets and the suspected
targets for cyclin E/cdk2 suggests a potential molecular mechanism for the
collaborative action of cyclin E/cdk2 and E2F in the induction of S phase.

PMCID: PMC21965
PMID: 10359762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Oncogene. 1999 May 27;18(21):3290-302.

Growth inhibition by CDK-cyclin and PCNA binding domains of p21 occurs by
distinct mechanisms and is regulated by ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

Rousseau D(1), Cannella D, Boulaire J, Fitzgerald P, Fotedar A, Fotedar R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Structurale J-P Ebel, Grenoble, France.

The CDK inhibitor, p21(WAF1/Cip1) blocks cell cycle progression. In vitro, the
N-terminus of p21 binds and inhibits CDK-cyclin kinase activity, whereas the
C-terminus binds and inhibits PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear antigen) function.
PCNA is essential for processivity of both DNA polymerase delta and epsilon. We
have performed a detailed analysis of growth inhibition by the N- and C-terminal 
regions of p21, and determined whether the N- and C-terminal regions mediate this
effect by different mechanisms. Expression of either the N- or the C-terminal
region of p21 inhibits DNA synthesis and cell growth, but not as efficiently as
full length p21. The effectiveness of the two p21 domains is dependent on their
stability which is determined by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. The
stabilization of the N- and C-terminal region of p21 increases their
effectiveness as inhibitors of DNA synthesis to levels comparable to full length 
p21. Inhibition of DNA synthesis by the N-terminal region of p21 involves
suppression of E2F activity. In contrast, inhibition by the C-terminal region of 
p21 is not accompanied by suppression of E2F activity, but is mediated via PCNA
binding. The C-terminal region of p21 therefore inhibits cell growth by a
mechanism distinct from that of the N-terminal region containing the CDK-cyclin
inhibitory domain.

PMID: 10359535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 28;274(22):15883-91.

Activation of the murine dihydrofolate reductase promoter by E2F1. A requirement 
for CBP recruitment.

Fry CJ(1), Pearson A, Malinowski E, Bartley SM, Greenblatt J, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The E2F family of heterodimeric transcription factors plays an important role in 
the regulation of gene expression at the G1/S phase transition of the mammalian
cell cycle. Previously, we have demonstrated that cell cycle regulation of murine
dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr) expression requires E2F-mediated activation of the
dhfr promoter in S phase. To investigate the mechanism by which E2F activates an 
authentic E2F-regulated promoter, we precisely replaced the E2F binding site in
the dhfr promoter with a Gal4 binding site. Using Gal4-E2F1 derivatives, we found
that E2F1 amino acids 409-437 contain a potent core transactivation domain.
Functional analysis of the E2F1 core domain demonstrated that replacement of
phenylalanine residues 413, 425, and 429 with alanine reduces both
transcriptional activation of the dhfr promoter and protein-protein interactions 
with CBP, transcription factor (TF) IIH, and TATA-binding protein (TBP). However,
additional amino acid substitutions for phenylalanine 429 demonstrated a strong
correlation between activation of the dhfr promoter and binding of CBP, but not
TFIIH or TBP. Finally, transactivator bypass experiments indicated that direct
recruitment of CBP is sufficient for activation of the dhfr promoter. Therefore, 
we suggest that recruitment of CBP is one mechanism by which E2F activates the
dhfr promoter.

PMID: 10336493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Oncogene. 1999 Apr 8;18(14):2299-309.

Cell growth-regulated expression of mammalian MCM5 and MCM6 genes mediated by the
transcription factor E2F.

Ohtani K(1), Iwanaga R, Nakamura M, Ikeda M, Yabuta N, Tsuruga H, Nojima H.

Author information: 
(1)Human Gene Sciences Center, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Japan.

Initiation of DNA replication requires the function of MCM gene products, which
participate in ensuring that DNA replication occurs only once in the cell cycle. 
Expression of all mammalian genes of the MCM family is induced by growth
stimulation, unlike yeast, and the mRNA levels peak at G1/S boundary. In this
study, we examined the transcriptional activities of isolated human MCM gene
promoters. Human MCM5 and MCM6 promoters with mutation in the E2F sites failed in
promoter regulation following serum stimulation and exogenous E2F expression. In 
addition, we identified a novel E2F-like sequence in human MCM6 promoter which
cooperates with the authentic E2F sites in E2F-dependent regulation. Forced
expression of E2F1 could induce expression of all members of the endogenous MCM
genes in rat embryonal fibroblast REF52 cells. Our results demonstrated that the 
growth-regulated expression of mammalian MCM5 and MCM6 genes, and presumably
other MCM members, is primarily regulated by E2F through binding to multiple E2F 
sites in the promoters.

PMID: 10327050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Apr 29;258(1):77-80.

An early S phase checkpoint is regulated by the E2F1 transcription factor.

Stubbs MC(1), Strachan GD, Hall DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Deptartment of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, Room 501
Curtis Building, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19107, USA.

The E2F1 transcription factor regulates transit of cells through the S phase
checkpoint, dependent on its association with cyclin A/cdk2. Expression in cells 
of a mutant E2F1 lacking the cyclin A/cdk2 binding domain leads to partial arrest
of cells at the S phase checkpoint. When subconfluent growing cells expressing
this mutant E2F1 are analyzed in detail, it is shown here that they display a
significantly reduced incorporation of 3H-thymidine into the DNA of each S phase 
cell, compared to control cells or to cells overexpressing full-length E2F1.
Further, when cells are blocked at the G1/S phase border and released, there is a
clear reduction in the amount of 3H-thymidine incorporated into the DNA of S
phase cells by 1.5 hours post release. Considering a normal 6 hour S phase
duration, the results show that the S phase checkpoint mediated by E2F1 is not a 
late S phase event but an early one.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10222238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Mar 25;1423(2):M9-15.

Balancing proliferation and apoptosis in vivo: the Goldilocks theory of E2F/DP
action.

Yamasaki L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Columbia University, Department of Biological Sciences, New York, NY 10027,
USA. ly63@columbia.edu

Stimulation of both proliferation and apoptosis by E2F-1 provides a mechanistic
basis for how E2F-1 functions as an oncogene and a tumor suppressor in vivo. In
each normal tissue, a precise balance of proliferation versus apoptosis must be
maintained, and in many tissues this appears to be controlled by E2F-1 levels.
Presumably, variable expression of all E2F family members in each tissue dictates
a tissue-specific sensitivity to loss or overexpression of any one family member.
At sites where E2F-1 contributes mainly to proliferation and p53 levels remain
low, loss of E2F-1 expression may lead to tissue atrophy and overexpression may
lead to hyperplasia or tumors. Hence, E2F-1 would act as an oncogene. At other
sites where E2F-1 levels induce p19, which stabilizes p53 leading to apoptosis,
E2F-1 overexpression may lead to tissue atrophy and loss of expression may lead
to hyperplasia or tumors. And thus, E2F-1 would act as a tumor suppressor.
Perhaps it is the unique property of E2F-1 within the E2F family to stimulate
both proliferation and apoptosis which makes it a bimodal switch that pRB must
control so carefully. It is a delicate equilibrium that must be maintained
throughout embryonic development and adult life. However, it is easy to envision 
that mutations which deregulate other E2F family members and which ultimately
lead to changes in E2F-1 levels could lead to similar growth aberrations. In
summary, although pRB interacts with numerous transcription factors, pRB
minimally must restrain the E2F/DP transcription factor family to prevent the
cell cycle from whirling onwards out of control.

PMID: 10214348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 May;19(5):3704-13.

Transcription factor E2F-1 is upregulated in response to DNA damage in a manner
analogous to that of p53.

Blattner C(1), Sparks A, Lane D.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Campaign Cell Transformation Group, Department of
Biochemistry, Medical Sciences Institute, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 4HN,
United Kingdom.

The transcription factor E2F-1 directs the expression of genes that induce or
regulate cell division, and a role for E2F-1 in driving cells into apoptosis is
the subject of intense discussion. Recently it has been shown that E2F-1 binds
and coprecipitates with the mouse double-minute chromosome 2 protein (Mdm2). A
domain of E2F-1 (amino acids 390 to 406) shows striking similarity to the Mdm2
binding domain of the tumor suppressor protein p53. It is known that interaction 
of Mdm2 with p53 through this domain is required for Mdm2-dependent degradation
of p53. We show here that E2F-1 protein is upregulated in response to DNA damage.
The kinetics of induction are dependent upon the source of DNA damage, i.e., fast
and transient after irradiation with X rays and delayed and stable after
irradiation with UVC, and thus match the kinetics of p53 induction in response to
DNA damage. We show further that E2F-1 is also upregulated by treatment with the 
transcription inhibitor actinomycin D and with the kinase inhibitor DRB, as well 
as by high concentrations of the kinase inhibitor H7, all conditions which also
upregulate p53. In our experiments we were not able to see an increase in E2F-1
RNA production but did find an increase in protein stability in UVC-irradiated
cells. Upregulation of E2F-1 in response to DNA damage seems to require the
presence of wild-type p53, since we did not observe an increase in the level of
E2F-1 protein in several cell lines which possess mutated p53. Previous
experiments showed that p53 is upregulated after microinjection of an antibody
which binds to a domain of Mdm2 that is required for the interaction of Mdm2 with
p53. Microinjection of the same antibody also increases the expression of E2F-1
protein, while microinjection of a control antibody does not. Furthermore,
microinjection of Mdm2 antisense oligonucleotides upregulates E2F-1 protein,
while microinjection of an unrelated oligonucleotide does not. These data suggest
that E2F-1 is upregulated in a similar way to p53 in response to DNA damage and
that Mdm2 appears to play a major role in this pathway.

PMCID: PMC84185
PMID: 10207094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 May;19(5):3246-56.

Cumulative effect of phosphorylation of pRB on regulation of E2F activity.

Brown VD(1), Phillips RA, Gallie BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

The product of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene, pRB, is a nuclear
phosphoprotein that controls cell growth by binding to and suppressing the
activities of transcription factors such as the E2F family. Transactivation
activity is inhibited when E2F is bound to hypophosphorylated pRB and released
when pRB is phosphorylated by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). To determine which
of 16 potential CDK phosphorylation sites regulated the pRB-E2F interaction,
mutant pRB proteins produced by site-directed mutagenesis were tested for the
ability to suppress E2F-mediated transcription in a reporter chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase assay. Surprisingly, no one CDK site regulated the interaction 
of pRB with E2F when E2F was bound to DNA. Instead, disruption of transcriptional
repression resulted from accumulation of phosphate groups on the RB molecule.

PMCID: PMC84119
PMID: 10207050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 23;274(17):12009-16.

Modulation of E2F complexes during G0 to S phase transition in human primary
B-lymphocytes.

van der Sman J(1), Thomas NS, Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research and Section of Virology and Cell Biology,
Imperial College School of Medicine at St Mary's, London W2 1PG, United Kingdom.

The pocket protein-E2F complexes are convergence points for cell cycle signaling.
In the present report, we identified and monitored the pocket protein-E2F
complexes in human primary B-lymphocytes after activation by phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate. Consistent with previous data from human and mouse fibroblasts and
T-lymphocytes, E2F4 and DP1 form the predominant E2F heterodimers both in G0 and 
G1 phases of the human B-lymphocyte cell cycle, whereas E2F1 and -3 are first
detected in late G1, and their expression levels increase towards S phase.
Intriguingly, the major E2F complex that we detected in quiescent human
B-lymphocytes is consisted of pRB, E2F4, and DP1. Though the levels of DP1 and -2
increase when cells progress from G0 to S, the proportion of DP1 to DP2 remains
relatively constant during the cell cycle. We also observed an increase in
electrophoretic mobility of the predominant E2F components, DP1 and E2F4, as
B-lymphocytes progressed from G0 into early G1. This increase in mobility was
attributable to dephosphorylation, as lambda phosphatase treatment could convert 
the slower migrating forms into the corresponding faster mobility forms. We
further demonstrated that this change in phosphorylation status correlates with a
decrease in DNA binding activity. This modulation of DNA binding activity
mediated through the dephosphorylation of DP1 and E2F4 could help to explain the 
lack of in vivo DNA footprinting in late G1 and S phases of gene promoters
negatively regulated through E2F sites and suggests a novel mechanism for
controlling E2F transcriptional activity during the transition from quiescence to
proliferation.

PMID: 10207023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. EMBO J. 1999 Apr 1;18(7):1878-90.

Timing of cyclin E gene expression depends on the regulated association of a
bipartite repressor element with a novel E2F complex.

Le Cam L(1), Polanowska J, Fabbrizio E, Olivier M, Philips A, Ng Eaton E, Classon
M, Geng Y, Sardet C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire, UMR 5535, CNRS, 1919 route de Mende, 34293,
Montpellier cedex 5, France.

Transient induction of the cyclin E gene in late G1 gates progression into S. We 
show that this event is controlled via a cyclin E repressor module (CERM), a
novel bipartite repressor element located near the cyclin E transcription start
site. CERM consists of a variant E2F-binding site and a contiguous upstream
AT-rich sequence which cooperate during G0/G1 to delay cyclin E expression until 
late G1. CERM binds the protein complex CERC, which disappears upon progression
through G0-G1 and reappears upon entry into the following G1. CERC disappearance 
correlates kinetically with the liberation of the CERM module in vivo and cyclin 
E transcriptional induction. CERC contains E2F4/DP1 and a pocket protein, and
sediments faster than classical E2F complexes in a glycerol gradient, suggesting 
the presence of additional components in a novel high molecular weight complex.
Affinity purified CERC binds to CERM but not to canonical E2F sites, thus
displaying behavior different from known E2F complexes. In cells nullizygous for 
members of the Rb family, CERC is still detectable and CERM-dependent repression 
is functional. Thus p130, p107 and pRb function interchangeably in CERC. Notably,
the CERC-CERM complex dissociates prematurely in pRb-/- cells in correspondence
with the premature expression of cyclin E. Thus, we identify a new regulatory
module that controls repression of G1-specific genes in G0/G1.

PMCID: PMC1171273
PMID: 10202151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Cell. 1999 Apr 2;97(1):53-61.

Active transcriptional repression by the Rb-E2F complex mediates G1 arrest
triggered by p16INK4a, TGFbeta, and contact inhibition.

Zhang HS(1), Postigo AA, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

Rb inhibits progression from G1 to S phase of the cell cycle. It associates with 
a number of cellular proteins; however, the nature of these interactions and
their relative significance in cell cycle regulation are still unclear. We
present evidence that Rb must normally interact with the E2F family of
transcription factors to arrest cells in G1, and that this arrest results from
active transcriptional repression by the Rb-E2F complex, not from inactivation of
E2F. Thus, a major role of E2F in cell cycle regulation is assembly of this
repressor complex. We demonstrate that active repression by Rb-E2F mediates the
G1 arrest triggered by TGFbeta, p16INK4a, and contact inhibition.

PMID: 10199402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Virol. 1999 May;73(5):3877-85.

Activation of promoter P4 of the autonomous parvovirus minute virus of mice at
early S phase is required for productive infection.

Deleu L(1), Pujol A, Faisst S, Rommelaere J.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Tumor Virology, Abteilung F0100 and Institut National de la Santé et
de la Recherche Médicale U375, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany.

Autonomous parvoviruses are tightly dependent on host cell factors for various
steps of their life cycle. In particular, DNA replication and gene expression of 
the prototype strain of the minute virus of mice (MVMp) are closely linked to the
onset of host cell DNA replication, pointing to the involvement of an
S-phase-specific cellular factor(s) in parvovirus multiplication. The viral
nonstructural protein NS-1 is absolutely required for parvovirus DNA replication 
and is able to transcriptionally regulate parvoviral and heterologous promoters. 
We previously showed that the promoter P4, which directs the transcription unit
encoding the NS proteins, is activated at the onset of S phase. This activation
is dependent on an E2F motif in the proximal region of promoter P4. An infectious
MVM DNA clone was mutated in the E2F motif of P4. The wild type and the E2F
mutant derivative were tested for their ability to produce progeny viruses after 
transfection of permissive cells. In the context of the whole MVMp genome, the
E2F mutation abolished P4 induction in S phase and inactivated the infectious
molecular clone, which failed to become amplified and generate progeny particles.
The virus could be rescued when NS proteins were supplied in trans, showing that 
P4 hyperactivity in S is needed to reach a level of NS-1 expression that is
sufficient to drive the viral replication cycle. These data show that
E2F-mediated P4 activation at the early S phase is a limiting factor for
parvovirus production. The primary barrier to parvovirus gene expression in G1 is
thought to be promoter formation rather than activation, due to the poor
conversion of the parental single-strand genome to a duplex form. The S
dependence of P4 activation may therefore be a sign of the virus adaptation to
life in the S-phase host cell. If the conversion block in G1 were to be leaky,
the S induction of promoter P4 could be envisioned as a safeguard against the
production of toxic NS proteins until cells reach the S phase and provide the
full machinery for parvovirus replication.

PMCID: PMC104165
PMID: 10196282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Cancer Gene Ther. 1999 Mar-Apr;6(2):163-71.

Apoptosis induction by E2F-1 via adenoviral-mediated gene transfer results in
growth suppression of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines.

Liu TJ(1), Wang M, Breau RL, Henderson Y, El-Naggar AK, Steck KD, Sicard MW,
Clayman GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston 77303, USA. tjlui@notes.mdacc.tmc.edu

E2F-1, a transcription factor by discovery, is thought to play a crucial role in 
regulating G1/S cell cycle progression. Its activity is modulated by complex
formation with the retinoblastoma protein and related proteins. Overexpression of
E2F-1 has been shown to induce apoptosis in quiescent fibroblasts. We constructed
a recombinant E2F-1 adenovirus to test whether an overexpression of E2F-1 in head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines would also induce apoptosis. Two cell
lines, Tu-138 and Tu-167, were chosen for use in this study. Both cell lines
harbor p53 mutations but express different levels of the retinoblastoma protein. 
Upon E2F-1 adenovirus infection, both cell lines expressed elevated levels of
E2F-1 protein and then activated a pRb-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter
construct containing an E2F-1 binding motif. In vitro growth assay demonstrated
that growth suppression by the E2F-1 protein was effective on both cell lines.
Results from DNA fragmentation and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated
deoxyuridine triphosphate-biotin nick end-labeling analyses indicated apoptosis
induction in cells infected with AdCMV-E2F-1. Moreover, ex vivo experiments in
nude mice showed total suppression of tumor growth at sites that received cells
infected AdCMV-E2F-1. An in vivo analysis of apoptosis using in situ end-labeling
further demonstrated the induction of apoptosis by AdCMV-E2F-1 in tumor-bearing
animals. These data indicate that overexpression of E2F-1 via an adenoviral
vector suppresses in vitro and in vivo growth of head and neck squamous carcinoma
cell lines through induction of apoptosis.

PMID: 10195883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 9;274(15):10339-48.

Two E2F sites control growth-regulated and cell cycle-regulated transcription of 
the Htf9-a/RanBP1 gene through functionally distinct mechanisms.

Di Fiore B(1), Guarguaglini G, Palena A, Kerkhoven RM, Bernards R, Lavia P.

Author information: 
(1)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Centre of Evolutionary Genetics, c/o
University La Sapienza, Via degli Apuli 4, 00185 Rome, Italy.

The gene encoding Ran-binding protein 1 (RanBP1) is transcribed in a cell
cycle-dependent manner. The RanBP1 promoter contains two binding sites for E2F
factors, named E2F-c, located proximal to the transcription start, and E2F-b,
falling in a more distal promoter region. We have now induced site-directed
mutagenesis in both sites. We have found that the distal E2F-b site, together
with a neighboring Sp1 element, actively controls up-regulation of transcription 
in S phase. The proximal E2F-c site plays no apparent role in cycling cells yet
is required for transcriptional repression upon growth arrest. Protein binding
studies suggest that each E2F site mediates specific interactions with individual
E2F family members. In addition, transient expression assays with mutagenized
promoter constructs indicate that the functional role of each site is also
dependent on its position relative to other regulatory elements in the promoter
context. Thus, the two E2F sites play opposite genetic functions and control
RanBP1 transcription through distinct molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 10187822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Cell Growth Differ. 1999 Mar;10(3):147-54.

Overproduction of MDM2 in vivo disrupts S phase independent of E2F1.

Reinke V(1), Bortner DM, Amelse LL, Lundgren K, Rosenberg MP, Finlay CA, Lozano
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Expression of a beta-lactoglobulin (BLG)/mdm2 transgene (BLGmdm2) in the
epithelial cells of the mouse mammary gland causes an uncoupling of S phase from 
M phase, resulting in polyploidy and tumor formation. The cell cycle defects are 
independent of interactions with p53. Because MDM2 also binds and activates the S
phase-specific transcription factor E2F1, we hypothesized that increased E2F1
activity causes the development of the BLGmdm2 phenotype. We, therefore,
generated BLGmdm2 mice that were null for E2F1. We observed no notable
differences in histology or cyclin gene expression between BLGmdm2 and
BLGmdm2/E2F1-/- mice, indicating that endogenous E2F1 activity was not required
for the BLGmdm2 phenotype. Because, depending on the experimental system, either 
loss of E2F1 function or overexpression of E2F1 results in transformation, we
also tested whether overexpression of E2F1 augmented the severity of the BLGmdm2 
phenotype by generating mice that were bitransgenic for BLGmdm2 and BLGE2F1. We
observed a unique mixture of the two single transgenic phenotypes histologically 
and found no significant changes in cyclin levels, indicating that overexpression
of E2F1 had no effect on the BLGmdm2 transgenic phenotype. Thus, increased
expression or absence of E2F1 does not affect the ability of MDM2 to disrupt the 
cell cycle.

PMID: 10099828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cell Growth Differ. 1999 Mar;10(3):141-6.

E2F-1 has properties of a radiosensitizer and its regulation by cyclin A kinase
is required for cell survival of fibrosarcoma cells lacking p53.

Pruschy M(1), Wirbelauer C, Glanzmann C, Bodis S, Krek W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospital Zürich, Switzerland.

Negative regulation of E2F-1 DNA binding function by cyclin A kinase represents
part of an S-phase checkpoint control system that, when activated, leads to
apoptosis. In this study, we examined the cellular sensitivity and resistance of 
isogenic mouse fibrosarcoma cell lines, differing primarily in their p53 status, 
to ectopic expression of wild-type (wt) E2F-1 and cyclin A kinase
binding-defective mutants of it. We found that E2F-1 (wt) potently affected the
survival of p53+/+ tumor cells but not that of p53-/- cells. In contrast,
expression of cyclin A kinase binding-defective E2F-1 species interfered with
cell survival of fibrosarcoma cells irrespective of their p53 status. Finally,
expression of E2F-1 (wt) in p53-/- fibrosarcoma cells enhanced the cytotoxic
effect of ionizing radiation in vitro and in vivo in a mouse tumor model. These
results suggest that E2F-1-dependent activation of an S-phase checkpoint is p53
independent and that E2F-1 possesses radiosensitizing properties in the absence
of p53.

PMID: 10099827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Apr;19(4):2936-45.

C/EBPalpha regulates formation of S-phase-specific E2F-p107 complexes in livers
of newborn mice.

Timchenko NA(1), Wilde M, Darlington GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA. nikolait@bcm.tmc.edu

We previously showed that the rate of hepatocyte proliferation in livers from
newborn C/EBPalpha knockout mice was increased. An examination of cell
cycle-related proteins showed that the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor
p21 level was reduced in the knockout animals compared to that in wild-type
littermates. Here we show additional cell cycle-associated proteins that are
affected by C/EBPalpha. We have observed that C/EBPalpha controls the composition
of E2F complexes through interaction with the retinoblastoma (Rb)-like protein,
p107, during prenatal liver development. S-phase-specific E2F complexes
containing E2F, DP, cdk2, cyclin A, and p107 are observed in the developing
liver. In wild-type animals these complexes disappear by day 18 of gestation and 
are no longer present in the newborn animals. In the C/EBPalpha mutant, the
S-phase-specific complexes do not diminish and persist to birth. The elevation of
levels of the S-phase-specific E2F-p107 complexes in C/EBPalpha knockout mice
correlates with the increased expression of several E2F-dependent genes such as
those that encode cyclin A, proliferating cell nuclear antigen, and p107. The
C/EBPalpha-mediated regulation of E2F binding is specific, since the deletion of 
another C/EBP family member, C/EBPbeta, does not change the pattern of E2F
binding during prenatal liver development. The addition of bacterially expressed,
purified His-C/EBPalpha to the E2F binding reaction resulted in the disruption of
E2F complexes containing p107 in nuclear extracts from C/EBPalpha knockout mouse 
livers. Ectopic expression of C/EBPalpha in cultured cells also leads to a
reduction of E2F complexes containing Rb family proteins. Coimmunoprecipitation
analyses revealed an interaction of C/EBPalpha with p107 but none with cdk2,
E2F1, or cyclin A. A region of C/EBPalpha that has sequence similarity to E2F is 
sufficient for the disruption of the E2F-p107 complexes. Despite its role as a
DNA binding protein, C/EBPalpha brings about a change in E2F complex composition 
through a protein-protein interaction. The disruption of E2F-p107 complexes
correlates with C/EBPalpha-mediated growth arrest of hepatocytes in newborn
animals.

PMCID: PMC84088
PMID: 10082561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cell Growth Differ. 1999 Feb;10(2):87-92.

Analysis of the degradation function of Mdm2.

Kubbutat MH(1), Ludwig RL, Levine AJ, Vousden KH.

Author information: 
(1)ABL Basic Research Program, National Cancer Institute-Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

Degradation of the p53 tumor suppressor protein has been shown to be regulated by
Mdm2. In this study, we identify regions of Mdm2 that are not required for p53
binding but are essential for degradation. Mdm2 mutants lacking these regions
function in a dominant negative fashion, stabilizing endogenous p53 in cells by
interfering with the degradative function of the endogenous Mdm2. p53 protein
stabilized in this way does not strongly enhance the expression of
p21(Waf1/Cip1), the product of a p53-responsive gene, supporting the model in
which binding of Mdm2 to the NH2-terminal domain of p53 inhibits interaction with
other components of the basal transcriptional machinery. Interestingly,
COOH-terminal truncations of Mdm2 that retain p53 binding but fail to mediate its
degradation are also stabilized themselves. Because Mdm2, like p53, is normally
an unstable protein that is degraded through the proteasome, this result suggests
a direct link between the regulation of Mdm2 and p53 stability.

PMID: 10074902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1999 Feb;9(1):31-9.

pRb and E2f-1 in mouse development and tumorigenesis.

Macleod K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Cellular Pathology, University of Dundee, Ninewells 
Hospital, Dundee DD1 9SY, UK. k.f.macleod@dundee.ac.uk

Our understanding of how RB and E2F-1 function has progressed significantly from 
the model in which RB negatively regulates expression of genes required for S
phase by binding to and inhibiting E2F-1. Both RB and E2F-1 have been shown
recently to possess additional properties and mechanisms of regulation relevant
to developmental and tumorigenic processes. In particular, it is now realised
that RB has E2F-independent tumor suppressor functions which rely upon the
ability of RB to induce differentiation. For its part, E2F-1 is unique amongst
E2F family members in its capacity to induce apoptosis and this function is
clearly relevant to our appreciation of E2F-1 as a conditional tumor suppressor. 
E2F-1 can induce both apoptosis and S-phase transition and whether E2F-1 acts as 
an oncogene or a tumor-suppressor gene may depend on the extent to which E2F-1
induces apoptosis as opposed to G1/S transition.

PMID: 10072353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Dev Biol. 1999 Mar 15;207(2):257-70.

Neural precursor cells differentiating in the absence of Rb exhibit delayed
terminal mitosis and deregulated E2F 1 and 3 activity.

Callaghan DA(1), Dong L, Callaghan SM, Hou YX, Dagnino L, Slack RS.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute, Ottawa General Hospital Research Institute,
University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario, K1H 8M5, Canada.

The severe neurological deficit in embryos carrying null mutations for the
retinoblastoma (Rb) gene suggests that Rb plays a crucial role in neurogenesis.
While developing neurons undergo apoptosis in vivo neural precursor cells
cultured from Rb-deficient embryos appear to differentiate and survive. To
determine whether Rb is an essential regulator of the intrinsic pathway
modulating terminal mitosis we examined the terminal differentiation of primary
cortical progenitor cells and bFGF-dependent neural stem cells derived from
Rb-deficient mice. Although Rb -/- neural precursor cells are able to
differentiate in vitro we show that these cells exhibit a significant delay in
terminal mitosis relative to wild-type cells. Furthermore, Rb -/- cells surviving
in vitro exhibit an upregulation of p107 that is found in complexes with E2F3.
This suggests that p107 may partially compensate for the loss of Rb in neural
precursor cells. Functional ablation of Rb family proteins by adenovirus-mediated
delivery of an E1A N-terminal mutant results in apoptosis in Rb-deficient cells, 
consistent with the interpretation that other Rb family proteins may facilitate
differentiation and survival. While p107 is upregulated and interacts with the
putative Rb target E2F3 in neural precursor cells, our results indicate that it
clearly cannot restore normal E2F regulation. Rb-deficient cells exhibit a
significant enhancement of E2F 1 and 3 activity throughout differentiation
concomitant with the aberrant expression of E2F-inducible genes. In these studies
we show that Rb is essential for the regulation of E2F 1 and 3 activity as well
as the onset of terminal mitosis in neural precursor cells.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10068462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Oncogene. 1999 Jan 21;18(3):679-88.

Rapid dephosphorylation of p107 following UV irradiation.

Voorhoeve PM(1), Watson RJ, Farlie PG, Bernards R, Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, The Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam.

In response to UV irradiation, mouse NIH3T3 fibroblasts transiently arrest
predominantly in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Here, we investigate the role of
the retinoblastoma-related pocket proteins in this biological process. We report 
here that UV induces an increase in p107/E2F complexes, shown previously to be
repressors of E2F-dependent transcriptional activity. Several lines of evidence
indicate that the increase of p107/E2F complexes following UV irradiation is a
consequence of rapid dephosphorylation of p107. First, UV-mediated p107
dephosphorylation could be abolished by pretreatment of NIH3T3 fibroblasts with
the serine/threonine phosphatase inhibitors calyculin A and okadaic acid. Second,
alteration of protein phosphatase 2A holoenzyme composition by over-expression of
specific B subunits interfered with UV-mediated dephosphorylation of p107.
Consistent with this, p107 could be dephosphorylated in vitro with PP2A.
Moreover, dephosphorylation of p107 was shown to be independent of the activity
of p53 and p21, as it occurred also in UV-treated p53-null as well as p21-null
mouse fibroblasts. We observed a close correlation between the UV dosages
required for G1 cell cycle arrest and p107 dephosphorylation. Our data suggest a 
model in which UV radiation-induced cell cycle arrest depends, at least in part, 
on the induction of a PP2A-like phosphatase that acts on p107.

PMID: 9989818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Oncogene. 1998 Dec 24;17(25):3365-83.

Role of the retinoblastoma protein family, pRB, p107 and p130 in the negative
control of cell growth.

Graña X(1), Garriga J, Mayol X.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology and Department of
Biochemistry, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

The retinoblastoma family of proteins, also known as pocket proteins, includes
the product of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene and the functionally and
structurally related proteins p107 and p130. Pocket proteins control growth
processes in many cell types, and this has been linked to the ability of pocket
proteins to interact with a multitude of cellular proteins that regulate gene
expression at various levels. By regulating gene expression, pocket proteins
control cell cycle progression, cell cycle entry and exit, cell differentiation
and apoptosis. This review will focus on the mechanisms of regulation of pocket
proteins and how modulation of pocket protein levels and phosphorylation status
regulate association with their cellular targets. The coordinated regulation of
pocket proteins provides the cells with a competence mechanism for passage
through certain cell growth and differentiation transitions.

PMID: 9916999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. EMBO J. 1999 Jan 4;18(1):212-28.

Integration of a growth-suppressing BTB/POZ domain protein with the DP component 
of the E2F transcription factor.

de la Luna S(1), Allen KE, Mason SL, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Davidson Building, University 
of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.

Transcription factor E2F plays an important role in orchestrating early cell
cycle progression through its ability to co-ordinate and integrate the cell cycle
with the transcription apparatus. Physiological E2F arises when members of two
distinct families of proteins interact as E2F-DP heterodimers, in which the E2F
component mediates transcriptional activation and the physical interaction with
pocket proteins, such as the tumour suppressor protein pRb. In contrast, a
discrete role for the DP subunit has not been defined. We report the
identification and characterization of DIP, a novel mammalian protein that can
interact with the DP component of E2F. DIP was found to contain a BTB/POZ domain 
and shows significant identity with the Drosophila melanogaster germ cell-less
gene product. In mammalian cells, DIP is distributed in a speckled pattern at the
nuclear envelope region, and can direct certain DP subunits and the associated
heterodimeric E2F partner into a similar pattern. DIP-dependent growth arrest is 
modulated by the expression of DP proteins, and mutant derivatives of DIP that
are compromised in cell cycle arrest exhibit reduced binding to the DP subunit.
Our study defines a new pathway of growth control that is integrated with the E2F
pathway through the DP subunit of the heterodimer.

PMCID: PMC1171116
PMID: 9878064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Exp Med. 1999 Jan 4;189(1):63-73.

STAT3 is required for the gp130-mediated full activation of the c-myc gene.

Kiuchi N(1), Nakajima K, Ichiba M, Fukada T, Narimatsu M, Mizuno K, Hibi M,
Hirano T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Biomedical Research Center, Osaka University
Medical School, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) family members have
been implicated in regulating the growth, differentiation, and death of normal
and transformed cells in response to either extracellular stimuli, including
cytokines and growth factors, or intracellular tyrosine kinases. c-myc expression
is coordinately regulated by multiple signals in these diverse cellular
responses. We show that STAT3 mostly mediates the rapid activation of the c-myc
gene upon stimulation of the interleukin (IL)-6 receptor or gp130, a signal
transducing subunit of the receptor complexes for the IL-6 cytokine family. STAT3
does so most likely by binding to cis-regulatory region(s) of the c-myc gene. We 
show that STAT3 binds to a region overlapping with the E2F site in the c-myc
promoter and this site is critical for the c-myc gene promoter- driven
transcriptional activation by IL-6 or gp130 signals. This is the first
identification of the linkage between a member of the STAT family and the c-myc
gene activation, and also explains how the IL-6 family of cytokines is capable of
inducing the expression of the c-myc gene.

PMCID: PMC1887683
PMID: 9874564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Int J Oncol. 1999 Jan;14(1):5-14.

p53-independent increase in E2F-1 expression enhances the cytotoxic effects of
etoposide and of adriamycin.

Meng RD(1), Phillips P, El-Deiry WS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology and Cell Cycle Regulation, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Departments of Medicine, Genetics, Cancer Center, and
Institute for Human Gene Therapy, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia,

The transcription factor E2F-1 drives cell cycle progression at the G1- to
S-phase boundary; however, overexpression of E2F-1 can induce apoptosis. We show 
here that E2F-1 protein levels increase in human medulloblastoma, glioma, lung,
colon, and bladder cancer cell lines (n=7) following treatment with the DNA
damaging agents adriamycin or etoposide. This induction of E2F-1 occurs
independently of Rb or p53 status and involves new protein synthesis. Although
E2F-1 protein levels increase following DNA damage, several genes
transcriptionally targeted by E2F-1 are not similarly induced. Rather, induction 
of E2F-1 in the tumor cells correlates with their sensitivity to adriamycin or to
etoposide. Correspondingly, fibroblasts from E2F-1 knockout mice are more
resistant to DNA damage than cells from normal mice. Overexpression of E2F-1
protein in tumor cell lines infected with an adenovirus encoding wild-type E2F-1 
leads to enhanced cytotoxicity following exposure to DNA damaging agents, which
results from enhanced apoptosis. The results of this study implicate a role for
E2F-1 in p53-independent cytotoxicity of chemotherapy and provide a
pharmacological tool for increasing levels of the apoptosis-inducing E2F-1
protein.

PMID: 9863003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Dec 22;95(26):15583-6.

Endogenous E2F-1 promotes timely G0 exit of resting mouse embryo fibroblasts.

Wang ZM(1), Yang H, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, 44 Binney Street,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Much evidence strongly suggests a positive role for one or more E2F species in
the control of exit from G0/G1. Results described here provide direct evidence
that endogenous E2F-1, as predicted, contributes to progression from G0 to S. By 
contrast, cycling cells lacking an intact E2F-1 gene demonstrated normal cell
cycle distribution. Therefore, E2F-1 exerts a unique function leading to timely
G0 exit of resting cultured primary cells, while at the same time being
unnecessary for normal G1 to S phase progression of cycling cells.

PMCID: PMC28086
PMID: 9861012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Gene. 1998 Nov 26;223(1-2):355-60.

Characterization of the 3' untranslated region of mouse E2F1 mRNA.

Bartley SM(1), Szakaly RJ, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors has been implicated in the regulation of 
the G1 to S phase transition of the mammalian cell cycle. We have focused on
characterizing the cell cycle stage-specific expression of one family member,
E2F1. Previous studies indicated that there are two mouse E2F1 (mE2F1) mRNA
species whose abundance peaks in early S phase. However, it was unknown as to
what constituted the structural difference between the two mE2F1 mRNAs and
whether or not they encoded identical proteins. We have now cloned sequences
corresponding to the 3' untranslated region (3'-UTR) of the mE2F1 gene. Northern 
blot analyses using different probes demonstrated that the two E2F1 mRNAs were
distinguished by differences in the length of their 3' UTRs. We found that the
longer (2.7-kb) mE2F1 mRNA contained two consensus RNA instability elements that 
the shorter (2.2-kb) mE2F1 mRNA lacked. However, a comparison of the stability of
the 2.7-kb and the 2.2-kb mE2F1 mRNAs suggests that both mE2F1 mRNAs are fairly
stable, having a half-life of 6-9h in both asynchronously growing cells and in
the S phase of synchronized cells. Thus, we have determined that both mE2F1 mRNAs
contain the identical coding region of the E2F1 protein and that enforced
expression of mE2F1 mRNA should not be hampered by problems with RNA stability.

PMID: 9858765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Science. 1998 Dec 18;282(5397):2270-2.

p53-independent role of MDM2 in TGF-beta1 resistance.

Sun P(1), Dong P, Dai K, Hannon GJ, Beach D.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, 
USA.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) inhibits cell proliferation, and
acquisition of TGF-beta resistance has been linked to tumorigenesis. A genetic
screen was performed to identify complementary DNAs that abrogated TGF-beta
sensitivity in mink lung epithelial cells. Ectopic expression of murine double
minute 2 rescued TGF-beta-induced growth arrest in a p53-independent manner by
interference with retinoblastoma susceptibility gene product (Rb)/E2F function.
In human breast tumor cells, increased MDM2 expression levels correlated with
TGF-beta resistance. Thus, MDM2 may confer TGF-beta resistance in a subset of
tumors and may promote tumorigenesis by interference with two independent tumor
suppressors, p53 and Rb.

PMID: 9856953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Cancer Res. 1998 Nov 15;58(22):5049-52.

The COOH-terminal region of pRb2/p130 binds to histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1),
enhancing transcriptional repression of the E2F-dependent cyclin A promoter.

Stiegler P(1), De Luca A, Bagella L, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Jefferson Medical College, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The tumor suppressor retinoblastoma protein family members pRb, p107, and
pRb2/p130 are potent negative transcriptional regulators. The best understood
target is the transcription factor E2F, which activates cell cycle-dependent
transcription of genes controlling and promoting the cell division cycle (e.g.,
cyclin A). pRb2/p130 is known to be important in implementing cell cycle exit
into G0 due to serum deprivation or various differentiation programs. Several
recent studies demonstrated the effect histone acetylases and histone
deacetylases (HDACs) have on fine-tuning transcriptional regulation of eucaryotic
cells. In this study, we demonstrate that pRb2/p130 binds to HDAC1. This
interaction increases the ability of pRb2/p130 to inhibit transcription of the
E2F-dependent cyclin A promoter in vivo. We also identify the COOH-terminal 35aa 
as being necessary for stable interaction between HDAC1 and pRb2/p130.

PMID: 9823308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Oncogene. 1998 Oct 29;17(17):2251-8.

Deregulated expression of cell-cycle proteins during premalignant progression in 
SENCAR mouse skin.

Rodriguez-Puebla ML(1), LaCava M, Gimenez-Conti IB, Johnson DG, Conti CJ.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Science Park-Research
Division, Smithville 78957, USA.

It is now evident that several genes encoding regulatory activities that control 
the mammalian cell cycle, particularly some that control the progression of
quiescent cells through G1 and into S phase, are targets for alterations that
underlie the development of neoplasms. Here, we made a sequential study of
alterations in cell cycle protein expression and complex formation among cyclin, 
cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs) and CDK inhibitors (CKIs) during premalignant
progression in SENCAR mouse skin tumors. Changes in the level of expression were 
observed in positive (cyclin D1, D2, and E2F family members) and negative
regulators (p16Ink4a, p57Kip2) of the cell cycle. Also, we observed the formation
of cyclin/CDK/CKI complexes. The amounts of these proteins and complexes
increased substantially at specific times during promotion but not during
malignant conversion to carcinomas. These data show that deregulation of growth
control occurs in benign tumors and that subsequent mutations not involved
cell-cycle regulation are probably necessary to induce invasive behavior.

PMID: 9811455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mol Cell. 1998 Sep;2(3):293-304.

Mutation of E2f-1 suppresses apoptosis and inappropriate S phase entry and
extends survival of Rb-deficient mouse embryos.

Tsai KY(1), Hu Y, Macleod KF, Crowley D, Yamasaki L, Jacks T.

Author information: 
(1)MIT Center for Cancer Research, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge 02139, USA.

Mice mutant for the Rb tumor suppressor gene die in mid-gestation with defects in
erythropoiesis, cell cycle control, and apoptosis. We show here that embryos
mutant for both Rb and its downstream target E2f-1 demonstrate significant
suppression of apoptosis and S phase entry in certain tissues compared to Rb
mutants, implicating E2f-1 as a critical mediator of these effects. Up-regulation
of the p53 pathway, required for cell death in these cells in Rb mutants, is also
suppressed in the Rb/E2f-1 double mutants. However, double mutants have defects
in cell cycle regulation and apoptosis in some tissues and die at approximately
E17.0 with anemia and defective skeletal muscle and lung development,
demonstrating that E2F-1 regulation is not the sole function of pRB in
development.

PMID: 9774968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Mol Cell. 1998 Sep;2(3):283-92.

Key roles for E2F1 in signaling p53-dependent apoptosis and in cell division
within developing tumors.

Pan H(1), Yin C, Dyson NJ, Harlow E, Yamasaki L, Van Dyke T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill 27599, USA.

Apoptosis induced by the p53 tumor suppressor can attenuate cancer growth in
preclinical animal models. Inactivation of the pRb proteins in mouse brain
epithelium by the T121 oncogene induces aberrant proliferation and p53-dependent 
apoptosis. p53 inactivation causes aggressive tumor growth due to an 85%
reduction in apoptosis. Here, we show that E2F1 signals p53-dependent apoptosis
since E2F1 deficiency causes an 80% apoptosis reduction. E2F1 acts upstream of
p53 since transcriptional activation of p53 target genes is also impaired. Yet,
E2F1 deficiency does not accelerate tumor growth. Unlike normal cells, tumor cell
proliferation is impaired without E2F1, counterbalancing the effect of apoptosis 
reduction. These studies may explain the apparent paradox that E2F1 can act as
both an oncogene and a tumor suppressor in experimental systems.

PMID: 9774967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Nov;18(11):6679-97.

Cell cycle-regulated expression of mammalian CDC6 is dependent on E2F.

Hateboer G(1), Wobst A, Petersen BO, Le Cam L, Vigo E, Sardet C, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, 20141
Milan, Italy.

The E2F transcription factors are essential regulators of cell growth in
multicellular organisms, controlling the expression of a number of genes whose
products are involved in DNA replication and cell proliferation. In Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, the MBF and SBF transcription complexes have functions similar to
those of E2F proteins in higher eukaryotes, by regulating the timed expression of
genes implicated in cell cycle progression and DNA synthesis. The CDC6 gene is a 
target for MBF and SBF-regulated transcription. S. cerevisiae Cdc6p induces the
formation of the prereplication complex and is essential for initiation of DNA
replication. Interestingly, the Cdc6p homolog in Schizosaccharomyces pombe,
Cdc18p, is regulated by DSC1, the S. pombe homolog of MBF. By cloning the
promoter for the human homolog of Cdc6p and Cdc18p, we demonstrate here that the 
cell cycle-regulated transcription of this gene is dependent on E2F. In vivo
footprinting data demonstrate that the identified E2F sites are occupied in
resting cells and in exponentially growing cells, suggesting that E2F is
responsible for downregulating the promoter in early phases of the cell cycle and
the subsequent upregulation when cells enter S phase. Our data also demonstrate
that the human CDC6 protein (hCDC6) is essential and limiting for DNA synthesis, 
since microinjection of an anti-CDC6 rabbit antiserum blocks DNA synthesis and
CDC6 cooperates with cyclin E to induce entry into S phase in cotransfection
experiments. Furthermore, E2F is sufficient to induce expression of the
endogenous CDC6 gene even in the absence of de novo protein synthesis. In
conclusion, our results provide a direct link between regulated progression
through G1 controlled by the pRB pathway and the expression of proteins essential
for the initiation of DNA replication.

PMCID: PMC109252
PMID: 9774682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Exp Cell Res. 1998 Oct 10;244(1):157-70.

Regulation of expression and activity of distinct pRB, E2F, D-type cyclin, and
CKI family members during terminal differentiation of P19 cells.

Gill RM(1), Slack R, Kiess M, Hamel PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1A8, Canada.

The cell cycle regulatory proteins, which include cyclin-dependent kinases
(cdks), cdk inhibitors (CKIs), cyclins, and the pRB, and E2F families of
proteins, constitute a network of interacting factors which govern exit from or
passage through the mammalian cell cycle. While the proteins within these
families have similar structural characteristics, each family member exhibits
distinct expression patterns during embryogenesis and distinct biological
activities. In order to begin to understand the tissue-specific roles of these
interacting factors, we determined the expression pattern and activity of the
pRB, E2F, cyclin, cdk, and CKI families of cell cycle regulatory proteins during 
retinoic acid-induced (neuronal pathway) and DMSO-induced (cardiac muscle
pathway) differentiation of the pluripotent murine embryonal carcinoma cell line,
P19. We demonstrate here that P19 terminal differentiation causes
lineage-specific changes in the expression and activity of distinct members of
the E2F, pRB, cyclin, and CKI families. Furthermore, dynamic changes in the
activities of these cell cycle regulatory proteins occur through several
overlapping mechanisms, culminating in repression of DNA-binding activity by all 
of the E2F family members as cells terminally differentiate.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9770359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1998 Sep;12(1-2):16-28.

The transcription factor E2F-1 in SV40 T antigen-induced cerebellar Purkinje cell
degeneration.

Athanasiou MC(1), Yunis W, Coleman N, Ehlenfeldt R, Clark HB, Orr HT, Feddersen
RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, 55455, USA.

Transgenic targeting of SV40 large T antigen (Tag) expression to murine
cerebellar Purkinje cells induces these normally postmitotic neurons to undergo
DNA synthesis and apoptosis. It has been proposed that these effects of Tag are
due to the binding of Tag to pRb, which leads to the release and activation of
the transcription factor E2F. Here it is reported that E2F and CDC2, the protein 
product of a gene regulated by E2F, were detectable in the Purkinje cell nuclei
of Tag expressing transgenic animals. To directly test whether E2F-1 is part of
the mechanism of Tag-induced Purkinje cell degeneration, transgenic mice that
overexpress E2F-1 specifically in cerebellar Purkinje cells were generated.
Although E2F-1 itself did not affect Purkinje cells, it did accelerate
Tag-induced ataxia and Purkinje cell loss, suggesting that E2F-1 can contribute
to the mechanism of Tag-induced Purkinje cell degeneration.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9770337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Cell Biochem. 1998 Sep 15;70(4):528-42.

c-myc-enhanced S phase entry in keratinocytes is associated with positive and
negative effects on cyclin-dependent kinases.

Alexandrow MG(1), Moses HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and the Vanderbilt Cancer Center, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-6838, USA.

The function of the c-myc proto-oncogene in cell cycle progression remains
unclear. In order to examine the role c-myc may play in cell cycle progression,
we have expressed the hormone-inducible MycER protein in the nontransformed,
EGF-dependent mouse keratinocyte cell line BALB/MK. We have found that activation
of MycER, but not a mutant MycER, Gal4ER, or FosER, leads to an EGF-dependent and
hormone-dependent increased incorporation of labeled thymidine only during the S 
phase of the cell cycle in BALB/MK cells. A possible explanation for the increase
in thymidine incorporation comes from flow cytometric analyses that reveal that
activation of MycER leads to an increase in the total number of cells that enter 
S phase after EGF restimulation. Investigation of the intracellular effects of
Myc activation shows that the expression of several putative Myc-sensitive
proteins, cyclins A, E, and D1, and the E2F-1 protein are unaffected by Myc
induction. Interestingly, we find that the histone H1 kinase activity associated 
with an E2F-1 complex containing Cyclin A and Cdk-2, but not that associated with
Cyclin E, in late G1 and early S phases is increased in cells containing
hormone-activated MycER, but not FosER. Although the mechanism for this
Myc-dependent effect on E2F-1-associated kinase activity is still unknown, it
does not appear to involve dissociation of the Cdk inhibitor p27Kip1 from the
complexes as suggested by others. However, we have also found that
hormone-treated cells actually show more p16INK4A inhibitor associated with
another kinase, Cdk-4, as the cells are entering S phase. Altogether, the data
suggest that the presence of excessive Myc protein in keratinocytes can stimulate
otherwise noncycling cells to enter the cell cycle, and that this effect of Myc
involves both positive effects on E2F-1-associated Cdk-2 and negative effects on 
Cdk-4 in late G1.

PMID: 9712150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Kokubyo Gakkai Zasshi. 1998 Jun;65(2):172-88.

[Interaction of E2F/Rb family members with factor binding to co-repressor element
on B-myb and E2F1 promoters].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakajima Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Faculty of Dentistry,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University.

The E2F transcription factor plays an important role in controlling the
expression of genes required for cell cycle progression. The transcription of a
number of these genes, including E2F1 and B-myb, is repressed in G0/early G1 at
E2F DNA binding sites mediated by interaction of E2F with the Rb family member
proteins. It was shown that a corepressor element CHR, which was originally
identified in the B-myb promoter, is also responsible for the repression of the
E2F1 promoter. The mutation of the CHR element adjacent to E2F sites leads to a
derepression of the E2F1 promoter in quiescent cells. The CHR-mutated promoter is
activated by the E2F family of proteins (E2F1, E2F2, E2F3, and E2F4) but unable
to be repressed by any of the Rb family members (Rb, p107, and p130) to the level
of the wild-type promoter activity in G0, indicating that the repression by the
Rb family members is required for the corepressor element. Moreover, it was shown
that a factor specifically bound to the CHR element is co-purified with E2F by
DNA affinity purification and co-immunoprecipitated with E2F4 and the Rb family
members. These results seggested that E2F and the Rb family member proteins
regulate the transcription of the E2F1 and B-myb genes by associating with an
additional corepressor protein.

PMID: 9711036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;18(9):5032-41.

A cellular repressor of E1A-stimulated genes that inhibits activation by E2F.

Veal E(1), Eisenstein M, Tseng ZH, Gill G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA.

The adenovirus E1A protein both activates and represses gene expression to
promote cellular proliferation and inhibit differentiation. Here we report the
identification and characterization of a cellular protein that antagonizes
transcriptional activation and cellular transformation by E1A. This protein,
termed CREG for cellular repressor of E1A-stimulated genes, shares limited
sequence similarity with E1A and binds both the general transcription factor TBP 
and the tumor suppressor pRb in vitro. In transfection assays, CREG represses
transcription and antagonizes 12SE1A-mediated activation of both the adenovirus
E2 and cellular hsp70 promoters. CREG also antagonizes E1A-mediated
transformation, as expression of CREG reduces the efficiency with which E1A and
the oncogene ras cooperate to transform primary cells. Binding sites for E2F, a
key transcriptional regulator of cell cycle progression, were found to be
required for repression of the adenovirus E2 promoter by CREG, and CREG was shown
to inhibit activation by E2F. Since both the adenovirus E1A protein and
transcriptional activation by E2F function to promote cellular proliferation, the
results presented here suggest that CREG activity may contribute to the
transcriptional control of cell growth and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC109088
PMID: 9710587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Oncogene. 1998 Aug 6;17(5):585-94.

Regulation of E2F-1 gene expression in avian cells.

Espanel X(1), Le Cam L, North S, Sardet C, Brun G, Gillet G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR 49 CNRS, ENS Lyon,
France.

E2F-1 is the prototype of a family of transcription factors playing a central
role in the control of cell proliferation and apoptosis. E2F DNA binding activity
is down-regulated during cellular differentiation, which is correlated with cell 
division arrest. We report here that the expression of E2F-1 itself is
down-regulated in the developing quail neural retina between embryonic days
E8-E10. This event occurs just after the massive arrest of the quail neuroretina 
cell division (E7-E8). To gain further insight into the regulatory mechanisms
monitoring E2F-1 expression in differentiating neurons, we have cloned the quail 
E2F-1 promoter. In vivo DNA footprintings of this promoter have shown that a
number of potential SP-1 and C/EBP response elements are constitutively occupied 
in the entire quail neuroretina of E5 and E14, whereas the two consensus
palindromic E2F binding sites are only protected at E5. This suggests that these 
E2F elements participate in down-regulation of E2F-1 gene expression during avian
neuroretina development. CAT reporter assays have shown that E2F-1 in association
with its partner DP-1 transactivates its own promoter, whereas p105Rb inhibits
the E2F-1 promoter. Both E2F-1/DP-1 and p105Rh require the presence of the E2F
binding sites to mediate their effects. However, experiments performed with
deletion mutants of the promoter strongly suggest that other regions located
upstream of the E2F binding sites also mediate part of the E2F-1 transactivating 
effect on its own promoter. Altogether, these results suggest that the
down-regulation of E2F-1 gene expression in differentiating neurons could be due,
in part, to the E2F/Rb complexes binding to the E2F-1 promoter.

PMID: 9704924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Nat Genet. 1998 Aug;19(4):371-4.

A retinoblastoma-binding protein that affects cell-cycle control and confers
transforming ability.

Woitach JT(1), Zhang M, Niu CH, Thorgeirsson SS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Division of Basic Sciences,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4255, USA.

The retinoblastoma (RB) gene is one of the most extensively studied
tumour-suppressor genes. Deletion or inactivation of both RB alleles is an
essential, rate-limiting step in the formation of retinoblastoma and osteosarcoma
that arise in families that carry mutant RB (ref. 2). RB inactivation is also
found in other human tumours. Whereas loss of RB function is associated with the 
loss of cellular proliferative control, introduction of a wild-type RB can
suppress cell growth and tumorigenicity. Thus, identification of factors that
interfere with and/or control the function of the RB protein is critical for
understanding both cell-cycle control and oncogenesis. Here we describe a new
gene, Bog (for B5T over-expressed gene), which was identified and shown to be
overexpressed in several transformed rat liver epithelial (RLE) cell lines
resistant to the growth-inhibitory effect of TGF-beta1, as well as in primary
human liver tumours. The Bog protein shares homology with other
retinoblastoma-binding proteins and contains the Rb-binding motif LXCXE. Using
the yeast two-hybrid system and co-immunoprecipitation, we demonstrated that Bog 
binds to Rb. In vivo, Bog/Rb complexes do not contain E2F-1, and Bog can displace
E2F-1 from E2F-1/Rb complexes in vitro. Overexpression of Bog in normal RLE cells
conferred resistance to the growth-inhibitory effect of TGF-beta1. Furthermore,
normal RLE cells are rapidly transformed when Bog is continuously overexpressed
and form hepatoblastoma-like tumours when transplanted into nude mice. These data
suggest that Bog may be important in the transformation process, in part due to
its capacity to confer resistance to the growth-inhibitory effects of TGF-beta1
through interaction with Rb and the subsequent displacement of E2F-1.

PMID: 9697699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Int J Oncol. 1998 Sep;13(3):549-55.

Cyclin A levels, the duration of S phase and sensitivity to a chemotherapeutic
agent are altered in fibroblasts cultured on a fibronectin matrix.

Min I(1), Stubbs MC, Strachan GD, Hall DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Culture of murine embryonic fibroblasts, but not vascular smooth muscle cells, on
a fibronectin matrix significantly shortens their transit time through the S
phase of the cell cycle. This shortening corresponds to an increase in both
cyclin A protein levels and active cyclin A/cdk2 complex. The increase in cyclin 
A protein appears due to a translational/post-translational mechanism since there
is no increase in cyclin A mRNA following culture of the cells on fibronectin.
Treatment of cells cultured on fibronectin with a short pulse of the S phase
chemotherapeutic agent camptothecin, resulted in a relative protection from cell 
death when compared to cells cultured on tissue culture plastic. Thus, while the 
cells have increased rate of transit through S phase fibronectin-mediated
signaling protects the cells from S phase mediated apoptosis. In addition,
fibroblasts constitutively expressing a mutant E2F1 transcription factor
(E2F1d87) have a lengthened S phase, due to a truncation of the cyclin A/cdk2
binding domain. Culture of these mutant- expressing cells on fibronectin did not 
shorten their S phase duration in spite of the fact that cyclin A levels and
active cyclin A/cdk2 complex were significantly elevated. Thus, although the
fibronectin signaling mechanisms culminating in elevated cyclin A were intact in 
these mutant E2F1 expressing cells, they were insensitive to the effects of this 
elevated cyclin A. The effect of the mutant E2F1d87 on slowing transit through S 
phase appears dominant over the effect of elevated cyclin A.

PMID: 9683792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Oncogene. 1998 Jul 16;17(2):143-55.

E2F-1-induced p53-independent apoptosis in transgenic mice.

Holmberg C(1), Helin K, Sehested M, Karlström O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Biology,
University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

The E2F transcription factors are key targets for the retinoblastoma protein,
pRB. By inactivation of E2Fs, pRB prevents progression to the S phase. To test
proliferative functions of E2F, we generated transgenic mice expressing human
E2F-1 and/or human DP-1. When the hydroxymethyl glutaryl coenzyme A reductase
promoter was used to express DP-1, overexpression occurred in a variety of
tissues and did not confer phenotypic changes. In contrast, expression of E2F-1
from the same promoter was obtained only in testicles, in which E2F-1
overexpression caused atrophy and sterility through a process involving increased
apoptosis in the germinal epithelium. This effect was potentiated by simultaneous
overexpression of DP-1. Testicular atrophy as a result of overexpression of E2F-1
and DP-1 is independent of functional p53, since p53-nullizygous transgenic mice 
overexpressing E2F-1 and DP-1 also suffered testicular atrophy.

PMID: 9674698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jul 21;95(15):8858-63.

Increased E2F1 activity induces skin tumors in mice heterozygous and nullizygous 
for p53.

Pierce AM(1), Gimenez-Conti IB, Schneider-Broussard R, Martinez LA, Conti CJ,
Johnson DG.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Science Park-Research
Division, Department of Carcinogenesis, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.

The p16(INK4a)-cyclin D-retinoblastoma tumor suppressor pathway is disrupted in
most human cancers, and it has been suggested that the subsequent release of E2F 
transcription factors from inhibitory complexes may be a key event in tumor
development. We described recently the generation of transgenic mice with E2F1
gene expression targeted to squamous epithelial tissues by a keratin 5 (K5)
promoter. In the present study, K5 E2F1 transgenic mice were crossed with p53
null mice to examine functional interactions between E2F1 and p53 in vivo. We
find that E2F1-induced apoptosis of epidermal keratinocytes is reduced in K5 E2F1
transgenic mice lacking p53, whereas E2F1-induced hyperproliferation is
unaffected by p53 status. We also find that K5 E2F1 transgenic mice heterozygous 
or nullizygous for p53 develop spontaneous skin carcinomas, which normally are
rare in p53-deficient mice. The timing of tumor development correlates with the
level of E2F1 transgene expression and the status of p53. In primary transgenic
keratinocytes, the major change in E2F1 DNA-binding activity is the generation of
a complex also containing the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein.
Nevertheless, the expression and associated kinase activity of cyclin E, a known 
target for E2F transcriptional activity, is elevated significantly in K5 E2F1
transgenic keratinocytes. These findings firmly establish that increased E2F1
expression can contribute to tumor development and suggest that p53 plays an
important role in eliminating cells with deregulated E2F1 activity.

PMCID: PMC21167
PMID: 9671769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jul 21;95(15):8574-9.

Control of retinoblastoma protein-independent hematopoietic cell cycle by the
pRB-related p130.

Hoshikawa Y(1), Mori A, Amimoto K, Iwabe K, Hatakeyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 170-8455, Japan.

The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (pRB) is a potent inhibitor of
mammalian cell growth and the functional inactivation of pRB is widely presumed
to be essential for progression of the cell cycle from G1 phase. In this work,
the generality of pRB-based cell cycle control in mammalian cells was addressed
by conditionally expressing pRB in cytokine-dependent hematopoietic cells. We
show herein that these cells are able to progress through the cell cycle in
response to cytokine despite the continued presence of supraphysiological amounts
of wild-type pRB or phosphorylation-resistant pRB mutants. However, their growth 
was strongly blocked by ectopic expression of the pRB-related pocket protein,
p130. This growth inhibition required the E2F-binding pocket domain but not the
cyclin-binding domain of p130. Furthermore, increased amounts of the
p130-controlled E2F, termed E2F-4, potentiated the mitogenic response of the
cells to cytokine and the constitutive overexpression of E2F-4 rendered the cells
cytokine-independent. Our results indicate the existence of a non-pRB-based cell 
cycle whose operation depends primarily on the interplay between p130 and E2F-4
in certain hematopoietic cells.

PMCID: PMC21117
PMID: 9671719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 24;273(30):18812-8.

Rac and Cdc42 are potent stimulators of E2F-dependent transcription capable of
promoting retinoblastoma susceptibility gene product hyperphosphorylation.

Gjoerup O(1), Lukas J, Bartek J, Willumsen BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Copenhagen, Oster 
Farimagsgade 2A, DK 1353, Copenhagen K, Denmark.

The Rho family of GTPases plays an important and diverse role in reorganization
of the actin cytoskeleton, transcriptional regulation, and multiple aspects of
cell growth. Our study has examined their potential links to the cell cycle
machinery. We find that constitutively active mutants of Rac and Cdc42, but not
Rho, are potent inducers of E2F transcriptional activity in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. 
Furthermore, activated Rac and Cdc42, but again not Rho, are capable of inducing 
cyclin D1 accumulation and pRB hyperphosphorylation in serum-deprived cells,
outlining one route leading to enhanced E2F-mediated transcription. The
inhibitory effect of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, p16(ink4),
p21(cip1), and p27(cip) on Rac/Cdc42-mediated E2F transcription corroborates a
role for pRB family members and their functional inactivation by cyclin-dependent
kinases in generating E2F activity. While the up-regulation of E2F
transcriptional activity by Rac or Cdc42, not Rho, suffices for entry into S
phase and DNA synthesis in Rat-1 R12 cells, this is clearly not the case in NIH
3T3, where additional requirements must exist.

PMID: 9668055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Biochem Cell Biol. 1998;76(1):37-44.

A mutant E2F-1 transcription factor that affects the phenotype of NIH3T3
fibroblasts inefficiency associates with cyclin A-cdk2.

Jordan-Sciutto KL(1), Hall DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

The amino-terminal domain of the E2F1 transcription factor is the site of
association with cyclin A-cdk2, mapping to residues 87-94. A mutant of E2F1
lacking the first 87 amino acids (termed E2F1d87) has a number of potent effects 
on cellular phenotype when constitutively expressed in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. For
example, in these fibroblasts the duration of S phase and the sensitivity to S
phase chemotherapeutic agents are both increased. Since E2F1d87 only partially
truncates the cyclin A-cdk2 binding domain, it was important to determine the
level of cyclin A-cdk2 association with this mutant to correlate any reduction in
association with the observed effects on the cell cycle. It was found that cyclin
A-cdk2 binds E2F1d87 in an in vitro assay but that this binding is reduced
approximately 8 fold compared with binding to full-length E2F1, whereas no
detectable binding was seen to a mutant E2F1 that lacks the first 117 amino
acids. Correspondingly, H1 kinase activity in E2F1d87 immunoprecipitates from
E2F1d87-expressing cells was significantly reduced compared with that seen for
full-length E2F1. From these data it appears that E2F1 with reduced cyclin A-cdk2
binding activity mediates the alteration in cell cycle parameters seen in these
cells.

PMID: 9666304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Oncogene. 1998 Jun 11;16(23):2957-63.

A new model of cell cycle-regulated transcription: repression of the cyclin A
promoter by CDF-1 and anti-repression by E2F.

Liu N(1), Lucibello FC, Engeland K, Müller R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Germany.

Cell cycle regulation of the cyclin A gene is determined by a bipartite repressor
binding site in the region of the basal promoter, termed CDE-CHR, which also
controls the expression of cell cycle genes upregulated in S or G2 (such as
cdc25C). The CDE-CHR in the cyclin A promoter is recognized by both E2F complexes
and CDF-1, but the contribution of each of these factors in cell cycle regulation
is unknown. In the present study, we have introduced mutations into the cyclin A 
promoter which lead to either a loss or enhancement of E2F binding, while having 
only marginal effects on the interaction with CDF-1. Unlike mutants deficient for
CDF-1 binding, promoter variants lacking E2F binding showed an unchanged
repression in G0, thus identifying CDF-1 as the principal repressor of the cyclin
A gene. The same mutants did show, however, a delayed derepression while a
mutation leading to increased E2F binding resulted in premature up-regulation.
These findings clearly suggest that E2F contributes to the correct timing of
cyclin A transcription, presumably by acting as an anti-repressor. In agreement
with this conclusion, we find that the cyclin A promoter only poorly interacts
with E2F-4, which is the major E2F family member in G0 cells, while a clear
binding is seen with E2F-1 and -3, which are up-regulated in late G1.

PMID: 9662327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Biochemistry. 1998 Jun 30;37(26):9363-70.

Regulation of the expression or recruitment of components of the DNA synthesome
by poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase.

Simbulan-Rosenthal CM(1), Rosenthal DS, Boulares AH, Hickey RJ, Malkas LH, Coll
JM, Smulson ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgetown University School
of Medicine, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) is a component of the multiprotein DNA
replication complex (MRC, DNA synthesome) that catalyzes replication of viral DNA
in vitro. PARP poly(ADP-ribosyl)ates 15 of the approximately 40 proteins of the
MRC, including DNA polymerase alpha (DNA pol alpha), DNA topoisomerase I (topo
I), and proliferating-cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). Although about equal amounts
of MRC-complexed and free forms of PCNA were detected by immunoblot analysis of
HeLa cell extracts, only the complexed form was poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated, suggesting
that poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of PCNA may regulate its function within the MRC. NAD
inhibited the activity of DNA pol delta in the MRC in a dose-dependent manner,
whereas the PARP inhibitor, 3-AB, reversed this inhibitory effect. The roles of
PARP in modulating the composition and enzyme activities of the DNA synthesome
were further investigated by characterizing the complex purified from 3T3-L1
cells before and 24 h after induction of a round of DNA replication required for 
differentiation of these cells; at the latter time point, approximately 95% of
the cells are in S phase and exhibit a transient peak of PARP expression. The MRC
was also purified from similarly treated 3T3-L1 cells depleted of PARP by
antisense RNA expression; these cells do not undergo DNA replication nor terminal
differentiation. Both PARP protein and activity and essentially all of the DNA
pol alpha and delta activities exclusively cosedimented with the MRC fractions
from S phase control cells, and were not detected in the MRC fractions from
PARP-antisense or uninduced control cells. Immunoblot analysis further revealed
that, although PCNA and topo I were present in total extracts from both control
and PARP-antisense cells, they were present in the MRC fraction only from induced
control cells, indicating that PARP may play a role in their assembly into an
active DNA synthesome. In contrast, expression of DNA pol alpha, DNA primase, and
RPA was down-regulated in PARP-antisense cells, suggesting that PARP may be
involved in the expression of these proteins. Depletion of PARP also prevented
induction of the expression of the transcription factor E2F-1, which positively
regulates transcription of the DNA pol alpha and PCNA genes; thus, PARP may be
necessary for expression of these genes when quiescent cells are stimulated to
proliferate.

PMID: 9649317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jun;18(6):3212-22.

Inhibition of cyclin D1 kinase activity is associated with E2F-mediated
inhibition of cyclin D1 promoter activity through E2F and Sp1.

Watanabe G(1), Albanese C, Lee RJ, Reutens A, Vairo G, Henglein B, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Coordinated interactions between cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), their target
"pocket proteins" (the retinoblastoma protein [pRB], p107, and p130), the pocket 
protein binding E2F-DP complexes, and the Cdk inhibitors regulate orderly cell
cycle progression. The cyclin D1 gene encodes a regulatory subunit of the Cdk
holoenzymes, which phosphorylate the tumor suppressor pRB, leading to the release
of free E2F-1. Overexpression of E2F-1 can induce apoptosis and may either
promote or inhibit cellular proliferation, depending upon the cell type. In these
studies overexpression of E2F-1 inhibited cyclin D1-dependent kinase activity,
cyclin D1 protein levels, and promoter activity. The DNA binding domain, the pRB 
pocket binding region, and the amino-terminal Sp1 binding domain of E2F-1 were
required for full repression of cyclin D1. Overexpression of pRB activated the
cyclin D1 promoter, and a dominant interfering pRB mutant was defective in cyclin
D1 promoter activation. Two regions of the cyclin D1 promoter were required for
full E2F-1-dependent repression. The region proximal to the transcription
initiation site at -127 bound Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4, and the distal region at -143
bound E2F-4-DP-1-p107. In contrast with E2F-1, E2F-4 induced cyclin D1 promoter
activity. Differential regulation of the cyclin D1 promoter by E2F-1 and E2F-4
suggests that E2Fs may serve distinguishable functions during cell cycle
progression. Inhibition of cyclin D1 abundance by E2F-1 may contribute to an
autoregulatory feedback loop to reduce pRB phosphorylation and E2F-1 levels in
the cell.

PMCID: PMC108903
PMID: 9584162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Oncogene. 1998 May 14;16(19):2489-501.

Release of cell cycle constraints in mouse melanocytes by overexpressed mutant
E2F1E132, but not by deletion of p16INK4A or p21WAF1/CIP1.

Halaban R(1), Cheng E, Zhang Y, Mandigo CE, Miglarese MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06510, USA.

Compared to normal melanocytes, melanoma cell lines exhibit overexpression of
hyperphosphorylated retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (Rb) or a marked
decrease in, or lack of, expression of Rb. Hyperphosphorylation of Rb results in 
increased E2F-mediated transactivation of target genes and cell cycle
progression. Using a combination of gene disruption and ectopic expression in
growth factor-dependent mouse melanocytes, we studied the roles of E2F1 and the
p16INK4A and p21WAF1/CIP1 CKIs (cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors) in the
acquisition of TPA (12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate)-independent growth in 
culture, a hallmark of melanomas. Surprisingly, melanocytes from p16INK4A- or
p21WAF1/CIP1-null mice remained TPA-dependent, and disruption of p21WAF1/CIP1
accelerated cell death in the absence of this mitogen. Disruption of E2F1 had the
most profound effect on melanocyte growth, resulting in a fourfold decrease in
growth rate in the presence of TPA. Furthermore, enforced overexpression of the
DNA-binding-defective E2F1E132 mutant conferred TPA-independence upon melanocytes
and was associated with sequestration of Rb and constitutive expression of E2F1
target genes, including p21WAF1/CIP1. We conclude that neutralization of Rb by
E2F1E132, but not the disruption of p16INK4A or p21WAF1/CIP1, resulted in the
accumulation of free E2F and cell cycle progression. Thus, mechanisms other than 
the loss of p16INK4A or p21WAF1/CIP1 that activate E2F may play an important role
in melanomas.

PMID: 9627115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Nat Med. 1998 Jun;4(6):685-90.

Overexpression of E2F-1 in glioma triggers apoptosis and suppresses tumor growth 
in vitro and in vivo.

Fueyo J(1), Gomez-Manzano C, Yung WK, Liu TJ, Alemany R, McDonnell TJ, Shi X, Rao
JS, Levin VA, Kyritsis AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuro-Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

The transfer of apoptosis genes to tumors is one of the most promising strategies
for cancer gene therapy. We have shown that massive apoptosis occurs when
wild-type p53 expression is induced in glioma cells carrying a p53 gene mutation.
However, adenovirus-mediated p53 gene transfer is ineffective in causing
apoptosis in glioma cells that retain a wild-type p53 genotype. We evaluated the 
effect of E2F-1 overexpression on the growth of gliomas in vitro and in vivo. In 
the in vitro study, the adenovirus-mediated transfer of exogenous E2F-1 protein
precipitated generalized apoptosis in gliomas. The treatment with Ad5CMV-E2F-1 of
nude mice carrying subcutaneous gliomas arrested tumor growth. Our results
indicate that E2F-1 has anti-glioma activity in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 9623977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Front Biosci. 1998 Jun 8;3:D532-47.

New perspectives on retinoblastoma family functions in differentiation.

Yee AS(1), Shih HH, Tevosian SG.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Biochemistry, Tufts University School of Medicine, 136
Harrison Ave., Boston, MA 02111, USA. ayee@opal.tufts.edu

Cell differentiation is a coordinated process that includes cell cycle exit and
the expression of unique genes to specify tissue identity. The focus of this
review is the recent progress in understanding the functions of the RB family
(RB, p130,p107) in cell differentiation. Much work has focused on the functions
of RB in G1 regulation. However, much evidence now suggests a diverse function in
differentiation. For discussion, differentiation will be divided into three
general steps: cell cycle exit, apoptosis protection, and tissue-specific gene
expression. These processes are coordinated to provide the final and unique
tissue characteristics. The RB family and targets such as E2F and HBP1 have
functions in each step. While there is much knowledge on each separate step of
differentiation, the mechanisms that coordinate cell cycle and tissue-specific
events are still not known. New evidence suggests that this coordination contains
both positive and negative regulation of tissue-specific gene expression. RB.
p130, HBP1, and other proteins appear to have unexpected functions in regulating 
tissue-specific gene expression. The ubiquitous expressions of these proteins
suggest membership in a new and general pathway to coordinate cell cycle events
with tissue-specific gene expression during differentiation. The collective
observations hypothesize the existence of a differentiation checkpoint to insure 
fidelity.

PMID: 9616132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Int J Cancer. 1998 May 29;76(5):757-60.

Induction of p53 and melanoma cell death is reciprocal with down-regulation of
E2F, cyclin D1 and pRB.

Rieber M(1), Strasberg-Rieber M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas, Centro de Microbiología y
Biología Celular, Tumor-Cell Biology Laboratory, Caracas, Venzuela.
mrieber@pasteur.ivic.ve

Tumor-suppressor-gene products such as p53 and retinoblastoma (Rb) play an
important role as negative regulators of cell-cycle progression, which is
reciprocally favored by the availability of cyclin D1 and the E2F transcription
factor. We now show that UV irradiation of B16 melanoma after prior exposure to
the radiation sensitizer, bromodeoxyuridine (BUdR) leads to induction of p53 and 
DNA fragmentation, and concomitant decreases in Rb, E2F, cyclin D1, and cell
viability, with no comparable effects on irradiated unsensitized cells. Our data 
suggest that over-expression of p53 correlates with down-regulation of E2F,
cyclin D1 in inducing apoptosis.

PMID: 9610736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 17;273(16):10051-7.

Modulation of E2F activity via signaling through surface IgM and CD40 receptors
in WEHI-231 B lymphoma cells.

Lam EW(1), Choi MS, van der Sman J, Burbidge SA, Klaus GG.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research and Department of Medical Microbiology,
Imperial College School of Medicine at St Mary's, Norfolk Place, London W2 1PG,
United Kingdom. eric.lam@ic.ac.uk

Stimulation of the phenotypically immature B cell lymphoma WEHI-231 with anti-IgM
induces G1 arrest followed by apoptotic cell death, which can be reversed by
stimulation via the CD40 receptor. Here, we show that cells expressing bcl-xL
(WEHI-bcl-xL) arrest at G0/G1 following culture with anti-IgM but do not undergo 
apoptosis. These arrested cells can be induced to reenter the cell cycle by
ligation of CD40. We have therefore used these cells as a model to study the
regulation of the transcription factor E2F, which is critically involved in
transit through the cell cycle. We found that anti-IgM treatment induces the
appearance of an inhibitory DNA binding complex containing the pRB-related pocket
protein p130 together with E2F and a concomitant decrease in "free" E2F,
consisting of E2F1 and its partner DP1; these effects were reversed following
stimulation via CD40. These changes in free E2F levels were regulated by changes 
in E2F1 gene transcription, which is at least partly a result of control of E2F1 
promoter activity through its E2F binding sites. Transient transfection
experiments showed that either E2F1 or the viral oncoprotein E1A, which
sequesters pocket proteins, including p130, overcame anti-IgM-induced cell cycle 
arrest in WEHI-bcl-xL. Taken together, these results indicate that in WEHI-231
sIgM ligation induces the accumulation of hypophosphorylated p130 with consequent
inhibition of E2F1 gene transcription and cell cycle arrest. Conversely, ligation
of CD40 causes hyperphosphorylation of p130, thereby releasing the repression of 
E2F1 and other E2F-regulated genes, enabling the cells to reenter the cycle.
These results, therefore, provide novel insights into the mechanisms whereby
antigen receptors on immature B cells deliver inhibitory signals (leading to
negative selection of self-reactive B cells) and how these signals can be
modulated by positive signals generated via CD40.

PMID: 9545352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 31;95(7):3603-8.

Cdc6 is regulated by E2F and is essential for DNA replication in mammalian cells.

Yan Z(1), DeGregori J, Shohet R, Leone G, Stillman B, Nevins JR, Williams RS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75235, USA.

Cdc6 has a critical regulatory role in the initiation of DNA replication in
yeasts, but its function in mammalian cells has not been characterized. We show
here that Cdc6 is expressed selectively in proliferating but not quiescent
mammalian cells, both in culture and within tissues of intact animals. During the
transition from a growth-arrested to a proliferative state, transcription of
mammalian Cdc6 is regulated by E2F proteins, as revealed by a functional analysis
of the human Cdc6 promoter and by the ability of exogenously expressed E2F
proteins to stimulate the endogenous Cdc6 gene. Immunodepletion of Cdc6 by
microinjection of anti-Cdc6 antibody blocks initiation of DNA replication in a
human tumor cell line. We conclude that expression of human Cdc6 is regulated in 
response to mitogenic signals though transcriptional control mechanisms involving
E2F proteins, and that Cdc6 is required for initiation of DNA replication in
mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC19882
PMID: 9520412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Oncogene. 1998 Mar 26;16(12):1513-23.

Regulation of the cdk inhibitor p21 gene during cell cycle progression is under
the control of the transcription factor E2F.

Hiyama H(1), Iavarone A, Reeves SA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuro-Oncology, Neuroscience Center, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston 02129, USA.

The control of cell cycle progression is orchestrated by an extraordinary diverse
and dynamic in function group of proteins. Critical in the progression are the
actions of the E2F family of transcription factors which regulate the expression 
of genes necessary for the G1/S transition and the WAF/CIP/KIP family of cdk
inhibitors which can inhibit cell cycle progression. In this report, we have
identified E2F binding sites in both the human and mouse p21 promoters that bind 
E2F protein complexes from nuclear extracts in a cell cycle-dependent manner. In 
ectopic expression experiments we determined that E2F1, but not E2F4, can
strongly transactivate the human p21 gene through these E2F binding sites which
are located in the -215/+1 region of the p21 gene. The transactivation of the p21
gene through regulatory elements within the -215/+1 region of the promoter was
correlated with increased levels of endogenous E2F1 and p21 proteins at the G1/S 
boundary. The significance of transactivation of the p21 gene by E2F is that p21 
function is important in cell cycle progression as well as for cell cycle arrest.
Indeed, E2F-induced levels of p21 protein during the G1/ S transition is
consistent with the recent findings demonstrating that p21 acts as an assembly
factor for kinase active cyclin/cdk/p21 complexes.

PMID: 9569018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Oncogene. 1998 Mar 12;16(10):1267-76.

Deregulated expression of E2F1 induces hyperplasia and cooperates with ras in
skin tumor development.

Pierce AM(1), Fisher SM, Conti CJ, Johnson DG.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Department of
Carcinogenesis, Smithville 78957, USA.

In cell culture studies, overexpression of the E2F1 transcription factor has been
shown to stimulate proliferation, induce apoptosis, and cooperate with an
activated ras gene to oncogenically transform primary rodent cells. To study the 
effect of increased E2F1 activity on epithelial growth and tumorigenesis in vivo,
transgenic mice expressing E2F1 under the control of a keratin 5 (K5) promoter
were generated. Expression of E2F1 in the epidermis results in hyperplasia but
does not inhibit terminal differentiation. In a transgenic line expressing high
levels of E2F1, mice have decreased hair growth likely as a result of aberrant
apoptosis in developing hair follicles. Coexpression of a cyclin D1 transgene
with E2F1 augments epidermal hyperplasia and further disrupts hair follicle
development suggesting that hypophosphorylated Rb antagonizes the proliferative
and apoptotic-promoting activities of E2F1. Finally, the E2F1 transgene is found 
to cooperate with a v-Ha-ras transgene to induce skin tumors in double transgenic
animals. These findings confirm that many of the activities ascribed to E2F1
through in vitro studies can be reproduced in vivo and demonstrate for the first 
time that deregulated E2F activity can contribute to tumor development.

PMID: 9546428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Nat Genet. 1998 Apr;18(4):360-4.

Loss of E2F-1 reduces tumorigenesis and extends the lifespan of Rb1(+/-)mice.

Yamasaki L(1), Bronson R, Williams BO, Dyson NJ, Harlow E, Jacks T.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown 02129, USA.
ly63@columbia.edu

Mutation of the retinoblastoma tumour-suppressor gene (RB) leads to the
deregulation of many proteins and transcription factors that interact with the
retinoblastoma gene product (pRB), including members of the E2F transcription
factor family. As pRB is known to repress E2F transcriptional activity and
overexpression of E2F is sufficient for cell cycle progression, it is thought
that pRB suppresses growth in part by repressing E2F-mediated transcription.
Previously, we reported that loss of E2f1 in mice results in tissue-specific
tumour induction and tissue atrophy, demonstrating that E2F-1 normally controls
growth both positively and negatively in a tissue-specific fashion. To determine 
whether E2F-1 deregulation--as a result of loss of pRB--promotes proliferation in
vivo, we have tested whether loss of E2f1 interferes with the pituitary and
thyroid tumorigenesis that occurs in Rb1(+/-) mice. We have found that loss of
E2f1 reduces the frequency of pituitary and thyroid tumours, and greatly
lengthens the lifespan of Rb1(+/-); E2f1(-/-) animals, demonstrating that E2F-1
is an important downstream target of pRB during tumorigenesis. Furthermore, loss 
of E2f1 reduces a previously reported strain-dependent difference in Rb1(+/-)
lifespan, suggesting that E2f1 or an E2F-1-regulated gene acts as a genetic
modifier between the 129/Sv and C57BL/6 strains.

PMID: 9537419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1998 Feb;8(1):28-35.

Regulation of cell proliferation by the E2F transcription factors.

Helin K(1).

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Department of Experimental Oncology, Milan,
Italy. khelin@ieo.cilea.it

Experimental data generated in the past year have further emphasized the
essential role for the E2F transcription factors in the regulation of cell
proliferation. Genetic studies have shown that E2F activity is required for
normal development in fruitflies, and the generation of E2F-1(-/-) mice has
demonstrated that individual members of the E2F transcription factor family are
likely to have distinct roles in mammalian development and homeostasis.
Additional mechanisms regulating the activity of the E2F transcription factors
have been reported, including subcellular localization and proteolysis of the
E2Fs in the proteasomes. Novel target genes for the E2F transcription factors
have been identified that link the E2Fs directly to the initiation of DNA
replication.

PMID: 9529602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Oncogene. 1998 Feb 26;16(8):957-66.

Small contribution of G1 checkpoint control manipulation to modulation of
p53-mediated apoptosis.

Canman CE(1), Kastan MB.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Deregulation of the S-phase promoting E2F-1 transcription factor has been shown
to cooperate with p53 to induce apoptosis. BaF3 cells undergo rapid,
p53-dependent apoptosis when irradiated in the absence of IL-3. Rapid apoptosis
induced by ionizing radiation (IR) coincides with attenuated p21(WAF1/Cip1)
induction. Failure to adequately induce p21 could result in inappropriate release
of E2F from Rb which may then cooperate with p53 to induce apoptosis in cells
deprived of growth factor. We engineered BaF3 cells to express exogenous p21 and 
tested whether overexpressing p21 in cells irradiated in the absence of IL-3
protects from IR-induced apoptosis. Enforced p21 expression resulted in a
consistent, but partial, protection of cells from undergoing IR-induced
apoptosis. However, deregulating E2F activity through expression of HPV E7 failed
to sensitize cells to IR-induced apoptosis in the presence of IL-3. Together,
these data strongly suggest that the IL-3-responsive factors which modulate
p53-mediated apoptosis in BaF3 cells are largely independent of G1 cell cycle
checkpoint control mediated by p21.

PMID: 9519869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Virol. 1998 Mar;72(3):2323-34.

Anchorage-independent transcription of the cyclin A gene induced by the E7
oncoprotein of human papillomavirus type 16.

Schulze A(1), Mannhardt B, Zerfass-Thome K, Zwerschke W, Jansen-Dürr P.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany.

To develop an experimental model for E7-mediated anchorage-independent growth, we
studied the ability of E7-expressing NIH 3T3 subclones to enter S phase when they
were cultured in suspension. We found that expression of E7 prevents the
inhibition of cyclin E-associated kinase and also triggers activation of cyclin A
gene expression in suspension cells. A point mutation in the amino terminus of E7
prevented E7-driven rescue of cyclin E-associated kinase activity in suspension
cells; however, cells with this mutation retained some ability to activate cyclin
A gene expression and promote S-phase entry. Activation of cyclin A gene
expression by E7 was correlated with an increased binding of free E2F to a
regulatory element in the cyclin A promoter which mediates both repression of
cyclin A upon loss of adhesion and its reactivation by E7. Surprisingly,
expression of E7 led to a nuclear accumulation of one species of free E2F,
namely, an E2F-4-DP-1 heterodimer, that is exclusively cytoplasmic in the absence
of E7. Taken together, the data reported here indicate that several different
E7-dependent changes of cellular-growth-regulating pathways can cooperate to
allow adhesion-independent entry into S phase.

PMCID: PMC109532
PMID: 9499093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Dec 15;25(24):4921-5.

The differential binding of E2F and CDF repressor complexes contributes to the
timing of cell cycle-regulated transcription.

Lucibello FC(1), Liu N, Zwicker J, Gross C, Müller R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung (IMT), Philipps-Universität 
Marburg, Emil-Mannkopff-Strasse 2, D-35033 Marburg, Germany.

B- myb and cdc25C exemplify different groups of genes whose transcription is
consecutively up-regulated during the cell cycle. Both promoters are controlled
by transcriptional repression via modules consisting of an E2F binding site
(E2FBS) or the related CDE plus a contiguous CHR co-repressor element. We now
show that the B- myb repressor module, which is derepressed early (mid G1), is
preferentially recognized by E2F-DP complexes and that a mutation selectively
abolishing E2F binding impairs regulation. In contrast, the cdc25C repressor
module, which is derepressed late (S/G2), interacts selectively with CDE-CHR
binding factor-1 (CDF-1). E2F binding, but not CDF-1 binding, requires specific
nucleotides flanking the E2FBS/CDE core, while CDF-1 binding, but not E2F
binding, depends on specific nucleotides in the CHR. Swapping these nucleotides
between the two promoters profoundly changes protein binding patterns and alters 
expression kinetics. Thus predominant CDF-1 binding leads to derepression in late
S, predominant E2F binding results in up-regulation in late G1, while promoters
binding both E2F and CDF-1 with high efficiency show intermediate kinetics. Our
results support a model where the differential binding of E2F and CDF-1 repressor
complexes contributes to the timing of promoter activity during the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC147143
PMID: 9396797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Dec 15;25(24):4915-20.

CDF-1, a novel E2F-unrelated factor, interacts with cell cycle-regulated
repressor elements in multiple promoters.

Liu N(1), Lucibello FC, Körner K, Wolfraim LA, Zwicker J, Müller R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung (IMT), Philipps-Universität 
Marburg Emil-Mannkopff-Strasse 2, D-35033 Marburg, Germany.

The cdc25C , cdc2 and cyclin A promoters are controlled by transcriptional
repression through two contiguous protein binding sites, termed the CDE and CHR. 
In the present study we have identified a factor, CDF-1, which interacts with the
cdc25C CDE-CHR module. CDF-1 binds to the CDE in the major groove and to the CHR 
in the minor grove in a cooperative fashion in vitro , in a manner similar to
that seen by genomic footprinting. In agreement with in vivo binding data and its
putative function as a periodic repressor, DNA binding by CDF-1 in nuclear
extracts is down-regulated during cell cycle progression. CDF-1 also binds avidly
to the CDE-CHR modules of the cdc2 and cyclin A promoters, but not to the E2F
site in the B- myb promoter. Conversely, E2F complexes do not recognize the
cdc25C CDE-CHR and CDF-1 is immunologically unrelated to all known E2F and DP
family members. This indicates that E2F- and CDF-mediated repression is
controlled by different factors acting at different stages during the cell cycle.
While E2F-mediated repression seems to be associated with genes that are
up-regulated early (around mid G1), such as B- myb , CDE-CHR-controlled genes,
such as cdc25C , cdc2 and cyclin A , become derepressed later. Finally, the
fractionation of native nuclear extracts on glycerol gradients leads to
separation of CDF-1 from both E2F complexes and pocket proteins of the pRb
family. This emphasizes the conclusion that CDF-1 is not an E2F family member and
points to profound differences in the cell cycle regulation of CDF-1 and E2F.

PMCID: PMC147142
PMID: 9396796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Neurosci Res. 1998 Jan 15;51(2):257-67.

Developmental pattern of expression of NPDC-1 and its interaction with E2F-1
suggest a role in the control of proliferation and differentiation of neural
cells.

Dupont E(1), Sansal I, Evrard C, Rouget P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique Oncologique, CNRS-URA 1967, Institut Gustave Roussy,
Villejuif, France.

We have previously identified NPDC-1, a gene specifically expressed in neural
cells and involved in the control of cell proliferation and differentiation. In
the present study, we have investigated the expression of this gene during mouse 
development and the interactions of the NPDC-1 protein with cell cycle regulatory
proteins. The data show that NPDC-1 mRNA begins to be expressed in a variety of
neural structures when the precursors enter into their terminal differentiation. 
They also indicate that in adult brain, the expression patterns of NPDC-1 and
E2F-1 mRNA largely overlap. In addition, the NPDC-1 protein is able to interact
directly with the transcription factor E2F-1 that participates in the regulation 
of the cell cycle, cell survival, and apoptosis. The present results suggest that
NPDC-1 might be involved in the terminal differentiation and survival of neural
cells and might act through interactions with E2F-1.

PMID: 9469579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. DNA Cell Biol. 1998 Jan;17(1):9-18.

Site-directed mutant p21 proteins defective in both inhibition of E2F-regulated
transcription and disruption of E2F-p130-cyclin-cdk2 complexes.

Robles SJ(1), Shiyanov P, Aristodemo GT, Raychaudhuri P, Adami GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of Dentistry,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 60612, USA.

P21 is a regulatory protein that can contribute to cell cycle arrest by
inhibiting the cyclin-dependent-kinases (cdks). However, the mechanism that links
the inhibition of the cdk activities and the cell cycle arrest is not well
established. To investigate this, we studied a purified endogenous cellular
complex which contained E2F (in the form of E2F-4), p130, cyclin, and cdk2. This 
complex of E2F-p130-cyclin-cdk2 is found mainly in cycling cells and is
postulated to be an intermediate that leads to the activation of E2F. We
previously showed that p21 could disrupt this complex leading to the accumulation
of an E2F-p130 complex and the inhibition of E2F-regulated transcription. We
analyzed a group of p21 mutants including those that harbored changes in cyclin- 
and cdk2-binding motifs. We show that both the cyclin and cdk2 binding motifs of 
p21 are crucial for the disruption of this endogenous complex of
E2F-p130-cyclin-cdk2. This suggests a model where the ability of p21 to inhibit
the function of this complex is dependent on interactions with both cyclin and
cdk2 molecules. This was substantiated by studies with intact cells. P21 mutants 
that are impaired in their ability to disrupt the cellular E2F-p130-cyclin-cdk2
complex are also shown to be maximally impaired in the ability to repress
E2F-regulated transcription.

PMID: 9468218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 9;273(2):720-8.

Necdin, a postmitotic neuron-specific growth suppressor, interacts with viral
transforming proteins and cellular transcription factor E2F1.

Taniura H(1), Taniguchi N, Hara M, Yoshikawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Regulation of Macromolecular Functions, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Yamadaoka 3-2, Suita, Osaka 565, Japan.

Necdin is a nuclear protein expressed in virtually all postmitotic neurons, and
ectopic expression of this protein strongly suppresses the proliferation of
NIH3T3 cells. Simian virus 40 large T antigen targets both p53 and the
retinoblastoma protein (Rb) for cellular transformation. By analogy with the
interactions of the large T antigen with these nuclear growth suppressors, we
examined the ability of necdin to bind to the large T antigen. Necdin was
co-immunoprecipitated with the large T antigen from the nuclear extract of necdin
cDNA-transfected COS-1 cells. Yeast two-hybrid and in vitro binding analyses
revealed that necdin bound to an amino-terminal region of the large T antigen,
which encompasses the Rb-binding domain. Moreover, necdin bound to adenovirus
E1A, another viral oncoprotein that forms a specific complex with Rb. We then
examined the ability of necdin to bind to the transcription factor E2F1, a
cellular Rb-binding factor involved in cell-cycle progression. Intriguingly,
necdin, like Rb, bound to a carboxyl-terminal domain of E2F1, and repressed
E2F-dependent transactivation in vivo. In addition, necdin suppressed the colony 
formation of Rb-deficient SAOS-2 osteosarcoma cells. These results suggest that
necdin is a postmitotic neuron-specific growth suppressor that is functionally
similar to Rb.

PMID: 9422723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Clin Invest. 1997 Dec 1;100(11):2722-8.

Adenoviral delivery of E2F-1 directs cell cycle reentry and p53-independent
apoptosis in postmitotic adult myocardium in vivo.

Agah R(1), Kirshenbaum LA, Abdellatif M, Truong LD, Chakraborty S, Michael LH,
Schneider MD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Unit, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA.

Irreversible exit from the cell cycle precludes the ability of cardiac muscle
cells to increase cell number after infarction. Using adenoviral E1A, we
previously demonstrated dual pocket protein- and p300-dependent pathways in
neonatal rat cardiac myocytes, and have proven that E2F-1, which occupies the Rb 
pocket, suffices for these actions of E1A. By contrast, the susceptibility of
adult ventricular cells to viral delivery of exogenous cell cycle regulators has 
not been tested, in vitro or in vivo. In cultured adult ventricular myocytes,
adenoviral gene transfer of E2F-1 induced expression of proliferating cell
nuclear antigen, cyclin-dependent protein kinase 4, cell division cycle 2 kinase,
DNA synthesis, and apoptosis. In vivo, adenoviral delivery of E2F-1 by direct
injection into myocardium induced DNA synthesis, shown by 5'-bromodeoxyuridine
incorporation, and accumulation in G2/M, by image analysis of Feulgen-stained
nuclei. In p53(-)/- mice, the prevalence of G1 exit was more than twofold
greater; however, E2F-1 evoked apoptosis and rapid mortality comparably in both
backgrounds. Thus, the differential effects of E2F-1 on G1 exit in wild-type
versus p53-deficient mice illustrate the combinatorial power of viral gene
delivery to genetically defined recipients: E2F-1 can override the G1/S
checkpoint in postmitotic ventricular myocytes in vitro and in vivo, but leads to
apoptosis even in p53(-)/- mice.

PMCID: PMC508475
PMID: 9389735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Cancer Res. 1998 Jan 1;58(1):123-34.

Disruption of the pRb/E2F pathway and inhibition of apoptosis are major oncogenic
events in liver constitutively expressing c-myc and transforming growth factor
alpha.

Santoni-Rugiu E(1), Jensen MR, Thorgeirsson SS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Division of Basic Sciences,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4255, USA.

The oncogene c-myc and transforming growth factor (TGF) alpha are frequently
coexpressed in human cancers, suggesting that their interaction may be a critical
step in malignant growth. Consistent with this idea, we recently demonstrated in 
a transgenic mouse model that TGF-alpha dramatically enhances c-myc-induced
hepatocarcinogenesis. To elucidate this synergistic effect, we have now
investigated regulation of cell cycle and apoptosis during neoplastic development
in the liver of c-myc and c-myc/TGFalpha transgenic mice. Both lines displayed
dramatic increases of mitotic and apoptotic rates before the onset of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but only c-myc/TGF-alpha livers showed
significant levels of net proliferation (mitosis minus apoptosis). Subsequently, 
mitosis declined in peritumorous tissues, concomitant with the previously
reported induction of TGF-beta1, whereas c-myc and c-myc/TGFalpha HCCs maintained
mitotic hyperactivity. The c-myc/TGF-alpha HCCs were also characterized by a
particularly strong expression of TGF-alpha and very low apoptotic index in
contrast to high levels of apoptosis in peritumorous tissues and c-myc HCCs. The 
differential levels of cell proliferation in noncancerous and cancerous tissues
correlated with a stronger induction of cyclin D1 mRNA and protein in
c-myc/TGF-alpha and c-myc HCCs associated with intense pRb hyperphosphorylation. 
Severe deregulation of G1-S transition was also indicated by the dramatic
up-regulation, particularly in the HCCs, of pRb-free E2F1-DP1 and E2F2-DP1
transcription factor heterodimers, as assessed by immunoprecipitation and
immunohistochemistry. The existence of increased E2F activity during
hepatocarcinogenesis was further indicated by the transcriptional induction of
putative E2F target genes involved in cell cycle progression, such as endogenous 
c-myc, cyclin A, Cdc2, and E2F itself. Cdc2 overexpression and the elevated
mitotic indices in the HCCs correlated also with induction of cyclin B
steady-state levels. The data suggest that coexpression of c-myc and TGF-alpha
leads to a selective growth advantage for hepatic (pre)neoplastic cells by
disrupting the pRb/E2F pathway and by TGF-alpha-mediated reduction of apoptosis.

PMID: 9426068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;17(12):7268-82.

E2F activity is regulated by cell cycle-dependent changes in subcellular
localization.

Verona R(1), Moberg K, Estes S, Starz M, Vernon JP, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
02139, USA.

E2F directs the cell cycle-dependent expression of genes that induce or regulate 
the cell division process. In mammalian cells, this transcriptional activity
arises from the combined properties of multiple E2F-DP heterodimers. In this
study, we show that the transcriptional potential of individual E2F species is
dependent upon their nuclear localization. This is a constitutive property of
E2F-1, -2, and -3, whereas the nuclear localization of E2F-4 is dependent upon
its association with other nuclear factors. We previously showed that E2F-4
accounts for the majority of endogenous E2F species. We now show that the
subcellular localization of E2F-4 is regulated in a cell cycle-dependent manner
that results in the differential compartmentalization of the various E2F
complexes. Consequently, in cycling cells, the majority of the p107-E2F,
p130-E2F, and free E2F complexes remain in the cytoplasm. In contrast, almost all
of the nuclear E2F activity is generated by pRB-E2F. This complex is present at
high levels during G1 but disappears once the cells have passed the restriction
point. Surprisingly, dissociation of this complex causes little increase in the
levels of nuclear free E2F activity. This observation suggests that the
repressive properties of the pRB-E2F complex play a critical role in establishing
the temporal regulation of E2F-responsive genes. How the differential subcellular
localization of pRB, p107, and p130 contributes to their different biological
properties is also discussed.

PMCID: PMC232584
PMID: 9372959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Nature. 1997 Dec 11;390(6660):567-8.

An E2F-like repressor of transcription.

Morkel M, Wenkel J, Bannister AJ, Kouzarides T, Hagemeier C.

PMID: 9403682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Virol. 1997 Dec;71(12):9410-6.

The DnaJ domain of polyomavirus large T antigen is required to regulate Rb family
tumor suppressor function.

Sheng Q(1), Denis D, Ratnofsky M, Roberts TM, DeCaprio JA, Schaffhausen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02111, USA.

Tumor suppressors of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene family regulate cell 
growth and differentiation. Polyomavirus large T antigens (large T) bind Rb
family members and block their function. Mutations of large T sequences conserved
with the DnaJ family affect large T binding to a cellular DnaK, heat shock
protein 70. The same mutations abolish large T activation of E2F-containing
promoters and Rb binding-dependent large T activation of cell cycle progression. 
Cotransfection of a cellular DnaJ domain blocks wild-type large T action, showing
that the connection between the chaperone system and tumor suppressors is direct.
Although they are inactive in assays dependent on Rb family binding, mutants in
the J region retain the ability to associate with pRb, p107, and p130. This
suggests that binding of Rb family members by large T is not sufficient for their
inactivation and that a functional J domain is required as well. This work
connects the DnaJ and DnaK molecular chaperones to regulation of tumor
suppressors by polyomavirus large T.

PMCID: PMC230245
PMID: 9371601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Exp Cell Res. 1997 Nov 1;236(2):527-36.

Reduction in fibronectin expression and alteration in cell morphology are
coincident in NIH3T3 cells expressing a mutant E2F1 transcription factor.

Jordan-Sciutto KL(1), Logan TJ, Norton PA, Derfoul A, Dodge GR, Hall DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Fibronectin within the extracellular matrix plays a role in cell attachment,
spreading, and shape, while it also affects aspects of cell proliferation.
Transcription factors such as E2F1 are also known to regulate cell shape and cell
proliferation. Yet, to date no linkage has been established between fibronectin
expression and E2F1. We show here that cells constitutively expressing a mutant
E2F1 protein (E2F1d87) produce reduced amounts of fibronectin mRNA and protein.
The altered expression of fibronectin seen in the E2F1d87 expressing cells is
due, in part, to a reduction in transcription from the fibronectin promoter.
Providing exogenous fibronectin, but not Type I collagen or laminin, as a
substrate for cell adhesion is sufficient to revert the altered morphology and
reestablish actin-containing microfilaments lost in the mutant cell line. An
additional characteristic of the cells expressing the mutant E2F1 is that they
demonstrate slow growth and a doubling in S phase duration. While providing
exogenous fibronectin as an adhesion substrate did not shorten the S phase
duration in the mutant line, it did significantly shorten the S phase duration in
the parental NIH3T3 cell line, implicating a role for the extracellular matrix in
regulating S phase transit in normal cells.

PMID: 9367638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Cell Biochem. 1997 Oct 1;67(1):24-31.

Distinct roles for Sp1 and E2F sites in the growth/cell cycle regulation of the
DHFR promoter.

Jensen DE(1), Black AR, Swick AG, Azizkhan JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

Dihydrofolate reductase activity is required for many biosynthetic pathways
including nucleotide synthesis. Its expression is therefore central to cellular
growth, and it has become a key target for cancer chemotherapy. Transcription of 
the dihydrofolate reductase gene is regulated with growth, being expressed
maximally in late G1/early S phase following serum stimulation of quiescent
cells. This regulation is directed by a promoter which contains binding sites for
only the transcription factors Sp1 and E2F. In this study, the role of these
promoter elements in growth/cell cycle regulation of dihydrofolate transcription 
was addressed directly by transient transfection of Balb/c 3T3 cells with mutant 
promoter-reporter gene constructs. The E2F sites were found to repress
transcription in G0 and early G1 but did not contribute to the level of
transcription in late G1/S phase. In contrast, Sp1 sites were able to mediate
induction of transcription from the dihydrofolate reductase promoter, as well as 
a heterologous promoter, following serum stimulation of quiescent cells. These
findings add dihydrofolate reductase to a growing list of genes at which E2F
sites are primarily repressive elements and delineate a role for Sp1 sites in the
growth/cell cycle regulation of transcription.

PMID: 9328836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. EMBO J. 1997 Sep 1;16(17):5322-33.

Cyclin E and c-Myc promote cell proliferation in the presence of p16INK4a and of 
hypophosphorylated retinoblastoma family proteins.

Alevizopoulos K(1), Vlach J, Hennecke S, Amati B.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, CH-1066 Epalinges,
Switzerland.

Retroviral expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor p16(INK4a)
in rodent fibroblasts induces dephosphorylation of pRb, p107 and p130 and leads
to G1 arrest. Prior expression of cyclin E allows S-phase entry and long-term
proliferation in the presence of p16. Cyclin E prevents neither the
dephosphorylation of pRb family proteins, nor their association with E2F proteins
in response to p16. Thus, cyclin E can bypass the p16/pRb growth-inhibitory
pathway downstream of pRb activation. Retroviruses expressing E2F-1, -2 or -3
also prevent p16-induced growth arrest but are ineffective against the cyclin
E-CDK2 inhibitor p27(Kip1), suggesting that E2F cannot substitute for cyclin E
activity. Thus, cyclin E possesses an E2F-independent function required to enter 
S-phase. However, cyclin E may not simply bypass E2F function in the presence of 
p16, since it restores expression of E2F-regulated genes such as cyclin A or
CDC2. Finally, c-Myc bypasses the p16/pRb pathway with effects indistinguishable 
from those of cyclin E. We suggest that this effect of Myc is mediated by its
action upstream of cyclin E-CDK2, and occurs via the neutralization of p27(Kip1) 
family proteins, rather than induction of Cdc25A. Our data imply that oncogenic
activation of c-Myc, and possibly also of cyclin E, mimics loss of the p16/pRb
pathway during oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1170164
PMID: 9311992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 1997 Sep;24(11):1368-80.

[The retinoblastoma gene: from its basic understanding as a signal mediator for
growth and differentiation to its use in the treatment of cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Lee WH(1), Lee EY.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular Medicine/Institute of Bio-technology, University of Texas
Health Science Center, USA.

The retinoblastoma gene (RB) plays important roles in the genesis of human
cancers. Several pieces of evidence have shown that the retinoblastoma protein
(Rb) has dual roles in gating cell cycle progression and promoting cellular
differentiation. The molecular mechanisms involved in these roles have been
elucidated in some biological systems: Rb sequesters the transcription factors of
E2F-1 to regulate entry of cell cycle, but enhances the activities of
transcription factors such as C/ EBPs to initiate terminal differentiation. Thus,
the Rb protein can serve as a mediator of extracellular signals for growth or
differentiation. RB also has a tumor suppression function. Introduction of
wild-type RB into human tumor cells deficient for RB suppresses their
tumorigenicity in nude mice. Similarly, mice with RB+/- genotypes created by gene
knockout methods spontaneously develop melanotrophic tumors with complete
penetrance. Immune-competent RB+/- mice benefited significantly from
adenovirus-mediated RB gene therapy. The fundamental knowledge of Rb function
will allow us to take the next steps toward the use of tumor suppressor genes in 
the treatment of human cancer.

PMID: 9309128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mol Biol Cell. 1997 Sep;8(9):1815-27.

p27Kip1 induces an accumulation of the repressor complexes of E2F and inhibits
expression of the E2F-regulated genes.

Shiyanov P(1), Hayes S, Chen N, Pestov DG, Lau LF, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Chicago 60612, USA.

p27Kip1 is an inhibitor of the cyclin-dependent kinases and it plays an
inhibitory role in the progression of cell cycle through G1 phase. To investigate
the mechanism of cell cycle inhibition by p27Kip1, we constructed a cell line
that inducibly expresses p27Kip1 upon addition of
isopropyl-1-thio-beta-D-galactopyranoside in the culture medium.
Isopropyl-1-thio-beta-D-galactopyranoside-induced expression of p27Kip1 in these 
cells causes a specific reduction in the expression of the E2F-regulated genes
such as cyclin E, cyclin A, and dihydrofolate reductase. The reduction in the
expression of these genes correlates with the p27Kip1-induced accumulation of the
repressor complexes of the E2F family of factors (E2Fs). Our previous studies
indicated that p21WAF1 could disrupt the interaction between
cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (cdk2) and the E2F repressor complexes E2F-p130 
and E2F-p107. We show that p27Kip1, like p21WAF1, disrupts cyclin/cdk2-containing
complexes of E2F-p130 leading to the accumulation of the E2F-p130 complexes,
which is found in growth-arrested cells. In transient transfection assays,
expression of p27Kip1 specifically inhibits transcription of a promoter
containing E2F-binding sites. Mutants of p27Kip1 harboring changes in the cyclin-
and cdk2-binding motifs are deficient in inhibiting transcription from the E2F
sites containing reporter gene. Moreover, these mutants of p27Kip1 are also
impaired in disrupting the interaction between cyclin/cdk2 and the repressor
complexes of E2Fs. Taken together, these observations suggest that p27Kip1
reduces expression of the E2F-regulated genes by generating repressor complexes
of E2Fs. Furthermore, the results also demonstrate that p27Kip1 inhibits
expression of cyclin A and cyclin E, which are critical for progression through
the G1-S phases.

PMCID: PMC305739
PMID: 9307976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):5508-20.

Induction of S-phase entry by E2F transcription factors depends on their nuclear 
localization.

Müller H(1), Moroni MC, Vigo E, Petersen BO, Bartek J, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan,
Italy.

The E2F transcription factors are essential for regulating the correct timing of 
activation of several genes whose products are implicated in cell proliferation
and DNA replication. The E2Fs are targets for negative regulation by the
retinoblastoma protein family, which includes pRB, p107, and p130, and they are
in a pathway that is frequently found altered in human cancers. There are five
members of the E2F family, and they can be divided into two functional subgroups.
Whereas, upon overexpression, E2F-1, -2, and -3 induce S phase in quiescent
fibroblasts and override G1 arrests mediated by the p16INK4A tumor suppressor
protein or neutralizing antibodies to cyclin D1, E2F-4 and -5 do not. Using E2F-1
and E2F-4 as representatives of the two subgroups, we showed here, by
constructing a set of chimeric proteins, that the amino terminus of E2F-1 is
sufficient to confer S-phase-inducing potential as well as the ability to
efficiently transactivate an E2F-responsive promoter to E2F-4. We found that the 
E2F-1 amino terminus directs chimeric proteins to the nucleus. Surprisingly, a
short nuclear localization signal derived from simian virus 40 large T antigen
could perfectly substitute for the presence of the E2F-1 amino terminus in these 
assays. Thus, nuclearly localized E2F-4, when overexpressed, displayed biological
activities similar to those of E2F-1. Furthermore, we showed that nuclear
localization of endogenous E2F-4 is cell cycle regulated, with E2F-4 being
nuclear in the G0 and early G1 phases and mainly cytoplasmic after the pRB family
members have become phosphorylated. We propose a novel mechanism for the
regulation of E2F-dependent transcription in which E2F-4 regulates transcription 
only from G0 until mid- to late G1 phase whereas E2F-1 is active in late G1 and S
phases, until it is inactivated by cyclin A-dependent kinase in late S phase.

PMCID: PMC232399
PMID: 9271426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 22;272(34):20971-4.

A unique domain of pRb2/p130 acts as an inhibitor of Cdk2 kinase activity.

De Luca A(1), MacLachlan TK, Bagella L, Dean C, Howard CM, Claudio PP, Baldi A,
Khalili K, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19107, USA.

The Cdk2 kinase has long been known to be involved in the progression of
mammalian cells past the G1 phase restriction point and through DNA replication
in the cell cycle. The Rb family of proteins, consisting of pRb, p107, and
pRb2/p130, has also been shown to monitor progression of G1 phase, mostly through
their interaction with E2F family members. p107 is able to inhibit Cdk2 kinase
activity through this interaction via a p21-related domain present in the C
terminus of the protein. We show here that pRb2/p130 also possesses this
activity, but through a separate domain. Moreover, we correlate the increased
expression of pRb2/p130 during various cellular processes with the decreased
kinase activity of Cdk2. We hypothesize that pRb2/p130 may act not only to bind
and modify E2F activity, but also to inhibit Cdk2 kinase activity in concert with
p21 in a manner different from p107.

PMID: 9261093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Oncogene. 1997 Aug 7;15(6):657-68.

Characterization of an E2F-p130 complex formed during growth arrest.

Corbeil HB(1), Branton PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were used to analyse the pattern of E2F
transcription factor complexes containing pRB and related 'pocket' proteins
associated with changes in growth of monkey CV-1 cells. Little change was noted
in pRB/E2F complexes following growth arrest or serum stimulation. Serum
starvation induced the formation of a novel slowly-migrating p130/E2F complex,
termed C7, which was comparable to one reported previously in terminally
differentiated C2C12 mouse cells (Corbeil et al., 1995, Oncogene 11, 909-920) and
thought to contain one or more additional unidentified proteins. After serum
stimulation, C7 complex disappeared in S-phase but returned during mitosis. A
major E2F complex containing p107 appeared during S-phase but was undetectable at
other times. It appeared likely that regulation of pRB, p107 and p130 occurs by
several mechanisms. First, phosphorylation has previously been proposed to be
involved. All pRB-related proteins were found to be highly phosphorylated during 
S-phase when E2F activity was highest, and hypophosphorylated in arrested cells
when E2F activity was low. Second, the absolute levels of some members of the RB 
family varied during the cell cycle. Levels of pRB protein and pRB/E2F complexes 
changed little; however, the amounts of both p107/E2F and p130/E2F complexes
varied according to the overall levels of p107 and p130 proteins. Formation of
the novel C7 complex in serum arrested cells suggested a third regulatory
mechanism mediated by interactions with additional proteins. Our studies
indicated that binding of such proteins with p130/E2F occurred via a site in the 
'pocket' similar to that utilized by adenovirus E1A proteins. Such proteins could
function as additional regulators of E2F-driven transcription.

PMID: 9264406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Mech Dev. 1997 Aug;66(1-2):13-25.

Expression patterns of the E2F family of transcription factors during mouse
nervous system development.

Dagnino L(1), Fry CJ, Bartley SM, Farnham P, Gallie BL, Phillips RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Cancer Research, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. ldagnino@ogh.on.ca

The E2F family of transcription factors consists of two subgroups termed E2F and 
DP. E2F is required for cell proliferation, and is necessary for fruit fly
development. E2F activity is a target for regulation by the retinoblastoma gene
family, which includes pRB, p107 and p130. Mutant RB-/-, RB-/-:p107-/- and
p107-/-:p130-/- mice develop abnormally, probably as a result of dysregulation in
the activity of E2F, indicating the importance of E2F in mammalian development.
To investigate the role of E2F in murine development, we have examined the
patterns of expression of E2F-1 through E2F-5, and DP-1 in the developing nervous
system by in situ hybridization. E2F-1, E2F-2 and E2F-5 are first detected in the
9.5 days post-coitus (dpc) forebrain. Expression of these E2F forms extends
caudally thereafter and includes the developing brain and the upper half of the
10.5 dpc spinal cord. By 11.5 dpc, these E2F factors are expressed throughout the
central nervous system. In 12.5 dpc embryos, E2F-1, E2F-2 and E2F-5 are highly
expressed in proliferating, undifferentiated neuronal precursors. As neurons
differentiate and migrate to the outer marginal zones in the nervous system,
expression of these E2F members is extinguished. In the developing retina,
another neuronal tissue, E2F-1 expression is also confined to the proliferating, 
undifferentiated retinoblastic layer. In contrast, E2F-3 expression is
up-regulated as retinoblasts differentiate into the ganglion cell layer. In
non-neuronal tissues, high E2F-4 transcript levels are present in regions
corresponding to proliferative chondrocytes, whereas E2F-2 and E2F-4 transcripts 
are very abundant in the thymic cortex, which contains immature thymocytes. We
conclude that individual E2F forms are differentially regulated during the
development of distinct tissues, and especially during neuronal development.

PMID: 9376316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Genes Dev. 1997 Aug 1;11(15):1999-2011.

Mutations in Drosophila DP and E2F distinguish G1-S progression from an
associated transcriptional program.

Royzman I(1), Whittaker AJ, Orr-Weaver TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Whitehead
Institute, Cambridge 02142, USA.

The E2F transcription factor, a heterodimer of E2F and DP subunits, is capable of
driving the G1-S transition of the cell cycle. However, mice in which the E2F-1
gene had been disrupted developed tumors, suggesting a negative role for E2F in
controlling cell proliferation in some tissues. The consequences of disrupting
the DP genes have not been reported. We screened for mutations that disrupt G1-S 
transcription late in Drosophila embryogenesis and identified five mutations in
the dDP gene. Although mutations in dDP or dE2F nearly eliminate E2F-dependent
G1-S transcription, S-phase still occurs. Cyclin E has been shown to be essential
for S-phase in late embryogenesis, but in dDP and dE2F mutants the peaks of G1-S 
transcription of cyclin E are missing. Thus, greatly reduced levels of cyclin E
transcript suffice for DNA replication until late in development. Both dDP and
dE2F are necessary for viability, and mutations in the genes cause lethality at
the late larval/pupal stage. The mutant phenotypes reveal that both genes promote
progression of the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC316409
PMID: 9271122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Genes Dev. 1997 Aug 1;11(15):1987-98.

PPARgamma induces cell cycle withdrawal: inhibition of E2F/DP DNA-binding
activity via down-regulation of PP2A.

Altiok S(1), Xu M, Spiegelman BM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and the Department of Cell Biology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

PPAR gamma is an adipose-selective nuclear hormone receptor that plays a key role
in the control of adipocyte differentiation. Previous studies indicated that
activation of ectopically expressed PPAR gamma induces differentiation when cells
have ceased growth because of confluence. We show here that ligand activation of 
PPAR gamma is sufficient to induce growth arrest in fibroblasts and SV40 large
T-antigen transformed, adipogenic HIB1B cells. Cell cycle withdrawal is
accompanied by a decrease in the DNA-binding and transcriptional activity of the 
E2F/DP complex, which is attributable to an increase in the phosphorylation of
these proteins, especially DP-1. This effect is a consequence of decreased
expression of the catalytic subunit of the serine-threonine phosphatase PP2A.
These data suggest an important role for PP2A in the control of E2F/DP activity
and a new mode of cell cycle control in differentiation.

PMCID: PMC316411
PMID: 9271121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jul 18;272(29):18367-74.

E2F-mediated growth regulation requires transcription factor cooperation.

van Ginkel PR(1), Hsiao KM, Schjerven H, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Previous studies have indicated that the presence of an E2F site is not
sufficient for G1/S phase transcriptional regulation. For example, the E2F sites 
in the E2F1 promoter are necessary, but not sufficient, to mediate differential
promoter activity in G0 and S phase. We have now utilized the E2F1 minimal
promoter to test several hypotheses that could account for these observations. To
test the hypothesis that G1/S phase regulation is achieved via E2F-mediated
repression of a strong promoter, a variety of transactivation domains were
brought to the E2F1 minimal promoter. Although many of these factors caused
increased promoter activity, growth regulation was not observed, suggesting that 
a general repression model is incorrect. However, constructs having CCAAT or YY1 
sites or certain GC boxes cloned upstream of the E2F1 minimal promoter displayed 
E2F site-dependent regulation. Further analysis of the promoter activity
suggested that E2F requires cooperation with another factor to activate
transcription in S phase. However, we found that the requirement for E2F to
cooperate with additional factors to achieve growth regulation could be relieved 
by bringing the E2F1 activation domain to the promoter via a Gal4 DNA binding
domain. Our results suggest a model that explains why some, but not all,
promoters that contain E2F sites display growth regulation.

PMID: 9218478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Oncogene. 1997 Jul 17;15(3):291-301.

Inhibition of E2F-4/DP-1-stimulated transcription by p202.

Choubey D(1), Gutterman JU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

The interferon (IFN)-inducible proteins mediate activities of the interferons
including the cell growth-regulatory activity. We have shown that p202, an
IFN-inducible 52kDa primarily nuclear phosphoprotein whose expression in
transfected cells inhibits cell proliferation, interacts with the retinoblastoma 
tumor suppressor protein (pRb) and the transcription factor E2F (E2F-1/ DP-1) in 
vitro and in vivo. p202 was shown to inhibit E2F-1/DP-1-stimulated transcription 
of a reporter gene and of endogenous genes. Here we report that expression of
p202 inhibited E2F-4/DP-1-stimulated transcription of a reporter gene in
transfected cells. Furthermore, this inhibition was associated with the
inhibition of the sequence-specific DNA-binding of E2F-4 both in complex with the
pocket proteins p107 or p130 and in its 'free' form in vitro. p202 bound to p107 
and p130 in vitro and in vivo and also associated with E2F-4, supporting the
notion that complexes containing p107/E2F-4 or p130/ E2F-4 and p202 exist in
vivo. Moreover, cotransfection of E2F-4-encoding plasmid in AKR-2B cells overcame
p202-mediated inhibition of cell growth, raising the possibility that p202
contributes to cell growth inhibition by the interferons, at least in part, by
modulating E2F-4-mediated transcription.

PMID: 9233764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Oncogene. 1997 Jul 10;15(2):143-57.

BRCA1 proteins are transported to the nucleus in the absence of serum and splice 
variants BRCA1a, BRCA1b are tyrosine phosphoproteins that associate with E2F,
cyclins and cyclin dependent kinases.

Wang H(1), Shao N, Ding QM, Cui J, Reddy ES, Rao VN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Allegheny University of the Health Sciences,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

BRCA1, a familial breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene encodes nuclear
phosphoproteins that function as tumor suppressors in human breast cancer cells. 
Previously, we have shown that overexpression of a BRCA1 splice variant BRCA1a
accelerates apoptosis in human breast cancer cells. In an attempt to determine
whether the subcellular localization of BRCA1 is cell cycle regulated, we have
studied the subcellular distribution of BRCA1 in asynchronous and growth arrested
normal, breast and ovarian cancer cells using different BRCA1 antibodies by
immunofluorescence and immunohistochemical staining. Upon serum starvation of
NIH3T3, some breast and ovarian cancer cells, most of the BRCA1 protein
redistributed to the nucleus revealing a new type of regulation that may modulate
the activity of BRCA1 gene. We have also characterized two new variant BRCA1
proteins (BRCA1a/p110 and BRCA1b/ p100) which are phosphoproteins containing
phosphotyrosine. Immunofluorescence and Western blotting analysis indicate
cytoplasmic and nuclear localization of BRCA1a and BRCA1b proteins. To elucidate 
the biological function of BRCA1, we created a bacterial fusion protein of
glutathione-transferase (GST) and BRCA1 zinc finger domain and detected two
cellular proteins with molecular weights of approximately 32 and 65 kD, one of
which contains phosphotyrosine designated p32 and p65 BRCA1 interacting proteins 
(BIP) that specifically interact with BRCA1. Western blot analysis of BIP with
cyclins/CDKs and E2F antisera indicated association with cdc2, cdk2, cdk4, cyclin
B, cyclin D, cyclin A and E2F-4 but not with cdk3, cdk5, cdk6, E2F-1, E2F-2,
E2F-3, E2F-5 and cyclin E. Furthermore, we have also demonstrated a direct
interaction of in vitro translated BRCA1a and BRCA1b proteins with recombinant
cyclin A, cyclin B1, cyclin D1, cdc2, cdk2 and E2F fusion proteins in vitro.
Taken together these results seem to suggest that BRCA1 could be an important
negative regulator of cell cycle that functions through interaction with E2F
transcriptional factors and phosphorylation by cyclins/cdk complexes with the
zinc ring finger functioning as a major protein-protein interaction domain. If
the interactions we observe in vitro is also seen in vivo then it may be possible
that lack or impaired binding of the disrupted BRCA1 proteins to E2F,
cyclins/CDKs in patients with mutations in the zinc finger domain could deprive
the cell of an important mechanism for braking cell proliferation leading to the 
development of breast and ovarian cancers.

PMID: 9244350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Cell Biochem. 1997 Jul 1;66(1):27-36.

Uncoupling of p21 induction and MyoD activation results in the failure of
irreversible cell cycle arrest in doxorubicin-treated myocytes.

Puri PL(1), Medaglia S, Cimino L, Maselli C, Germani A, De Marzio E, Levrero M,
Balsano C.

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione A. Cesalpino University of Rome La Sapienza, Italy.

Doxorubicin (Dox, Adriamicin), a potent broad spectrum anthracycline anticancer
drug, selectively inhibits muscle specific gene expression in cardiac cells in
vivo and prevents terminal differentiation of skeletal muscle cells in vitro. By 
inducing the expression of the helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcriptional inhibitor
ld2, Dox represses the myogenic function of the MyoD family of muscle regulatory 
factors (MRFs). In many cell types, terminal differentiation is coupled to an
irreversible exit from the cell cycle and MyoD plays a critical role in the
permanent cell cycle arrest of differentiating myocytes by upregulating the
cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor (cdki) p21. Here, we correlate Dox effects on
cell cycle with changes of E2F/DP complexes and activity in differentiating C2C12
myocytes. In Dox-treated quiescent myoblasts, which fail to differentiate into
myotubes under permissive culture conditions, serum re-stimulation induces
cyclin/cdk re-association on the E2F/DP complexes and this correlates with an
evident increase in E2F/DP driven transcription and re-entry of myoblasts into
the cell cycle. Despite Dox ability to activate the DNA-damage dependent p53/p21 
pathway, when induced in the absence of MyoD or other MRFs, p21 fails to maintain
the postmitotic state in Dox-treated myocytes induced to differentiate. Thus,
uncoupling p21 induction and MyoD activity results in a serum-reversible cell
cycle arrest, indicating that MRF specific activation of cdki(s) is required for 
permanent cell cycle arrest in differentiating muscle cells.

PMID: 9215525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Oncogene. 1997 Jun 26;14(25):3029-38.

Deregulation of specific E2F complexes by the v-mos oncogene.

Afshari CA(1), Rhodes N, Paules RS, Mudryj M.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Department of Medicine and Center for the
Study of Aging and Human Development and Durham VA a Veterans Administration
Medical Center, North Carolina 27705, USA.

The product of the c-mos proto-oncogene is a protein kinase that is normally
expressed in germ cells and functions during oocyte maturation. It has been
shown, however, that inappropriate expression of either the viral or cellular mos
gene can induce neoplastic progression in somatic cells. Furthermore,
v-mos-transformed NIH3T3 cells will undergo arrest of proliferation in early G1
upon serum withdrawal but are unable to appropriately down-regulate cell cycle
regulatory proteins, such as cyclin and cdc2 proteins, that normally are
down-regulated in quiescent, untransformed NIH3T3 cells. Since the levels of
these proteins are partially transcriptionally controlled, we investigated
whether there were alterations in the expression of E2F and AP-1 transcription
factor complexes. Indeed, the putative G0/G1-specific p130-E2F complex that is
normally observed during low serum-induced cell cycle arrest in NIH3T3 cells is
not present in serum starved v-mos-transformed cells. Instead, G1-phase arrested 
v-mos-transformed cells stably express two E2F protein complexes that are
normally observed only during S-phase in untransformed cells. The elevation of
these complexes in arrested v-mos-transformed cells may be the cause of the
transcriptional activation of the E2F-regulated genes cdc2, DHFR, cyclin A, and
E2F1 seen in serum starved v-mos-transformed cells. In addition, there are high
levels of AP-1 DNA binding activity in serum starved v-mos-transformed cells
compared to very low amounts in nontransformed cells. This altered regulation of 
transcription factor complexes and cell cycle control proteins upon serum
withdrawal may provide a mechanism for the uncontrolled cell growth associated
with neoplastic transformation induced by certain proto-oncogenes.

PMID: 9223666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Genes Dev. 1997 Jun 1;11(11):1479-92.

Cyclin E-induced S phase without activation of the pRb/E2F pathway.

Lukas J(1), Herzinger T, Hansen K, Moroni MC, Resnitzky D, Helin K, Reed SI,
Bartek J.

Author information: 
(1)Danish Cancer Society, Division of Cancer Biology, Copenhagen.

In cells of higher eukaryotes, cyclin D-dependent kinases Cdk4 and Cdk6 and,
possibly, cyclin E-dependent Cdk2 positively regulate the G1- to S-phase
transition, by phosphorylating the retinoblastoma protein (pRb), thereby
releasing E2F transcription factors that control S-phase genes. Here we performed
microinjection and transfection experiments using rat R12 fibroblasts, their
derivatives conditionally overexpressing cyclins D1 or E, and human U-2-OS cells,
to explore the action of G1 cyclins and the relationship of E2F and cyclin E in
S-phase induction. We demonstrate that ectopic expression of cyclin E, but not
cyclin D1, can override G1 arrest imposed by either the p16INK4a Cdk inhibitor
specific for Cdk4 and Cdk6 or a novel phosphorylation-deficient mutant pRb.
Several complementary approaches to assess E2F activation, including quantitative
reporter assays in live cells, showed that the cyclin E-induced S phase and
completion of the cell division cycle can occur in the absence of E2F-mediated
transactivation. Together with the ability of cyclin E to overcome a G1 block
induced by expression of dominant-negative mutant DP-1, a heterodimeric partner
of E2Fs, these results provide evidence for a cyclin E-controlled S
phase-promoting event in somatic cells downstream of or parallel to
phosphorylation of pRb and independent of E2F activation. They furthermore
indicate that a lack of E2F-mediated transactivation can be compensated by
hyperactivation of this cyclin E-controlled event.

PMID: 9192874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Genes Dev. 1997 Jun 1;11(11):1447-63.

pRB and p107/p130 are required for the regulated expression of different sets of 
E2F responsive genes.

Hurford RK Jr(1), Cobrinik D, Lee MH, Dyson N.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown 02129, USA.

The activity of the E2F transcription factor is controlled by physical
association with the retinoblastoma protein (pRB) and two related proteins, p107 
and p130. The pRB family members are thought to control different aspects of E2F 
activity, but it has been unclear what the respective functions of these proteins
might be. To dissect the specific functions of pRB, p107, and p130 we have
investigated how the expression of E2F-regulated genes is changed in cultures of 
primary cells lacking each of these family members. Whereas no changes were found
in the expression of E2F-target genes in cells lacking either p107 or p130,
deregulated expression of E2F targets was seen in cells lacking pRB and in cells 
lacking both p107 and p130. Surprisingly, the genes that were disregulated in
these two settings were completely different. These findings show that pRB and
p107/p130 indeed provide different functions in E2F regulation and identify
target genes that are dependent on pRB family proteins for their normal
expression.

PMID: 9192872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 Jun;8(6):699-710.

Down-regulation of cyclin A gene expression upon genotoxic stress correlates with
reduced binding of free E2F to the promoter.

Spitkovsky D(1), Schulze A, Boye B, Jansen-Dürr P.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte
Tumorvirologie, Heidelberg, Germany.

Treatment of mammalian cells by DNA-damaging agents leads to various cellular
responses. At sufficiently high dosage, cisplatin blocks cell proliferation and
finally kills cells; this effect is the basis for its widespread use as an
anticancer drug. Cisplatin-treated cells arrest in the G1 phase of the cell
cycle, most likely due to a signal generated by the stabilization of p53 and the 
subsequent induction of p21WAF-1/Cip1. We show here that cisplatin-treated
mammalian cells accumulate normal levels of cyclin D1 and cyclin E but fail to
produce cyclin A. The block to cyclin A gene expression occurs at the level of
transcription and is mediated by an E2F binding site in the cyclin A promoter. It
is shown here that, upon cisplatin treatment, transcriptionally active free E2F
becomes limiting, coincident with the accumulation of hypophosphorylated species 
of the retinoblastoma protein family. Immunoprecipitation experiments suggest
that the loss of free E2F results, at least in part, from the sequestration of
E2F-4/DP-1 heterodimers by p107. A role for the kinase inhibitor p21WAF-1/Cip1 in
repression of the cyclin A promoter is supported by our finding that ectopic
expression of p21WAF-1/Cip1 is sufficient to inhibit transcription from the
cyclin A gene, dependent on the E2F site. The data establish the E2F site in the 
human cyclin A promoter as a key target for the signaling pathway leading to G1
arrest in response to DNA damage by cisplatin and potentially other genotoxic
agents.

PMID: 9186003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jun;17(6):3116-24.

Regulated expression and RNA processing of transcripts from the Srp20 splicing
factor gene during the cell cycle.

Jumaa H(1), Guénet JL, Nielsen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.

Eukaryotic splicing factors belonging to the SR family are essential splicing
factors consisting of an N-terminal RNA-binding region and a C-terminal RS
domain. They are believed to be involved in alternative splicing of numerous
transcripts because their expression levels can influence splice site selection. 
We have characterized the structure and transcriptional regulation of the gene
for the smallest member of the SR family, SRp20 (previously called X16). The
mouse gene encoding SRp20, termed Srp20, consists of one alternative exon and six
constitutive exons and was mapped to a 2-centimorgan interval on chromosome 17.
When cells are transfected with SRp20 genomic DNA, both standard and
alternatively spliced transcripts and corresponding proteins are produced.
Interestingly, in starved (G0) cells, the amount of SRp20 mRNA containing the
alternative exon is large, whereas the amount of the standard SRp20 mRNA without 
the alternative exon is small. When starved cells are stimulated with serum, the 
alternative form is lost and the standard form is induced. These results suggest 
that splicing could be regulated during the cell cycle and that this could be, at
least in part, due to regulated expression of SR proteins. Consistent with this, 
experiments with synchronized cells showed an induction of SRp20 transcripts in
late G1 or early S. We have also characterized the promoter of SRp20. It lies
within a GC-rich CpG island and contains two consensus binding sites for E2F, a
transcription factor thought to be involved in regulating the cell cycle. These
motifs may be functional since reporter constructs with the SRp20 promoter can be
stimulated by cotransfection with E2F expression plasmids.

PMCID: PMC232164
PMID: 9154810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Oncogene. 1997 May 29;14(21):2533-42.

Regulated ectopic expression of cyclin D1 induces transcriptional activation of
the cdk inhibitor p21 gene without altering cell cycle progression.

Hiyama H(1), Iavarone A, LaBaer J, Reeves SA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuro-Oncology, Neuroscience Center, Massachusetts General Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston 02129, USA.

Cyclin D1 plays a key regulatory role during the G1 phase of the cell cycle and
its gene is amplified and overexpressed in many cancers. To address the
relationship between cyclin D1 and other cell cycle regulatory proteins, we
established human glioma and rodent fibroblast cell lines in which cyclin D1
expression could be regulated ectopically with tetracycline. In both of these
cell lines, we found that ectopic expression of cyclin D1 in asynchronously
growing cells was accompanied by increased levels of the p53 tumor suppressor
protein and the cyclin/cdk inhibitor p21. Despite the induction of these cell
cycle inhibitory proteins, cyclin D1-associated cdk kinase remained activated and
the cells grew essentially like that of the parent cells. Although growth
parameters were unchanged in these cells, morphological changes were clearly
identifiable and anchorage independent growth was observed in NIH3T3 cells. In a 
first step toward elaborating the mechanism for cyclin D1-mediated induction of
p21 gene expression we show that co-expression of E2F-1 and DP-1 can specifically
transactivate the p21 promoter. In support of these findings and a direct effect 
of E2F on induction of p21 gene expression a putative E2F binding site was
identified within the p21 promoter. In summary, our results demonstrate that
ectopic expression of cyclin D1 can induce gene expression of the cdk inhibitor
p21 through an E2F mechanism the consequences of which are not to growth arrest
cells but possibly to stabilize cyclin D1/cdk function.

PMID: 9191053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Nature. 1997 May 22;387(6631):422-6.

Myc and Ras collaborate in inducing accumulation of active cyclin E/Cdk2 and E2F.

Leone G(1), DeGregori J, Sears R, Jakoi L, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature 1997 Jun 26;387(6636):932.

Considerable evidence points to a role for G1 cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) in
allowing the accumulation of E2F transcription factor activity and induction of
the S phase of the cell cycle. Numerous experiments have also demonstrated a
critical role for both Myc and Ras activities in allowing cell-cycle progression.
Here we show that inhibition of Ras activity blocks the normal growth-dependent
activation of G1 CDK, prevents activation of the target genes of E2F, and results
in cell-cycle arrest in G1. We also show that Ras is essential for entry into the
S phase in Rb+/+ fibroblasts but not in Rb-/- fibroblasts, establishing a link
between Ras and the G1 CDK/Rb/E2F pathway. However, although expression of Ras
alone will not induce G1 CDK activity or S phase, coexpression of Ras with Myc
allows the generation of cyclin E-dependent kinase activity and the induction of 
S phase, coincident with the loss of the p27 cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
(CKI). These results suggest that Ras, along with the activation of additional
pathways, is required for the generation of G1 CDK activity, and that activation 
of cyclin E-dependent kinase in particular depends on the cooperative action of
Ras and Myc.

PMID: 9163430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 May 13;94(10):5095-100.

The subcellular localization of E2F-4 is cell-cycle dependent.

Lindeman GJ(1), Gaubatz S, Livingston DM, Ginsberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors plays a crucial role in cell cycle
progression. E2F activity is tightly regulated by a number of mechanisms, which
include the timely synthesis and degradation of E2F, interaction with
retinoblastoma protein family members ("pocket proteins"), association with DP
heterodimeric partner proteins, and phosphorylation of the E2F/DP complex. Here
we report that another mechanism, subcellular localization, is important for the 
regulation of E2F activity. Unlike E2F-1, -2, or -3, which are constitutively
nuclear, ectopic E2F-4 and -5 were predominantly cytoplasmic. Cotransfection of
expression vectors encoding p107, p130, or DP-2, but not DP-1, resulted in the
nuclear localization of E2F-4 and -5. Moreover, the transcriptional activity of
E2F-4 was markedly enhanced when it was invariably nuclear. Conversely, it was
reduced when the protein was excluded from the nucleus, implying that E2F-4
transcription function depends upon its cytological location. In keeping with
this, the nuclear/cytoplasmic ratios of endogenous E2F-4 changed as cells exited 
G0, with high ratios in G0 and early G1 and a progressive increase in cytoplasmic
E2F-4 as cells approached S phase. Thus, the subcellular location of E2F-4 is
regulated in a cell cycle-dependent manner, providing another potential mechanism
for its functional regulation.

PMCID: PMC24637
PMID: 9144196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 May;8(5):553-63.

Expression patterns of the E2F family of transcription factors during murine
epithelial development.

Dagnino L(1), Fry CJ, Bartley SM, Farnham P, Gallie BL, Phillips RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Cancer Research, Hospital for Sick Children,
University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. ldagnino@ogh.on.ca

The E2F family of transcription factors includes five E2F and three DP forms. E2F
is involved in the regulation of cell proliferation, but little is known about
E2F function during vertebrate development. We have explored the regulation of
E2F expression during mouse organogenesis by in situ hybridization. We find
selective up-regulation of E2F-2, E2F-4, and E2F-5 transcripts in epidermis and
intestinal epithelium at important developmental stages. E2F-4 transcript levels 
are high in early, undifferentiated single-cell-layer ectoderm, and later in
13.5-14.5-day-postcoitus (dpc) embryo epithelium, which contains several layers
of proliferating cells. E2F-2 is up-regulated following the onset of E2F-4
expression and is first apparent in undifferentiated epithelium at 13.5-14.5 days
of gestation. In contrast, E2F-5 transcripts are detected later in gestation,
once the epidermis shows evidence of stratification. Stratification of the
epidermis into basal, proliferating cells and suprabasal, terminally
differentiating cells at 15.5-19.5 days of gestation coincides with expression of
E2F-2 and E2F-4 in basal cells and of E2F-5 in suprabasal cells. Similarly, in
intestinal epithelium, E2F-4 up-regulation in pseudostratified epithelium at 13.5
days of gestation precedes appearance of E2F-2 transcripts, in 14.5-dpc embryos, 
in the proliferating, intervillus epithelium. In 16.5-19.5-dpc embryos, no E2F-2 
transcripts were detected at the tip of the developing villi, which contain
terminally differentiating cells. In contrast, E2F-5 transcripts were limited to 
the upper half of the villi and were absent in the intervillus epithelium. This
suggests that E2F-2 and E2F-4 may participate in maintaining epithelial cells in 
a proliferative, undifferentiated phenotype, whereas E2F-5 may be important to
maintain the differentiated state. Thus, selective regulation of E2F forms occurs
during murine epithelial development, irrespective of the ectodermal or
endodermal origin of such epithelia.

PMID: 9149906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 11;272(15):10117-24.

Regulation and expression of retinoblastoma proteins p107 and p130 during 3T3-L1 
adipocyte differentiation.

Richon VM(1), Lyle RE, McGehee RE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Cell Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, New York 10021, USA.

During 3T3-L1 adipocyte differentiation, growth-arrested, postconfluent
preadipocytes are required to reenter the cell cycle and proceed through a
mitotic clonal expansion phase prior to terminal differentiation. The
retinoblastoma proteins (pRB, p107, and p130) are thought to be critical in
controlling cell cycle progression by binding to and regulating the activity of
the E2F transcription factors. We show here that p130/p107 protein levels, p107
mRNA levels, and E2F DNA binding complexes are regulated during 3T3-L1
adipogenesis. The predominant E2F binding complex in day 0 preadipocytes was
p130-E2F with no detectable free E2F or p107. On Day 1, during mitotic clonal
expansion, there was a distinct switch to free E2F and p107-E2F complexes
associated with increased p107 mRNA and protein along with decreased p130 protein
levels. Following differentiation, the day 0 pattern is reestablished. The switch
is not just a consequence of reentry into the cell cycle, in that p107 protein
levels are both detectable and unchanged in dividing, serum-restricted, or serum 
restimulated preconfluent cells. Interestingly, hormonal stimulation of 3T3-C2
cells, a related nondifferentiating cell line, also induces a mitotic clonal
expansion phase that is associated with the p130:p107 switch in a pattern very
similar to 3T3-L1 cells, suggesting the block in differentiation observed in
3T3-C2 cells occurs after clonal expansion. Combined, these findings suggest that
the regulatory mechanisms of the p130:p107 switch are not specific to
differentiation but may play a key role in regulating the mitotic clonal
expansion necessary for adipocyte differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells.

PMID: 9092557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 4;272(14):8905-11.

The p120-v-Abl protein interacts with E2F-1 and regulates E2F-1 transcriptional
activity.

Birchenall-Roberts MC(1), Yoo YD, Bertolette DC 3rd, Lee KH, Turley JM, Bang OS, 
Ruscetti FW, Kim SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, SAIC Frederick, National Cancer
Institute-Frederick Cancer Research and Development Center, Frederick, Maryland
21702-1201, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors regulates cell cycle progression, and
deregulated expression of E2F-1 can lead to neoplastic transformation. In myeloid
cells, introduction and expression of the Abelson leukemia virus causes growth
factor independence. Here, the p120 v-Abl protein activates E2F-1-mediated
transcription through a physical interaction with the E2F-1 transcription factor.
BCR-Abl and c-Abl also stimulate E2F-1-mediated transcription. Our results
suggest a new mechanism by which v-Abl leads to factor-independent myeloid cell
proliferation: the activation of E2F-1-mediated transcription.

PMID: 9083010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Cell Biochem. 1997 Apr;65(1):83-94.

Altered cell shape is linked to increased p34cdc2 gene expression in fibroblasts 
expressing a mutant E2F-1 transcription factor.

Logan TJ(1), Jordan KL, Evans DL, Hall DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The E2F1 transcription factor or an amino terminal deletion mutant termed E2F1d87
was constitutively expressed in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. Cells expressing wild-type
E2F1 display a morphology indistinguishable from that of normal fibroblasts.
However, the E2F1d87-expressing cells exhibited a distinct rounding during
culture in media containing 10% calf serum. The morphology change was most
pronounced during S phase, which was considerably lengthened in the
E2F1d87-expressing cells. Consistent with this rounded shape, the
E2F1d87-expressing cells have significantly increased levels of both p34cdc2 mRNA
and protein. Also observed was an increase in active p34cdc2 in
immunoprecipitates from extracts of the E2F1d87 cell line, as assayed by histone 
H1 kinase assay. The upregulation of p34cdc2 expression occurs at the
transcriptional level and requires ectopic E2F1d87 along with serum growth factor
stimulation, since culture of these cells in low serum media results in a
flattened shape and a drop in p34cdc2 expression compared to that of the control 
cells.

PMID: 9138083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Apr;17(4):1966-76.

Position-dependent transcriptional regulation of the murine dihydrofolate
reductase promoter by the E2F transactivation domain.

Fry CJ(1), Slansky JE, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison 53706, USA.

Activity of the dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr) promoter increases at the
G1-S-phase boundary of the cell cycle. Mutations that abolish protein binding to 
an E2F element in the dhfr promoter also abolish the G1-S-phase increase in dhfr 
transcription, indicating that transcriptional regulation is mediated by the E2F 
family of proteins. To investigate the mechanism by which E2F regulates dhfr
transcription, we moved the E2F element upstream and downstream of its natural
position in the promoter. We found that the E2F element confers growth regulation
to the dhfr promoter only when it is proximal to the transcription start site.
Using a heterologous E2F element, we showed that position-dependent regulation is
a property that is promoter specific, not E2F element specific. We demonstrated
that E2F-mediated growth regulation of dhfr transcription requires activation of 
the dhfr promoter in S phase and that the C-terminal activation domains of E2F1, 
E2F4, and E2F5, when fused to the Gal4 DNA binding domain, are sufficient to
specify position-dependent activation. To further investigate the role of
activation in dhfr regulation, we tested other transactivation domains for their 
ability to activate the dhfr promoter. We found that the N-terminal
transactivation domain of VP16 cannot activate the dhfr promoter. We propose
that, unlike other E2F-regulated promoters, robust transcription from the dhfr
promoter requires an E2F transactivation domain close to the transcription start 
site.

PMCID: PMC232043
PMID: 9121444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Apr 1;94(7):2811-6.

Targeting E2F1-DNA complexes with microgonotropen DNA binding agents.

Chiang SY(1), Bruice TC, Azizkhan JC, Gawron L, Beerman TA.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Therapeutics Department, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, 
NY 14263, USA.

Microgonotropen (MGT) DNA binding drugs, which consist of an A+T-selective DNA
minor groove binding tripyrrole peptide and polyamine chains attached to a
central pyrrole that extend drug contact into the DNA major groove, were found to
be extraordinarily effective inhibitors of E2 factor 1 (E2F1) association with
its DNA promoter element (5'-TTTCGCGCCAAA). The most active of these drugs,
MGT-6a, was three orders of magnitude more effective than distamycin and
inhibited complexes between E2F1 and the dihydrofolate reductase promoter by 50% 
at 0.00085 microM. A relationship was found between the measured equilibrium
constants for binding of MGTs to the A+T region of d(GGCGA3T3GGC)/d(CCGCT3A3CCG) 
and their inhibition of complex formation between E2F1 and the DNA promoter
element. A representative of the potent MGT inhibitors was significantly more
active on inhibition of E2F1-DNA complex formation compared with disruption of a 
preexisting complex.

PMCID: PMC20278
PMID: 9096302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Mar 17;232(2):336-9.

Novel phosphorylated forms of E2F-1 transcription factor bind to the
retinoblastoma protein in cells overexpressing an E2F-1 cDNA.

Yang XH(1), Sladek TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Finch University of Health
Sciences, Chicago Medical School, Illinois 60064-3095, USA.

In cells overexpressing an exogenous cDNA encoding the E2F-1 transcription
factor, as many as eight closely-migrating protein bands were detected after
denaturing protein gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting with an E2F-1-specific 
antibody. Control cells, not overexpressing an E2F-1 cDNA, contained only four
E2F-1 specific bands. Pretreatment of protein extracts, from both control and
E2F-1 overexpressing cells, with lambda-phosphatase eliminated all E2F-1-specific
bands except the single band migrating most rapidly on the gels. These data
demonstrated that the multiple protein bands were differentially-phosphorylated
forms of E2F-1 protein and showed that novel, more highly phosphorylated E2F-1
forms were present in cells overexpressing the E2F-1 protein. In addition,
immunoprecipitation of the retinoblastoma (pRb) protein from cells overexpressing
the E2F-1 cDNA showed that the novel, highly phosphorylated E2F-1 forms were
preferentially coimmunoprecipitated, indicating that pRb bound preferentially to 
these E2F-1 forms.

PMID: 9125176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Oncogene. 1997 Mar 13;14(10):1171-84.

MyoD prevents cyclinA/cdk2 containing E2F complexes formation in terminally
differentiated myocytes.

Puri PL(1), Balsano C, Burgio VL, Chirillo P, Natoli G, Ricci L, Mattei E,
Graessmann A, Levrero M.

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione A Cesalpino and I Clinica Medica, University of Rome La Sapienza,
Roma, Italy.

Withdrawal from the cell cycle of differentiating myocytes is regulated by the
myogenic basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein MyoD and the pocket proteins pRb, 
p107 and pRb2/p130. Downstream effectors of 'pocket' proteins are the components 
of the E2F family of transcription factors, which regulate the G1/S-phase
transition. We analysed by EMSA the composition of E2F complexes in cycling,
quiescent undifferentiated and differentiated C2C12 skeletal muscle cells. An E2F
complex containing mainly E2F4 and pRb2/p130 (E2F-G0/G1 complex) appears when DNA
synthesis arrests, replacing the cyclinA/cdk2 containing E2F complex of
proliferating myoblasts (E2F-G1/S complex). Serum stimulation reinduces DNA
synthesis and the re-appearance of E2F-G1/S complexes in quiescent myoblasts but 
not in differentiated C2C12 myotubes. In differentiating C2C12 cells, E2F
complexes switch and DNA synthesis in response to serum are prevented when MyoD
DNA binding activity and the cdks inhibitor MyoD downstream effector p21 are
induced. Thus, during myogenic differentiation, formation of E2F4 and pRb2/p130
containing complexes is an early event, but not enough on its own to prevent the 
reactivation of DNA synthesis. Using a subclone of C3H10T1/2 mouse fibroblasts
stably expressing Estrogen Receptor-MyoD (ER-MyoD) chimerae, we found that
estrogen directed MyoD activation prevents the reassociation of cyclinA/cdk2 to
the E2F4 containing complex following serum stimulation and this correlates with 
suppression of E2F activity and the inability of cells to re-enter the cell
cycle. Our data indicate that, in differentiating myocytes, one mechanism through
which MyoD induces permanent cell cycle arrest involves p21 upregulation and
suppression of the proliferation-associated cdks-containing E2F complexes
formation.

PMID: 9121766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cell Prolif. 1997 Mar-Apr;30(3-4):171-94.

A mathematical model of the regulation of the G1 phase of Rb+/+ and Rb-/- mouse
embryonic fibroblasts and an osteosarcoma cell line.

Obeyesekere MN(1), Knudsen ES, Wang JY, Zimmerman SO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomathematics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston 77030, USA.

A mathematical model integrating the roles of cyclin D, cdk4, cyclin E, cdk2, E2F
and RB in control of the G1 phase of the cell cycle is described. Experimental
results described with murine embryo fibroblasts (MEFs), either Rb+/+ or Rb-/-,
and with the RB-deficient osteosarcoma cell line, Saos-2, served as the basis for
the formulation of this mathematical model. A model employing the known
interactions of these six proteins does not reproduce the experimental
observations described in the MEFs. The appropriate modelling of G1 requires the 
inclusion of a sensing mechanism which adjusts the activity of cyclin E/cdk2 in
response to both RB concentration and growth factors. Incorporation of this
sensing mechanism into the model allows it to reproduce most of the experimental 
results observed in Saos-2 cells, Rb-/- MEFS, and Rb+/+ MEFs. The model also
makes specific predictions which have not been tested experimentally.

PMID: 9375029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Genes Dev. 1997 Mar 1;11(5):654-62.

Induction of c-myc transcription by the v-Abl tyrosine kinase requires Ras, Raf1,
and cyclin-dependent kinases.

Zou X(1), Rudchenko S, Wong K, Calame K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.

v-Abl is an oncogenic form of the c-Abl nonreceptor tyrosine kinase. v-Abl
induces transcription of c-myc, and c-Myc function is a necessary but not
sufficient component of the v-Abl transformation program. Previously we showed
that the E2F site in the c-myc promoter is a v-Abl response element and that
v-Abl appears to induce c-myc by initiating a phosphorylation cascade that
ultimately activates E2F-binding proteins. In this work we have investigated the 
signaling pathway between the v-Abl tyrosine kinase and activated E2F proteins.
We show that the Ras GTPase and Raf1 serine/threonine kinase are required in this
pathway. However, in contrast to other aspects of v-Abl signaling, induction of
c-myc transcription is independent of the Rac GTPase. Our results also establish 
a requirement for activated cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks), as v-Abl-dependent
induction of c-myc transcription is blocked by cdk inhibitor p21 and induction of
c-myc is accompanied by activation of cdk2 and cdk4. Finally, we show that
v-Abl-dependent induction of c-myc is accompanied by hyperphosphorylation of pRb,
p107, and p130. On the basis of these data, we propose a model for the signaling 
path from v-Abl to c-myc.

PMID: 9119229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Oncogene. 1997 Feb 27;14(8):987-95.

Polyomavirus large T antigen-dependent DNA amplification.

Stiegler P(1), Schüchner S, Lestou V, Wintersberger E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Vienna Biocenter, University of Vienna,
Austria.

DNA amplification is a readily measurable indicator for genome destabilization.
Contrary to normal senescing cells, those of most immortal or transformed cell
lines are karyotypically unstable and permissive for amplification. Permissivity 
for amplification can be generated by gene products of several DNA tumor viruses 
whereby their interaction with the tumorsuppressor protein p53 is important. p53 
is the major protein involved in check point control of DNA damage. Polyomavirus 
large T antigen is also involved in immortalization and transformation of cells
but it does not interact with p53. We, therefore, examined whether this protein
could still make the non-permissive cell line REF52 permissive for gene
amplification. To this end REF52 cell lines were constructed which conditionally 
expressed the wild type polyomavirus large T antigen or a mutant form unable to
bind the retinoblastoma protein. Using the inhibitor of de novo pyrimidine
biosynthesis, phosphonoacetyl-L-aspartate (PALA), as selective agent we found
that PALA resistant cells arise with a frequency of about 5 x 10(-5) and that the
interaction of polyomavirus large T protein with the retinoblastoma protein or
another related pocket protein is important for this to occur. PALA resistant
cells have an increased number of chromosomes and dicentric chromosomes which are
considered as starting point for DNA structures characteristic for amplified DNA.
Such structures were indeed found with the help of fluorescence in situ
hybridization. PALA resistant cells appear normal with respect to p53. Our data
indicate that PALA induces a G1 block which can be partially overcome by
polyomavirus large T protein by its interaction with E2F-pocket protein complexes
providing further evidence that these complexes are downstream targets of p53.

PMID: 9050998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Eur J Haematol. 1997 Feb;58(2):114-20.

High levels of the DNA-binding activity of E2F in adult T-cell leukemia and human
T-cell leukemia virus type I-infected cells: possible enhancement of DNA-binding 
of E2F by the human T-cell leukemia virus I transactivating protein, Tax.

Mori N(1).

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health, School of Medicine, Kitakyushu, Japan.

Transcription factor E2F binds to cellular promoters of certain growth- and cell 
cycle-controlling genes and forms distinct heteromeric complexes with other
nuclear proteins. It has therefore been proposed that E2F is involved in cellular
proliferation control. Human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) is an
etiological agent of adult T-cell leukemia (ATL). We show here by mobility-shift 
assay that E2F-containing DNA-binding complexes were detected in HTLV-I-infected 
T-cell lines and leukemic cells obtained from ATL patients but not in an
uninfected T-cell line, Jurkat, and normal peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
The Tax protein, encoded by HTLV-I, is a potent transcription activator of viral 
and several cellular genes. We demonstrate that expression of Tax can induce the 
E2F-containing DNA-binding complexes in Jurkat T cells. Thus, Tax, through
enhancement of the DNA-binding activity of E2F, may be capable of regulating
cellular gene expression implicated in the proliferation and transformation of T 
cells in ATL. This activity may be relevant to the mechanisms whereby HTLV-I
which does not contain oncogenes induces neoplasia.

PMID: 9111593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Genes Dev. 1997 Feb 1;11(3):383-96.

HBP1: a HMG box transcriptional repressor that is targeted by the retinoblastoma 
family.

Tevosian SG(1), Shih HH, Mendelson KG, Sheppard KA, Paulson KE, Yee AS.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Biochemistry, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02111, USA.

A prominent feature of cell differentiation is the initiation and maintenance of 
an irreversible cell cycle arrest with the complex involvement of the
retinoblastoma (RB) family (RB, p130, p107). We have isolated the HBP1
transcriptional repressor as a potential target of the RB family in
differentiated cells. By homology, HBP1 is a sequence-specific HMG transcription 
factor, of which LEF-1 is the best-characterized family member. Several features 
of HBP1 suggest an intriguing role as a transcriptional and cell cycle regulator 
in differentiated cells. First, inspection of the HBP1 protein sequence revealed 
two consensus RB interaction motifs (LXCXE and IXCXE). Second, HBP1 interaction
was selective for RB and p130, but not p107. HBP1, RB, and p130 levels are all
up-regulated with differentiation; in contrast, p107 levels decline. Third, HBP1 
can function as a transcriptional repressor of the promoter for N-MYC, which is a
critical cell cycle and developmental gene. Fourth, because the activation of the
N-MYC promoter in cycling cells required the E2F transcription factor, we show
that E2F-1 and HBP1 represent opposite transcriptional signals that can be
integrated within the N-MYC promoter. Fifth, the expression of HBP1 lead to
efficient cell cycle arrest. The arrest phenotype was manifested in the presence 
of optimal proliferation signals, suggesting that HBP1 exerted a dominant
regulatory role. Taken together, the results suggest that HBP1 may represent a
unique transcriptional repressor with a role in initiation and establishment of
cell cycle arrest during differentiation.

PMID: 9030690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Trends Genet. 1997 Jan;13(1):3-6.

Cell-cycle regulation of gene expression by transcriptional repression.

Zwicker J(1), Müller R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung (IMT), Philipps-Universität 
Marburg, Germany. jorkz@mendel.berkeley.edu

PMID: 9009839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jan;17(1):407-15.

p27KIP1 blocks cyclin E-dependent transactivation of cyclin A gene expression.

Zerfass-Thome K(1), Schulze A, Zwerschke W, Vogt B, Helin K, Bartek J, Henglein
B, Jansen-Dürr P.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Abteilung 620, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany.

Cyclin E is necessary and rate limiting for the passage of mammalian cells
through the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Control of cell cycle progression by
cyclin E involves cdk2 kinase, which requires cyclin E for catalytic activity.
Expression of cyclin E/cdk2 leads to an activation of cyclin A gene expression,
as monitored by reporter gene constructs derived from the human cyclin A
promoter. Promoter activation by cyclin E/cdk2 requires an E2F binding site in
the cyclin A promoter. We show here that cyclin E/cdk2 kinase can directly bind
to E2F/p107 complexes formed on the cyclin A promoter-derived E2F binding site,
and this association is controlled by p27KIP1, most likely through direct
protein-protein interaction. These observation suggest that cyclin E/cdk2
associates with E2F/p107 complexes in late G1 phase, once p27KIP1 has decreased
below a critical threshold level. Since a kinase-negative mutant of cdk2 prevents
promoter activation, it appears that transcriptional activation of the cyclin A
gene requires an active cdk2 kinase tethered to its promoter region.

PMCID: PMC231765
PMID: 8972221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Oncogene. 1996 Dec 19;13(12):2671-80.

Genomic structure and developmental expression of the mouse cell cycle regulatory
transcription factor DP1.

Gopalkrishnan RV(1), Dollé P, Mattei MG, La Thangue NB, Kedinger C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute de Genetique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
France.

The E2F/DP family of transcription factors play an important role in the control 
of cell cycle progression. By direct regulatory interactions with the
retinoblastoma family of proteins, they integrate extracellular growth promoting 
signals impinging on the cyclin and cyclin dependent kinase complex during the G1
phase, with cell cycle progression. This is accomplished by direct
transcriptional activation of genes required for nucleotide biosynthesis and DNA 
replication in the S phase. In addition, these transcription factors also play a 
role in the control of genes involved in regulating G1 and S phase progression
including, autoregulatory control, as in the case of E2F1 itself. In this report,
we describe the characterisation of the genomic locus encoding DP1, a member of
this family. The DP1 gene has a TATA-less promoter and transcription initiates at
multiple sites. Using transient transfection assays we have delineated sequences 
in the upstream region which have promoter or enhancer activity. The DP1 gene was
localised to mouse chromosome 8 by metaphase chromosome analysis. We describe a
dynamic pattern of DP1 expression using in situ hybridisation on cryostat
sections of mouse embryos at various stages of development and a variable level
of expression by Northern blot analysis of RNA from various adult tissues.

PMID: 9000141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. EMBO J. 1996 Dec 16;15(24):7060-9.

The consensus motif for phosphorylation by cyclin D1-Cdk4 is different from that 
for phosphorylation by cyclin A/E-Cdk2.

Kitagawa M(1), Higashi H, Jung HK, Suzuki-Takahashi I, Ikeda M, Tamai K, Kato J, 
Segawa K, Yoshida E, Nishimura S, Taya Y.

Author information: 
(1)Banyu Tsukuba Research Institute in collaboration with Merck Research
Laboratories, Tsukuba, Japan.

Cyclin D-Cdk4/6 and cyclin A/E-Cdk2 are suggested to be involved in
phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein (pRB) during the G1/S transition of
the cell cycle. However, it is unclear why several Cdks are needed and how they
are different from one another. We found that the consensus amino acid sequence
for phosphorylation by cyclin D1-Cdk4 is different from S/T-P-X-K/R, which is the
consensus sequence for phosphorylation by cyclin A/E-Cdk2 using various synthetic
peptides as substrates. Cyclin D1-Cdk4 efficiently phosphorylated the G1 peptide,
RPPTLS780PIPHIPR that contained a part of the sequence of pRB, while cyclins
E-Cdk2 and A-Cdk2 did not. To determine the phosphorylation state of pRB in vitro
and in vivo, we raised the specific antibody against phospho-Ser780 in pRB. We
confirmed that cyclin D1-Cdk4, but not cyclin E-Cdk2, phosphorylated Ser780 in
recombinant pRB. The Ser780 in pRB was phosphorylated in the G1 phase in a cell
cycle-dependent manner. Furthermore, we found that pRB phosphorylated at Ser780
cannot bind to E2F-1 in vivo. Our data show that cyclin D1-Cdk4 and cyclin A/E
Cdk2 phosphorylate different sites of pRB in vivo.

PMCID: PMC452531
PMID: 9003781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Oncogene. 1996 Dec 5;13(11):2421-30.

Activation of JNK/SAPK pathway is not directly inhibitory for cell cycle
progression in NIH3T3 cells.

Shu J(1), Hitomi M, Stacey D.

Author information: 
(1)The Cleveland Clinic Foundation Research Institute, Department of Molecular
Biology, Ohio 44195, USA.

In this study the induction of stress activated protein kinase (SAPK) activity by
protein synthesis inhibitors was shown not to inhibit cellular proliferation.
Anisomycin induced strong SAPK activity at non-inhibitory concentrations for
either protein or DNA synthesis, while the other two inhibitors, emetine and
cycloheximide, blocked cell cycle progression without strong SAPK induction. With
all three inhibitors, the induction of SAPK activity was always accompanied by
protein synthesis inhibition to some extent. Stimulation of mRNA expression of
the genes c-jun, c-fos and c-myc correlated well with SAPK induction, but not
with cell cycle inhibition. With concentrations of each inhibitor able to block
DNA synthesis, no induction of message for the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 
waf-1 was observed; while induction of gadd45 message indicated that the cells
might be responding to growth-arrest or DNA damage. The inability of
microinjected E2F/DP1 transcription factor proteins to overcome the inhibition of
DNA synthesis induced by protein synthesis inhibitors indicate that blockage of
an early event in cell cycle progression had occurred. These results indicate
that the SAPK induction by protein synthesis inhibitors has no proliferative
consequences.

PMID: 8957084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Dec;16(12):6965-76.

The accumulation of an E2F-p130 transcriptional repressor distinguishes a G0 cell
state from a G1 cell state.

Smith EJ(1), Leone G, DeGregori J, Jakoi L, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Previous studies have demonstrated cell cycle-dependent specificities in the
interactions of E2F proteins with Rb family members. We now show that the
formation of an E2F-p130 complex is unique to cells in a quiescent, G0 state. The
E2F-p130 complex does not reform when cells reenter a proliferative state and
cycle through G1. The presence of an E2F-p130 complex in quiescent cells
coincides with the E2F-mediated repression of transcription of the E2F1 gene, and
we show that the E2F sites in the E2F1 promoter are important as cells enter
quiescence but play no apparent role in cycling cells. In addition, the decay of 
the E2F-p130 complex as cells reenter the cell cycle requires the action of G1
cyclin-dependent kinase activity. We conclude that the accumulation of the
E2F-p130 complex in quiescent cells provides a negative control of certain key
target genes and defines a functional distinction between these G0 cells and
cells that exist transiently in G1.

PMCID: PMC231700
PMID: 8943352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Cell Prolif. 1996 Nov;29(11):579-88.

Established cell lines transformed by E2F-1 overexpression contain wild-type p53.

Sladek TL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Finch University of Health
Sciences, Chicago Medical School, Illinois 60064-3095, USA.
sladekt@mis.finchcms.edu

Overexpression of genes encoding E2F transcription factors can transform some
cultured cell lines and cause apoptosis of others. Apoptosis due to E2F
overexpression requires the presence of wild-type p53. Cell lines in which stable
E2F overexpression is possible might be expected, therefore, to contain mutant
p53. In this report, it was asked whether endogenous p53 was mutant or wild-type 
in four established fibroblast cell lines that this laboratory previously showed 
stably overexpressed and were transformed by exogenous E2F-1. Unexpectedly, it
was found that the p53 in these cells was wild-type by the criteria of
immunoprecipitation with conformation-specific, p53 monoclonal antibodies and by 
transactivation of a p53-dependent reporter gene construct in transient
transfection assays. These data indicate that stable overexpression of E2F-1 is
possible in the presence of wild-type p53 and may result in cell transformation.

PMID: 9105415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. EMBO J. 1996 Nov 1;15(21):5917-27.

Dual mechanisms of repression of E2F1 activity by the retinoblastoma gene
product.

Zacksenhaus E(1), Jiang Z, Phillips RA, Gallie BL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Cancer Research, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The retinoblastoma gene product, pRb, negatively regulates cell proliferation by 
modulating the activity of the transcription factor E2F1 that controls expression
of S-phase genes. To dissect transcriptional regulation of E2F1 by pRb, we
developed a means to control the subcellular localization of pRb by exchanging
its constitutive nuclear localization signal (NLS) with an inducible nuclear
targeting domain from the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). In co-transfection
experiments in hormone-free media, pRb delta NLS-GR sequestered E2F1 in the
cytoplasm; addition of steroid hormones induced co-translocation of pRb delta
NLS-GR and E2F1 to the nucleus. A pRb allele lacking a NLS, pRb delta NLS, also
sequestered E2F1 in the cytoplasm. Both nuclear and cytoplasmic pRb delta NLS-GR 
repressed transcription from a simple, E2F1-activated, promoter equally well. pRb
delta NLS-GR exerted differential effects on complex promoters containing an
activator and E2F sites that acted as either positive or negative elements. We
propose a dual mechanism of transcriptional repression by pRb which allows tight 
control of E2F1-responsive genes: a pRb-E2F1 repressor unit is assembled off DNA 
to pre-empt transcriptional activation by E2F1; recruitment of this repressor
unit to cognate binding sites on promoters allows silencing of adjacent promoter 
elements.

PMCID: PMC452360
PMID: 8918469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. EMBO J. 1996 Oct 15;15(20):5668-78.

Inhibition of E2F-mediated transcription by p202.

Choubey D(1), Li SJ, Datta B, Gutterman JU, Lengyel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New
Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Many of the antimicrobial, immunomodulatory and cell growth inhibitory activities
of the interferons are mediated by interferon-inducible proteins. Earlier we
characterized an interferon-inducible murine protein, p202, whose expression in
transfected cells inhibits cell proliferation and which can form a complex with
retinoblastoma protein (pRb). Here we report that in transfected cells expression
of p202 inhibits E2F-stimulated transcription of a reporter gene and of
endogenous genes. Inhibition of the transcriptional activity of E2F by p202 does 
not depend on fully functional pRb and is correlated with inhibition of the
sequence-specific DNA binding of E2F. p202 interacts with the transcription
factor E2F (E2F-1/DP-1) in vitro and in vivo. Inhibition of E2F activity by p202 
may contribute to growth inhibition by the interferons.

PMCID: PMC452311
PMID: 8896460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Oncogene. 1996 Oct 3;13(7):1499-509.

p120-v-Abl expression overcomes TGF-beta1 negative regulation of c-myc
transcription but not cell growth.

Birchenall-Roberts MC(1), Kim SJ, Bertolette DC 3rd, Turley JM, Fu T, Bang OS,
Kasper JJ, Yoo YD, Ruscetti FW.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, SAIC Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

Transformation of interleukin-3 dependent (IL-3) 32D-123 myeloid cells by
p120-v-Abl produced the factor-independent 32D-abl cell line. In 32D-abl cells,
myc expression was found to be significantly higher than in the parental cells
and was correlated with increased E2F-1 protein expression and DNA binding
ability. Surprisingly, in 32D-abl cells, TGF-beta1, a potent G1/S inhibitor of
32D-123 and 32D-abl cell growth, increased E2F transactivation as shown by
increased c-myc promoter-CAT and GAL4-E2F-1 activity. In addition, TGF-beta1 was 
also found to increase E2F-1 protein levels but had no effect on steady-state
retinoblastoma (RB) protein levels or phosphorylation state. In the absence of
TGF-beta1, transient expression of RB in v-Abl expressing cells resulted in
decreased c-myc transcription, inhibition of GAL4-E2F-1 driven transactivation
and inhibition of cellular proliferation. RB and v-Abl were found to physically
associate in vivo and in vitro via v-Abl's ATP binding region. In summary, these 
studies established that in myeloid cells: (1) v-Abl binds RB resulting in
increased E2F-1-driven c-myc transcription, and (2) an alternative pathway exists
for TGF-beta1-mediated growth inhibition of v-Abl-transformed cells, in which
increased rather than decreased E2F-mediated c-myc transcription is observed.

PMID: 8875988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Neurosci Res. 1996 Oct 1;46(1):108-13.

Overexpression of E2F1 in astrocytes leads to neoplastic transformation and
changes in expression of retinoblastoma family members.

Miyajima M(1), Nornes HO, Sato K, Neuman T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins 80523, USA.

Overexpression of mouse E2F1 full-length but not truncated forms results in
neoplastic transformation of astrocytes in vitro. This neoplastic transformation 
is accompanied with changes in cell morphology and expression of cell cycle
regulators. Transformed astrocytes have higher expression of cdk2, pRb, and p107 
than control astrocytes. However, expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP) and p130 is reduced in transformed astrocytes.

PMID: 8892111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Virology. 1996 Oct 1;224(1):184-97.

Interaction of mouse adenovirus type 1 early region 1A protein with cellular
proteins pRb and p107.

Smith K(1), Ying B, Ball AO, Beard CW, Spindler KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens 30602, USA.

We demonstrated functional associations between mouse adenovirus type 1 (MAV-1)
early region 1A (E1A) protein and both the mouse retinoblastoma protein (pRb) and
the mouse pRb-related protein, p107. Interactions between MAV-1 E1A and mouse pRb
or mouse p107 proteins were examined in infected cell lysates using a mouse
embryonic fibroblast cell line infected with wild-type and mutant MAV-1 viruses. 
Using a polyclonal antibody to MAV-1 E1A, exogenously added mouse pRb or mouse
p107 was coimmunoprecipitated from wild-type, dIE105 (CR1 delta)-, and dIE106
(CR3 delta)-infected cell lysates. No coimmunoprecipitation was seen with cell
lysates from dIE102 (CR2 delta) or pmE109, a mutant virus that produces no
detectable E1A protein due to an ATG to TTG point mutation in the initiator
methionine. Introduction of mouse pRb into SAOS-2 cells resulted in a flat and
enlarged cell phenotype, whereas cotransfection of mouse pRb and MAV-1 E1A
resulted in a significant reduction of flat cells, presumably due to E1A binding 
pRb. CR1 delta and CR2 delta E1A proteins were less effective at reducing the
number of flat, enlarged cells induced by pRb expression than were the CR3 delta 
or wild-type E1A proteins. The reduced ability of these mutants to inactivate pRb
relative to wild-type E1A correlated with their reduced ability to bind pRb in
the in vitro coimmunoprecipitation experiments. As a measure of p107/MAV-1 E1A
complex formation in MAV-1-infected cells, we used mobility shift assays to
examine cell extracts for the presence of p107-containing E2F protein-DNA
complexes. Mock-, dIE102-, and pmE109-infected cell extracts formed a
p107-containing complex, whereas wild-type-infected cell extracts did not. Thus
the formation of a p107-E2F complex in wild-type- or these mutant-infected
extracts inversely correlated with the presence of E1A-p107 complexes identified 
in the vitro coimmunoprecipitation experiments. This is consistent with E1A-p107 
complexes forming in wild-type MAV-1-infected cells.

PMID: 8862413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;16(10):5888-95.

Functional interaction between DP-1 and p53.

Sørensen TS(1), Girling R, Lee CW, Gannon J, Bandara LR, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, MRC National Institute for
Medical Research, London, United Kingdom.

The cellular transcription factor DRTF1/E2F and the tumor suppressor protein p53 
play important roles in controlling early cell cycle events. DRTF1/E2F is
believed to coordinate and integrate the transcription of cell cycle-regulating
genes, for example, those involved in DNA synthesis, with the activity of
regulatory proteins, such as the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor gene product
(pRb), which modulate its transcriptional activity. In contrast, p53 is thought
to monitor the integrity of chromosomal DNA and when appropriate interfere with
cell cycle progression, for example, in response to DNA damage. Generic DRTF1/E2F
DNA binding activity and transcriptional activation arise when members of two
distinct families of proteins, such as DP-1 and E2F-1, interact as DP/E2F
heterodimers. In many cell types, DP-1 is a widespread component of DRTF1/E2F DNA
binding activity which when expressed at high levels oncogenically transforms
embryonic fibroblasts. Here, we document an association between DP-1 and p53 and 
demonstrate its presence in mammalian cell extracts. In vitro p53 interacts with 
an immunochemically distinct form of DP-1 and in vivo can regulate transcription 
driven by the DP-1/E2F-1 heterodimer. At the biochemical level, p53 competes with
E2F-1 for DP-1, with a consequent reduction in DNA binding activity. Mutational
analysis defines within DP-1 a C-terminal region required for the interaction
with p53 and within p53 an N-terminal region distinct from that required to bind 
to MDM2. Our results establish DRTF1/E2F as a common cellular target in growth
control mediated through the activities of pRb and p53 and suggest an alternative
mechanism through which p53 may regulate cellular proliferation.

PMCID: PMC231590
PMID: 8816502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;16(10):5302-12.

Expression of E1A in terminally differentiated muscle cells reactivates the cell 
cycle and suppresses tissue-specific genes by separable mechanisms.

Tiainen M(1), Spitkovsky D, Jansen-Dürr P, Sacchi A, Crescenzi M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncogenesis Laboratory, Regina Elena Cancer Center, Rome, Italy.

Terminally differentiated cells are characterized by permanent withdrawal from
the cell cycle; they do not enter S phase even when stimulated by growth factors 
or retroviral oncogenes. We have shown, however, that the adenovirus E1A oncogene
can reactivate the cell cycle in terminally differentiated cells. In this report,
we describe the molecular events triggered by E1A in terminally differentiated
skeletal muscle cells. We found that in myotubes infected with the adenovirus
mutant dl520, 12S E1A bypasses the early G1 phase and activates the expression of
late-G1 genes, such as the cyclin E and cyclin A genes, cdk2, PCNA, and B-myb. Of
these, the cyclin E gene and cdk2 were significantly overexpressed in comparison 
with levels in proliferating, undifferentiated myoblasts. p130 and pRb were
phosphorylated before the infected myotubes entered S phase, despite the high
expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21, and E2F was released.
Our results suggest that one of the mechanisms that E1A uses to overcome the
proliferative block of terminally differentiated cells involves coordinated
overexpression of cyclin E and cdk2. Following E1A expression, the myogenic
transcription factors MyoD and myogenin and the muscle-specific structural genes 
encoding muscle creatine kinase and myosin heavy chain were downregulated. The
muscle regulatory factors were also silenced in myotubes infected with adenovirus
E1A mutants incapable of reactivating the cell cycle in terminally differentiated
muscle cells. Thus, the suppression of the differentiation program is not a
consequence of cell cycle reactivation in myotubes, and it is induced by an
independent mechanism. Our results show that E1A reactivates the cell cycle and
suppresses tissue-specific gene expression in terminally differentiated muscle
cells, thus causing dedifferentiation.

PMCID: PMC231529
PMID: 8816442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Biochemistry. 1996 Sep 24;35(38):12320-8.

Isolation of two novel cDNAs whose products associate with the amino terminus of 
the E2F1 transcription factor.

Jordan KL(1), Evans DL, Steelman S, Hall DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107-5541, USA.

The amino terminus of the E2F1 transcription factor is a protein-protein
interaction domain since it associates with cyclin A/cdk2. Here, the two-hybrid
yeast screen was used to clone genes whose products associate with the amino
terminus of E2F1. The amino-terminal 121 amino acids of E2F1 were fused to the
Lex A binding domain while a partial length cDNA library from the embryo of a 12 
day old mouse was fused to the VP16 activation domain. Following coexpression of 
these fusions in yeast, two novel genes were cloned that code for proteins that
associate with E2F1. In an in vitro assay, these E2F1 Binding Proteins (EBP1 and 
EBP2) associate with residues 1-121 of E2F1 or with the full-length protein;
however, they do not associate with its carboxy terminus (residues 88-437). When 
EBP1 or EBP2 were expressed in COS cells along with E2F1 and the target promoter 
DNA polymerase alpha, repression of transcription was observed. However, no
repression of DNA polymerase alpha was seen if the cells expressed a
nonassociating mutant E2F1 (residues 88-437), along with EBP1 or EBP2. Finally,
expression of the EBP2 gene is up-regulated in growing NIH3T3 fibroblasts,
relative to serum-starved cells. However, this up-regulation of EBP2 expression
is not seen in fibroblasts constitutively expressing E2F1.

PMID: 8823166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Oncogene. 1996 Sep 5;13(5):1073-82.

E2F binding is required but not sufficient for repression of B-myb transcription 
in quiescent fibroblasts.

Bennett JD(1), Farlie PG, Watson RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Imperial College School of Medicine at
St Mary's, London, UK.

We have previously shown in mouse NIH3T3 fibroblasts that transcription of the
B-myb gene, which encodes a transcription factor required for S phase entry, is
repressed through a promoter E2F site in G0/early G1. Transcription repression at
this stage of the cell cycle was correlated with binding of a specific p107/E2F
complex to this site. We report here, however, that transfection of cells with
the known components of this complex, p107, E2F-4 and DP-1, did not repress the
B-myb promoter in cycling NIH3T3 cells, although p107 inhibited transcription
transactivation by E2F-4/DP-1. To establish definitively the contribution of E2F 
to repression, the effects of further mutations within and surrounding the E2F
site were examined. It was evident that E2F binding and repression were closely
correlated, lending greater weight to the contention that E2F itself is
implicated in this activity. These studies also identified a closely linked site,
designated the downstream repression site (DRS), which was not required for E2F
binding or transactivation but which was necessary for repression. These findings
indicated that E2F-dependent repression and activation are independently
regulated phenomena and suggest that repression involves additional interactions 
determined by the promoter context.

PMID: 8806697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Cell Biochem. 1996 Sep 1;62(3):405-10.

E2F1 inhibition of transcription activation by myogenic basic helix-loop-helix
regulators.

Wang J(1), Huang Q, Tang W, Nadal-Ginard B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Cellular transcription factor E2F1 is thought to regulate the expression of genes
important for cell cycle progression and cell proliferation. Deregulated E2F1
expression induces S-phase entry in quiescent cells and inhibits myogenic
differentiation. We show here that E2F1 inhibits the activation of gene
transcription by myogenic basic helix-loop-helix proteins myoD and myogenin.
Transfection assay using different deletion constructs indicates that both the
DNA binding and the transactivation domains of E2F1 are required for its
inhibition of myoD transcription activation. However, the retinoblastoma protein 
(RB) binding domain is not required. Furthermore, co-transfection with the RB,
which inhibits the transcription activity of E2F1, can also repress E2F1
inhibition of myoD transactivation. These results suggest an essential role of
E2F1-mediated transcription in its inhibition of myogenesis.

PMID: 8872611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Sep;16(9):4632-8.

Anchorage-dependent transcription of the cyclin A gene.

Schulze A(1), Zerfass-Thome K, Bergès J, Middendorp S, Jansen-Dürr P, Henglein B.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungschwerpunkt Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany.

NIH 3T3 cells cultured in suspension fail to express cyclin A and hence cannot
enter S phase and divide. We show that loss of cell adhesion to substratum
abrogates cyclin A gene expression by blocking its promoter activity through the 
E2F site that mediates its cell cycle regulation in adherent cells. In suspended 
cells, G0-specific E2F complexes remain bound to the cyclin A promoter.
Overexpression of cyclin D1 restores cyclin A transcription in suspended cells
and rescues them from cell cycle arrest. In suspended cells, cyclin D1 and cyclin
E accumulate normally upon serum stimulation, but their associated kinases remain
inactive; their substrates, pRb and p107, are not hyperphosphorylated.
Concomitantly, the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p27KIP1, is stabilized.
Ectopic expression of p27KIP1 blocks cyclin A promoter activity through its EN
binding site. These data suggest that the block to cyclin A transcription in
nonadherent NIH 3T3 cells results from stabilization of p27KIP1 and subsequent
inactivation of the specific E2F moiety required for its induction.

PMCID: PMC231462
PMID: 8756619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Aug 1;24(15):2905-10.

Cell cycle-regulated repression of B-myb transcription: cooperation of an E2F
site with a contiguous corepressor element.

Liu N(1), Lucibello FC, Zwicker J, Engeland K, Müller R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung (IMT), Philipps-Universität 
Marburg, Germany.

B-myb belongs to a group of cell cycle genes whose transcription is repressed in 
G0/early G1 through a binding site for the transcription factor E2F. Here, we
show that the B-myb repressor element is specifically recognised by heterodimers 
consisting of DP-1 and E2F-1, E2F-3 or E2F-4. Surprisingly, E2F-mediated
repression is dependent on a contiguous corepressor element that resembles the
CHR previously established as a corepressor of the CDE in cell cycle genes
derepressed in S/G2, such as cyclin A, cdc2 and cdc25C. A factor binding to the
B-myb CHR was identified in fractionated HeLa nuclear extract and found to
interact with the minor groove, as previously shown by in vivo footprinting for
the cyclin A CHR. The B-myb and cdc25C CHRs are related with respect to protein
binding but are functionally clearly distinct. Our results support a model where 
both E2F- and CDE-mediated repression, acting at different stages in the cell
cycle, are dependent on promoter-specific CHR elements.

PMCID: PMC146036
PMID: 8760872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Oncogene. 1996 Aug 1;13(3):599-608.

Differential regulation of cell cycle machinery by various antiproliferative
agents is linked to macrophage arrest at distinct G1 checkpoints.

Vadiveloo PK(1), Vairo G, Novak U, Royston AK, Whitty G, Filonzi EL, Cragoe EJ
Jr, Hamilton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Australia.

There is currently much interest in the mechanisms of action of antiproliferative
agents and their effects on cell cycle machinery. In the present study we
examined the mechanisms of action of four unrelated agents known to inhibit
proliferation of CSF-1-stimulated bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMM). We
report that 8-bromo-cAMP (8Br-cAMP) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) potently reduced
CSF-1-stimulated cyclin D1 protein, and cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) 4 mRNA and 
protein levels, while the inhibitory effects of the Na+/ H+ antiport inhibitor
5-(N',N'-dimethyl) amiloride (DMA) and interferon gamma (IFN gamma ) were only
weak. All agents repressed CSF-1-stimulated retinoblastoma protein
phosphorylation. Furthermore, 8Br-cAMP and to a lesser extent IFN gamma, also
reduced CSF-1-stimulated levels of E2F DNA binding activity in a macrophage cell 
line, BAC1.2F5. An explanation for the different effects of the agents is that
8Br-cAMP and LPS were found to arrest BMM in early/mid-G1, while IFN gamma and
DMA arrested cells in late G1 or early S phase. These data indicate that (1)
different antiproliferative agents can arrest the same cell type at distinct
checkpoints in G1 and (2) effects of antiproliferative agents on cell cycle
machinery is linked to the position at which they arrest cells in G1.

PMID: 8760301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. EMBO J. 1996 Jul 15;15(14):3676-83.

Requirements for dE2F function in proliferating cells and in post-mitotic
differentiating cells.

Brook A(1), Xie JE, Du W, Dyson N.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

The transcription factor E2F is a target of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor
protein (pRB) and may mediate pRB regulation of S phase entry in mammalian cells.
The recent identification of mutant alleles of the Drosophila E2F gene (dE2F) has
shown that dE2F is required for embryogenesis. dE2F-mutant embryos lack a
co-ordinated program of gene expression which accompanies S phase entry and DNA
synthesis declines to levels that are barely detectable. We have investigated the
role of the dE2F gene at later stages of development. dE2F is expressed in
several larval tissues and is required for cell proliferation in the eye imaginal
disc. Surprisingly, dE2F expression persists in post-mitotic cells of the eye
disc of third-instar larvae. The loss of dE2F function in these cells causes a
novel phenotype, characterized by loss of photoreceptors and abnormal rhabdomere 
cell morphology. These results show that dE2F is required at multiple stages of
development and suggest that E2F may have an important function in post-mitotic
cells in addition to its role during cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC452016
PMID: 8670871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Genes Dev. 1996 Jul 1;10(13):1633-44.

Shared role of the pRB-related p130 and p107 proteins in limb development.

Cobrinik D(1), Lee MH, Hannon G, Mulligan G, Bronson RT, Dyson N, Harlow E, Beach
D, Weinberg RA, Jacks T.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142,
USA.

The p130 protein shares extensive sequence similarity with pRB, the product of
the retinoblastoma gene, and is a major E2F-associated protein in quiescent
cells. To investigate its biological function, we have mutated p130 via gene
targeting in the mouse. Homozygous mutation of p130 had little discernible effect
on development or on the growth of mouse embryo fibroblasts in culture. Much of
the E2F activity that normally associates with p130 in serum-starved mouse embryo
fibroblasts associated instead with the highly related p107 protein. To determine
whether p130 and p107 have overlapping biological roles, we produced mice having 
simultaneous inactivation of the p130 and p107 genes. Such mice exhibited
deregulated chondrocyte growth, defective endochondral bone development,
shortened limbs, and neonatal lethality. These findings indicate that p130 and
p107 play an important role in limb development through their abilities to
control chondrocyte proliferation. Thus, in certain settings p107 and p130
perform growth-regulatory functions that are not fulfilled by pRB.

PMID: 8682294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jul;16(7):3401-9.

Cell cycle regulation of the murine cyclin E gene depends on an E2F binding site 
in the promoter.

Botz J(1), Zerfass-Thome K, Spitkovsky D, Delius H, Vogt B, Eilers M,
Hatzigeorgiou A, Jansen-Dürr P.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte Tumorvirologie,Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum für Molekulare Biologie der Universität, Heidelberg,
Germany.

Cyclin E controls progression through the G1 phase of the cell cycle in mammalian
fibroblasts and potentially in many other cell types. Cyclin E is a rate-limiting
activator of cdk2 kinase in late G1. The abundance of cyclin E is controlled by
phase-specific fluctuations in the mRNA level; in mammalian fibroblasts, mRNA is 
not detected under conditions of serum starvation and is accumulated upon serum
stimulation, with expression starting in mid-G1. Here, we report the cloning of
the murine cyclin E promoter. We isolated a 3.8-kb genomic fragment that contains
several transcriptional start sites and confers cell cycle regulation on a
luciferase reporter gene. This fragment also supports transcriptional activation 
by adenovirus E1A, a known upstream regulator of cyclin E gene expression. An E2F
binding site which is required for G1-specific activation of the cyclin E
promoter in synchronized NIH 3T3 cells was identified in this fragment.

PMCID: PMC231334
PMID: 8668155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Virology. 1996 Jun 1;220(1):78-90.

A conserved region of unknown function participates in the recognition of E2F
family members by the adenovirus E4 ORF 6/7 protein.

Jost CA(1), Ginsberg D, Kaelin WG Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

E2F DNA-binding activity in vivo is due to heterodimer formation between members 
of the E2F and DP transcription factor families. The ability of these
heterodimers to serve as transcriptional regulators is modulated by complex
formation with additional proteins such as the products of the retinoblastoma
gene and the adenovirus E4 ORF 6/7. Each of the E2F family members cloned to date
contains a highly conserved region of unknown function, termed the marked box,
which lies between their DNA binding and transactivation domains. Mutational
analysis showed that the marked box contributed to the recognition of E2F family 
members by the E4 ORF 6/7 protein in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 8659131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jun;16(6):2987-97.

Inhibition of E2F activity by the cyclin-dependent protein kinase inhibitor p21
in cells expressing or lacking a functional retinoblastoma protein.

Dimri GP(1), Nakanishi M, Desprez PY, Smith JR, Campisi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Life Sciences Division, Berkeley National
Laboratory, University of California 94720, USA.

p21Sdi1/WAF1/Cip1 inhibits cyclin-dependent protein kinases and cell
proliferation. p21 is presumed to inhibit growth by preventing the
phosphorylation of growth-regulatory proteins, including the retinoblastoma tumor
suppressor protein (pRb). The ultimate effector(s) of p21 growth inhibition,
however, is largely a matter of conjecture. We show that p21 inhibits the
activity of E2F, an essential growth-stimulatory transcription factor that is
negatively regulated by unphosphorylated pRb. p21 suppressed the activity of
E2F-responsive promoters (dihydrofolate reductase and cdc2), but E2F-unresponsive
promoters (c-fos and simian virus 40 early) were unaffected. Moreover, the simian
virus 40 early promoter was rendered p21 suppressible by introducing wild-type,
but not mutant, E2F binding sites; p21 deletion mutants showed good agreement in 
their abilities to inhibit E2F transactivation and DNA synthesis; and E2F-1
(which binds pRb), but not E2F-4 (which does not), reversed both inhibitory
effects of p21. Despite the central role for pRb in regulating E2F, p21
suppressed growth and E2F activity in cells lacking a functional pRb. Moreover,
p21 protein (wild type but not mutant) specifically disrupted an
E2F-cyclin-dependent protein kinase 2-p107 DNA binding complex in nuclear
extracts of proliferating cells, whether or not they expressed normal pRb. Thus, 
E2F is a critical target and ultimate effector of p21 action, and pRb is not
essential for the inhibition of growth or E2F-dependent transcription.

PMCID: PMC231293
PMID: 8649410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Cell. 1996 May 17;85(4):549-61.

E2F-1 functions in mice to promote apoptosis and suppress proliferation.

Field SJ(1), Tsai FY, Kuo F, Zubiaga AM, Kaelin WG Jr, Livingston DM, Orkin SH,
Greenberg ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massacusetts,
O2115,P5USA.

Members of the E2F transcription factor family (E2F-1-E2F-5) are believed to be
critical positive regulators of cell cycle progression in eukaryotes although the
in vivo functions of the individual E2Fs have not been elucidated. Mice were
generated that lack E2F-1 and, surprisingly, these mice develop and reproduce
normally. However, E2F-1-/- mice exhibit a defect in T lymphocyte development
leading to an excess of mature T cells due to a maturation stage-specific defect 
in thymocyte apoptosis. As E2F-1-/- mice age they exhibit a second phenotype
marked by aberrant cell proliferation. These findings suggest that while certain 
members of the E2F family may positively regulate cell cycle progression, E2F-1
functions to regulate apoptosis and to suppress cell proliferation.

PMID: 8653790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cell. 1996 May 17;85(4):537-48.

Tumor induction and tissue atrophy in mice lacking E2F-1.

Yamasaki L(1), Jacks T, Bronson R, Goillot E, Harlow E, Dyson NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown 02129, USA.

The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (pRB) is a transcriptional repressor 
that regulates gene expression by physically associating with transcription
factors such as E2F family members. Although pRB and its upstream regulators are 
commonly mutated in human cancer, the physiological role of the pRB-E2F pathway
is unknown. To address the function of E2F-1 and pRB/E2F-1 complexes in vivo, we 
have produced mice homozygous for a nonfunctional E2F-1 allele. Mice lacking
E2F-1 are viable and fertile, yet experience testicular atrophy and exocrine
gland dysplasia. Surprisingly, mice lacking E2F-1 develop a broad and unusual
spectrum of tumors. Although overexpression of E2F-1 in tissue culture cells can 
stimulate cell proliferation and be oncogenic, loss of E2F-1 in mice results in
tumorigenesis, demonstrating that E2F-1 also functions as a tumor suppressor.

PMID: 8653789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 May;16(5):1889-95.

The E2F transcription factor activates a replication-dependent human H2A gene in 
early S phase of the cell cycle.

Oswald F(1), Dobner T, Lipp M.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

Histone gene expression is restricted to the S phase of the cell cycle. Control
is mediated by a complex network of sequence-specific DNA-binding factors and
protein-protein interactions in response to cell cycle progression. To further
investigate the regulatory functions that are associated at the transcriptional
level, we analyzed the regulation of a replication-dependent human H2A.1-H2B.2
gene pair. We found that transcription factor E2F binds specifically to an E2F
recognition motif in the H2A.1 promoter region. Activation of the H2A.1 promoter 
by E2F-1 was shown by use of luciferase reporter constructs of the intergenic
promoter region. Overexpression of the human retinoblastoma suppressor gene
product RB suppressed E2F-1 mediated transcriptional activation, indicating an
E2F-dependent regulation of promoter activity during the G1-to-S-phase
transition. Furthermore, the activity of the H2A.1 promoter was also
downregulated by overexpression of the RB-related p107, a protein that has been
detected in S-phase-specific protein complexes of cyclin A, E2F, and cdk2. In
synchronized HeLa cells, expression of luciferase activity was induced at the
beginning of DNA synthesis and was dependent on the presence of an E2F-binding
site in the H2A.1 promoter. Together with the finding that E2F-binding motifs are
highly conserved in H2A promoters of other species, our results suggest that E2F 
plays an important role in the coordinate regulation of S-phase-specific histone 
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC231176
PMID: 8628255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1659-67.

Interaction of Sp1 with the growth- and cell cycle-regulated transcription factor
E2F.

Karlseder J(1), Rotheneder H, Wintersberger E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Für Molekularbiologie, Universität Wien, Austria, USA.

Within the region around 150 bp upstream of the initiation codon, which was
previously shown to suffice for growth-regulated expression, the murine thymidine
kinase gene carries a single binding site for transcription factor Sp1; about 10 
bp downstream of this site, there is a binding motif for transcription factor
E2F. The latter protein appears to be responsible for growth regulation of the
promoter. Mutational inactivation of either the Sp1 or the E2F site almost
completely abolishes promoter activity, suggesting that the two transcription
factors interact directly in delivering an activation signal to the basic
transcription machinery. This was verified by demonstrating with the use of
glutathione S-transferase fusion proteins that E2F and Sp1 bind to each other in 
vitro. For this interaction, the C-terminal part of Sp1 and the N terminus of
E2F1, a domain also present in E2F2 and E2F3 but absent in E2F4 and E2F5, were
essential. Accordingly, E2F1 to E2F3 but not E2F4 and E2F5 were found to bind sp1
in vitro. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that complexes exist in vivo, 
and it was estabilished that the distance between the binding sites for the two
transcription factors was critical for optimal promoter activity. Finally, in
vivo footprinting experiments indicated that both the sp1 and E2F binding sites
are occupied throughout the cell cycle. Mutation of either binding motif
abolished binding of both transcription factors in vivo, which may indicate
cooperative binding of the two proteins to chromatin-organized DNA. Our data are 
in line with the hypothesis that E2F functions as a growth- and cell cycle
regulated tethering factor between Sp1 and the basic transcription machinery.

PMCID: PMC231152
PMID: 8657141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Oncogene. 1996 Mar 21;12(6):1279-88.

Evidence for GEAPS, novel Glial E2F1-Associated Proteins in hamster glioma cells 
induced by the human neurotropic polyomavirus, JCV.

Raj GV(1), Ansari SA, Khalili K.

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Injection of the human neurotropic polyomavirus, JCV, into neonatal hamsters
causes tumors of glial origin. Previously, a rapidly proliferating cell line,
HJC-15, which expresses high levels of the viral T-antigen, had been established 
from JCV-induced hamster glial tumors. In our analyses of the mechanisms involved
in the control of glial cell proliferation in these tumor cells, we have focused 
our attention on E2F1, a DNA-binding transcription factor which modulates the
activity of genes involved in the S-phase of the cell cycle. Here, we report the 
identification of a novel nucleo-protein complex that forms between select
E2F1-binding sites and nuclear proteins from HJC-15 and normal hamster glial
cells. In comparison to the previously characterized E2F1 complexes, this complex
exhibited distinct mobility, binding and biochemical characteristics. This slower
migrating complex also contained several unique Glial E2F1-associated proteins,
(GEAP), which have a distinct molecular mass. Of particular, unlike the classical
E2F1 whose DNA binding activity is increased during S-phase, the level GEAPs
remained constant throughout the cell cycle. GEAPs appeared to confer an
increased basal transcriptional activity of promoters containing select E2F1
sites in HJC-15 cells. Interestingly, the increased transcriptional activity
modulated by GEAPs in HJC-15 cells was overcome by overexpression of E2F1 in
these cells. These data point to the presence of novel members of the E2F family 
in hamster glial cells with the potential to regulate expression of S-phase
specific genes in glial tumors obtained upon intracerebral injection of JCV. The 
importance of these findings in the pathogenesis of viral-induced tumors and the 
role of cell cycle regulatory proteins in brain tumor formation is discussed.

PMID: 8649830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Oncogene. 1996 Mar 21;12(6):1173-80.

Regulation of cyclin E transcription by E2Fs and retinoblastoma protein.

Geng Y(1), Eaton EN, Picón M, Roberts JM, Lundberg AS, Gifford A, Sardet C,
Weinberg RA.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Cyclin E is critical for the advance of cells through the G1 phase of their
growth cycle. Transcription of the cyclin E gene is known to be cell
cycle-dependent. We have shown previously that mRNA levels of cyclin E are
regulated positively by mitogens and negatively by TGF-beta. Much circumstantial 
evidence implicates both E2F transcription factors and the retinoblastoma protein
(pRB) in the control of cyclin E expression. However, the molecular basis of this
control has remained unclear. We report here the cloning of the cyclin E promoter
and the identification of several putative E2F binding sites within the promoter 
sequence. We have found that cell cycle regulation of cyclin E transcription is
mediated by E2F binding sites present in the promoter. The activity of this
promoter can be regulated negatively by pRB. Our results suggest the operation of
a positive-feedback loop in late G1 that functions to ensure continued cyclin E
expression and pRB inactivation.

PMID: 8649818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Science. 1996 Mar 15;271(5255):1595-7.

Cell cycle regulation of E2F site occupation in vivo.

Zwicker J(1), Liu N, Engeland K, Lucibello FC, Müller R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Germany.

DNA-binding E2F complexes have been identified throughout the mammalian cell
cycle, including the transcriptionally inactive complexes with pocket proteins,
which occur early in the prereplicative G1 phase of the cycle, and the
transactivating free E2F, which increases in late G1. Here, a regulatory B-myb
promoter site was shown to bind with high affinity to free E2F and to E2F-pocket 
protein complexes in an indistinguishable way in vitro. In contrast, in vivo
footprinting with NIH 3T3 cells demonstrated E2F site occupation specifically in 
early G1, when the B-myb promoter is inactive. These observations indicate that a
novel mechanism governs E2F-DNA interactions during the cell cycle and emphasize 
the relevance of E2F site-directed transcriptional repression.

PMID: 8599118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Exp Med. 1996 Mar 1;183(3):1205-13.

Blocking the transcription factor E2F/DP by dominant-negative mutants in a normal
breast epithelial cell line efficiently inhibits apoptosis and induces tumor
growth in SCID mice.

Bargou RC(1), Wagener C, Bommert K, Arnold W, Daniel PT, Mapara MY, Grinstein E, 
Royer HD, Dörken B.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin-Buch, Germany.

The transcription factor E2F is regulated during the cell cycle through
interactions with the product of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene and
related proteins. It is thought that E2F-mediated gene regulation at the G1/S
boundary and during S phase may be one of the rate-limiting steps in cell
proliferation. It was reported that in vivo overexpression of E2F-1 in
fibroblasts induces S phase entry and leads to apoptosis. This observation
suggests that E2F plays a role in both cell cycle regulation and apoptosis. To
further understand the role of E2F in cell cycle progression, cell death, and
tumor development, we have blocked endogenous E2F activity in HBL-100 cells,
derived from nonmalignant human breast epithelium, using dominant-negative
mutants under the control of a tetracycline-dependent expression system. We have 
shown here that induction of dominant-negative mutants led to strong
downregulation of transiently transfected E2F-dependent chloramphenicol acetyl
transferase reporter constructs and of endogenous c-myc, which has been described
as a target gene of the transcription factor E2F/DP. In addition, we have shown
that blocking of E2F could efficiently protect from apoptosis induced by serum
starvation within a period of 10 d, whereas control cells started to die after 24
h. Surprisingly, blocking of E2F did not alter the rate of proliferation or of
DNA synthesis of these cells; this finding indicates that cell-cycle progression 
could be driven in an E2F-independent manner. In addition, we have been able to
show that blocking of endogenous E2F in HBL-100 cells led to rapid induction of
tumor growth in severe combined immunodeficiency mice. No tumor growth could be
observed in mice that received mock-transfected clones or tetracycline to block
expression of the E2F mutant constructs in vivo. Thus, it appears that E2F has a 
potential tumor-suppressive function under certain circumstances. Furthermore, we
provide evidence that dysregulation of apoptosis may be an important step in
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2192328
PMID: 8642262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Mar;16(3):737-44.

p21 Disrupts the interaction between cdk2 and the E2F-p130 complex.

Shiyanov P(1), Bagchi S, Adami G, Kokontis J, Hay N, Arroyo M, Morozov A,
Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Illinois 60612,
USA.

In nonproliferating or growth-arrested cells, the transcription factor E2F
remains bound to the retinoblastoma-related protein p130. Accumulation of this
E2F-p130 complex correlates with an arrest of the cell cycle progression.
Progression through G1 phase is associated with a cyclin-dependent binding of the
cyclin-dependent kinase cdk2 to the E2F-p130 complex. By fractionating mouse
L-cell extracts, we have obtained a partially purified preparation of the
E2F-p130 complex that also contains cdk2. Incubation of this complex with
recombinant p21 results in a disruption of the interaction between cdk2 and the
E2F-p130 complex in extracts of a cell line that expresses a
temperature-sensitive mutant of p53. Incubation at the permissive temperature (32
degrees C) results in an induction of p21 synthesis. An increase in the level of 
p21 in these cells correlates with a loss of cdk2 from the cdk2-containing
E2F-p130 complex. We also show that the expression of a reporter gene containing 
E2F sites in the promoter region is reduced by the coexpression of p21. Since p21
is believed to be a mediator of p53, we speculated that the p21-mediated
disruption of the cdk2-containing E2F-p130 complex plays a role in the growth
suppression function of p53.

PMCID: PMC231053
PMID: 8622674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996 Feb 2;1310(2):185-92.

Cell adhesion to substratum and activation of tyrosine kinases are essentially
required for G1/S phase transition in BALB/c 3T3 fibroblasts.

Kuzumaki T(1), Matsuda A, Ito K, Ishikawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Japan.

Cell adhesion to substratum and activation of tyrosine kinases are essential for 
the progression of cell cycle through G1 phase in mammalian cells. The kinetic
studies of mouse BALB/c 3T3 fibroblasts showed that serum was no longer required 
for the progression of G1/S phase transition. In contrast, cell adhesion was
essentially required in late G1 phase, especially at the period of G1/S
transition. Among the kinase inhibitors used to elucidate the signal transduction
caused by cell adhesion, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, genistein and herbimycin A, 
blocked the G1/S transition most effectively when cells were exposed to the
inhibitors at the period of G1/S transition. Cell adhesion was not critically
required for cells to undergo DNA synthesis once they had passed the G1/S
boundary, and the effects of tyrosine kinase inhibitors on the progression of S
phase were also not critical. The expressions of histone H2B and dihydrofolate
reductase (DHFR) genes (S phase specific genes) and also the transcription factor
E2F-1 gene (an activator of DHFR gene) were suppressed when cells were cultured
without adhesion or exposed to the tyrosine kinase inhibitors. These results
suggest that cell adhesion to substratum plays an important role in the G1/S
phase transition of mouse BALB/c 3T3 fibroblasts through the activation of
tyrosine kinases other than growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinases.

PMID: 8611632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Feb;16(2):685-93.

E2F-1 blocks terminal differentiation and causes proliferation in transgenic
megakaryocytes.

Guy CT(1), Zhou W, Kaufman S, Robinson MO.

Author information: 
(1)Amgen, Inc., Thousand Oaks, California 91320, USA.

The transcription factor E2F-1 plays a central role in the cell cycle through its
ability to activate genes involved in cell division. E2F-1 activity is regulated 
by a number of proteins, including the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene
product, cyclin-dependent kinases, and their inhibitors, proteins that have been 
implicated in the control of certain developmental processes. To investigate a
potential role of E2F-1 in differentiation, we assayed the ability of
megakaryocytes to form platelets in an in vivo transgenic model. E2F-1 expression
in megakaryocytes blocked differentiation during maturation, resulting in severe 
thrombocytopenia. Ultrastructural analysis of megakaryocytes revealed abnormal
development characterized by hyperdemarcation of cytoplasmic membranes and
reduced numbers of alpha granules. Administration of megakaryocyte growth and
development factor or interleukin 6 could not overcome the differentiation block.
Additionally, E2F-1 caused massive megakaryocyte accumulation in both normal and 
ectopic sites, first evident in E15 embryonic liver. Furthermore, significant
apoptosis was observed in transgenic megakaryocytes. These data indicate that
E2F-1 can prevent terminal differentiation, probably through its cell
cycle-stimulatory activity.

PMCID: PMC231048
PMID: 8552097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Biochem Cell Biol. 1996;74(1):21-8.

Constitutive expression of the E2F1 transcription factor in fibroblasts alters G0
and S phase transit following serum stimulation.

Logan TJ(1), Jordan KL, Hall DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

The E2F1 transcription factor was constitutively expressed in NIH3T3 fibroblasts 
to determine its effect on the cell cycle. These E2F1 cell lines were not tightly
synchronized in G0 phase of the cell cycle following serum starvation, as are
normal fibroblasts. Instead, the cells are spread throughout G0 and G1 phase with
a portion of the population initiating DNA synthesis. Upon serum stimulation, the
remaining cells in G0/G1 begin to enter S phase immediately but with a reduced
rate. Constitutive expression of E2F1 appears to primarily affect the G0 phase,
since transit of proliferating E2F1 cell lines through G1 phase is the same as
control cells. Consistent with a shortened G0 phase, the E2F1 cell lines have a
significantly reduced cellular volume. Additionally, the first S phase after
serum stimulation, but not subsequent S phases, is nearly doubled in the E2F1
cell lines compared with control cells. Cell lines expressing a deletion mutant
of E2F1 (termed E2F1d87), known to significantly affect cell shape, have cell
cycle and volume characteristics similar to the E2F1 expressing cells. However,
all S phase durations are considerably lengthened and the cells demonstrate
delayed growth after plating.

PMID: 9035687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Gene Expr. 1996;6(1):45-57.

Characterization of the nonmuscle myosin heavy chain IIB promoter: regulation by 
E2F.

Weir L(1), Chen D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Cardiology), St. Elizabeth's Medical Center, Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02135, USA.

To identify DNA sequences important for the transcriptional regulation of the
nonmuscle myosin heavy chain IIB (NMMHC-IIB) gene we isolated and sequenced
genomic clones that contain the promoter of the gene for both human and mouse. In
addition to considerable homology in the first (untranslated) exon (91%) we found
80% sequence identity in the 700 base pairs immediately upstream of the major
start of transcription (+1) as well as significant homologies as far as 1500 base
pairs upstream. The promoter region was characterized using luciferase reporter
constructs transiently transfected into NIH3T3 cells. Consensus binding sites for
several known transcription factors are present that are completely conserved
between the mouse and human genes, including CRE/ATF, Sp1, CAAT, and the
cell-cycle transcription factor E2F. Gel shift assays indicated that E2F can bind
to its putative binding site in vitro. To test whether this site is functional we
cotransfected NMMHC-IIB promoter constructs driving luciferase with a vector
expressing E2F-1. The E2F-1 vector stimulated luciferase activity from an intact 
promoter whereas mutation of the site eliminates binding and diminishes
transactivation. These data provide strong evidence that E2F or an E2F-related
transcription factor is involved in the regulation of nonmuscle myosin
expression.

PMID: 8931991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Virus Genes. 1996;12(1):27-35.

E7 proteins of four groups of human papillomaviruses, irrespective of their
tissue tropism or cancer association, possess the ability to transactivate
transcriptional promoters E2F site dependently.

Hiraiwa A(1), Kiyono T, Suzuki S, Ohashi M, Ishibashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center, Nagoya, Japan.

In an experimental system in which an expression vector including the E7 gene of 
a given human papillomavirus (HPV), together with a luciferase reporter plasmid
including the adenovirus E2 (Ad E2) promoter, was transiently transfected into
cultured mouse NIH3T3 fibroblastic cells, we obtained the signal indicating that 
E7 proteins of HPV type 5, 12, 14, 20, 21, 25, and 47, which are associated with 
epidermodysplasia verruciformis (EV), can transactivate the Ad E2 promoter, as
previously reported for E7 proteins of other HPVs. Because the underlying
mechanism of the transactivation had not been analyzed, except for
transactivation by E7 gene of cervical cancer-associated HPV-16, we compared the 
E7 genes of representatives of three other groups of HPVs (HPV-1, -11, and -47)
with that of HPV-16 with regard to their transactivating activity toward
artificially constructed promoters. The experiment with a shortened AdE2 promoter
carrying only the E2F sites and TATA box provided evidence that all four E7
proteins can transactivate the shortened promoter and that this phenomenon is E2F
site dependent. Further experiments with the reporter gene constructs carrying
basal promoters or more complex forms with or without linked E2F sites, (a)
confirmed previous finding by others that in cells producing no transactivator,
the transcriptional level from promoters linked to E2F sites is rather repressed 
in comparison with the level of the corresponding promoters that are not linked
to the E2F sites, and (b) demonstrated, for the first time, that in cells
expected to produce the E7 protein of any one of the four HPVs, transcription
from the promoter linked to the E2F sites was released from repression. In other 
words, the present results reveal that E7 proteins of any of the four HPVs can
remove the E2F site-dependent repression, probably by modulating E2F complexes
from repressing forms to activating ones.

PMID: 8879118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Jan;7(1):43-52.

Expression of the E2F-1/DP-1 transcription factor in murine development.

Tevosian SG(1), Paulson KE, Bronson R, Yee AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02111, USA.

Because of its critical role in the control of cell proliferation and
differentiation, we postulated that E2F-1 could have a role in murine
development. To this end, the organ and developmental expression of the E2F-1
transcription factor was analyzed from mid-gestation to late-stage embryogenesis.
We demonstrate that the mRNA levels for E2F-1 and its heterodimeric partner DP-1 
reach maximal levels in the late embryonic and early postnatal period but decline
in the later postnatal and adult periods. Additionally, using high resolution in 
situ hybridization, high expression of E2F-1 was observed in specific cells of
individual tissues, suggesting that the role of E2F-1 may be more complex than
previously indicated from cell culture studies. Furthermore, the unusual pattern 
of E2F-1 and DP-1 developmental expression may have an essential role in certain 
cells and tissues in the late embryonic and early postnatal period.

PMID: 8788032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Jan;7(1):31-42.

Changes in E2F DNA-binding activity during induced erythroid differentiation.

Richon VM(1), Venta-Perez G.

Author information: 
(1)DeWitt Wallace Research Laboratory, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, New York 10021, USA. v-richon@ski.mskcc.org

The cytodifferentiation agent hexamethylene bisacetamide (HMBA) is an inducer of 
differentiation of a variety of transformed cells, including the murine
erythroleukemia (MEL) cell line. Induction of differentiation of MEL cells is a
multistep process resulting in cessation of cell division and phenotypic
maturation (including hemoglobin production). To investigate HMBA-induced MEL
cell differentiation, we have analyzed the regulation of the E2F transcription
factor. E2F regulates the transcription of several genes whose products are
involved in both cell cycle regulation and differentiation. In nuclear extracts
from uninduced MEL cells, three complexes were detected using gel mobility assays
with the E2F/E2 oligonucleotide. The complex with the fastest mobility is the
free form of E2F binding to DNA, and the more slowly migrating complexes contain 
E2F, p107, and cdk2. By 8 h of HMBA induction and for the remainder of the
differentiation process, the free E2F complex is not detected, and only complexes
of slower mobility, which contain p107 and cdk2, are found. The level of p107
protein increases during induction of differentiation; there is no change in the 
level of cdk2 protein and E2F-4 and DP-1 proteins during the first 4 days. The
level of E2F-1 mRNA does not change, but a new form of E2F is detected during
induction of differentiation. Thus, HMBA causes a selective loss in the free E2F 
DNA-binding complex, an increase in p107 protein, and an increase in a form of
E2F protein during MEL cell differentiation.

PMID: 8788031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Exp Gerontol. 1996 Jan-Apr;31(1-2):195-206.

Epidermal growth factor and platelet-derived growth factor regulate the activity 
of the insulin-like growth factor I gene promoter.

Li S(1), Baserga R.

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The expression of insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) is regulated by hormones, 
oncogenes, and other growth factors, and is markedly decreased or even absent in 
senescent human diploid fibroblasts. In previous articles, we have reported that 
the SV40 large T antigen increases the production of IGF-I and that the
expression of the IGF-I gene is negatively regulated by an E2F binding site in
the IGF-I promoter. We have now investigated the activity of the IGF-I promoter, 
in response to stimulation of cells by either PDGF or EGF. Both growth factors
stimulate the activity of the IGF-I promoter, indicating that they regulate the
levels of expression of IGF-I. When the E2F binding sequence in the IGF-I
promoter is mutated, the IGF-I promoter is constitutively active and no longer
responds to the action of growth factors.

PMID: 8706788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Cell. 1995 Dec 29;83(7):1149-58.

Cyclin A-kinase regulation of E2F-1 DNA binding function underlies suppression of
an S phase checkpoint.

Krek W(1), Xu G, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Commitment of mammalian cells to enter S phase enables the transcription factor
E2F-1 to activate certain genes whose products mediate cell cycle advance. In S
phase, E2F-1 forms stable complexes with cyclin A-kinase, which in turn
eliminates E2F-1DNA binding function. Here, we show that suppression of E2F-1
DNA-binding activity by cyclin A-kinase is linked to orderly S phase progression.
Disruption of this linkage resulted in S phase delay/arrest followed by regrowth 
or apoptosis, depending upon whether the DNA-bound E2F-1 could transactivate.
Hence, the unscheduled presence of E2F-1 on specific DNA sequences during S phase
can activate a specific S phase checkpoint, thereby linking transcription, DNA
replication, and cell cycle control.

PMID: 8548802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. EMBO J. 1995 Dec 15;14(24):6184-92.

Physical and functional interactions between p53 and cell cycle co-operating
transcription factors, E2F1 and DP1.

O'Connor DJ(1), Lam EW, Griffin S, Zhong S, Leighton LC, Burbidge SA, Lu X.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, St Mary's Hospital Medical School,
London, UK.

One way in which wild-type p53 is able to regulate cell cycle progression is
thought to be via the induction of its downstream target gene Waf1/CIP1, thus
indirectly regulating the transcriptional activity of E2F. The E2F transcription 
factors are known to be key effectors of the cell cycle. We report here that
there is a physical and functional interaction between p53 and two of the
components of the E2F transcription factors, E2F1 and DP1. The expression of
wild-type p53 can inhibit the transcriptional activity of E2F, and the expression
of both E2F1 and DP1 can also downregulate p53-dependent transcription. The
transcriptional activity of p53 is known to be inhibited by the direct binding of
mdm2, but we demonstrate here that both E2F1 and DP1 can inhibit p53
transcriptional activity independently of mdm2. Detailed studies of
protein-protein interactions have provided evidence that E2F1 and its
co-operating factor DP1 can complex with p53 both in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC394743
PMID: 8557038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Nov 21;92(24):11264-8.

Cell cycle regulation of the cyclin A gene promoter is mediated by a variant E2F 
site.

Schulze A(1), Zerfass K, Spitkovsky D, Middendorp S, Bergès J, Helin K,
Jansen-Dürr P, Henglein B.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte
Tumorvirologie, Abteilung 620, Heidelberg, Germany.

Cyclin A is involved in the control of S phase and mitosis in mammalian cells.
Expression of the cyclin A gene in nontransformed cells is characterized by
repression of its promoter during the G1 phase of the cell cycle and its
induction at S-phase entry. We show that this mode of regulation is mediated by
the transcription factor E2F, which binds to a specific site in the cyclin A
promoter. It differs from the prototype E2F site in nucleotide sequence and
protein binding; it is bound by E2F complexes containing cyclin E and p107 but
not pRB. Ectopic expression of cyclin D1 triggers premature activation of the
cyclin A promoter by E2F, and this effect is blocked by the tumor suppressor
protein p16INK4.

PMCID: PMC40612
PMID: 7479977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Oncogene. 1995 Oct 19;11(8):1475-86.

Isolation and characterization of a chicken homolog of the E2F-1 transcription
factor.

Pasteau S(1), Loiseau L, Arnaud L, Trembleau A, Brun G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR49 CNRS-ENS, L.A INRA
Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, France.

In higher eukaryotes, the E2F-1 transcription factor is an essential and limiting
component of cell cycle progression in late G1. E2F-1 heterodimerizes with
members of the DP gene family and the resulting heterodimer regulates the
expression of several proto-oncogenes and the genetic machinery of DNA
replication. Cell cycle regulation of E2F activity is mediated through its
association with the tumor suppressor Rb gene product. To examine the
evolutionary conservation of the E2F-1 protein sequence and its developmental
expression pattern we have isolated and sequenced the chick E2F-1 gene (chE2F-1) 
cDNA. The chicken protein is 34 amino acids (a.a) shorter than its human
counterpart (403/437 a.a.) but has extremely well conserved bHLH and pRb binding 
domains, with respectively 94% and 83% identity. The position of the leucine
zipper is also strictly conserved thereby accounting for ability of E2F-1 to form
heterodimers with human and chicken DP-1. E2F-1 expression was analysed in
synchronized cells as well as in embryonic or newborn chick tissues and appears
to be closely correlated to the cell proliferation rate. In situ hybridization
studies have shown very high expression levels in the neuroretina during the
early stages of embryonic development when active neuroblast division occurs. In 
contrast, a sharp down-regulation is observed when cells become postmitotic.
Overexpression of the chE2F-1 protein leads to oncogenic transformation only when
a truncated version of the transgene lacking the pRb binding domain is used; the 
full length protein either has no effect or may be deleterious for cell survival.

PMID: 7478572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Oncogene. 1995 Oct 19;11(8):1437-46.

A new member of the DP family, DP-3, with distinct protein products suggests a
regulatory role for alternative splicing in the cell cycle transcription factor
DRTF1/E2F.

Ormondroyd E(1), de la Luna S, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, MRC National Institute for
Medical Research, Mill Hill, London, UK.

Integrating cell cycle progression with transcription provides an important level
of control during proliferation. The cellular transcription factor DRTF1/E2F is
implicated in this integration process by virtue of its physical interaction and 
control by key regulators of proliferation, such as retinoblastoma protein,
cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases and regulation of target genes required for 
cell cycle progression. Generic DRTF1/E2F DNA binding activity arises when a
member of two distinct families of proteins, DP and E2F, interact as DP/E2F
heterodimers. Here, we report the isolation and characterisation of a new member 
of the murine DP family, called DP-3 (also referred to as human DP-2). In
contrast to previously characterised members of the DP and E2F families,
processing of DP-3 RNA provides an important level of control by generating at
least four distinct DP-3 proteins, of which three have been isolated, called
alpha, beta and gamma. Processing events, which we show are both tissue- and
cell-restricted, can occur either in the 5' region of DP-3 RNA and determine
whether translation begins at one or two potential intiating codons, or within
the coding sequence, producing variations in internal domains of the DP-3
proteins. The DP-3 proteins studied can co-operate with E2F-1 in DNA binding
activity and trans activation of E2F site-dependent transcription. This analysis 
of DP-3, which has uncovered a hitherto unexpected and surprising level of
complexity, documents a new member of the DP family and novel levels of control
which may influence the activity DRTF1/E2F and hence cell cycle progression.

PMID: 7478568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Cell Growth Differ. 1995 Oct;6(10):1299-306.

Inhibition of in vitro myogenic differentiation by cellular transcription factor 
E2F1.

Wang J(1), Helin K, Jin P, Nadal-Ginard B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02135,
USA.

Terminal differentiation of cultured myocytes requires withdrawal of the cells
from the cell cycle. Constitutive overexpression of several oncogenes in
myoblasts can inhibit in vitro myogenesis. Here we studied the role of the
cellular transcription factor E2F1 on myogenic differentiation. E2F1 expression
is irreversibly down-regulated during differentiation of C2C12 myocytes.
Furthermore, deregulated E2F1 expression in C2C12 cells prevented myogenic
differentiation. This inhibition of myogenesis was associated with the repression
of myogenin expression and an elevated cyclin D1 expression. Moreover,
E2F1-overexpressing myocytes failed to exit the cell cycle under differentiation 
conditions. These results are consistent with the notion that E2F1 can function
as an oncogene and further suggest that E2F1 down-regulation is required for
myogenic differentiation.

PMID: 8845307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Cell Growth Differ. 1995 Oct;6(10):1213-24.

Transcriptional control of the Htf9-A/RanBP-1 gene during the cell cycle.

Di Matteo G(1), Fuschi P, Zerfass K, Moretti S, Ricordy R, Cenciarelli C, Tripodi
M, Jansen-Durr P, Lavia P.

Author information: 
(1)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Center of Evolutionary Genetics, Department
of Genetics and Molecular Biology, University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

The mouse Htf9-a gene encodes a small hydrophilic protein, named Ran-binding
protein 1 (RanBP-1), for its interaction with the Ras-related Ran protein;
RanBP-1 binds the biologically active form of Ran. Ran has been implicated in a
variety of nuclear events including DNA replication, RNA export and protein
import, and monitoring completion of DNA synthesis before the onset of mitosis;
it biological activity is thought to be regulated in S phase. We have
investigated whether expression of the Htf9-a/RanBP-1 gene is linked to cell
proliferation. Expression of the Htf9-a/RanBP-1 transcript appeared to be
dependent on the proliferating state of the cells and peaked in S phase. We have 
identified a promoter region required for Htf9-a cell cycle-dependent expression 
and for responsiveness to cell cycle regulators. An E2F-binding site was
identified within the cell cycle-regulated promoter region. Expression of the E1A
oncoprotein prevented Htf9-a down-regulation in quiescent cells; in addition,
both pRb and its relative p107 inhibited transcription from the Htf9-a promoter. 
These results link the control of Htf9-a/RanBP-1 expression to the cell cycle
progression.

PMID: 8845298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Oct;15(10):5800-10.

Role of pRb-related proteins in simian virus 40 large-T-antigen-mediated
transformation.

Zalvide J(1), DeCaprio JA.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Simian virus 40 large T-antigen (TAg) transformation is thought to be mediated,
at least in part, by binding to and modulating the function of certain cellular
proteins, including the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor gene product, pRb. TAg
can disrupt the inhibitory complexes formed by pRb with the oncogenic
transcription factor E2F, and this mechanism has been suggested to be important
for TAg-mediated transformation. Residues 102 to 114 of TAg (including the LXCXE 
motif) are required for binding to pRb. Mutations within this LXCXE motif abolish
the ability of TAg to bind to pRb as well as to transform certain cell types. TAg
can also bind to at least two other cellular proteins, p107 and p130, that are
related to pRb by sequence homology and share the ability to bind E2F. However,
whether p107 and p130 are also targets in TAg-mediated transformation is less
clear. To assess the relative contribution of the inactivation of pRb, p107, and 
p130 to transformation by TAg, fibroblasts were prepared from embryos derived
from matings of mice heterozygous for an Rb knockout allele. The ability of TAg
to transform fibroblasts homozygous for either wild-type or knockout Rb alleles
was evaluated. It is demonstrated that the integrity of the LXCXE motif provides 
a growth advantage in Rb+/+ and Rb-/- cells. Furthermore, wild-type TAg, but not 
the LXCXE mutants, could bind to p107 and p130 and disrupt p107-E2F and p130-E2F 
binding complexes. These results suggest that p107 and p130 participate in
TAg-mediated transformation and that they may behave as tumor suppressors.

PMCID: PMC230832
PMID: 7565733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Oct;15(10):5444-52.

Association of p107 with Sp1: genetically separable regions of p107 are involved 
in regulation of E2F- and Sp1-dependent transcription.

Datta PK(1), Raychaudhuri P, Bagchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology of Oral Diseases, College of Dentistry,
University of Illinois at Chicago 60612, USA.

The retinoblastoma-related protein p107 has been shown to be a regulator of the
transcription factor E2F. p107 associates with E2F via its pocket region and
represses E2F-dependent transcription. In this study, we provide evidence for a
novel interaction between p107 and the transcription factor Sp1. We show that
p107 can be found endogenously associated with Sp1 in the extracts of several
different cell lines. Moreover, in transient transfection assays, expression of
p107 represses Sp1-dependent transcription. This repression of Sp1-dependent
transcription does not require the DNA-binding domain of Sp1. Transcription
driven by a chimeric protein containing the Ga14 DNA-binding domain and the Sp1
activation domains is inhibited by p107. Interestingly, unlike the repression of 
E2F-dependent transcription, the repression of Sp1-dependent transcription does
not depend on an intact pocket region. We show that distinct regions of p107 are 
involved in the control of Sp1 and E2F.

PMCID: PMC230794
PMID: 7565695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Cell Biol. 1995 Oct;131(1):227-34.

Inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinase activity triggers neuronal differentiation 
of mouse neuroblastoma cells.

Kranenburg O(1), Scharnhorst V, Van der Eb AJ, Zantema A.

Author information: 
(1)Sylvius Laboratory, Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Leiden University,
The Netherlands.

Studies on the molecular mechanisms underlying neuronal differentiation are
frequently performed using cell lines established from neuroblastomas. In this
study we have used mouse N1E-115 neuroblastoma cells that undergo neuronal
differentiation in response to DMSO. During differentiation, cyclin-dependent
kinase (cdk) activities decline and phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma gene
product (pRb) is lost, leading to the appearance of a pRb-containing E2F
DNA-binding complex. The loss of cdk2 activity is due to a decrease in cdk2
abundance whereas loss of cdk4 activity is caused by strong association with the 
cdk inhibitor (CKI) p27KIP1 and concurrent loss of cdk4 phosphorylation.
Moreover, neuronal differentiation can be induced by overexpression of p27KIP1 or
pRb, suggesting that inhibition of cdk activity leading to loss of pRb
phosphorylation, is the major determinant for neuronal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2120591
PMID: 7559779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Oncogene. 1995 Sep 7;11(5):909-20.

Characterization of transcription factor E2F complexes during muscle and neuronal
differentiation.

Corbeil HB(1), Whyte P, Branton PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

The activities of E2F transcription factors are inhibited by interactions with
members of the retinoblastoma (RB) tumor suppressor family, p105RB, p107 and
p130. In cycling cells p107 and p130 also interact with heterodimers comprised of
Cdk2 and either A or E cyclins. We characterized E2F complexes present in C2C12
and P19 mouse cells induced to differentiate into muscle and neuronal cells,
respectively. In both undifferentiated C2C12 and P19 cells, in addition to free
species, E2F was found in complexes containing p107 or p130 and Cdk2. No E2F-pRB 
complexes were detected by electrophoretic mobility shift assays even though such
cells were shown to contain pRB and E2F species capable of interacting in vitro. 
These results suggested that although present, pRB was unable to interact with
E2F. Following differentiation of C2C12 cells into myotubes, E2F was present in
at least two complexes which contained p130, but not in those containing p107 or 
Cdk2. Low levels of E2F-pRB complexes were also detected in fully differentiated 
C2C12 myotubes and in freshly isolated skeletal muscle. In the case of
differentiated P19 neuronal cells, E2F was found in complexes containing pRB,
p107 and p130. However, such cells may not be representative of fully
differentiated neurons, as studies with rodent brain extracts indicated that only
pRB-E2F complexes and those recognized by a p130-specific serum were present.
These results suggested that in both muscle and neurons, pRB and p130 may play
specific roles in the development or maintenance of terminal differentiation.

PMID: 7675450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Leukemia. 1995 Sep;9(9):1499-507.

Role for E2F1 in p210 BCR-ABL downstream regulation of c-myc transcription
initiation. Studies in murine myeloid cells.

Stewart MJ(1), Litz-Jackson S, Burgess GS, Williamson EA, Leibowitz DS, Boswell
HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, USA.

Experiments were performed to elucidate the mechanism through which p210 BCR-ABL,
by its downstream signals, regulates c-myc messenger RNA expression in
hematopoietic cells. We studied a model system in which stable expression of p210
BCR-ABL in interleukin-3 (IL-3) dependent murine myeloid cell lines led to growth
factor independent transformation. Active c-myc transcription was observed in
p210 BCR-ABL transformed cells by nuclear run-on assay, and in heterologous
reporter assays performed with the 5' regulatory region of murine c-myc linked to
firefly luciferase. Transcription initiation occurred primarily from the P2
promoter in p210 BCR-ABL transformed cells. Cis and trans elements responsible
for transcription initiation from the c-myc P2 promoter were studied. Expression 
of E2F1 protein in p210 BCR-ABL transformed cells accounted, in part, for binding
to the E2F site of the P2 c-myc promoter. The functional importance of E2F1
expression in p210 BCR-ABL transformed cells toward c-myc transcription was
established in reporter assays performed with the P2 c-myc promoter containing
either wild-type or mutant E2F sites. Mutation of the E2F motif of P2 5' c-myc
reduced activity of the promoter by 50%. By gel mobility shift, E2F1 was found in
P2 c-myc band shift complexes along with the cyclin-dependent kinase 2.
Therefore, coupling of E2F to components of the retinoblastoma-cyclin pathway
defines a route from p210 BCR-ABL to c-myc transcription, which is required for
p210 BCR-ABL transformation.

PMID: 7658719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Biol Chem. 1995 Aug 11;270(32):18759-65.

Regulation of the mouse histone H2A.X gene promoter by the transcription factor
E2F and CCAAT binding protein.

Yagi H(1), Kato T, Nagata T, Habu T, Nozaki M, Matsushiro A, Nishimune Y, Morita 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Osaka University, Japan.

We have molecularly cloned the genomic gene encoding the mouse histone variant
H2A.X and characterized the promoter. The promoter region of the H2A.X gene was
characterized by chloramphenicol acetyltransferase analysis using Balb/c 3T3
cells. Maximal promoter activity was found in the construct containing up to -282
base pairs H2A.X upstream region. Within this region, we found two sequences
regulating the promoter activation; one was an E2F site and another was a CCAAT
box. These sequences were also required for the DNA/protein binding activities.
Thus, these activities corresponded to the promoter activities, implying that the
promoter activity H2A.X gene was controlled by both the transcription factor E2F 
and H1TF2 through the E2F and CCAAT element. The CCAAT box binding activity was
constitutive when cell cycle was progressed by release from G1 arrest, but
transiently transfected chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity slightly
increased when cells entered S phase. Similarly, the level of the smallest form
of E2F (free E2F) became higher when cells reentered the cell cycle, indicating
that the free E2F was one capable of inducing the promoter activation. Thus, the 
free E2F and CCAAT DNA binding activity correlated with regulation of the
promoter activity.

PMID: 7642525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Gene. 1995 Jul 28;160(2):277-81.

Cell-cycle regulation of human B-myb transcription.

Lam EW(1), Bennett JD, Watson RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, St. Mary's Hospital Medical School,
London, UK.

We demonstrate here that activity of the human B-myb promoter is regulated during
the cell cycle by the E2 transcription factor (E2F). Comparison of the human
B-myb promoter sequence with that of its murine counterpart revealed an
evolutionally conserved sequence that contains an E2F-binding site. In
transiently transfected murine NIH3T3 and human HaCaT cells, luciferase (Luc)
reporter activity directed by the human B-myb promoter was found to increase
significantly in late G1/S phase of the cell cycle. Mutation of the promoter E2F 
site resulted in significantly greater Luc activity in NIH3T3 and HaCaT cells
made quiescent by serum deprivation, indicating that E2F repressed transcription 
of this gene during G0. Analysis of E2F DNA-binding activity in G0 HaCaT cells
revealed a distinct complex that apparently contained neither the retinoblastoma 
gene protein, pRb, nor the related p107 protein. De-repression of transcription
in S phase was accompanied by the disappearance of this G0 E2F complex and the
appearance of a distinct complex containing p107. In addition, complexes
containing pRb were detected at both stages of the cell cycle.

PMID: 7642110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Gen Virol. 1995 Jul;76 ( Pt 7):1815-20.

Cell cycle-dependent disruption of E2F-p107 complexes by human papillomavirus
type 16 E7.

Zerfass K(1), Levy LM, Cremonesi C, Ciccolini F, Jansen-Dürr P, Crawford L,
Ralston R, Tommasino M.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund Tumour Virus Group, Department of Pathology,
University of Cambridge, UK.

The human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16) E7 and adenovirus (Ad) E1A oncoproteins
share a common pathway of transformation. They disrupt the cell cycle G1
phase-specific protein complex containing the E2F transcription factor and the
regulatory protein Rb1, the retinoblastoma tumour suppressor gene product. In the
G1 and S phases of the cell cycle, E7 and E1A bind two other cellular complexes
containing the Rb1-related protein p107 and E2F. Ad E1A disrupts both complexes
and releases active E2F. In contrast, HPV-16 E7, although it efficiently binds
both E2F-p107 complexes, causes dissociation of the G1 phase complex only. Using 
chimeric proteins of HPV-16 E7 and Ad E1A we were able to demonstrate that the
ability of E1A to disrupt both G1 and S phase E2F-p107 complexes is not due to
the higher concentration of Ad E1A in the cell, but is an intrinsic property of
the Ad E1A transforming region. These data suggest that E1A and E7 may function
in cellular transformation in similar, but not identical ways.

PMID: 9049387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Cancer Res. 1995 Jul 1;55(13):2883-91.

Expression of a deletion mutant of the E2F1 transcription factor in fibroblasts
lengthens S phase and increases sensitivity to S phase-specific toxins.

Logan TJ(1), Evans DL, Mercer WE, Bjornsti MA, Hall DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

To better understand how the E2F1 transcription factor contributes to the process
of cell proliferation, NIH-3T3 cell lines were generated that constitutively
express either the wild-type E2F1 protein or an amino terminal deletion mutant,
termed E2F1d87. Proliferating E2F1d87-expressing cells exhibit a significant
lengthening of S phase relative to control and E2F1 cell lines and are
hypersensitive to the cytotoxic effects of the S phase-specific antitumor drug
camptothecin. This sensitivity is associated with an increase in drug-induced p53
and WAF1 levels. The E2F1 and E2F1d87 cell lines are both able to initiate, but
not complete, S phase under conditions of serum starvation. However, quantitation
of DNA synthesis, during culture in serum-deprived media, indicates that the
E2F1d87 cell line synthesizes more DNA/cell as compared to the E2F1 cell line.
Consistent with this relative increase in DNA synthesis, the E2F1d87 cell line
undergoes camptothecin-induced apoptosis when cultured under conditions of serum 
starvation, while the control and E2F1 cell lines are unaffected by drug
treatment under the same conditions. Thus, the sensitivity of the E2F1d87 cell
line to camptothecin is not dependent on cell proliferation. The data presented
here suggest that cell cycle parameters can be manipulated in order to enhance
sensitivity of a cell to the toxic effects of specific chemotherapeutic agents.

PMID: 7540951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Nature. 1995 Jun 22;375(6533):691-4.

Stimulation of E2F1/DP1 transcriptional activity by MDM2 oncoprotein.

Martin K(1), Trouche D, Hagemeier C, Sørensen TS, La Thangue NB, Kouzarides T.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome/CRC Institute, Cambridge, UK.

The MDM2 proto-oncogene is found amplified in a variety of tumours. The oncogenic
capacity of the MDM2 protein is attributed to its ability to bind the p53
tumour-suppressor protein and mask its transcriptional activation potential. Here
we show that MDM2 makes a functional contact with two cooperating transcription
factors, E2F1 and DP1 (refs 4,5), which are involved in S-phase progression. MDM2
contacts the activation domain of E2F1 using residues conserved in the activation
domain of p53. However, in contrast to its repression of p53 activity, MDM2
stimulates the activation capacity of E2F1/DP1. These results indicate that MDM2 
not only releases a proliferative block by silencing the tumour suppressor p53,
it also positively augments proliferation by stimulating the S-phase inducing
transcription factors E2F1/DP1.

PMID: 7791903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jun 6;92(12):5436-40.

Deficiency of retinoblastoma protein leads to inappropriate S-phase entry,
activation of E2F-responsive genes, and apoptosis.

Almasan A(1), Yin Y, Kelly RE, Lee EY, Bradley A, Li W, Bertino JR, Wahl GM.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The retinoblastoma susceptibility gene (Rb) participates in controlling the
G1/S-phase transition, presumably by binding and inactivating E2F transcription
activator family members. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) with no, one, or two
inactivated Rb genes were used to determine the specific contributions of Rb
protein to cell cycle progression and gene expression. MEFs lacking both Rb
alleles (Rb-/-) entered S phase in the presence of the dihydrofolate reductase
inhibitor methotrexate. Two E2F target genes, dihydrofolate reductase and
thymidylate synthase, displayed elevated mRNA and protein levels in Rb- MEFs.
Since absence of functional Rb protein in MEFs is sufficient for S-phase entry
under growth-limiting conditions, these data indicate that the E2F complexes
containing Rb protein, and not the Rb-related proteins p107 and p130, may be rate
limiting for the G1/S transition. Antineoplastic drugs caused accumulation of p53
in the nuclei of both Rb+/+ and Rb-/- MEFs. While p53 induction led to apoptosis 
in Rb-/- MEFs, Rb+/- and Rb+/+ MEFs underwent cell cycle arrest without
apoptosis. These results reveal that diverse growth signals work through Rb to
regulate entry into S phase, and they indicate that absence of Rb protein
produces a constitutive DNA replication signal capable of activating a
p53-associated apoptotic response.

PMCID: PMC41709
PMID: 7777526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Genes Dev. 1995 Jun 1;9(11):1340-53.

Regulation of the retinoblastoma protein-related p107 by G1 cyclin complexes.

Beijersbergen RL(1), Carlée L, Kerkhoven RM, Bernards R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam.

The orderly progression through the cell cycle is mediated by the sequential
activation of several cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) complexes. These
kinases phosphorylate a number of cellular substrates, among which is the product
of the retinoblastoma gene, pRb. Phosphorylation of pRb in late G1 causes the
release of the transcription factor E2F from pRb, resulting in the
transcriptional activation of E2F-responsive genes. We show here that
phosphorylation of the pRb-related p107 is also cell cycle regulated. p107 is
first phosphorylated at 8 hr following serum stimulation of quiescent
fibroblasts, which coincides with an increase in cyclin D1 protein levels.
Consistent with this, we show that a cyclin D1/cdk4 complex, but not a cyclin
E/cdk2 complex, can phosphorylate p107 in vivo. Furthermore, phosphorylation of
p107 can be abolished by the overexpression of a dominant-negative form of cdk4. 
Phosphorylation of p107 results in the loss of the ability to associate with
E2F-4, a transcription factor with growth-promoting and oncogenic activity. A
p107-induced cell cycle block can be released by cyclin D1/cdk4 but not by cyclin
E/cdk2. These data indicate that the activity of p107 is regulated by
phosphorylation through D-type cyclins.

PMID: 7797074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Oncogene. 1995 Jun 1;10(11):2085-93.

Cloning and characterization of human DP2, a novel dimerization partner of E2F.

Zhang Y(1), Chellappan SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The transcription factor E2F consists of a family of proteins that bind to the
sequence TTTCGCGC and regulate the expression of various cellular and viral
promoters. E2F binds to DNA as homodimers or as heterodimers in association with 
a protein, DP1 (for dimerization partner 1). E2F-DP1 heterodimers bind more
efficiently than homodimers to DNA, retinoblastoma gene product as well as the
adenovirus E4 protein and DP1 can stimulate transcription from E2F sites in a
synergistic fashion. Here we describe the cloning and characterization of a novel
human DP gene, DP2, whose product dimerizes efficiently with E2F. Unlike DP1,
there appear to be multiple transcripts for DP2 and their distribution appears to
vary in different tissues and cell lines. DP2 binds to E2F as detected by in
vitro reconstitution assays and an E2F-DP2 heterodimer can bind to DNA in
gel-retardation assays. We believe that DP2 also plays a major role in modulating
the function of E2F in cell cycle regulation and oncogenesis.

PMID: 7784053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Oncogene. 1995 Jun 1;10(11):2067-78.

A complex between E2F and the pRb-related protein p130 is specifically targeted
by the simian virus 40 large T antigen during cell transformation.

Wolf DA(1), Hermeking H, Albert T, Herzinger T, Kind P, Eick D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute für Klinische Molekularbiologie und Tumorgenetik, GSF
Forschungszentrum für Umwelt und Gesundheit, München, Germany.

The p130 protein is a recently cloned member of the retinoblastoma protein
family. We show here that transformation of NIH3T3-L1 fibroblasts (L1 cells) by
the simian virus 40 large T antigen (LTAg) depends on the disruption of DNA
binding complexes between transcription factor E2F and p130. LTAg binds to the
pocket region of p130 in vivo and disrupts the E2F-p130 complexes. E2F-p130
complexes are present only in quiescent L1 cells and disappear at the G1/S phase 
boundary concomitantly to induction of DNA synthesis and expression of the
E2F-regulated cdc2 gene. p130 is a substrate of cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (Cdk2) 
in vitro and associates with a Cdk in vivo which is activated upon serum
stimulation in late G1. Overexpression of p130 inhibits cdc2 promoter activity
and entry of quiescent L1 cells into S phase. The results demonstrate that p130
is negative regulator of cell cycle progression which is specifically targeted by
LTAg during cell transformation.

PMID: 7784051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mol Biol Cell. 1995 Jun;6(6):627-36.

Characterization of cis-regulatory elements of the c-myc promoter responding to
human GM-CSF or mouse interleukin 3 in mouse proB cell line BA/F3 cells
expressing the human GM-CSF receptor.

Watanabe S(1), Ishida S, Koike K, Arai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Biology, University of Tokyo, Japan.

Interleukin 3 (IL-3) or granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)
activates c-fos, c-jun, and c-myc genes and proliferation in both hematopoietic
and nonhematopoietic cells. Using a series of deletion mutants of the beta
subunit of human GM-CSF receptor (hGMR) and inhibitors of tyrosine kinase, two
distinct signaling pathways, one for activation of c-fos and c-jun genes, and the
other for cell proliferation and activation of c-myc gene have been elucidated.
In contrast to wealth of information on the pathway leading to activation of
c-fos/c-jun genes, knowledge of the latter is scanty. To clarify the mechanisms
of activation of c-myc gene by cytokines, we established a transient transfection
assay in mouse proB cell line BA/F3 cells expressing hGMR. Analyses of hGMR beta 
subunit mutants revealed two cytoplasmic regions involved in activation of the
c-myc promoter, one is essential and the other is dispensable but enhances the
activity. These regions are located at the membrane proximal and the distal
regions covering amino acid positions 455-544 and 544-589, respectively.
Characterization of cis-acting regulatory elements of the c-myc gene showed that 
the region containing the P2 promoter initiation site is sufficient to mediate
the response to mIL-3 or hGM-CSF. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay using an
oligonucleotide corresponding to the distal putative E2F binding site revealed
that p107/E2F complex, the negative regulator of E2F, decreased, and free E2F
increased after mIL-3 stimulation. These results support the thesis that mIL-3 or
hGM-CSF regulates the c-myc promoter by altering composition of the E2F complexes
at E2F binding site.

PMCID: PMC301224
PMID: 7579683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. EMBO J. 1995 May 1;14(9):1904-13.

The pRB-related protein p107 contains two growth suppression domains: independent
interactions with E2F and cyclin/cdk complexes.

Zhu L(1), Enders G, Lees JA, Beijersbergen RL, Bernards R, Harlow E.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown 02129, USA.

Unregulated expression of either the retinoblastoma protein (pRB) or the related 
protein p107 can cause growth arrest of sensitive cells in the G1 phase of the
cell cycle. However, growth arrests mediated by p107 and pRB are not identical.
Through structure-function and co-expression analyses we have dissected the p107 
molecule into two domains that independently are able to block cell cycle
progression. One domain corresponds to the sequences needed for interaction with 
the transcription factor E2F, and the other corresponds to the interaction domain
for cyclin A or cyclin E complexes. In cervical carcinoma cell line C33A, which
was previously shown to be sensitive to p107 but resistant to pRB growth
suppression, only the cyclin binding domain is active as a growth suppressor.
Furthermore, we show that these two independent domains are functional in
untransformed mouse fibroblasts. Together, these results provide experimental
evidence for the presence of two functional domains in p107 and pinpoint an
important functional difference between p107 and pRB.

PMCID: PMC398289
PMID: 7743997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 May;15(5):2536-46.

In vivo association of E2F and DP family proteins.

Wu CL(1), Zukerberg LR, Ngwu C, Harlow E, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown 02129, USA.

The mammalian transcription factor E2F plays an important role in regulating the 
expression of genes that are required for passage through the cell cycle. This
transcriptional activity is inhibited by association with the retinoblastoma
tumor suppressor protein (pRB) or its relatives p107 and p103. The first cDNA
from the E2F family to be cloned was designated E2F-1, and multiple E2F family
members have now been identified. They bind to DNA as heterodimers, interacting
with proteins known as DP. Here we demonstrate that DP is also a family of
polypeptides with at least two members (hDP-1 and hDP-2). Both hDP-1 and hDP-2
bind to all E2F family members in vivo, and each complex is capable of activating
transcription. However, the various E2F/DP complexes display strong differences
in the ability to bind to either pRB or p107 in vivo, and the specificity of pRB 
or p107 binding is mediated by the E2F subunit.

PMCID: PMC230484
PMID: 7739537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Cell Growth Differ. 1995 May;6(5):541-8.

The bidirectionally transcribed dihydrofolate reductase and rep-3a promoters are 
growth regulated by distinct mechanisms.

Schilling LJ(1), Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Medical School, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The mouse dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr) gene possesses a bidirectional promoter 
that produces functional transcripts in the opposite direction. These opposite
strand transcripts encode the Rep-3 gene product, a protein that has homology to 
DNA mismatch repair enzymes. The core of the bidirectional promoter consists of
four consensus binding sites for the transcription factor Sp1. These binding
sites have been shown to be important for basal transcription from both the
rep-3a and dhfr promoters. Extensive characterization of the dhfr promoter has
shown that growth-dependent regulation requires the E2F binding sites that flank 
the transcription initiation site. Here we show that endogenous rep-3a mRNA and
the rep-3a promoter are growth regulated, in a manner very similar to the
regulation of the dhfr mRNA and promoter region. However, we find that the E2F
sites required for dhfr regulation are dispensible for regulation of the rep-3a
promoter. Instead, we have shown that the rep-3a initiation region is critical
for the G1S phase-specific activation of this promoter. Gel mobility shift
experiments indicate that a member of the Sp1 family of transcription factors
binds to the rep-3a initiation region, suggesting that this family of
transcription factors may play a role in cell growth control.

PMID: 7647037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Biol Chem. 1995 Apr 28;270(17):9783-91.

An inverted repeat motif stabilizes binding of E2F and enhances transcription of 
the dihydrofolate reductase gene.

Wade M(1), Blake MC, Jambou RC, Helin K, Harlow E, Azizkhan JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

An overlapping inverted repeat sequence that binds the eukaryotic transcription
factor E2F is 100% conserved near the major transcription start sites in the
promoters of three mammalian genes encoding dihydrofolate reductase, and is also 
found in the promoters of several other important cellular and viral genes. This 
element, 5'-TTTCGCGCCAAA-3', is comprised of two overlapping, oppositely oriented
sites which match the consensus E2F site (5'-TTT(C/G)(C/G)CGC-3'). Recent work
has shown that E2F binding activity is composed of at least six related cellular 
polypeptides which are capable of forming DNA-binding homo- and heterodimers. We 
have investigated the binding of cellular E2F activity and of homo- and
heterodimers of cloned E2F proteins to the inverted repeat E2F element. We have
demonstrated that mutations in this element that abolish its inverted repeat
nature, while preserving a single consensus E2F site, significantly decrease the 
binding stability of all of the forms of E2F tested. The rate of association of
E2F-1/DP-1 heterodimers with the inverted repeat wild type site was not
significantly different from those with the two single site mutated probes.
Furthermore, the mutations decrease in vitro transcription and transient reporter
gene expression 2-5-fold, an effect equivalent to that of abolishing E2F binding 
altogether. These data suggest a functional role that may explain the
conservation of inverted repeat E2F elements among the DHFR promoters and several
other cellular and viral promoters.

PMID: 7730357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Virol. 1995 Apr;69(4):2491-500.

E2F1 overexpression in quiescent fibroblasts leads to induction of cellular DNA
synthesis and apoptosis.

Kowalik TF(1), DeGregori J, Schwarz JK, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710.

Various experiments have demonstrated a role for the E2F transcription factor in 
the regulation of cell growth during the G0/G1/S phase transition. Indeed,
overexpression of the E2F1 product, a component of the cellular E2F activity,
induces DNA synthesis in quiescent fibroblasts. To provide an approach to a more 
detailed biochemical analysis of these events, we have made use of a recombinant 
adenovirus containing the E2F1 cDNA in order to efficiently express the E2F1
product in an entire population of cells. We demonstrate an induction of DNA
synthesis when quiescent cells are infected with the E2F1 recombinant virus.
However, we also find that the induction does not lead to a complete replication 
of the cellular genome, as revealed by flow cytometry. The incomplete nature of
cellular DNA replication is due, at least in part, to the fact that E2F1
overexpression leads to massive cell death that is characteristic of apoptosis.
This E2F1-mediated induction of apoptosis is largely dependent on endogenous
wild-type p53 activity and can be subverted by introducing mutant forms of p53
into these cells or by overexpressing E2F1 in fibroblasts derived from p53-null
mouse embryos. We conclude that E2F1 can induce events leading to S phase but
that the process is not normal and appears to result from the activation of a
cell death pathway.

PMCID: PMC188925
PMID: 7884898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Exp Cell Res. 1995 Apr;217(2):363-7.

Isolation of genes which block neuronal differentiation of teratocarcinoma PCC7
cells.

Neuman T(1), Soosaar A, Nornes HO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins 80523, USA.

Since several viral oncoproteins block differentiation and induce proliferation
of differentiated cells, we developed an expression screening method to isolate
cDNAs which block neuronal differentiation and induce proliferation of
teratocarcinoma cells. Mouse E2F1, RNP-1, and RNP-2 (Regulator of Neuronal
Proliferation) were isolated using the developed screening method. Overexpression
of E2F1, RNP-1, and RNP-2 cDNAs in neuronally differentiated teratocarcinoma PCC7
cells results in blocking differentiation and initiation of proliferation. Also, 
expression of RNP-1 and RNP-2 blocks the expression of neurofilament-L and GAP-43
genes in PCC7 cells.

PMID: 7698237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Feb 28;92(5):1357-61.

Multiple members of the E2F transcription factor family are the products of
oncogenes.

Xu G(1), Livingston DM, Krek W.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.

The retinoblastoma gene product (pRB) is a known tumor suppressor, capable of
arresting growth in mid-to-late G1. Part of its growth suppression action arises 
from interaction(s) with one or more members of the E2F family of transcription
factors. These proteins most likely contribute to progression from G0 to S phase 
in mammalian cells, and pRB binding most likely inhibits aspects of their
suspected growth-promoting function. Given their growth-stimulating potential, we
asked whether one or more E2F alleles can function as oncogenes. Uncloned pools
of NIH 3T3 cells producing the pRB binding target E2F-1, E2F-2, or E2F-3 grew in 
semisolid medium. In addition, they grew to much higher saturation density than
controls. From the study of cells producing selected E2F-1 mutant species, it
appears that E2F DNA-binding function contributes to, and pRB/E2F binding
suppresses, soft-agar growth. Thus, three E2F family members can act as oncogene 
products, suggesting that part of the normal role of pRB is to down-modulate this
potential activity.

PMCID: PMC42518
PMID: 7877982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Feb 25;23(4):663-9.

Identification of an upstream region of the mouse p53 promoter critical for
transcriptional expression.

Hale TK(1), Braithwaite AW.

Author information: 
(1)John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian National University,
Canberra.

We have investigated the transcription factor requirements for basal expression
of the mouse p53 promoter by using a combination of reporter and electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays (EMSAs). We have found that only four regions of the
promoter bind transcription factors in EMSAs, suggesting that these are the only 
important factors for basal transcription. These factors are NF1, USF, ETF-like
and a novel factor which we have called PF2. Construction of promoter deletion
mutants has shown that the absence of the PF2 site completely inactivates the
promoter, whereas deletion of other sites, whilst reducing promoter activity,
does not. We suggest that this novel transcription factor (PF2) is critical for
expression of the mouse p53 promoter.

PMCID: PMC306735
PMID: 7899088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Science. 1995 Feb 17;267(5200):1018-21.

Correlation of terminal cell cycle arrest of skeletal muscle with induction of
p21 by MyoD.

Halevy O(1), Novitch BG, Spicer DB, Skapek SX, Rhee J, Hannon GJ, Beach D, Lassar
AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115.

Comment in
    Science. 1995 Feb 17;267(5200):963-4.
    Science. 1995 Apr 21;268(5209):352.

Skeletal muscle differentiation entails the coordination of muscle-specific gene 
expression and terminal withdrawal from the cell cycle. This cell cycle arrest in
the G0 phase requires the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (Rb). The
function of Rb is negatively regulated by cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), which 
are controlled by Cdk inhibitors. Expression of MyoD, a skeletal muscle-specific 
transcriptional regulator, activated the expression of the Cdk inhibitor p21
during differentiation of murine myocytes and in nonmyogenic cells. MyoD-mediated
induction of p21 did not require the tumor suppressor protein p53 and correlated 
with cell cycle withdrawal. Thus, MyoD may induce terminal cell cycle arrest
during skeletal muscle differentiation by increasing the expression of p21.

PMID: 7863327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Gene Expr. 1995;4(4-5):195-204.

Overexpression of the E2F-1 transcription factor gene mediates cell
transformation.

Yang XH(1), Sladek TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Finch University of Health
Sciences, Chicago Medical School, IL 60064-3095, USA.

The E2F transcription factor can regulate expression of numerous cellular genes
controlling proliferation, including proto-oncogenes and genes regulating cell
cycle progression. Therefore, genes comprising the E2F gene family could
potentially contribute to carcinogenesis. To test the potential of E2F to act as 
a transforming gene, a cDNA encoding E2F-1 was constitutively overexpressed in
established rodent cells using a retroviral vector. Overexpressed E2F-1 was
functional, as shown by stimulation of a transfected adenovirus E2 promoter
driving a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene in E2F-1 overexpressing
cells. This stimulation was dependent on functional E2F binding sites in the
promoter. Examination of phenotype showed that E2F-1 overexpression mediated cell
transformation as measured by the ability of cells to form colonies in soft agar 
medium. In addition, overexpressed E2F-1 shortened the duration of the G1 cell
cycle phase in proliferating cells, a property characteristic of other
transforming genes. These data provide direct evidence that E2F-1 can act as a
transforming gene and a critical regulator of cell cycle progression and suggest 
the possibility of E2F involvement in carcinogenesis.

PMID: 7787412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Dec 20;91(26):12823-7.

Oncogenic capacity of the E2F1 gene.

Johnson DG(1), Cress WD, Jakoi L, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710.

Previous experiments have identified the E2F transcription factor as a potential 
downstream target for the action of cellular regulatory activities, such as the
Rb tumor suppressor protein, that control cell growth and that, when altered,
contribute to the development of human tumors. In light of these findings, we
have assayed the ability of the E2F1 and DP1 genes, which encode heterodimeric
partners that together create E2F activity, to act in an oncogenic fashion. We
find that E2F1, particularly in combination with the DP1 product, cooperates with
an activated ras oncogene to induce the formation of morphologically transformed 
foci in primary rat embryo fibroblast cultures. In addition, an E2F1 chimeric
protein, in which sequences involved in Rb binding have been replaced with the
herpesvirus VP16 activation domain, exhibits increased transformation activity.
Cells transfected with E2F1 and DP1 or the E2F1-VP16 chimera form colonies in
soft agar and induce tumor formation in nude mice. We conclude that deregulated
E2F1 expression and function can have oncogenic consequences.

PMCID: PMC45532
PMID: 7809128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Oncogene. 1994 Dec;9(12):3475-82.

Activation of the E2F transcription factor by cyclin D1 is blocked by p16INK4,
the product of the putative tumor suppressor gene MTS1.

Schulze A(1), Zerfass K, Spitkovsky D, Henglein B, Jansen-Dürr P.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte
Tumorvirologie, Heidelberg, Germany.

The oncoprotein cyclin D1 binds to and activates cyclin-dependent kinase 4
(cdk4), whose activity is inhibited by p16INK4, the product of the putative tumor
suppressor gene MTS1. Cyclin D1 controls the timing of S phase onset in mammalian
cells. We show that cyclin D1 acts as a positive regulator of the transcription
factor E2F. In particular, cyclin D1 overexpression leads to the activation of
the dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) gene promoter. Activation depends on the E2F
binding site in the DHFR promoter, known to mediate its activation at the G1/S
transition in vivo. Cyclin D1 can also activate the adenovirus E2 promoter via
E2F. Both promoters are repressed by p16INK4 and this repression can be released 
by overexpression of cdk4. The data reported here support a direct role for
cyclin D1 and its associated kinase in cell cycle regulation of E2F activity and 
S phase-specific gene expression. In addition, we show that both E2F sites bind
complexes containing the retinoblastoma protein (pRB) and that in RB-deficient
cell lines overexpression of cyclin D1 fails to activate E2F-dependent
transcription, indicating that pRB may be involved in promoter activation.

PMID: 7970707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Dec;14(12):8241-9.

Positive and negative regulation of cell proliferation by E2F-1: influence of
protein level and human papillomavirus oncoproteins.

Melillo RM(1), Helin K, Lowy DR, Schiller JT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
20892.

E2F-1 is a member of a family of transcription factors implicated in the
activation of genes required for the progression through the S phase of the cell 
cycle. We have examined the biological activities of E2F-1 with short-term
colony-forming assays and long-term immortalization assays. High levels of E2F-1,
produced by transfection of the E2F-1 cDNA under the control of a strong
promoter, reduced colony formation in normal human foreskin keratinocytes
(NHFKs). This inhibition could not be overcome by wild-type human papillomavirus 
type 16 (HPV16) E6 and E7, two proteins which cooperate to immortalize NHFKs, or 
by a transdominant p53 mutant. High levels of E2F-1 also inhibited growth of
primary and established fibroblasts. The growth-inhibitory activity required the 
DNA binding function of E2F-1 but not its transactivation or pRB binding
activities. A positive role for lower levels of E2F-1 in NHFK immortalization was
established by examining the ability of E2F-1 to complement HPV16 E7 mutants that
were unable to cooperate with HPV16 E6 to immortalize NHFKs. Although E2F-1 was
unable by itself to cooperate with E6, it did, in conjunction with E6, complement
a p24GLY mutant of E7 that is defective for immortalization and binding of pRB
and pRB-related proteins. By contrast, E2F-1 was unable to complement two other
E7 mutants, p2PRO and p31/32ARG/PRO, which are also defective in the
immortalization assay, although their proteins display wild-type binding of pRB
in vitro. Since the binding of E7 to pRB results in disruption of pRB-E2F
interaction and release of transcriptionally active E2F, the data support the
hypothesis that binding of pRB by E7 and the consequence increase in E2F, the
data support the hypothesis that binding of pRB by E7 and the consequence
increase in E3F activity are important but not sufficient for E7-induced
keratinocyte immortalization.

PMCID: PMC359363
PMID: 7969161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Cell Growth Differ. 1994 Dec;5(12):1339-46.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 2 and cyclin A interaction with E2F are targets for
tyrosine induction of B16 melanoma terminal differentiation.

Rieber M(1), Rieber MS.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas, Tumor cell Biology
Laboratory, Caracas, Venezuela.

L-Tyrosine promotes a dramatic increase in melanogenesis and an apparent
replicative senescence in B16 melanoma (M. Strasberg-Rieber and M. Rieber, Cancer
Res., 53:2469-2471, 1993). Since cyclins are implicated in controlling cell
proliferation and differentiation, we have now investigated their relationship to
melanocytic growth arrest and pigmentation. In B16 melanoma cells enriched in G1 
by serum starvation or synchronized in late G1/early S phase by exposure to
hydroxyurea, L-tyrosine overrides mitogenic signals and induces terminal
differentiation without cytotoxicity. This correlates with a decrease in cyclin A
and cyclin E-dependent kinase 2 activity and with an altered interaction of
cyclin A with the transcription factor E2F. This activity involves a lower level 
of the catalytic cdK2 kinase protein without a concomitant decrease in cyclin A
or cyclin E. Upon addition of serum or removal of hydroxyurea, cells resume cell 
cycle progression and the ability to form tumors in vivo, but these properties
are irreversibly inhibited in tyrosine-treated cells. Our data suggest that
targeted inactivation of cdK2 with specific inducers of differentiation favors
reacquisition of tumor growth control.

PMID: 7696182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Nov;14(11):7195-203.

Suppression of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 during induced differentiation of
erythroleukemia cells.

Kiyokawa H(1), Richon VM, Rifkind RA, Marks PA.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Cell Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, New York 10021.

Differentiation of murine erythroleukemia cells induced by hexamethylene
bisacetamide (HMBA) is associated with accumulation of underphosphorylated
retinoblastoma protein (pRB) and an increase in retinoblastoma (RB) gene
expression. Here we show that HMBA causes a rapid decrease in the level of
cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (cdk4) protein. This decrease results from decreased
stability of the protein, while the rate of synthesis of the protein is not
affected by HMBA. The decrease in the level of cdk4 protein is followed by
suppression of the pRB kinase activity associated with cdk4. Cyclin D3, which can
bind and activated cdk4, is increased in HMBA-induced cells and is found in
complex with pRB and the transcription factor E2F. In uninduced cells cyclin D3
complexes with pRB and E2F are barely detected. At the later stages of
differentiation, MEL cells become arrested in G1 and cdk2 kinase activity is
suppressed; this is accompanied by a decrease in the level of cyclin A and cdk2
proteins. Cells transfected with cdk4, which continue to overexpress cdk4 protein
during culture with HMBA, are resistant to HMBA-induced differentiation. In
contrast, overexpression of cdk2 protein does not inhibit induced
differentiation. These findings suggest that suppression of cdk4 is a critical
event in the pathway leading to terminal differentiation of erythroleukemia
cells.

PMCID: PMC359253
PMID: 7935434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Oct;14(10):6607-15.

Transcription of the E2F-1 gene is rendered cell cycle dependent by E2F
DNA-binding sites within its promoter.

Neuman E(1), Flemington EK, Sellers WR, Kaelin WG Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Aug;15(8):4660.

The cell cycle-regulatory transcription factor E2F-1 is regulated by interactions
with proteins such as the retinoblastoma gene product and by cell cycle-dependent
alterations in E2F-1 mRNA abundance. To better understand this latter phenomenon,
we have isolated the human E2F-1 promoter. The human E2F-1 promoter, fused to a
luciferase cDNA, gave rise to cell cycle-dependent luciferase activity upon
transfection into mammalian cells in a manner which paralleled previously
reported changes in E2F-1 mRNA abundance. The E2F-1 promoter contains four
potential E2F-binding sites organized as two imperfect palindromes. Gel shift and
transactivation studies suggested that these sites can bind to E2F in vitro and
in vivo. Mutation of the two E2F palindromes abolished the cell cycle dependence 
of the E2F-1 promoter. Thus, E2F-1 appears to be regulated at the level of
transcription, and this regulation is due, at least in part, to binding of one or
more E2F family members to the E2F-1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC359190
PMID: 7935380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Mol Biol Cell. 1994 Oct;5(10):1081-92.

Molecular characterization of Xenopus laevis DP proteins.

Girling R(1), Bandara LR, Ormondroyd E, Lam EW, Kotecha S, Mohun T, La Thangue
NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, Medical Research Council National
Institute for Medical Research, London, United Kingdom.

It is widely believed that in mammalian cells the cellular transcription factor
(DRTF1/E2F integrates cell-cycle events with the transcription apparatus by
interacting with important regulators of the cell cycle, such as the
retinoblastoma gene product (pRb) and related proteins, cyclins, and
cyclin-dependent kinases. Here, we have defined DRTF1/E2F in Xenopus laevis that,
like its mammalian counterpart, specifically binds to the E2F site, is regulated 
during development, and interacts with pRb and related proteins. We have isolated
cDNAs that encode the functional homologue of mammalian DP-1, X1 DP-1, together
with a close relative, X1 DP-2. X1 DP-1, which is highly conserved with murine
DP-1, is a major DNA binding component of X1 DRTF1/E2F. Both DP-1 and DP-2
synergistically interact with members of the E2F family of proteins, E2F-1,
E2F-2, and E2F-3, to generate DNA binding complexes that specifically recognize
the E2F site and functionally interact with E2F-1 in E2F site-dependent
transcriptional activation of cellular genes. DP-1 and DP-2 encode maternally
stored transcripts that are expressed during early development. In the adult
however, the expression of DP-1 and DP-2 is tissue restricted. This study
therefore defines a new family of transcription factors, the DP proteins, members
of which can interact combinatorially with E2F proteins to generate an array of
DNA binding complexes that integrate cell-cycle progression with the
transcription apparatus through the E2F binding site. The tissue-specific
expression of DP family members suggests that the combination of DP/E2F
heterodimers that constitute DRTF1/E2F is influenced by the phenotype of the
cell.

PMCID: PMC301132
PMID: 7865876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Neuroreport. 1994 Sep 8;5(14):1749-51.

DNA synthesis is induced in adult neurons after expression of E2F1 and E1A.

Suda K(1), Holmberg EG, Nornes HO, Neuman T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins 80523.

Differentiated neurons in several brain regions express the retinoblastoma (Rb)
tumor suppressor gene. Changing the tumor suppressor function of Rb by expressing
transcription factor E2F1 and viral oncoprotein E1A in cerebellar granular
neurons in vitro and in cerebral cortical neurons in vivo results in the
induction of DNA synthesis in these neurons. Immunoliposome-mediated transfection
of E1A and E2F1 cDNAs into the adult cortical neurons of rats in vivo results in 
initiation of DNA synthesis in 5-15% of the transfected neurons. These results
indicate that expression of Rb may be necessary to prevent induction of
differentiated neurons to proliferate since many mitogenic growth factors are
expressed in the brain.

PMID: 7827323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Oncogene. 1994 Sep;9(9):2605-12.

An E2F dominant negative mutant blocks E1A induced cell cycle progression.

Dobrowolski SF(1), Stacey DW, Harter ML, Stine JT, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio 44195-5178.

E2F is a cellular transcription factor that is regulated during the cell cycle
through interactions with the product of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene
(RB1) and the pRb-like p107 and p130 proteins. Analysis of mutations within both 
adenovirus E1A and pRb, which affected their ability to regulate cellular
proliferation and alter E2F activity, suggested that E2F may play a role in cell 
cycle progression. Microinjection of a GST-E2F-1 fusion protein into quiescent
Balb/c 3T3 cells induced DNA synthesis whereas co-injection of GST-E2F-1 and
GST-E2F(95-191) protein, encoding only the DNA binding domain of E2F-1, blocked
the induction of S-phase. While E1A likely targets multiple cellular pathways,
co-injection of the GST-E2F(95-191) dominant inhibitory protein with 12S E1A
protein blocked E1A-mediated induction of DNA synthesis, suggesting that the
E2F-dependent pathway is dominant. Analysis of the interval required for
microinjected quiescent cells to enter S-phase indicated that E2F-1 acted faster 
than either E1A or serum.

PMID: 8058324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Oncogene. 1994 Aug;9(8):2235-43.

Transcriptional repression and activation in the same cell type of the human
c-MYC promoter by the retinoblastoma gene protein: antagonisation of both effects
by SV40 T antigen.

Batsché E(1), Lipp M, Cremisi C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Technologie Cellulaire, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The c-myc promoter was investigated as a possible cellular target for SV40 large 
T (LT) antigen. In fibroblast and epithelial cell lines, the human c-myc promoter
was transactivated by LT. This transactivation was dependent of the interaction
of LT with the retinoblastoma (RB) protein. The use of deletions and point
mutations of the c-myc promoter demonstrated that in both cell types, the E2F
binding sites are necessary for such transactivation. Unexpectedly however,
over-expression of RB caused an overall transcriptional activation of the c-myc
promoter. We resolved this apparent paradox by demonstrating that this activation
is a combination of two antagonistic effects: transcriptional repression mediated
by the E2F factor, and transcriptional activation independent of this factor. RB 
was also found to prevent LT-mediated transactivation, and LT inhibited
RB-mediated activation independently of the E2F factor. LT therefore antagonizes 
both the transcriptional repression and activation mediated by RB.

PMID: 8036009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Oncogene. 1994 Aug;9(8):2125-34.

An E2F binding sequence negatively regulates the response of the insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF-I) promoter to simian virus 40T antigen and to serum.

Porcu P(1), Graña X, Li S, Swantek J, De Luca A, Giordano A, Baserga R.

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Cancer Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107.

The promoter of the Insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) gene is activated by the
Simian Virus 40 large T antigen (SVLT), and one of the elements responding to
SVLT activation has been localized to a short 124 bp immediately upstream of the 
first initiation of transcription site. This short promoter contains an E2F
binding site, that, in gel shifts, binds a protein complex, but only when the
promoter activity is reduced or absent. A mutation in the E2F binding site
deregulates the activity of the promoter, which becomes active even in those
conditions in which the wild type promoter is inactive. By using antibodies in
gel retardation analyses, we can show that the different protein complexes
include, at least, the following proteins: E2F, cyclin A and p107. We conclude
that the short IGF-I promoter is negatively regulated by an E2F binding site that
complexes with several proteins. Our data suggest that disaggregation of these
complexes by the action of SVLT (or other activators) increases expression from
the promoter, thus establishing a link between the regulation of cell
proliferation by growth factors and the E2F-associated proteins.

PMID: 8035997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Cell. 1994 Jul 15;78(1):161-72.

Negative regulation of the growth-promoting transcription factor E2F-1 by a
stably bound cyclin A-dependent protein kinase.

Krek W(1), Ewen ME, Shirodkar S, Arany Z, Kaelin WG Jr, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

Cyclin A-kinase, an enzyme required for coordinating S phase progression, forms
stable in vivo complexes with E2F-1, a growth-promoting transcription factor,
which binds to the retinoblastoma gene product and is involved in the timely
activation of genes whose products contribute to G1 exit and S phase traversal.
Complex formation results in a negative biochemical effect of cyclin A-kinase:
the shut-off of E2F-1-dependent DNA binding function in S/G2. Thus, specific and 
timely cell cycle-dependent interactions of E2F-1 with proteins that inhibit its 
function (i.e., RB during G1 and cyclin A-kinase during S/G2) may contribute to
the periodicity of expression of certain E2F-1-responsive genes at the G1/S
transition.

PMID: 8033208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jul 5;91(14):6359-63.

DNA-binding and trans-activation properties of Drosophila E2F and DP proteins.

Dynlacht BD(1), Brook A, Dembski M, Yenush L, Dyson N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center, Charlestown 02129.

The temporal activation of E2F transcriptional activity appears to be an
important component of the mechanisms that prepare mammalian cells for DNA
replication. Regulation of E2F activity appears to be a highly complex process,
and the dissection of the E2F pathway will be greatly facilitated by the ability 
to use genetic approaches. We report the isolation of two Drosophila genes that
can stimulate E2F-dependent transcription in Drosophila cells. One of these
genes, dE2F, contains three domains that are highly conserved in the human
homologs E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3. Interestingly, one of these domains is highly
homologous to the retinoblastoma protein (RB)-binding sequences of human E2F
genes. The other gene, dDP, is closely related to the human DP-1 and DP-2 genes. 
We demonstrate that dDP and dE2F interact and cooperate to give sequence-specific
DNA binding and optimal trans-activation. These features suggest that endogenous 
Drosophila E2F, like human E2F, may be composed of heterodimers and may be
regulated by RB-like proteins. The isolation of these genes will provide
important reagents for the genetic analysis of the E2F pathway.

PMCID: PMC44201
PMID: 8022787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. EMBO J. 1994 Jul 1;13(13):3104-14.

DP-1: a cell cycle-regulated and phosphorylated component of transcription factor
DRTF1/E2F which is functionally important for recognition by pRb and the
adenovirus E4 orf 6/7 protein.

Bandara LR(1), Lam EW, Sørensen TS, Zamanian M, Girling R, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, MRC National Institute for
Medical Research, London, UK.

The cellular transcription factor DRTF1/E2F integrates cell cycle events with the
transcription apparatus through its cyclical interactions with important
regulators of cellular proliferation. Two sequence-specific DNA binding proteins,
DP-1 and E2F-1, are components of DRTF1/E2F which synergistically interact in a
DP-1/E2F-1 heterodimer. Here, we show that DP-1 is a very frequent, possibly
universal, component of DRTF1/E2F in 3T3 cells since it is present in all forms
of the DNA binding activity that occur during cell cycle progression.
Furthermore, the DP-1 polypeptide, which is phosphorylated, undergoes a
phosphorylation-dependent mobility shift during the cell cycle suggesting that
its level of phosphorylation is regulated during cell cycle progression. A
C-terminal region in DP-1 can interact with pRb which, in the context of the
DP-1/E2F-1 heterodimer, contributes to the efficiency of pRb binding. The
DP-1/E2F-1 heterodimer specifically interacts with the adenovirus type 5 E4 orf
6/7 protein, to produce a DNA binding activity which binds co-operatively to, and
transcriptionally activates through, two appropriately positioned E2F sites in a 
manner which resembles the regulation of DRTF1/E2F by E4 orf 6/7 during
adenovirus infection. We conclude that DP-1 is a frequent and cell
cycle-regulated component of DRTF1/E2F, and that in the DP-1/E2F-1 heterodimer it
is functionally important for recognition by pRb and the E4 orf 6/7 protein.

PMCID: PMC395201
PMID: 8039504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Cell Physiol. 1994 Jul;160(1):1-9.

Transforming growth factor-beta regulation of retinoblastoma gene product and E2F
transcription factor during cell cycle progression in mouse fibroblasts.

Kim TA(1), Ravitz MJ, Wenner CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York
14263.

The mechanism by which transforming growth factor beta (TGF beta) exerts growth
stimulatory effects was examined in C3H/10T1/2 mouse fibroblasts by study of cell
cycle regulation of the retinoblastoma gene product (p110Rb) and transcriptional 
regulation of the p110Rb-associated transcription factor, E2F. Northern blotting 
analysis shows that TGF beta and/or epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulate by
three to sixfold the level of Rb mRNA which is also reflected by the increased
levels of p110Rb. p110Rb becomes phosphorylated in mid-G1 and further
phosphorylated at the G1/S transition. Hyperphosphorylation of p110Rb by TGF beta
can be observed when cells are in S phase. TGF beta stimulates by three to
fourfold the activity of cdk2 kinase consistent with the observed phosphorylation
of p110Rb and also with the possibility that the kinase is involved in
phosphorylating p110Rb close to the G1/S transition. Thus, TGF beta as a growth
stimulator induces, as does EGF, the phosphorylation of p110Rb during cell cycle 
progression. Transient transfection of E2F promoter constructs was used to
analyze the effect of TGF beta on the modulation of E2F-mediated transcription.
The data revealed that TGF beta can stimulate wild-type adenoviral E2 promoter
activity by 12-fold. Taken together, TGF beta-induced phosphorylation of p110Rb
in mouse fibroblasts appears to exert a positive regulatory function upon genes
that have a pivotal role in the G1/S transition of the cell cycle.

PMID: 8021288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Genes Dev. 1994 Jul 1;8(13):1526-37.

Multiple DNA elements are required for the growth regulation of the mouse E2F1
promoter.

Hsiao KM(1), McMahon SL, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison 53706.

To prepare for the DNA synthesis (S) phase of the cell cycle, transcription of
many genes required for nucleotide biosynthesis increases. The promoters of
several of these genes contain binding sites for the E2F family of transcription 
factors, and, in many cases, mutation of these sites abolishes growth-regulated
transcription. The RNA levels of one family member, E2F1, increase about 15-fold 
at the G1/S-phase boundary and expression of E2F1 in quiescent cells activates
transcription from some G1/S-phase-specific promoters, suggesting that E2F1 plays
a critical role in preparing cells to enter S phase. To elucidate the signal
transduction pathway leading to the activation of genes required for DNA
synthesis, we are investigating the mechanism by which expression of E2F1 is
regulated. To determine whether levels of E2F1 mRNA are controlled by changes in 
promoter activity, we have cloned and characterized the mouse E2F1 promoter.
Sequence analysis revealed two sets of overlapping E2F-binding sites located
between -12 and -40 relative to the transcription initiation site. We show that
these sites bind cellular E2F and that an E2F1 promoter fragment can be activated
up to 100-fold by coexpression of E2F proteins. We also show that the activity of
this E2F1 promoter fragment increases approximately 80-fold at the G1/S-phase
boundary and that this activation is, in part, regulated by G0-specific
repression via the E2F sites. However, the E2F sites are not sufficient to
mediate growth-regulated transcriptional activity; our results indicate that
multiple DNA elements are required for transcription regulation of the E2F1
promoter at the G1/S-phase boundary.

PMID: 7958837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jun 24;269(25):17035-42.

The macromolecular state of the transcription factor E2F and glucocorticoid
regulation of c-myc transcription.

Rhee K(1), Ma T, Thompson EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biological Chemistry and Genetics, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston 77550.

Glucocorticoids inhibit transcription of the proto-oncogene c-myc in lymphoid
cells of thymic origin. To determine if this effect is associated with changes in
the properties of the transcription factor E2F, extracts were prepared from
control and glucocorticoid-treated P1798 murine T lymphoma cells, and the
macromolecular state of E2F was assessed by gel-mobility shift. Control extracts 
exhibit two predominant gel-mobility shift entities of which one corresponds to
"free" E2F. A second entity, complex C, has properties similar to those described
for the complex containing E2F, p107, cyclin A, and Cdk2. Complex C disappears
after addition of dexamethasone and is replaced by complex D. The mobility of
this complex and its sensitivity to SV40 T antigen suggest that complex D
corresponds to an E2F-p105Rb-1 complex. Extracts from control and
glucocorticoid-treated cells yield identical DNase I protection patterns on the
c-myc P2 promoter. Furthermore, such extracts transcribe the c-myc P2 promoter in
vitro with equal activity. The relative abundance of the E2F complexes was
measured after addition of dexamethasone. Complex C disappears as cells withdraw 
from S phase, and complex D appears at this time. The genes encoding thymidine
kinase (Tk-1) and p34cdc2 (cdc2) are regulated with kinetics similar to those
observed for changes in the macromolecular state of E2F. However, regulation of
c-myc expression occurs long before any change in E2F. The macromolecular state
of E2F may regulate expression of genes at the G1/S boundary. However, the data
are not consistent with the hypothesis that association of E2F with tumor
suppressor gene products such as p107 or p105Rb-1 is relevant to glucocorticoid
regulation of c-myc transcription.

PMID: 8006008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jun 10;269(23):16180-6.

Regulation of two E2F-related genes in presenescent and senescent human
fibroblasts.

Dimri GP(1), Hara E, Campisi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory,
University of California, Berkeley 94720.

Several mammalian genes expressed in late G1 are positively regulated by E2F, a
heterodimeric transcription factor. Genes encoding two E2F proteins, E2F-1 and
DP-1, were regulated differently during the cell cycle and replicative senescence
of normal human fibroblasts. In presenescent cells, E2F-1 mRNA was cell-cycle
regulated, appearing a few hours before S phase. By contrast, DP-1 mRNA was
constitutively expressed, independent of position in the cell cycle. After a
finite number of divisions, normal cells enter a state of irreversible growth
arrest termed senescence. Many genes remain mitogen-inducible in senescent cells;
there are, however, exceptions, including several late G1 genes potentially
regulated by E2F. Senescent cells expressed DP-1 at the presenescent level, but
did not express E2F-1 mRNA. Senescent cells were also markedly deficient in E2F
binding activity associated with the dihydrofolate reductase promoter. E2F-1 and 
DP-1 expression vectors only weakly induced DNA synthesis in quiescent or
senescent human cells and immortal murine NIH3T3 cells, although the E2F-1 vector
stimulated DNA synthesis in immortal murine A31 cells, and transactivated
E2F-responsive promoters in NIH3T3 cells. The results suggest that senescent
cells may fail to express late G1 genes due to repression of E2F-1, leading to a 
deficiency of E2F activity. Furthermore, although E2F-1 stimulates DNA synthesis 
in some cells, other cells, including normal human fibroblasts, require
additional factors.

PMID: 8206919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Mol Biol Cell. 1994 Jun;5(6):667-78.

Altered shape and cell cycle characteristics of fibroblasts expressing the E2F1
transcription factor.

Logan TJ(1), Jordan KL, Hall D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107.

To gain an understanding of the role the E2F1 transcription factor plays in cell 
physiology, the full length protein (E2F1) and an amino terminal deletion of 87
amino acids (E2F1d87) were constitutively expressed in NIH3T3 fibroblasts.
Multiple cell lines were generated for each construct. These cells do not
proliferate in media containing low serum and do not proliferate in soft agar,
indicating that they are likely not transformed. However, both sets of cell lines
show increased DNA synthesis and increased numbers of cells in S phase when
cultured in media containing low serum, compared to the control cell lines. Cells
expressing E2F1d87 (but not E2F1) have an extremely rounded morphology when
cultured in 10% serum-containing media. These rounded cells lack detectable
microfilaments, microtubules, and focal contacts. However, when these cells are
cultured in low serum-containing media (0.5%), they attain the flattened
morphology and cytoskeletal structure of normal NIH3T3 cells.

PMCID: PMC301082
PMID: 7949423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Mar;14(3):1861-9.

Cloning, chromosomal location, and characterization of mouse E2F1.

Li Y(1), Slansky JE, Myers DJ, Drinkwater NR, Kaelin WG, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison
53706.

E2F has been implicated in growth control because of its association with the
retinoblastoma protein and the presence of E2F binding sites in the promoters of 
several growth-regulated genes. Proteins that bind to an E2F site have been
cloned from human and mouse cells. However, these two proteins (human E2F1 and
mouse DP-1) are quite different in sequence. We have now cloned a mouse cDNA
encoding a protein 86% identical to the human E2F1 protein. The mouse E2F1 cDNA
encodes a 430-amino-acid protein with a predicted molecular weight of 46,322 and 
detects mRNAs of 2.7 and 2.2 kb. Using primers complementary to sequences in the 
mouse E2F1 3' untranslated region, we mapped the mouse E2F1 gene to chromosome 2,
near the Agouti and c-src loci. To understand the role of the different E2F
family members in the growth of mouse NIH 3T3 cells, we examined the levels of
E2F1 and DP-1 mRNAs in different stages of the cell cycle. Since the levels of
E2F1 but not DP-1 mRNA correlated with changes in transcription from the dhfr
promoter, we examined whether E2F1 could activate various growth-regulated
promoters. We found that E2F1 could activate some (dhfr, thymidine kinase, and
DNA polymerase alpha) but not all (thymidylate synthase, cad, and c-myc) of these
promoters. On the basis of changes in levels of E2F1 and its ability to
transactivate growth-regulated promoters, we propose that E2F1 may mediate growth
factor-initiated signal transduction.

PMCID: PMC358544
PMID: 8114719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Mar;14(3):1886-92.

Coordinated trans activation of DNA synthesis- and precursor-producing enzymes by
polyomavirus large T antigen through interaction with the retinoblastoma protein.

Mudrak I(1), Ogris E, Rotheneder H, Wintersberger E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Universität Wien, Austria.

Previously constructed Swiss mouse 3T3 fibroblasts producing polyomavirus large T
antigen after addition of dexamethasone were used to study the transcriptional
activation by the viral protein of five genes coding for enzymes involved in DNA 
synthesis and precursor production, namely, dihydrofolate reductase, thymidine
kinase, thymidylate synthase, DNA polymerase alpha, and proliferating-cell
nuclear antigen. It was found that all these genes, whose expression is
stimulated at the G1/S boundary of the cell cycle after growth stimulation by
serum addition, are coordinately trans activated when T antigen is induced in
cells previously growth arrested by serum withdrawal. Cell lines carrying the
information for a mutant form of large T antigen, in which a glutamic acid
residue in the binding site for the retinoblastoma protein was changed into
aspartic acid, were constructed to test the involvement of an interaction of T
antigen with the retinoblastoma protein in this reaction. It was found that the
mutated T protein is incapable of stimulating transcription of any one of the
genes. The promoter of three of the genes (dihydrofolate reductase, thymidine
kinase, and DNA polymerase alpha) unequivocally carries binding sites for
transcription factor E2F, suggesting that complexes forming with this growth- and
cell cycle-regulating transcription factor are the targets for T antigen.
Although there is so far no evidence that thymidylate synthase and proliferating 
cell nuclear antigen are regulated via E2F, our data indicate that the
retinoblastoma protein still is involved in the control of these genes. mRNA for 
E2F itself increases in amount at the G1/S border in serum-stimulated cells but
not during polyomavirus T antigen-induced transcriptional activation of DNA
synthesis enzymes in arrested cells.

PMCID: PMC358546
PMID: 7906859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. EMBO J. 1994 Feb 15;13(4):871-8.

HPV16 E7 oncoprotein deregulates B-myb expression: correlation with targeting of 
p107/E2F complexes.

Lam EW(1), Morris JD, Davies R, Crook T, Watson RJ, Vousden KH.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, St Mary's Hospital Medical School,
London, UK.

HPV16 is a human tumour virus encoding two principal oncoproteins, E6 and E7.
Expression of E7 can induce DNA synthesis in quiescent cells and this property
coincides with its ability to bind to the cell proteins pRb and p107. As these
cell proteins are regulators of the transcription factor E2F, we have
investigated whether the interaction with E7 could result in induction of cell
cycle regulated genes. We show that B-myb, whose induction at the G1/S boundary
is regulated by release from E2F mediated transcriptional repression, is a target
for transcriptional activation by E7 and is the first E7 responsive cell gene to 
be identified. E7 transactivation leads to both inappropriate transcription of
B-myb during G1 and constitutive over-expression in cycling cells. B-Myb plays an
essential role in cell cycle progression, and activation by E7 is likely to
contribute to the mitogenic activity of the viral oncoprotein. Regulation of the 
B-myb promoter in NIH3T3 cells correlates with binding of distinct
p107-containing complexes at the E2F binding site, and analysis of E7 mutants
confirms that B-myb transcription in these cells is regulated through
interactions with p107 rather than pRb. These results provide the first example
of a potentially specific role for p107 in the regulation of the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC394886
PMID: 8112300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Oncogene. 1994 Feb;9(2):405-15.

Dual control of myc expression through a single DNA binding site targeted by ets 
family proteins and E2F-1.

Roussel MF(1), Davis JN, Cleveland JL, Ghysdael J, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105.

NIH3T3 cells expressing a mutant colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF-1R)
containing a phenylalanine for tyrosine substitution in the tyrosine kinase
domain at codon 809 exhibit defective myc regulation and do not enter S phase
when stimulated by CSF-1. Enforced expression of either ets-1 or ets-2 in these
cells restores their mitogenic response, albeit less efficiently than myc itself,
suggesting that ets proteins may regulate c-myc expression. Ets-1 transactivates 
reporter genes driven by the human and mouse c-myc promoters through the binding 
site for the transcription factor E2F, the latter being required for E1A- and
serum-induced c-myc expression. Analysis of E2F-1 sequences identified a minimal 
DNA binding domain that is related to those of ets proteins. Although E2F and ets
proteins interact with similar consensus DNA binding sites, in vitro binding
assays revealed that E2F can bind DNA as a homodimer, whereas ets proteins bind
these sites as monomers. E2F and ets proteins do not form heterodimers in vitro
and do not transactivate c-myc synergistically. Thus, E2F-1 and ets family
members may independently regulate c-myc transcription through the same binding
site at different times following growth factor stimulation.

PMID: 8290253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jan 14;269(2):1306-13.

G1/S-regulated E2F-containing protein complexes bind to the mouse thymidine
kinase gene promoter.

Dou QP(1), Zhao S, Levin AH, Wang J, Helin K, Pardee AB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Growth and Regulation, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts.

By performing DNase I footprint analysis, we had identified three distinct
protein binding sequences (MT1, MT2, and MT3) located on the mouse thymidine
kinase (TK) upstream promoter (Dou, Q.-P., Fridovich-Keil, J. L., and Pardee,
A.B. (1991) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 88, 1157-1161). Here we report that MT2
includes an E2F-like binding site (GTTCGCGGGCAAA), as shown by the following
evidence. (i) MT2 bound specifically to an affinity-purified fusion human E2F
protein. (ii) Both MT2 and an authentic E2F site (TTTCGCGCGCTTT) bound
specifically to similar or identical nuclear protein complexes. (iii) Formation
of both these DNA-protein complexes were cell cycle-dependent: a G0/G1
phase-specific complex (E2F.G0/G1) was replaced by an S phase-specific
complex(es) (E2F.S), whereas "free" E2F increased after the G1/S transition. (iv)
Pulse inhibition of protein synthesis with cycloheximide interchanged these
complexes with similar kinetics. (v) When MT2-shifted E2F.G0/G1, E2F.S, and free 
E2F were eluted and analyzed by Western blot assay using a specific antiserum to 
human E2F-1, two forms of murine E2F (62 and 66 kDa) were observed from all three
complexes. The compositions of these MT2-bound complexes were also investigated. 
Studies using specific antibodies revealed that p107, a retinoblastoma-like
protein, was present in both E2F-G0/G1 and E2F.S, whereas cyclin E.cyclin A.cdk2 
were only present in E2F.S complex(es). These data suggest that removal of the
p107-containing E2F.G0/G1 complex, a candidate repressor, from the MT2 site in
late G1 may be essential for S phase-dependent transcription of the mouse TK
gene.

PMID: 8288595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Genes Dev. 1993 Dec;7(12A):2392-404.

Cell cycle-specific association of E2F with the p130 E1A-binding protein.

Cobrinik D(1), Whyte P, Peeper DS, Jacks T, Weinberg RA.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge Massachusetts 02142.

Association of the E2F transcription factor with the pRb and p107 proteins
appears to regulate the activity of E2F and, in turn, affect cell cycle
progression. We found, however, that pRb and p107 are only minor E2F-associated
proteins in G0/G1 mouse fibroblasts, and we sought to identify the major E2F
partner protein in these cells. Because the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein seemed
able to bind to the G0 E2F partner, we enriched for proteins that associated both
with an E2F-binding site DNA column and with E1A. The major species in G0 and
early G1 fibroblasts detected with this approach had properties identical to the 
pRb- and p107-related p130 protein. In serum-stimulated cells, p107 replaced p130
as the major E2F-associated protein near the G1/S border, concomitant with an
increase in p107 protein levels. p130-E2F complexes resembled p107-E2F complexes 
in their ability to bind to cyclin-cdk kinases, and they appeared to be
associated with the cyclin E-cdk2 kinase in late G1 cells. These observations
indicate that E2F transcription factors are regulated by a succession of partner 
proteins with which they associate during defined stages of the cell cycle.

PMID: 8253385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Oncogene. 1993 Nov;8(11):2977-86.

Rb may act as a transcriptional co-activator in undifferentiated F9 cells.

Bocco JL(1), Reimund B, Chatton B, Kedinger C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes (CNRS), Unité 184
(INSERM), Strasbourg, France.

Erratum in
    Oncogene 1994 Mar;9(3):999.

The reversible interaction of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene product (Rb)
with the cellular transcription factor E2F has recently been demonstrated.
Activation of the adenovirus E2a promoter by the products of the viral E1a gene
correlates with the ability of both early E1a proteins to sequester Rb, thereby
releasing E2F from inactive complexes with this protein. The E2a promoter is also
efficiently stimulated by a product (17.5 kDa) of the viral E4 gene. The specific
interaction of this E4 protein with E2F results in the formation of complexes
that bind cooperatively to the two neighboring E2F binding sites in the E2a
promoter. We have previously shown that in undifferentiated F9 cells (F9EC) the
E2a promoter is refractory to E2F-mediated activation by E1a, but not by E4.
Using both band-shift and transfection experiments, we now demonstrate (i) that
in F9EC cells the E4 product, in combination with E2F, recruits Rb into a stable 
multiprotein complex and (ii) that in these undifferentiated cells, as opposed to
their differentiated counterpart, Rb is actively involved in the transcriptional 
stimulation of the E2a promoter by E4. Our results suggest that, depending on the
cell state, Rb may behave either as a transcriptional activator (F9EC cells) or
as a transcriptional inhibitor (differentiated F9 cells).

PMID: 8414500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Oct;13(10):6537-46.

Association of the human papillomavirus type 16 E7 protein with the
S-phase-specific E2F-cyclin A complex.

Arroyo M(1), Bagchi S, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Chicago 60612.

The transcription factor E2F has been shown to be involved in the expression of
several cell cycle-regulated genes, and the activity of this factor is controlled
by cellular proteins such as pRB and p107. E2F is also a target of the DNA virus 
oncoproteins (adenovirus E1A, simian virus 40 T antigen, and human papillomavirus
[HPV] E7) (see the review by J. R. Nevins [Science 258: 424-429, 1992]). These
viral oncoproteins dissociate an inactive complex between E2F and the
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (pRB), and this dissociation of the
E2F-pRB complex correlates with a stimulation of the E2F-dependent transcription.
In the S phase of the cell cycle, E2F forms a complex with p107, cyclin A, and
the cdk2 kinase (E2F-cyclin A complex). The cellular function of this
S-phase-specific complex is unclear. The adenovirus E1A protein dissociates the
E2F-cyclin A complex. The HPV type 16 (HPV-16) E7 protein, which possesses
significant sequence homology with E1A, does not dissociate the E2F-cyclin A
complex. We find that the HPV-16 E7 protein associates very efficiently with the 
E2F-cyclin A complex. This association is dependent on the sequences that are
also necessary for the transforming activity of E7. Moreover, the E7 protein of a
low-risk HPV (type 6b) is much less efficient in binding to the E2F-cyclin A
complex compared with that of the high-risk type. We also find that the
E2F-cyclin A complex remains endogenously associated with the E7 protein in
extracts of Caski cells, which express high levels of HPV-16 E7 protein. Finally,
we have extensively purified the E2F-cyclin A complex from mouse L-cell extracts 
and show that, in cell extracts, the E2F-cyclin A complex remains associated with
other cellular proteins.

PMCID: PMC364713
PMID: 8413252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. EMBO J. 1993 Jul;12(7):2705-13.

An E2F-binding site mediates cell-cycle regulated repression of mouse B-myb
transcription.

Lam EW(1), Watson RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, St Mary's Hospital Medical School,
London, UK.

Transcription of the B-myb gene is regulated at the G1/S boundary of the cell
cycle. To begin to examine the mechanism controlling expression of this gene
during the cell-cycle, a mouse B-myb 5' flanking sequence was isolated from a
cosmid library and shown to promote efficiently the transcription of a luciferase
reporter gene when transfected into NIH3T3 fibroblasts. It was further shown that
in transfected cells released from G0 by readdition of serum, luciferase activity
directed by the B-myb promoter was induced substantially as cells entered S
phase, thus paralleling the regulation of endogenous B-myb. Analysis of the B-myb
promoter identified a region that appeared to have no intrinsic promoter activity
yet which acted to regulate transcription negatively in G0. Mutagenesis of an E2F
consensus binding site within this region was sufficient to relieve transcription
repression in G0, resulting in a promoter with constitutively high activity.
Specific G0 and S phase E2F complexes binding to this B-myb element were detected
in NIH3T3 cell extracts by mobility shift assays. These studies demonstrate for
the first time a direct role for E2F in regulation of cell cycle gene expression 
by repression of transcription in G0/early G1.

PMCID: PMC413519
PMID: 8334989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Apr 15;90(8):3685-9.

Differential modulation of cyclin gene expression by MYC.

Jansen-Dürr P(1), Meichle A, Steiner P, Pagano M, Finke K, Botz J, Wessbecher J, 
Draetta G, Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Deutsches Krebsforschüngs
Zentrüm, Heidelberg, Federal Republic of Germany.

We have investigated the effects of deregulated expression of the human c-MYC
protooncogene on cyclin gene expression and on the transcription factor E2F. We
found that constitutive expression of MYC or activation of conditional MycER
chimeras led to higher levels of cyclin A and cyclin E mRNA. Activation of cyclin
A expression by MYC led to a growth factor-independent association of cyclin A
and cdk2 with the transcription factor E2F and correlated with an increase in E2F
transcriptional activity. In contrast, expression of the G1 phase cyclin D1 was
strongly reduced in MYC-transformed cells. In synchronized cells, repression of
cyclin D1 by MYC occurred very early in the G1 phase of the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC46366
PMID: 8386381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Oncogene. 1993 Apr;8(4):893-8.

Human papillomavirus type 16 E7 regulates E2F and contributes to mitogenic
signalling.

Morris JD(1), Crook T, Bandara LR, Davies R, LaThangue NB, Vousden KH.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, St Mary's Hospital Medical School,
London, UK.

We have produced human papillomavirus type 16 E7 protein in a bacterial
expression system and examined the mitogenic activity of this protein in Swiss
3T3 cells after scrape loading. The ability of E7 to induce cellular DNA
synthesis in quiescent mouse fibroblasts is strongly enhanced by the presence of 
a single growth factor such as insulin. Although only weakly mitogenic,
introduction of E7 alone resulted in the rapid induction of the transcriptionally
active form of E2F, which was not enhanced further by the addition of insulin.
Mutant E7 proteins defective for RB binding failed to induce the active form of
E2F or act synergistically with insulin to stimulate DNA synthesis. The ability
of E7 to regulate E2F may therefore be necessary, but is not sufficient, for full
induction of DNA synthesis.

PMID: 8455943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Virol. 1993 Apr;67(4):1765-71.

A binding site for transcription factor E2F is a target for trans activation of
murine thymidine kinase by polyomavirus large T antigen and plays an important
role in growth regulation of the gene.

Ogris E(1), Rotheneder H, Mudrak I, Pichler A, Wintersberger E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Universität Wien, Austria.

The promoter of the murine thymidine kinase gene contains a binding site for
transcription factor E2F. Using cell lines (3T3-LT) conditionally expressing
polyomavirus large T antigen from a hormone-responsive promoter and reporter gene
constructs carrying the thymidine kinase promoter with intact or mutated E2F
sites, we show that this E2F site is the target for trans activation by the viral
protein. Transcription of the growth-regulated endogenous thymidine kinase gene
can be activated in serum-starved, quiescent 3T3-LT cells by induction of T
antigen. Activation of transcription from the thymidine kinase promoter requires 
an intact binding site for the retinoblastoma protein in the T antigen. The same 
promoter region was furthermore shown to play a major role in growth regulation
of the gene. As several other DNA synthesis enzymes also carry E2F binding sites 
in their promoters, our observations suggest a common mechanism of growth
regulation of these genes and that they all might be targets for trans activation
by DNA tumor virus proteins.

PMCID: PMC240217
PMID: 8445710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Nature. 1993 Mar 4;362(6415):83-7.

A new component of the transcription factor DRTF1/E2F.

Girling R(1), Partridge JF, Bandara LR, Burden N, Totty NF, Hsuan JJ, La Thangue 
NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, MRC National Institute for
Medical Research, Mill Hill, London, UK.

Erratum in
    Nature. 1993 Sep 30;365(6445):468.

Transcription factor DRTF1/E2F coordinates events in the cell cycle with
transcription by its cyclical interactions with important regulators of cellular 
proliferation like the retinoblastoma tumour-suppressor gene product (Rb) and the
Rb-related protein, p107 (refs 1-8). DRTF1/E2F binding sites occur in the control
regions of genes involved in proliferation, and both Rb and p107 repress the
capacity of DRTF1/E2F to activate transcription (refs 11, 12; M. Zamanian and
N.B.L.T., manuscript submitted). Mutant Rb proteins isolated from tumour cells
are unable to bind DRTF1/E2F (refs 11-13), and certain viral oncoproteins, such
as adenovirus E1A, sequester Rb and p107 in order to free active DRTF1/E2F (refs 
5, 11, 12, 14, 15). Here we report the isolation of a complementary DNA encoding 
DRTF1-polypeptide-1 (DP-1), a major sequence-specific binding protein that is
present in DRTF1/E2F, including Rb- and p107-associated DRTF1/E2F. The
DNA-binding domain of DP-1 contains a region that resembles that of E2F-1 (refs
16, 17), and recognizes the same sequence. DRTF1/E2F thus appears to contain at
least two sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins.

PMID: 8446173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. EMBO J. 1993 Mar;12(3):1013-20.

Interactions of the p107 and Rb proteins with E2F during the cell proliferation
response.

Schwarz JK(1), Devoto SH, Smith EJ, Chellappan SP, Jakoi L, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC
27710.

The E2F transcription factor is found in complexes with a variety of cellular
proteins including the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein. Various assays
have demonstrated a tight correlation between the functional capacity of Rb as a 
growth suppressor and its ability to bind to E2F. Moreover, only the
underphosphorylated form of Rb, which appears to be the active species, interacts
with E2F. Despite the fact that the majority of Rb becomes hyperphosphorylated at
the end of G1, we now show that the E2F-Rb interaction persists through the G1/S 
transition and into S phase. A distinct E2F complex does appear to be regulated
in relation to the transition from G1 to S phase. We now demonstrate that this
complex contains the Rb-related p107 protein. Moreover, like the Rb protein, p107
inhibits E2F-dependent transcription in a co-transfection assay. This result,
together with the observation that free, uncomplexed E2F accumulates as cells
leave G1 and enter S phase, suggests that the p107 protein may regulate
E2F-dependent transcription during G1. In contrast, although Rb does regulate the
transcriptional activity of E2F, this association does not coincide with the G1
to S phase transition.

PMCID: PMC413302
PMID: 8458319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Mar;13(3):1610-8.

A protein synthesis-dependent increase in E2F1 mRNA correlates with growth
regulation of the dihydrofolate reductase promoter.

Slansky JE(1), Li Y, Kaelin WG, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison
53706.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol 1993 Nov;13(11):7201.

Enhanced expression of genes involved in nucleotide biosynthesis, such as
dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), is a hallmark of entrance into the DNA synthesis 
(S) phase of the mammalian cell cycle. To investigate the regulated expression of
the DHFR gene, we stimulated serum-starved NIH 3T3 cells to synchronously reenter
the cell cycle. Our previous results show that a cis-acting element at the site
of DHFR transcription initiation is necessary for serum regulation. Recently,
this element has been demonstrated to bind the cloned transcription factor E2F.
In this study, we focused on the role of E2F in the growth regulation of DHFR. We
demonstrated that a single E2F site, in the absence or presence of other promoter
elements, was sufficient for growth-regulated promoter activity. Next, we showed 
that the increase in DHFR mRNA at the G1/S-phase boundary required protein
synthesis, raising the possibility that a protein(s) lacking in serum-starved
cells is required for DHFR transcription. We found that, similar to DHFR mRNA
expression, levels of murine E2F1 mRNA were low in serum-starved cells and
increased at the G1/S-phase boundary in a protein synthesis-dependent manner.
Furthermore, in a cotransfection experiment, expression of human E2F1 stimulated 
the DHFR promoter 22-fold in serum-starved cells. We suggest that E2F1 may be the
key protein required for DHFR transcription that is absent in serum-starved
cells. Expression of E2F also abolished the serum-stimulated regulation of the
DHFR promoter and resulted in transcription patterns similar to those seen with
expression of the adenoviral oncoprotein E1A. In summary, we provide evidence for
the importance of E2F in the growth regulation of DHFR and suggest that
alterations in the levels of E2F may have severe consequences in the control of
cellular proliferation.

PMCID: PMC359473
PMID: 8441401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 1993;3(4):229-54.

Transcription from TATA-less promoters: dihydrofolate reductase as a model.

Azizkhan JC(1), Jensen DE, Pierce AJ, Wade M.

Author information: 
(1)Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 24623.

The promoters of many of the genes encoding the so-called "housekeeping" enzymes,
oncogenes, growth factors and their receptors, and transcription factors, do not 
contain a canonical TATA box, which is known to direct transcription initiation. 
The mechanisms through which TATA-less promoters are regulated, and their
transcription start sites selected, have begun to yield to investigation. Using
the dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) gene as a model, recent work on this group of 
genes has been reviewed. Control of transcription initiation and the role of
"initiator" sequences, as well as their binding factors, in particular YY1 and
E2F, are addressed. In the DHFR gene, neither the E2F site at the major
initiation region nor the upstream Sp1 sites can alone produce wild-type
initiation, despite the fact that each of these sites has certain properties of
initiators. Many TATA-less genes are growth regulated, that is, transcription is 
increased in response to stimulation of cell proliferation. Although both Sp1 and
E2F have been implicated in growth regulation, our recent studies suggest that
Sp1 sites alone can confer a growth-dependent increase in transcription in the
late G1 and early S phases of the cell cycle. The regulatory role of E2F, which
binds to many TATA-less promoters and mediates viral stimulation of
transcription, is also reviewed.

PMID: 8286846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Nov 25;20(22):5947-54.

Retinoblastoma-repression of E2F-dependent transcription depends on the ability
of the retinoblastoma protein to interact with E2F and is abrogated by the
adenovirus E1A oncoprotein.

Arroyo M(1), Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois, Chicago 60680.

The product of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor gene interacts with the
transcription factor E2F. Two distinct types of interactions can be detected
between the retinoblastoma gene product (Rb) and E2F. The first type involves an 
Rb-binding protein, RBP60. The Rb/E2F complex formed in the presence of RBP60 is 
able to bind DNA and migrates with a distinct mobility in gel retardation assays.
The second type of Rb/E2F complex is seen in the absence of RBP60. This second
type of Rb/E2F complex does not form a band-shift complex in gel retardation
assays and its formation results in an apparent inhibition or loss of the DNA
binding activity of E2F. Using a series of Rb-mutants we show that these two
types of Rb/E2F complexes depend on common domains of the Rb protein. The
T/E1A-binding region as well as the carboxyl-terminus of the Rb protein are
critical for these two types of Rb/E2F interactions. We also show that the
retinoblastoma protein represses the E2F-dependent transcription, and this
Rb-repression of the E2F-dependent transcription depends on the ability of Rb to 
interact with E2F. Moreover, the adenovirus E1A gene product, which binds Rb,
counteracts the Rb-repression and restores E2F-dependent transcription.

PMCID: PMC334459
PMID: 1461728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Oct;12(10):4327-33.

Identification of a 60-kilodalton Rb-binding protein, RBP60, that allows the
Rb-E2F complex to bind DNA.

Ray SK(1), Arroyo M, Bagchi S, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry (M/C 536), University of Illinois, Chicago 60680.

Several reports have indicated that the product of the retinoblastoma gene (Rb)
complexes with the transcription factor E2F. We present evidence that the
DNA-binding of the Rb-E2F complex involves another cellular factor. Addition of
Rb to purified preparations of E2F does not generate an Rb-E2F complex that can
bind DNA, and in fact, we see an inhibition of the DNA-binding ability of E2F. On
the other hand, addition of Rb to cruder preparations of E2F results in the
formation of an Rb-E2F complex (E2Fr) that can bind DNA and produces a distinct
complex in gel retardation assays. We have identified and purified a 60-kDa
protein that allows the Rb-E2F complex to bind DNA, and we show that this 60-kDa 
protein exerts its effect by directly interacting with Rb.

PMCID: PMC360356
PMID: 1406625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Cell. 1992 Jan 10;68(1):167-76.

A cyclin A-protein kinase complex possesses sequence-specific DNA binding
activity: p33cdk2 is a component of the E2F-cyclin A complex.

Devoto SH(1), Mudryj M, Pines J, Hunter T, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710.

The E2F transcription factor has been found in association with the cyclin A
protein, and this complex accumulates during the S phase of the cell cycle,
suggesting that E2F may play a role in cell cycle control. In independent
studies, cyclin A has been shown to be associated with two other proteins, the
Rb-related p107 protein and the cdc2-related p33 cdk2 protein kinase. Through an 
analysis of the E2F-cyclin A complex, we now find that both the p107 protein and 
the cdc2-related p33cdk2 kinase are components of the previously described
complex. Moreover, the complex possesses H1 kinase activity. These results thus
define a cyclin A-cdk2 kinase complex that possesses sequence-specific DNA
binding activity. This suggests that the cdk2 kinase may phosphorylate other
DNA-bound substrates, and that one role of the E2F factor may be to localize this
protein kinase to the DNA.

PMID: 1310073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Gene Expr. 1992;2(3):259-71.

Regulation of E2F/cyclin A-containing complex upon retinoic acid-induced
differentiation of teratocarcinoma cells.

Reichel RR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Biology, Chicago Medical School,
Illinois 60064.

Retinoic acid-induced differentiation of mouse P19 teratocarcinoma cells is
accompanied by alterations in the level of E2F transcription factor. P19 stem
cells contain free, uncomplexed E2F and an E2F complex termed E2F/stem. This stem
cell complex is a heterotrimeric protein aggregate consisting of E2F
transcription factor, E2F-binding protein (E2F/bp1), and cyclin A. Retinoic acid 
treatment converts P19 stem cells into differentiated neurons, glial cells, and
fibroblasts. The presented experiments clearly show that the level of uncomplexed
E2F gradually decreases upon differentiation, and fully differentiated cells do
not contain free E2F. In addition, the stem cell-specific E2F aggregate is
converted into a smaller complex, termed E2F/diff. This smaller complex, which is
specific for differentiated cells, does not contain cyclin A and consists of E2F 
transcription factor associated with E2F/bp1. Finally, the role of E2F complexes 
in the cessation of cell proliferation, which accompanies P19 cell
differentiation, is discussed.

PMID: 1450664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. EMBO J. 1991 Dec;10(12):3819-27.

A developmentally regulated and tissue-dependent transcription factor complexes
with the retinoblastoma gene product.

Partridge JF(1), La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London, UK.

DRTF1 is a cellular transcription factor which complexes with the retinoblastoma 
(Rb) gene product and cyclin A, an association modulated by certain viral
oncogenes, such as adenovirus E1a. Complexed DRTF1, referred to as DRTF1a, has
similar DNA binding specificity and DNA binding polypeptides to DRTF1b, which
lacks Rb. DRTF1b is abundant in both F9 embryonal carcinoma (EC) stem cells and
pluripotent embryonic stem (ES) cells and is strongly down-regulated during the
differentiation of both cell types, suggestive of a stem cell E1a-like activity. 
In contrast, DRTF1a, which in F9 EC cells is much less abundant than the other
activities, is induced as F9 cells begin to differentiate. Consistent with the
relationship between EC, ES and inner cell mass cells, DRTF1b is present in
blastocyst stage embryos although as embryogenesis progresses the levels of
Rb-complexed DRTF1 increase. Certain tissues, such as liver and brain, contain
high levels of DRTF1 during early embryonic stages but little in adult terminally
differentiated tissue, in contrast to the thymus, which contains high levels of
Rb-complexed DRTF1 but lacks associated cyclin A. These data show that DRTF1 is a
group of transcription factors that share common DNA binding polypeptides and
which complex with other non-DNA binding proteins, such as the Rb protein and
cyclin A, in a developmentally regulated and tissue-dependent fashion.

PMCID: PMC453118
PMID: 1834460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Genes Dev. 1991 Jul;5(7):1200-11.

Domains of the adenovirus E1A protein required for oncogenic activity are also
required for dissociation of E2F transcription factor complexes.

Raychaudhuri P(1), Bagchi S, Devoto SH, Kraus VB, Moran E, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710.

Recent experiments have shown that the cellular E2F transcription factor is found
in complexes with cellular proteins and that one such complex contains the
cyclin-A protein. Isolation of a cellular activity, which we term E2F-BF, can
reconstitute the E2F-cyclin-A complex and has permitted a more detailed analysis 
of the mechanism of E1A dissociation. Through the analysis of a series of E1A
mutants, we find that sequences in conserved region 1 (CR1) and conserved region 
2 (CR2) are important for dissociation of the E2F complex, whereas amino-terminal
sequences are not required. In contrast to the requirements for dissociation,
only the CR1 sequences are required to block formation of the complex if E1A is
added when the components are combined. We have also identified an activity,
termed E2F-I, that inhibits E2F binding to DNA, again apparently through the
formation of a complex with E2F. This inhibitory activity is also blocked by E1A,
dependent on the same elements of the E1A protein that disrupt the interaction
with E2F-BF. Because the E1A sequences that are important for releasing E2F from 
these interactions are also sequences necessary for oncogenesis, we suggest that 
this activity may be a critical component of the transforming activity of E1A.

PMID: 1829698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Cell. 1991 Jun 28;65(7):1243-53.

Cell cycle regulation of the E2F transcription factor involves an interaction
with cyclin A.

Mudryj M(1), Devoto SH, Hiebert SW, Hunter T, Pines J, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710.

We have examined E2F binding activity in extracts of synchronized NIH 3T3 cells. 
During the G0 to G1 transition, there is a marked increase in the level of active
E2F. Subsequently, there are changes in the nature of E2F-containing complexes. A
G1-specific complex increases in abundance, disappears, and is then replaced by
another complex as S phase begins. Analysis of extracts of thymidine-blocked
cells confirms that the complexes are cell cycle regulated. We also show that the
cyclin A protein is a component of the S phase complex. Each complex can be
dissociated by the adenovirus E1A 12S product, releasing free E2F. The release of
E2F from the cyclin A complex coincides with the stimulation of an E2F-dependent 
promoter. We suggest that these interactions control the activity of E2F and that
disruption of the complexes by E1A contributes to a loss of cellular
proliferation control.

PMID: 1829647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Cell. 1991 Jun 14;65(6):1063-72.

The retinoblastoma protein copurifies with E2F-I, an E1A-regulated inhibitor of
the transcription factor E2F.

Bagchi S(1), Weinmann R, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry (M/C 536), College of Dentistry (M/C 860),
University of Illinois, Chicago 60680.

Recently, we identified an inhibitory protein, E2F-I, that blocks the DNA-binding
activity of the transcription factor E2F. We also showed that the adenovirus E1A 
protein reverses this inhibitory activity of E2F-I, thereby restoring the
DNA-binding activity of E2F. We have now further purified this inhibitory
activity and show that the most purified preparation of E2F-I contains a 105 kd
E1A-binding protein. This 105 kd E1A-binding protein cross-reacts with two
different antibodies against the retinoblastoma (RB) gene product. Moreover, the 
RB gene product copurifies with E2F-I activity. Taken together, we conclude that 
the product of the RB gene is a part of E2F-I and is involved in the regulation
of E2F activity.

PMID: 1828393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


