
1. Int J Oncol. 2016 Mar 30. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3465. [Epub ahead of print]

MicroRNA-155 promotes tumor growth of human hepatocellular carcinoma by targeting
ARID2.

Zhang L(1), Wang W(2), Li X(2), He S(3), Yao J(4), Wang X(2), Zhang D(1), Sun
X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710004, P.R. China. (2)Department of General 
Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an,
Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China. (3)Breast Cancer Program, Shaanxi Provincial Tumor
Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China. (4)Department of General Surgery,
Shanxi Province People's Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710068, P.R. China.

Aberrant expression of microRNA-155 (miR-155) has been reported in several human 
cancers and is associated with prognosis of patients. However, the clinical
significance of miR-155 and its underlying mechanisms involved in
hepatocarcinogenesis remain to be determined. In this study, we demonstrated that
the expression of miR-155 was elevated in both hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
tissues and cell lines. Clinical association analysis revealed that high
expression of miR-155 was correlated with malignant clinicopathological
characteristics including large tumor size, high Edmondson-Steiner grading and
TNM tumor stage. Furthermore, its high expression conferred a reduced 5-year
overall survival and disease-free survival of HCC patients. Gain- and loss-of
function studies revealed that miR-155 promoted cell cycle progression, cell
proliferation and inhibited apoptosis. Mechanistically, we identified AT-rich
interactive domain 2 (ARID2) as a direct downstream target and functional
mediator of miR-155 in HCC cells. Notably, alterations of ARID2 expression
abrogated the effects of miR-155 on HCC cell proliferation, cell cycle and
apoptosis. Moreover, we demonstrated that Akt phosphorylation is essential for
the functional roles of miR-155 through altering Cyclin D1 and p27, which were
key components of cell cycle machinery. Finally, we disclosed that the
downregulation of miR-155 suppressed tumor growth of HCC by inhibiting Akt
signaling pathway. In conclusion, our results indicate that miR-155 promotes
tumor growth of HCC by targeting ARID2-mediated Akt phosphorylation pathway, and 
potentially serves as a novel prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for
HCC.

PMID: 27035278  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Nat Commun. 2016 Mar 29;7:11008. doi: 10.1038/ncomms11008.

Meta-analysis of gene-environment-wide association scans accounting for education
level identifies additional loci for refractive error.

Fan Q, Verhoeven VJ, Wojciechowski R, Barathi VA, Hysi PG, Guggenheim JA, Höhn R,
Vitart V, Khawaja AP, Yamashiro K, Hosseini SM, Lehtimäki T, Lu Y, Haller T, Xie 
J, Delcourt C, Pirastu M, Wedenoja J, Gharahkhani P, Venturini C, Miyake M,
Hewitt AW, Guo X, Mazur J, Huffman JE, Williams KM, Polasek O, Campbell H, Rudan 
I, Vatavuk Z, Wilson JF, Joshi PK, McMahon G, St Pourcain B, Evans DM, Simpson
CL, Schwantes-An TH, Igo RP, Mirshahi A, Cougnard-Gregoire A, Bellenguez C,
Blettner M, Raitakari O, Kähönen M, Seppala I, Zeller T, Meitinger T; Consortium 
for Refractive Error and Myopia (CREAM), Ried JS, Gieger C, Portas L, van Leeuwen
EM, Amin N, Uitterlinden AG, Rivadeneira F, Hofman A, Vingerling JR, Wang YX,
Wang X, Tai-Hui Boh E, Ikram MK, Sabanayagam C, Gupta P, Tan V, Zhou L, Ho CE,
Lim W, Beuerman RW, Siantar R, Tai ES, Vithana E, Mihailov E, Khor CC, Hayward C,
Luben RN, Foster PJ, Klein BE, Klein R, Wong HS, Mitchell P, Metspalu A, Aung T, 
Young TL, He M, Pärssinen O, van Duijn CM, Jin Wang J, Williams C, Jonas JB, Teo 
YY, Mackey DA, Oexle K, Yoshimura N, Paterson AD, Pfeiffer N, Wong TY, Baird PN, 
Stambolian D, Wilson JE, Cheng CY, Hammond CJ, Klaver CC, Saw SM, Rahi JS,
Korobelnik JF, Kemp JP, Timpson NJ, Smith GD, Craig JE, Burdon KP, Fogarty RD,
Iyengar SK, Chew E, Janmahasatian S, Martin NG, MacGregor S, Xu L, Schache M,
Nangia V, Panda-Jonas S, Wright AF, Fondran JR, Lass JH, Feng S, Zhao JH, Khaw
KT, Wareham NJ, Rantanen T, Kaprio J, Pang CP, Chen LJ, Tam PO, Jhanji V, Young
AL, Döring A, Raffel LJ, Cotch MF, Li X, Yip SP, Yap MK, Biino G, Vaccargiu S,
Fossarello M, Fleck B, Yazar S, Tideman JW, Tedja M, Deangelis MM, Morrison M,
Farrer L, Zhou X, Chen W, Mizuki N, Meguro A, Mäkelä KM.

Myopia is the most common human eye disorder and it results from complex genetic 
and environmental causes. The rapidly increasing prevalence of myopia poses a
major public health challenge. Here, the CREAM consortium performs a joint
meta-analysis to test single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) main effects and SNP ×
education interaction effects on refractive error in 40,036 adults from 25
studies of European ancestry and 10,315 adults from 9 studies of Asian ancestry. 
In European ancestry individuals, we identify six novel loci (FAM150B-ACP1,
LINC00340, FBN1, DIS3L-MAP2K1, ARID2-SNAT1 and SLC14A2) associated with
refractive error. In Asian populations, three genome-wide significant loci AREG, 
GABRR1 and PDE10A also exhibit strong interactions with education (P<8.5 ×
10(-5)), whereas the interactions are less evident in Europeans. The discovery of
these loci represents an important advance in understanding how gene and
environment interactions contribute to the heterogeneity of myopia.

PMID: 27020472  [PubMed - in process]


3. Cancer. 2016 Mar 21. doi: 10.1002/cncr.29974. [Epub ahead of print]

Whole-exome sequencing of duodenal adenocarcinoma identifies recurrent
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway mutations.

Yuan W(1), Zhang Z(1,)(2), Dai B(3), Wei Q(4), Liu J(5), Liu Y(6), Liu Y(7), He
L(1,)(7,)(8), Zhou D(1,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. (2)Institute of Biliary Tract Disease, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (3)The Department of Special
Treatment, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China. (4)Department of Pathology, Shanghai Tenth People's 
Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. (5)Zhengzhou Translational Medicine
Research Center, Zhengzhou Sixth People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, Henan Province,
China. (6)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Xinxiang Medical University, Weihui, Henan Province, China. (7)Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (8)Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Genomic alterations of small bowel cancers remain poorly understood
due to the rarity of these diseases. In the current study, the authors report the
identification of somatic mutations from patients with duodenal adenocarcinoma by
whole-exome sequencing.
METHODS: Whole-exome sequencing and follow-up analysis were conducted in 12
matched tumor-normal tissue duodenal adenocarcinoma tissue pairs to examine the
genetic characteristics of this disease. Somatic mutations (single-nucleotide
variants and short insertion/deletions) were obtained and filtered and then
searched for recurrently mutated genes and pathways.
RESULTS: An excess of C-to-T transitions at the CpG dinucleotide was observed in 
the substitution of bases. The authors identified recurrent mutations in tumor
protein p53 (TP53), KRAS, catenin (cadherin-associated protein) ß-1 (CTNNB1),
AT-rich interactive domain 2 (ARID2), adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), erb-b2
receptor tyrosine kinase 2 (ERBB2), ARID1A, cadherin-related family member 1
(CDHR1), NRAS, Bcl-2-related ovarian killer (BOK), radial spoke head 14 homolog
(chlamydomonas) (RTDR1), cell division cycle 27 (CDC27), catalytic subunit of
phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PIK3CA), and SMAD family member 4 (SMAD4). Pathway
scan indicated that the Wnt signaling pathway, regulation of the actin
cytoskeleton pathway, ErbB signaling pathway, and the pathway of focal adhesion
were the most extensively affected pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: This genomic characterization of duodenal adenocarcinoma provides
researchers with insight into its somatic landscape and highlights the vital role
of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. The study data also indicate that
duodenal adenocarcinomas have a genetic resemblance to gastric and colorectal
cancers. These discoveries may benefit the future development of molecular
diagnosis and personalized therapies. Cancer 2016. © 2016 American Cancer
Society.

© 2016 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 26998897  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. J Mol Med (Berl). 2016 Feb 27. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeted next-generation sequencing for molecular diagnosis of
endometriosis-associated ovarian cancer.

Er TK(1,)(2), Su YF(3), Wu CC(4), Chen CC(5), Wang J(6), Hsieh TH(7),
Herreros-Villanueva M(8), Chen WT(4), Chen YT(3,)(4), Liu TC(2,)(9), Chen HS(7), 
Tsai EM(10,)(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Nutrition Biotechnology, College of Medical and
Health Science, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan. (2)Division of Molecular
Diagnostics, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (3)Graduate Institute 
of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. (4)Department of Pathology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (5)Institute of Medical Science and Technology, National Sun
Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (6)Department of Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (7)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung, 80708, Taiwan. (8)Department of Gastroenterology, 
Hospital Donostia/Instituto Biodonostia, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red
de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Universidad del País Vasco
UPV/EHU, San Sebastián, Spain. (9)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department
of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(10)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. tsaieing@yahoo.com. (11)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, 80708, Taiwan. tsaieing@yahoo.com. (12)Research Center for
Environmental Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
tsaieing@yahoo.com.

Recent molecular and pathological studies suggest that endometriosis may serve as
a precursor of ovarian cancer (endometriosis-associated ovarian cancer, EAOC),
especially of the endometrioid and clear cell subtypes. Accordingly, this study
had two cardinal aims: first, to obtain mutation profiles of EAOC from Taiwanese 
patients; and second, to determine whether somatic mutations present in EAOC can 
be detected in preneoplastic lesions. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
tissues were obtained from ten endometriosis patients with malignant
transformation. Macrodissection was performed to separate four different types of
cells from FFPE sections in six patients. The four types of samples included
normal endometrium, ectopic endometriotic lesion, atypical endometriosis, and
carcinoma. Ultra-deep (>1000×) targeted sequencing was performed on 409
cancer-related genes to identify pathogenic mutations associated with EAOC. The
most frequently mutated genes were PIK3CA (6/10) and ARID1A (5/10). Other
recurrently mutated genes included ETS1, MLH1, PRKDC (3/10 each), and AMER1,
ARID2, BCL11A, CREBBP, ERBB2, EXT1, FANCD2, MSH6, NF1, NOTCH1, NUMA1, PDE4DIP,
PPP2R1A, RNF213, and SYNE1 (2/10 each). Importantly, in five of the six patients,
identical somatic mutations were detected in atypical endometriosis and tumor
lesions. In two patients, genetic alterations were also detected in ectopic
endometriotic lesions, indicating the presence of genetic alterations in
preneoplastic lesion. Genetic analysis in preneoplastic lesions may help to
identify high-risk patients at early stage of malignant transformation and also
shed new light on fundamental aspects of the molecular pathogenesis of EAOC.KEY
MESSAGES: Molecular characterization of endometriosis-associated ovarian cancer
genes by targeted NGS. Candidate genes predictive of malignant transformation
were identified. Chromatin remodeling, PI3K-AKT-mTOR, Notch signaling, and
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway may promote cell malignant transformation.

PMID: 26920370  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 26;11(1):e0147372. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147372.
eCollection 2016.

Early-Stage Induction of SWI/SNF Mutations during Esophageal Squamous Cell
Carcinogenesis.

Nakazato H(1,)(2,)(3), Takeshima H(1), Kishino T(1), Kubo E(1), Hattori N(1),
Nakajima T(4), Yamashita S(1), Igaki H(2), Tachimori Y(2), Kuniyoshi Y(3),
Ushijima T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epigenomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan. (2)Esophageal Surgery Division, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan. (3)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan. (4)Endoscopy Division,
National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

The SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex is frequently inactivated by somatic
mutations of its various components in various types of cancers, and also by
aberrant DNA methylation. However, its somatic mutations and aberrant methylation
in esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCCs) have not been fully analyzed. In
this study, we aimed to clarify in ESCC, what components of the SWI/SNF complex
have somatic mutations and aberrant methylation, and when somatic mutations of
the SWI/SNF complex occur. Deep sequencing of components of the SWI/SNF complex
using a bench-top next generation sequencer revealed that eight of 92 ESCCs
(8.7%) had 11 somatic mutations of 7 genes, ARID1A, ARID2, ATRX, PBRM1, SMARCA4, 
SMARCAL1, and SMARCC1. The SMARCA4 mutations were located in the Forkhead
(85Ser>Leu) and SNF2 family N-terminal (882Glu>Lys) domains. The PBRM1 mutations 
were located in a bromodomain (80Asn>Ser) and an HMG-box domain (1,377Glu>Lys).
For most mutations, their mutant allele frequency was 31-77% (mean 61%) of the
fraction of cancer cells in the same samples, indicating that most of the cancer 
cells in individual ESCC samples had the SWI/SNF mutations on one allele, when
present. In addition, a BeadChip array analysis revealed that a component of the 
SWI/SNF complex, ACTL6B, had aberrant methylation at its promoter CpG island in
18 of 52 ESCCs (34.6%). These results showed that genetic and epigenetic
alterations of the SWI/SNF complex are present in ESCCs, and suggested that
genetic alterations are induced at an early stage of esophageal squamous cell
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4728064
PMID: 26812616  [PubMed - in process]


6. PLoS Genet. 2015 Dec 30;11(12):e1005748. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005748.
eCollection 2015.

Genome-Wide Transcriptional Regulation Mediated by Biochemically Distinct SWI/SNF
Complexes.

Raab JR(1,)(2), Resnick S(1), Magnuson T(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina, United States of America. (2)Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, United States of America.

Multiple positions within the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex can be filled 
by mutually exclusive subunits. Inclusion or exclusion of these proteins defines 
many unique forms of SWI/SNF and has profound functional consequences. Often this
complex is studied as a single entity within a particular cell type and we
understand little about the functional relationship between these biochemically
distinct forms of the remodeling complex. Here we examine the functional
relationships among three complex-specific ARID (AT-Rich Interacting Domain)
subunits using genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation, transcriptome analysis,
and transcription factor binding maps. We find widespread overlap in
transcriptional regulation and the genomic binding of distinct SWI/SNF complexes.
ARID1B and ARID2 participate in wide-spread cooperation to repress hundreds of
genes. Additionally, we find numerous examples of competition between ARID1A and 
another ARID, and validate that gene expression changes following loss of one
ARID are dependent on the function of an alternative ARID. These distinct
regulatory modalities are correlated with differential occupancy by transcription
factors. Together, these data suggest that distinct SWI/SNF complexes dictate
gene-specific transcription through functional interactions between the different
forms of the SWI/SNF complex and associated co-factors. Most genes regulated by
SWI/SNF are controlled by multiple biochemically distinct forms of the complex,
and the overall expression of a gene is the product of the interaction between
these different SWI/SNF complexes. The three mutually exclusive ARID family
members are among the most frequently mutated chromatin regulators in cancer, and
understanding the functional interactions and their role in transcriptional
regulation provides an important foundation to understand their role in cancer.

PMCID: PMC4699898
PMID: 26716708  [PubMed - in process]


7. Anticancer Res. 2015 Dec;35(12):6819-27.

Loss of ARID1A, ARID1B, and ARID2 Expression During Progression of Gastric
Cancer.

Aso T(1), Uozaki H(2), Morita S(1), Kumagai A(1), Watanabe M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
uozaki@med.teikyo-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Gastric cancer is a common cancer worldwide. Chromatin remodeling
complexes have emerged as tumor suppressors and include AT-rich interaction
domain-containing proteins (ARIDs) 1A, 1B, and 2. We examined their expression
and clarified their roles in gastric carcinogenesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The expression of ARIDs was studied by
immunohistochemistry in 469 gastric carcinoma and 47 adenoma samples and was
analyzed according to clinicopathological factors.
RESULTS: Low expression rates of ARID1A, 1B, and 2 in gastric carcinoma were 20%,
10%, and 15% respectively. ARIDs are correlated to each other. Low expression of 
ARID1A was related to advanced tumor and vessel infiltration. Loss of ARID1B and 
ARID2 was also related to tumor progression, but their relationship was weaker
than that of ARID1A.
CONCLUSION: ARID1A is the strongest tumor suppressor in gastric carcinogenesis
among ARIDs. Their aberration might be caused by shared mechanisms such as
mutation and methylation.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26637902  [PubMed - in process]


8. Case Rep Oncol Med. 2015;2015:893694. doi: 10.1155/2015/893694. Epub 2015 Nov 8.

Clinicopathological and Targeted Exome Gene Features of a Patient with Metastatic
Acinic Cell Carcinoma of the Parotid Gland Harboring an ARID2 Nonsense Mutation
and CDKN2A/B Deletion.

Warner WA(1), Wong DJ(2), Palma-Diaz F(3), Shibuya TY(4), Momand J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Siteman Cancer Center, Department of Cell Biology and
Physiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(2)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (4)Department of 
Head & Neck Surgery, Southern California Permanente Medical Group, Anaheim, CA
92806, USA ; Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, University of
California Irvine School of Medicine, Orange, CA 92868, USA. (5)Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, California State University, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA 90032, USA.

We describe the presentation, treatment, clinical outcome, and targeted genome
analysis of a metastatic salivary acinic cell carcinoma (AciCC). A 71-year-old
male presented with a 3<U+2009>cm right tail of a parotid lesion, first detected as a
nodule by the patient seven months earlier. He had a right total parotidectomy
with cranial nerve VII resection, right facial nerve resection and grafting,
resection of the right conchal cartilage, and right modified radical neck
dissection. The primary tumor revealed AciCC with two distinct areas: a
well-differentiated component with glandular architecture and a dedifferentiated 
component with infiltrative growth pattern associated with prominent stromal
response, necrosis, perineural invasion, and cellular pleomorphism. Tumor staging
was pT4 N0 MX. Immunohistochemistry staining showed pankeratin (+), CD56 (-), and
a Ki67 proliferation index of 15%. Upon microscopic inspection, 49 local lymph
nodes resected during parotidectomy were negative for cancer cells. Targeted
sequencing of the primary tumor revealed deletions of CDKN2A and CDKN2B, a
nonsense mutation in ARID2, and single missense mutations of unknown significance
in nine other genes. Despite postoperative localized radiation treatment,
follow-up whole body PET/CT scan showed lung, soft tissue, bone, and liver
metastases. The patient expired 9 months after resection of the primary tumor.

PMCID: PMC4655020
PMID: 26634163  [PubMed]


9. Hum Pathol. 2015 Jul;46(7):1068-77.

ARID2, p110a, p53, and ß-catenin protein expression in hepatocellular carcinoma
and clinicopathologic implications.

You J, Yang H, Lai Y, Simon L, Au J, Burkart AL.

Erratum for
    Hum Pathol. 2015 Apr;46(4):583-92.

ARID2 (ARID2), CTNNB1 (ß catenin), tumor protein 53 (p53), and PIK3CA (p110a)
mutations are implicated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC); and previous work has
contributed to thorough molecular characterization of these events. However,
studies that assess the impact of these mutations on downstream protein
expression, especially those that evaluate all 4 cancer markers simultaneously,
are relatively lacking. Hence, the present study uses immunohistochemistry to
assess protein expression patterns of ARID2, ß-catenin, p53, and p110a in HCCs
and adjacent nonneoplastic cirrhotic tissues from 58 explanted livers. Notably,
this study is the first to our knowledge to investigate ARID2 protein expression 
in the liver. The frequency of ARID2 mutations detected using our
immunohistochemistry method was similar to that reported in previous molecular
studies. Furthermore, we found that loss of ARID2 protein expression may be
associated with recurrence, although further studies must be done to validate
these findings in a larger population. We found that expression patterns of the 4
cancer markers were independent of each other, suggesting separate pathways of
hepatocarcinogenesis. We also did not observe an association between viral
etiology and protein expression. Consistent with previous studies, overexpression
of p53 correlated with poor differentiation. Lastly, 17.5% of HCCs paradoxically 
had diffuse loss of the oncoprotein p110a compared with strong expression in
background cirrhotic liver. The exact mechanism is unclear, but enigmatic loss of
oncoprotein function has been described in other carcinomas and could potentially
have significant implications for the use of mechanistic target of rapamycin
(mTOR) drug therapies.

PMID: 26284269  [PubMed]


10. Neurogenetics. 2015 Oct;16(4):307-14. doi: 10.1007/s10048-015-0454-0. Epub 2015
Aug 4.

Mutations in ARID2 are associated with intellectual disabilities.

Shang L(1), Cho MT(2), Retterer K(2), Folk L(2), Humberson J(3), Rohena L(4),
Sidhu A(5), Saliganan S(5), Iglesias A(1), Vitazka P(2), Juusola J(2),
O'Donnell-Luria AH(6,)(7,)(8), Shen Y(9), Chung WK(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, 1150 St.
Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY, 10032, USA. (2)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Metabolism, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Genetics, San Antonio Military Medical Center, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and Human Development, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI, USA. (6)Analytical and Translational Genetics Unit,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (7)Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. (8)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (9)Department of System Biology and
Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, 10032, 
USA. (10)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, 1150 St.
Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY, 10032, USA. wkc15@columbia.edu. (11)Department of 
Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
wkc15@columbia.edu.

The etiology of intellectual disabilities (ID) remains unknown for the majority
of patients. Due to reduced reproductive fitness in many individuals with ID, de 
novo mutations account for a significant portion of severe ID. The ATP-dependent 
SWI/SNF chromatin modifier has been linked with neurodevelopmental disorders
including ID and autism. ARID2 is an intrinsic component of polybromo-associated 
BAF (PBAF), the SWI/SNF subcomplex. In this study, we used clinical whole exome
sequencing (WES) in proband-parent-trios to identify the etiology of ID. We
identified four independent, novel, loss of function variants in ARID2 gene in
four patients, three of which were confirmed to be de novo. The patients all have
ID and share other clinical characteristics including attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, short stature, dysmorphic facial features, and Wormian
bones. All four novel variants are predicted to lead to a premature termination
with the loss of the two conservative zinc finger motifs. This is the first
report of mutations in ARID2 associated with developmental delay and ID.

PMID: 26238514  [PubMed - in process]


11. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Jun 9;7(1):59. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0091-3. eCollection
2015.

Targeted next-generation sequencing reveals high frequency of mutations in
epigenetic regulators across treatment-naïve patient melanomas.

Lee JJ(1), Sholl LM(1), Lindeman NI(1), Granter SR(1), Laga AC(1), Shivdasani
P(1), Chin G(1), Luke JJ(2), Ott PA(2), Hodi FS(2), Mihm MC Jr(2), Lin JY(2),
Werchniak AE(2), Haynes HA(2), Bailey N(2), Liu R(1), Murphy GF(1), Lian CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
221 Longwood Avenue, EBRC Suite 401, Boston, MA 02115 USA. (2)Melanoma Center,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 450 Brookline Ave., Boston,
MA 02215-5450 USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent developments in genomic sequencing have advanced our
understanding of the mutations underlying human malignancy. Melanoma is a
prototype of an aggressive, genetically heterogeneous cancer notorious for its
biologic plasticity and predilection towards developing resistance to targeted
therapies. Evidence is rapidly accumulating that dysregulated epigenetic
mechanisms (DNA methylation/demethylation, histone modification, non-coding RNAs)
may play a central role in the pathogenesis of melanoma. Therefore, we sought to 
characterize the frequency and nature of mutations in epigenetic regulators in
clinical, treatment-naïve, patient melanoma specimens obtained from one academic 
institution.
RESULTS: Targeted next-generation sequencing for 275 known and investigative
cancer genes (of which 41 genes, or 14.9 %, encoded an epigenetic regulator) of
38 treatment-naïve patient melanoma samples revealed that 22.3 % (165 of 740) of 
all non-silent mutations affected an epigenetic regulator. The most frequently
mutated genes were BRAF, MECOM, NRAS, TP53, MLL2, and CDKN2A. Of the 40 most
commonly mutated genes, 12 (30.0 %) encoded epigenetic regulators, including
genes encoding enzymes involved in histone modification (MECOM, MLL2, SETD2),
chromatin remodeling (ARID1B, ARID2), and DNA methylation and demethylation
(TET2, IDH1). Among the 38 patient melanoma samples, 35 (92.1 %) harbored at
least one mutation in an epigenetic regulator. The genes with the highest number 
of total UVB-signature mutations encoded epigenetic regulators, including MLL2
(100 %, 16 of 16) and MECOM (82.6 %, 19 of 23). Moreover, on average, epigenetic 
genes harbored a significantly greater number of UVB-signature mutations per gene
than non-epigenetic genes (3.7 versus 2.4, respectively; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01).
Bioinformatics analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) melanoma mutation
dataset also revealed a frequency of mutations in the 41 epigenetic genes
comparable to that found within our cohort of patient melanoma samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified a high prevalence of somatic mutations in genes
encoding epigenetic regulators, including those involved in DNA demethylation,
histone modification, chromatin remodeling, and microRNA processing. Moreover,
UVB-signature mutations were found more commonly among epigenetic genes than in
non-epigenetic genes. Taken together, these findings further implicate epigenetic
mechanisms, particularly those involving the chromatin-remodeling enzyme
MECOM/EVI1 and histone-modifying enzyme MLL2, in the pathobiology of melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4517542
PMID: 26221190  [PubMed]


12. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Aug 15;336(2):232-41. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.07.008. Epub
2015 Jul 10.

miR-208-3p promotes hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation and invasion
through regulating ARID2 expression.

Yu P(1), Wu D(1), You Y(1), Sun J(1), Lu L(1), Tan J(1), Bie P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of
Hepatobiliary Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: bieping2010@163.com.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that negatively regulate gene
expression at post-transcriptional level. miRNA dysregulation plays a causal role
in cancer progression. In this study, miR-208-3p was highly expressed and
directly repressed ARID2 expression. As a result, ARID2 expression in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) was decreased. In vitro, miR-208-3p
down-regulation and ARID2 over-expression elicited similar inhibitory effects on 
HCC cell proliferation and invasion. In vivo test results revealed that
miR-208-3p down-regulation inhibited HCC tumorigenesis in Hep3B cells. Moreover, 
ARID2 was possibly a downstream element of transforming growth factor beta1
(TGFß1)/miR-208-3p/ARID2 regulatory pathway. These findings suggested that
miR-208-3p up-regulation is associated with HCC cell progression and may provide 
a new target for liver cancer treatment.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26169693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Gastroenterology. 2015 Oct;149(5):1226-1239.e4. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2015.05.061. Epub 2015 Jun 20.

Genetic Landscape and Biomarkers of Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Zucman-Rossi J(1), Villanueva A(2), Nault JC(3), Llovet JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, UMR-1162, Génomique Fonctionnelle des Tumeurs Solides, Equipe
Labellisée Ligue Contre le Cancer, Institut Universitaire d'Hematologie, Paris,
France; Université Paris Descartes, Labex Immuno-Oncology, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
Faculté de Médecine, Paris, France; Université Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
Unité de Formation et de Recherche Santé, Médecine, Biologie Humaine, Bobigny,
France; Université Paris Diderot, Paris. Electronic address:
jessica.zucman-rossi@inserm.fr. (2)Liver Cancer Program, Division of Liver
Diseases, Department of Medicine, Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York; Division of Hematology and Medical
Oncology, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, New York. (3)Inserm, UMR-1162, Génomique Fonctionnelle des Tumeurs Solides,
Equipe Labellisée Ligue Contre le Cancer, Institut Universitaire d'Hematologie,
Paris, France; Université Paris Descartes, Labex Immuno-Oncology, Sorbonne Paris 
Cité, Faculté de Médecine, Paris, France; Service d'hépatologie, Hôpital Jean
Verdier, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris-Seine-Saint-Denis, Assistance-Publique
Hôpitaux de Paris, Bondy, France. (4)Liver Cancer Program, Division of Liver
Diseases, Department of Medicine, Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York; Liver Cancer Translational Research 
Laboratory, Barcelona-Clínic Liver Cancer Group, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Liver Unit, CIBEREHD, Hospital Clínic, 
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain; Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats
(ICREA), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. Electronic address: jmllovet@clinic.cat.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has emerged as a major cause of cancer-related
death. Its mortality has increased in Western populations, with a minority of
patients diagnosed at early stages, when curative treatments are feasible. Only
the multikinase inhibitor sorafenib is available for the management of advanced
cases. During the last 10 years, there has been a clear delineation of the
landscape of genetic alterations in HCC, including high-level DNA amplifications 
in chromosome 6p21 (VEGFA) and 11q13 (FGF19/CNND1), as well as homozygous
deletions in chromosome 9 (CDKN2A). The most frequent mutations affect TERT
promoter (60%), associated with an increased telomerase expression. TERT promoter
can also be affected by copy number variations and hepatitis B DNA insertions,
and it can be found mutated in preneoplastic lesions. TP53 and CTNNB1 are the
next most prevalent mutations, affecting 25%-30% of HCC patients, that, in
addition to low-frequency mutated genes (eg, AXIN1, ARID2, ARID1A, TSC1/TSC2,
RPS6KA3, KEAP1, MLL2), help define some of the core deregulated pathways in HCC. 
Conceptually, some of these changes behave as prototypic oncogenic addiction
loops, being ideal biomarkers for specific therapeutic approaches. Data from
genomic profiling enabled a proposal of HCC in 2 major molecular clusters
(proliferation and nonproliferation), with differential enrichment in prognostic 
signatures, pathway activation and tumor phenotype. Translation of these
discoveries into specific therapeutic decisions is an unmet medical need in this 
field.

Copyright © 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26099527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 19;6:6336. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7336.

Recurrent chromosomal gains and heterogeneous driver mutations characterise
papillary renal cancer evolution.

Kovac M(1), Navas C(2), Horswell S(3), Salm M(3), Bardella C(4), Rowan A(2),
Stares M(2), Castro-Giner F(4), Fisher R(2), de Bruin EC(5), Kovacova M(6),
Gorman M(4), Makino S(4), Williams J(4), Jaeger E(4), Jones A(4), Howarth K(4),
Larkin J(7), Pickering L(7), Gore M(7), Nicol DL(8), Hazell S(9), Stamp G(10),
O'Brien T(11), Challacombe B(11), Matthews N(12), Phillimore B(12), Begum S(12), 
Rabinowitz A(12), Varela I(13), Chandra A(14), Horsfield C(14), Polson A(14),
Tran M(15), Bhatt R(16), Terracciano L(17), Eppenberger-Castori S(17), Protheroe 
A(18), Maher E(19), El Bahrawy M(20), Fleming S(21), Ratcliffe P(22), Heinimann
K(23), Swanton C(24), Tomlinson I(25).

Author information: 
(1)1] Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Centre for
Human Genetics, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford,
Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK [2] Department of Biomedicine, Research Group
Human Genomics, University of Basel, Mattenstrasse 28, 4058 Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Translational Cancer Therapeutics Laboratory, London Research Institute,
Cancer Research UK, 44, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3LY, UK.
(3)Bioinformatics and Biostatistics, London Research Institute, Cancer Research
UK, 44, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3LY, UK. (4)Molecular and Population
Genetics Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Nuffield
Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford
OX3 7BN, UK. (5)University College London Cancer Institute and Hospitals, Huntley
Street, London WC1E 6DD, UK. (6)Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Institute of
Mathematics and Physics, Slovak University of Technology, Namestie slobody 17,
812 31 Bratislava, Slovakia. (7)Department of Medicine, The Royal Marsden NHS
Foundation Trust, 203 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JJ, UK. (8)1] Department of
Urology, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, 203 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JJ,
UK [2] School of Medicine, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(9)Department of Histopathology, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, 203
Fulham Road, London SW3 6JJ, UK. (10)Experimental Histopathology, London Research
Institute, Cancer Research UK, 44, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3LY, UK.
(11)Urology Centre, Guy's and St Thomas's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Great
Maze Pond, London SE1 9RT, UK. (12)Advanced Sequencing Laboratory, London
Research Institute, Cancer Research UK, 44, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A
3LY, UK. (13)Genomic analysis of tumour development, Instituto de Biomedicina y
Biotecnología de Cantabria (CSIC-UC-Sodercan), Departamento de Biología
Molecular, Universidad de Cantabria, 39011 Santander, Spain. (14)Department of
Histopathology, Guy's and St Thomas's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Great Maze
Pond, London SE1 9RT, UK. (15)Department of Oncology, Uro-Oncology Research
Group, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK. (16)Department of Urology,
University Hospitals, Birmingham B15 2TH, UK. (17)Institute for Pathology,
University Hospital Basel, Schönbeinstrasse 40, 4003 Basel, Switzerland.
(18)Department of Oncology, Cancer and Haematology Centre, Churchill Hospital,
Oxford University Hospitals, Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK. (19)Department of Medical
Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK. (20)Department of
Histopathology, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, London W12 0HS,
UK. (21)Department of Histopathology, Medical Research Institute, University of
Dundee Medical School, Ninewells Hospital, Dundee DD1 9SY, UK. (22)Hypoxia
Biology Laboratory, Henry Wellcome Building for Molecular Physiology, Nuffield
Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford
OX3 7BN, UK. (23)Department of Biomedicine, Research Group Human Genomics,
University of Basel, Mattenstrasse 28, 4058 Basel, Switzerland. (24)1]
Translational Cancer Therapeutics Laboratory, London Research Institute, Cancer
Research UK, 44, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3LY, UK [2] University College
London Cancer Institute and Hospitals, Huntley Street, London WC1E 6DD, UK.
(25)1] Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Centre for
Human Genetics, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford,
Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK [2] NIHR Comprehensive Biomedical Research
Centre, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.

Papillary renal cell carcinoma (pRCC) is an important subtype of kidney cancer
with a problematic pathological classification and highly variable clinical
behaviour. Here we sequence the genomes or exomes of 31 pRCCs, and in four
tumours, multi-region sequencing is undertaken. We identify BAP1, SETD2, ARID2
and Nrf2 pathway genes (KEAP1, NHE2L2 and CUL3) as probable drivers, together
with at least eight other possible drivers. However, only ~10% of tumours harbour
detectable pathogenic changes in any one driver gene, and where present, the
mutations are often predicted to be present within cancer sub-clones. We
specifically detect parallel evolution of multiple SETD2 mutations within
different sub-regions of the same tumour. By contrast, large copy number gains of
chromosomes 7, 12, 16 and 17 are usually early, monoclonal changes in pRCC
evolution. The predominance of large copy number variants as the major drivers
for pRCC highlights an unusual mode of tumorigenesis that may challenge precision
medicine approaches.

PMCID: PMC4383019
PMID: 25790038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Ther. 2015 Jun;23(6):1034-43. doi: 10.1038/mt.2015.31. Epub 2015 Mar 6.

Long Noncoding RNA Arid2-IR Is a Novel Therapeutic Target for Renal Inflammation.

Zhou Q(1), Huang XR(2), Yu J(1), Yu X(3), Lan HY(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medicine & Therapeutics, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health
Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China [2] Department of
Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou,
China. (2)1] Department of Medicine & Therapeutics, Li Ka Shing Institute of
Health Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China [2]
Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,
China. (3)Department of Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

Increasing evidence shows that microRNAs play an important role in kidney
disease. However, functions of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) in kidney diseases
remain undefined. We have previously shown that TGF-ß1 plays a diverse role in
renal inflammation and fibrosis and Smad3 is a key mediator in this process. In
this study, we used RNA-sequencing to identify lncRNAs related to renal
inflammation and fibrosis in obstructive nephropathy induced in Smad3 wild-type
and knockout mice. We found that Arid2-IR was a Smad3-associated lncRNA as a
Smad3 binding site was found in the promoter region of Arid2-IR and deletion of
Smad3 abolished upregulation of Arid2-IR in the diseased kidney. In vitro
knockdown of Arid2-IR from tubular epithelial cells produced no effect on
TGF-ß-induced Smad3 signaling and fibrosis but inhibited
interleukin-1ß-stimulated NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent inflammatory response. In contrast,
overexpression of Arid2-IR promoted interleukin-1ß-induced NF-<U+03BA>B signaling and
inflammatory cytokine expression without alteration of TGF-ß1-induced fibrotic
response. Furthermore, treatment of obstructed kidney with Arid2-IR shRNA blunted
NF-<U+03BA>B-driven renal inflammation without effect on TGF-ß/Smad3-mediated renal
fibrosis. Thus, Arid2-IR is a novel lncRNA that functions to promote
NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent renal inflammation. Blockade of Arid2-IR may represent a novel
and specific therapy for renal inflammatory disease.

PMID: 25743111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Hum Pathol. 2015 Apr;46(4):583-92. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.01.001. Epub 2015 
Jan 14.

AT-rich interactive domain 2, p110a, p53, and ß-catenin protein expression in
hepatocellular carcinoma and clinicopathologic implications.

You J(1), Yang H(2), Lai Y(2), Simon L(3), Au J(4), Burkart AL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA
19107, USA. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell
Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. (4)Department 
of Gastroenterology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. Electronic address:
ashlie.burkart@gmail.com.

Erratum in
    Hum Pathol. 2015 Jul;46(7):1068-77.

AT-rich interactive domain 2 (ARID2), catenin (cadherin-associated protein), beta
1, 88kDa (ß-catenin), tumor protein 53 (p53), and
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase, catalytic subunit alpha (p110a)
mutations are implicated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC); and previous work has
contributed to thorough molecular characterization of these events. However,
studies that assess the impact of these mutations on downstream protein
expression, especially those that evaluate all 4 cancer markers simultaneously,
are relatively lacking. Hence, the present study uses immunohistochemistry to
assess protein expression patterns of ARID2, ß-catenin, p53, and p110a in HCCs
and adjacent nonneoplastic cirrhotic tissues from 58 explanted livers. Notably,
this study is the first to our knowledge to investigate ARID2 protein expression 
in the liver. The frequency of ARID2 mutations detected using our
immunohistochemistry method was similar to that reported in previous molecular
studies. Furthermore, we found that loss of ARID2 protein expression may be
associated with recurrence, although further studies must be done to validate
these findings in a larger population. We found that expression patterns of the 4
cancer markers were independent of each other, suggesting separate pathways of
hepatocarcinogenesis. We also did not observe an association between viral
etiology and protein expression. Consistent with previous studies, overexpression
of p53 correlated with poor differentiation. Lastly, 17.5% of HCCs paradoxically 
had diffuse loss of the oncoprotein p110a compared with strong expression in
background cirrhotic liver. The exact mechanism is unclear, but enigmatic loss of
oncoprotein function has been described in other carcinomas and could potentially
have significant implications for the use of targeted mechanistic target of
rapamycin (serine/threonine kinase) drug therapies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25701229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Nat Commun. 2015 Jan 30;6:6120. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7120.

Whole-genome mutational landscape of liver cancers displaying biliary phenotype
reveals hepatitis impact and molecular diversity.

Fujimoto A(1), Furuta M(2), Shiraishi Y(3), Gotoh K(4), Kawakami Y(5), Arihiro
K(6), Nakamura T(7), Ueno M(8), Ariizumi S(9), Nguyen HH(10), Shigemizu D(11),
Abe T(11), Boroevich KA(11), Nakano K(2), Sasaki A(2), Kitada R(2), Maejima K(2),
Yamamoto Y(2), Tanaka H(12), Shibuya T(12), Shibata T(13), Ojima H(14), Shimada
K(15), Hayami S(8), Shigekawa Y(8), Aikata H(5), Ohdan H(16), Marubashi S(4),
Yamada T(4), Kubo M(17), Hirano S(7), Ishikawa O(4), Yamamoto M(9), Yamaue H(8), 
Chayama K(18), Miyano S(19), Tsunoda T(11), Nakagawa H(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Laboratory for Genome Sequencing Analysis, RIKEN Center for Integrative
Medical Sciences, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan [2] Laboratory for Medical Science
Mathematics, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama 230-0045,
Japan. (2)Laboratory for Genome Sequencing Analysis, RIKEN Center for Integrative
Medical Sciences, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. (3)Laboratory of DNA Information
Analysis, Human Genome Center, The Institute of Medical Science, The University
of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. (4)Department of Surgery, Osaka Medical Center
for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka 537-8511, Japan. (5)Department of
Medicine &Molecular Science, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, Hiroshima
734-8551, Japan. (6)Department of Anatomical Pathology, Hiroshima University
School of Medicine, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan. (7)Department of
Gastroenterological Surgery II, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. (8)Second Department of Surgery, Wakayama Medical
University, Wakayama 641-8510, Japan. (9)Department of Gastroenterological
Surgery, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan. (10)1]
Laboratory for Genome Sequencing Analysis, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan [2] Genome Analysis Laboratory, Institute of
Genome Research, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology, Hanoi Vietnam.
(11)Laboratory for Medical Science Mathematics, RIKEN Center for Integrative
Medical Sciences, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (12)Laboratory of Sequence Analysis, 
Human Genome Center, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. (13)Division of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Center,
Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. (14)Division of Molecular Pathology, National
Cancer Center, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. (15)Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic
Surgery Division, National Cancer Center, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.
(16)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Hiroshima University School of
Medicine, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan. (17)Laboratory for Genotyping Development,
RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (18)1]
Department of Medicine &Molecular Science, Hiroshima University School of
Medicine, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan [2] Laboratory for Digestive Diseases, RIKEN 
Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan. (19)1]
Laboratory of DNA Information Analysis, Human Genome Center, The Institute of
Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan [2] Laboratory of
Sequence Analysis, Human Genome Center, The Institute of Medical Science, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and combined hepatocellular cholangiocarcinoma
show varying degrees of biliary epithelial differentiation, which can be defined 
as liver cancer displaying biliary phenotype (LCB). LCB is second in the
incidence for liver cancers with and without chronic hepatitis background and
more aggressive than hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To gain insight into its
molecular alterations, we performed whole-genome sequencing analysis on 30 LCBs. 
Here we show, the genome-wide substitution patterns of LCBs developed in chronic 
hepatitis livers overlapped with those of 60 HCCs, whereas those of
hepatitis-negative LCBs diverged. The subsequent validation study on 68 LCBs
identified recurrent mutations in TERT promoter, chromatin regulators (BAP1,
PBRM1 and ARID2), a synapse organization gene (PCLO), IDH genes and KRAS. The
frequencies of KRAS and IDHs mutations, which are associated with poor
disease-free survival, were significantly higher in hepatitis-negative LCBs. This
study reveals the strong impact of chronic hepatitis on the mutational landscape 
in liver cancer and the genetic diversity among LCBs.

PMID: 25636086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 19;9(12):e114263. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114263.
eCollection 2014.

Integrated analysis of whole genome and transcriptome sequencing reveals diverse 
transcriptomic aberrations driven by somatic genomic changes in liver cancers.

Shiraishi Y(1), Fujimoto A(2), Furuta M(3), Tanaka H(4), Chiba K(1), Boroevich
KA(5), Abe T(5), Kawakami Y(6), Ueno M(7), Gotoh K(8), Ariizumi S(9), Shibuya
T(4), Nakano K(3), Sasaki A(3), Maejima K(3), Kitada R(3), Hayami S(7), Shigekawa
Y(7), Marubashi S(8), Yamada T(8), Kubo M(10), Ishikawa O(8), Aikata H(6),
Arihiro K(11), Ohdan H(12), Yamamoto M(9), Yamaue H(7), Chayama K(6), Tsunoda
T(5), Miyano S(13), Nakagawa H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of DNA Information Analysis, Human Genome Center, The Institute of 
Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 108-8639, Japan. (2)Laboratory
for Genome Sequencing Analysis, RIEKN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences,
Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan; Laboratory for Medical Science Mathematics, RIEKN
Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan. (3)Laboratory
for Genome Sequencing Analysis, RIEKN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences,
Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan. (4)Laboratory of Sequence Analysis, Human Genome
Center, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
108-8639, Japan. (5)Laboratory for Medical Science Mathematics, RIEKN Center for 
Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan. (6)Department of
Medicine & Molecular Science, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, Hiroshima,
734-8551, Japan. (7)Second Department of Surgery, Wakayama Medical University,
Wakayama, 641-8510, Japan. (8)Department of Surgery, Osaka Medical Center for
Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka, 537-8511, Japan. (9)Department of
Surgery, Institute of Gastroenterology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, 
162-8666, Japan. (10)Laboratory for Genotyping Development, RIEKN Center for
Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan. (11)Department of
Anatomical Pathology, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, Hiroshima,
734-8551, Japan. (12)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Hiroshima
University School of Medicine, Hiroshima, 734-8551, Japan. (13)Laboratory of DNA 
Information Analysis, Human Genome Center, The Institute of Medical Science, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 108-8639, Japan; Laboratory of Sequence Analysis,
Human Genome Center, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, 108-8639, Japan.

Recent studies applying high-throughput sequencing technologies have identified
several recurrently mutated genes and pathways in multiple cancer genomes.
However, transcriptional consequences from these genomic alterations in cancer
genome remain unclear. In this study, we performed integrated and comparative
analyses of whole genomes and transcriptomes of 22 hepatitis B virus
(HBV)-related hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) and their matched controls.
Comparison of whole genome sequence (WGS) and RNA-Seq revealed much evidence that
various types of genomic mutations triggered diverse transcriptional changes. Not
only splice-site mutations, but also silent mutations in coding regions, deep
intronic mutations and structural changes caused splicing aberrations. HBV
integrations generated diverse patterns of virus-human fusion transcripts
depending on affected gene, such as TERT, CDK15, FN1 and MLL4. Structural
variations could drive over-expression of genes such as WNT ligands, with/without
creating gene fusions. Furthermore, by taking account of genomic mutations
causing transcriptional aberrations, we could improve the sensitivity of
deleterious mutation detection in known cancer driver genes (TP53, AXIN1, ARID2, 
RPS6KA3), and identified recurrent disruptions in putative cancer driver genes
such as HNF4A, CPS1, TSC1 and THRAP3 in HCCs. These findings indicate genomic
alterations in cancer genome have diverse transcriptomic effects, and integrated 
analysis of WGS and RNA-Seq can facilitate the interpretation of a large number
of genomic alterations detected in cancer genome.

PMCID: PMC4272259
PMID: 25526364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 11;9(12):e114912. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114912.
eCollection 2014.

A peculiar mutation spectrum emerging from young peruvian patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Marchio A(1), Bertani S(2), Rojas Rojas T(3), Doimi F(4), Terris B(5), Deharo
E(6), Dejean A(1), Ruiz E(7), Pineau P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité Organisation Nucléaire et Oncogenèse, Paris, France;
INSERM, U993, Paris, France. (2)Université de Toulouse, UPS, UMR152 PHARMADEV,
Université Toulouse 3, Toulouse, France; Institut de Recherche pour le
Développement, UMR152 PHARMADEV, Lima, Peru. (3)Aix-Marseille Université, UMR912 
SESSTIM INSERM-IRD-AMU, Centre d'Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique des Armées,
Marseille, France. (4)Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Neoplásicas,
Departamento de Patología, Banco de Tejidos Tumorales, Lima, Peru. (5)Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Cochin, Service d'Anatomie et Cytologie
Pathologiques, Paris, France. (6)Université de Toulouse, UPS, UMR152 PHARMADEV,
Université Toulouse 3, Toulouse, France; Institut de Recherche pour le
Développement, UMR152 PHARMADEV, Vientiane, Laos. (7)Instituto Nacional de
Enfermedades Neoplásicas, Departamento de Cirugía en Abdomen, Lima, Peru.

Hepatocellular carcinoma usually afflicts individuals in their later years
following longstanding liver disease. In Peru, hepatocellular carcinoma exists in
a unique clinical presentation, which affects patients around age 25 with a
normal, healthy liver. In order to deepen our understanding of the molecular
processes ongoing in Peruvian liver tumors, mutation spectrum analysis was
carried out on hepatocellular carcinomas from 80 Peruvian patients. Sequencing
analysis focused on nine genes typically altered during liver carcinogenesis,
i.e. ARID2, AXIN1, BRAF, CTNNB1, NFE2L2, H/K/N-RAS, and TP53. We also assessed
the transcription level of factors involved in the control of the
alpha-fetoprotein expression and the Hippo signaling pathway that controls
contact inhibition in metazoans. The mutation spectrum of Peruvian patients was
unique with a major class of alterations represented by Insertions/Deletions.
There were no changes at hepatocellular carcinoma-associated mutation hotspots in
more than half of the specimens analyzed. Furthermore, our findings support the
theory of a consistent collapse in the Hippo axis, as well as an expression of
the stemness factor NANOG in high alpha-fetoprotein-expressing hepatocellular
carcinomas. These results confirm the specificity of Peruvian hepatocellular
carcinoma at the molecular genetic level. The present study emphasizes the
necessity to widen cancer research to include historically neglected patients
from South America, and more broadly the Global South, where cancer genetics and 
tumor presentation are divergent from canonical neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC4263719
PMID: 25502816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Dev Biol. 2015 Feb 15;398(2):153-62. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.10.014. Epub 2014 
Oct 28.

Comprehensive single cell-resolution analysis of the role of chromatin regulators
in early C. elegans embryogenesis.

Krüger AV(1), Jelier R(1), Dzyubachyk O(2), Zimmerman T(3), Meijering E(2),
Lehner B(4).

Author information: 
(1)EMBL/CRG Systems Biology Research Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG),
Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain; University Pompeu Fabra (UPF), 08003
Barcelona, Spain. (2)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Departments of Medical
Informatics and Radiology, Erasmus MC - University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (3)Advanced Light Microscopy Facility, Centre for
Genomic Regulation (CRG), Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. (4)EMBL/CRG
Systems Biology Research Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Dr. Aiguader 
88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain; University Pompeu Fabra (UPF), 08003 Barcelona,
Spain; Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluis
Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: ben.lehner@crg.eu.

Chromatin regulators are widely expressed proteins with diverse roles in gene
expression, nuclear organization, cell cycle regulation, pluripotency, physiology
and development, and are frequently mutated in human diseases such as cancer.
Their inhibition often results in pleiotropic effects that are difficult to study
using conventional approaches. We have developed a semi-automated nuclear
tracking algorithm to quantify the divisions, movements and positions of all
nuclei during the early development of Caenorhabditis elegans and have used it to
systematically study the effects of inhibiting chromatin regulators. The
resulting high dimensional datasets revealed that inhibition of multiple
regulators, including F55A3.3 (encoding FACT subunit SUPT16H), lin-53 (RBBP4/7), 
rba-1 (RBBP4/7), set-16 (MLL2/3), hda-1 (HDAC1/2), swsn-7 (ARID2), and let-526
(ARID1A/1B) affected cell cycle progression and caused chromosome segregation
defects. In contrast, inhibition of cir-1 (CIR1) accelerated cell division timing
in specific cells of the AB lineage. The inhibition of RNA polymerase II also
accelerated these division timings, suggesting that normal gene expression is
required to delay cell cycle progression in multiple lineages in the early
embryo. Quantitative analyses of the dataset suggested the existence of at least 
two functionally distinct SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex activities in the 
early embryo, and identified a redundant requirement for the egl-27 and lin-40
MTA orthologs in the development of endoderm and mesoderm lineages. Moreover, our
dataset also revealed a characteristic rearrangement of chromatin to the nuclear 
periphery upon the inhibition of multiple general regulators of gene expression. 
Our systematic, comprehensive and quantitative datasets illustrate the power of
single cell-resolution quantitative tracking and high dimensional phenotyping to 
investigate gene function. Furthermore, the results provide an overview of the
functions of essential chromatin regulators during the early development of an
animal.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 13;9(11):e111153. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111153.
eCollection 2014.

Clonal architectures and driver mutations in metastatic melanomas.

Ding L(1), Kim M(2), Kanchi KL(3), Dees ND(3), Lu C(3), Griffith M(4),
Fenstermacher D(2), Sung H(2), Miller CA(3), Goetz B(5), Wendl MC(3), Griffith
O(6), Cornelius LA(7), Linette GP(8), McMichael JF(3), Sondak VK(2), Fields
RC(9), Ley TJ(10), Mulé JJ(2), Wilson RK(11), Weber JS(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Genome Institute, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri,
United States of America; Department of Medicine, Washington University in St.
Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America; Department of Genetics,
Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of
America; Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis,
Missouri, United States of America. (2)Donald A. Adam Comprehensive Melanoma
Research Center, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida, United States of America.
(3)The Genome Institute, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri,
United States of America. (4)The Genome Institute, Washington University in St.
Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America; Department of Genetics,
Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of
America. (5)Department of Surgery, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis,
Missouri, United States of America. (6)The Genome Institute, Washington
University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America;
Department of Medicine, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, 
United States of America. (7)Department of Medicine, Washington University in St.
Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America; Department of Surgery,
Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of
America. (8)Department of Medicine, Washington University in St. Louis, St.
Louis, Missouri, United States of America; Siteman Cancer Center, Washington
University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(9)Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis,
Missouri, United States of America; Department of Surgery, Washington University 
in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America. (10)The Genome
Institute, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States
of America; Department of Medicine, Washington University in St. Louis, St.
Louis, Missouri, United States of America; Siteman Cancer Center, Washington
University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America. (11)The
Genome Institute, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United
States of America; Department of Genetics, Washington University in St. Louis,
St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America; Siteman Cancer Center, Washington 
University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

To reveal the clonal architecture of melanoma and associated driver mutations,
whole genome sequencing (WGS) and targeted extension sequencing were used to
characterize 124 melanoma cases. Significantly mutated gene analysis using 13 WGS
cases and 15 additional paired extension cases identified known melanoma genes
such as BRAF, NRAS, and CDKN2A, as well as a novel gene EPHA3, previously
implicated in other cancer types. Extension studies using tumors from another 96 
patients discovered a large number of truncation mutations in tumor suppressors
(TP53 and RB1), protein phosphatases (e.g., PTEN, PTPRB, PTPRD, and PTPRT), as
well as chromatin remodeling genes (e.g., ASXL3, MLL2, and ARID2). Deep
sequencing of mutations revealed subclones in the majority of metastatic tumors
from 13 WGS cases. Validated mutations from 12 out of 13 WGS patients exhibited a
predominant UV signature characterized by a high frequency of C->T transitions
occurring at the 3' base of dipyrimidine sequences while one patient (MEL9) with 
a hypermutator phenotype lacked this signature. Strikingly, a subclonal mutation 
signature analysis revealed that the founding clone in MEL9 exhibited UV
signature but the secondary clone did not, suggesting different mutational
mechanisms for two clonal populations from the same tumor. Further analysis of
four metastases from different geographic locations in 2 melanoma cases revealed 
phylogenetic relationships and highlighted the genetic alterations responsible
for differential drug resistance among metastatic tumors. Our study suggests that
clonal evaluation is crucial for understanding tumor etiology and drug resistance
in melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4230926
PMID: 25393105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Oncol Rep. 2015 Jan;33(1):283-91. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3584. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

Loss of function of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling genes leads to genome
instability of human lung cancer.

Huang HT(1), Chen SM(1), Pan LB(1), Yao J(1), Ma HT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, P.R. China.

SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes are frequently mutated in a variety of
human cancers. We investigated the mutation incidence and the role of mSWI/SNF
(BAF) complexes in human lung cancer. In the present study, we analyzed somatic
mutations of BAF complexes and other driver mutated genes of lung carcinoma
deposited in the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) database. BAF 
complexes were mutated in 282 of 803 (35.12%) lung carcinoma samples analyzed,
ranking second to TP53. Significantly, BAF-mutated samples exhibited more genomic
mutations than BAF wild-type ones. Moreover, a significant positive correlation
existed between the BAF mutations and overall genomic mutations in these lung
carcinoma samples (P<0.001, Pearson's correlation analysis). Specifically, the
mutant-typing of 6 BAF genes, SMARCA4, ARID2, ARID1B, BCL11A, BCL11B and BRD9 was
associated with more overall mutations in the lung carcinoma samples. A mutation 
reporter system was developed by means of the establishment of stable cell
sublines with slippage-luciferase transcript in a lung adenocarcinoma cell line, 
Calu-3. SMARCA4, the most frequently mutated BAF gene in lung cancer, was stably 
knocked down by pSUPER constructs carrying short hairpin RNA (shRNA). Mutation
ratios determined from the mutation reporters of Calu-3 cells were significantly 
increased upon stable SMARCA4 knockdown. We demonstrated that genetic mutations
of BAF complexes lead to genome instability of lung carcinoma. Therefore, BAF
complexes play an important role in maintaining genome stability in human lung
cancer.

PMID: 25370573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 9;9(10):e109493. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109493.
eCollection 2014.

BAF200 is required for heart morphogenesis and coronary artery development.

He L(1), Tian X(1), Zhang H(1), Hu T(1), Huang X(1), Zhang L(1), Wang Z(2), Zhou 
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Graduate School of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Cardiovascular Research Center, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

ATP-dependent SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes utilize ATP hydrolysis to
non-covalently change nucleosome-DNA interactions and are essential in stem cell 
development, organogenesis, and tumorigenesis. Biochemical studies show that
SWI/SNF in mammalian cells can be divided into two subcomplexes BAF and PBAF
based on the subunit composition. ARID2 or BAF200 has been defined as an
intrinsic subunit of PBAF complex. However, the function of BAF200 in vivo is not
clear. To dissect the possible role of BAF200 in regulating embryogenesis and
organ development, we generated BAF200 mutant mice and found they were embryonic 
lethal. BAF200 mutant embryos exhibited multiple cardiac defects including thin
myocardium, ventricular septum defect, common atrioventricular valve, and double 
outlet right ventricle around E14.5. Moreover, we also detected reduced
intramyocardial coronary arteries in BAF200 mutants, suggesting that BAF200 is
required for proper migration and differentiation of subepicardial venous cells
into arterial endothelial cells. Our work revealed that PBAF complex plays a
critical role in heart morphogenesis and coronary artery angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4192121
PMID: 25299188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Genome Biol. 2014 Aug 26;15(8):436. doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0436-9.

Diverse modes of genomic alteration in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Jhunjhunwala S, Jiang Z, Stawiski EW, Gnad F, Liu J, Mayba O, Du P, Diao J,
Johnson S, Wong KF, Gao Z, Li Y, Wu TD, Kapadia SB, Modrusan Z, French DM, Luk
JM, Seshagiri S, Zhang Z.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a heterogeneous disease with high
mortality rate. Recent genomic studies have identified TP53, AXIN1, and CTNNB1 as
the most frequently mutated genes. Lower frequency mutations have been reported
in ARID1A, ARID2 and JAK1. In addition, hepatitis B virus (HBV) integrations into
the human genome have been associated with HCC.
RESULTS: Here, we deep-sequence 42 HCC patients with a combination of whole
genome, exome and transcriptome sequencing to identify the mutational landscape
of HCC using a reasonably large discovery cohort. We find frequent mutations in
TP53, CTNNB1 and AXIN1, and rare but likely functional mutations in BAP1 and
IDH1. Besides frequent hepatitis B virus integrations at TERT, we identify
translocations at the boundaries of TERT. A novel deletion is identified in
CTNNB1 in a region that is heavily mutated in multiple cancers. We also find
multiple high-allelic frequency mutations in the extracellular matrix protein
LAMA2. Lower expression levels of LAMA2 correlate with a proliferative signature,
and predict poor survival and higher chance of cancer recurrence in HCC patients,
suggesting an important role of the extracellular matrix and cell adhesion in
tumor progression of a subgroup of HCC patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The heterogeneous disease of HCC features diverse modes of genomic
alteration. In addition to common point mutations, structural variations and
methylation changes, there are several virus-associated changes, including gene
disruption or activation, formation of chimeric viral-human transcripts, and DNA 
copy number changes. Such a multitude of genomic events likely contributes to the
heterogeneous nature of HCC.

PMCID: PMC4189592
PMID: 25159915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Int J Cancer. 2015 Feb 1;136(3):560-71. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29015. Epub 2014 Jun 19.

Biallelic germline and somatic mutations in malignant mesothelioma: multiple
mutations in transcription regulators including mSWI/SNF genes.

Yoshikawa Y(1), Sato A, Tsujimura T, Otsuki T, Fukuoka K, Hasegawa S, Nakano T,
Hashimoto-Tamaoki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan.

We detected low levels of acetylation for histone H3 tail lysines in malignant
mesothelioma (MM) cell lines resistant to histone deacetylase inhibitors. To
identify the possible genetic causes related to the low histone acetylation
levels, whole-exome sequencing was conducted with MM cell lines established from 
eight patients. A mono-allelic variant of BRD1 was common to two MM cell lines
with very low acetylation levels. We identified 318 homozygous protein-damaging
variants/mutations (18-78 variants/mutations per patient); annotation analysis
showed enrichment of the molecules associated with mammalian SWI/SNF (mSWI/SNF)
chromatin remodeling complexes and co-activators that facilitate initiation of
transcription. In seven of the patients, we detected a combination of variants in
histone modifiers or transcription factors/co-factors, in addition to variants in
mSWI/SNF. Direct sequencing showed that homozygous mutations in SMARCA4, PBRM1
and ARID2 were somatic. In one patient, homozygous germline variants were
observed for SMARCC1 and SETD2 in chr3p22.1-3p14.2. These exhibited extended
germline homozygosity and were in regions containing somatic mutations, leading
to a loss of BAP1 and PBRM1 expression in MM cell line. Most protein-damaging
variants were heterozygous in normal tissues. Heterozygous germline variants were
often converted into hemizygous variants by mono-allelic deletion, and were
rarely homozygous because of acquired uniparental disomy. Our findings imply that
MM might develop through the somatic inactivation of mSWI/SNF complex subunits
and/or histone modifiers, including BAP1, in subjects that have rare germline
variants of these transcription regulators and/or transcription
factors/co-factors, and in regions prone to mono-allelic deletion during
oncogenesis.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24916674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Sep;54(9):761-8. doi: 10.1002/mc.22140. Epub 2014 Feb 28.

Genetic variants in the SWI/SNF complex and smoking collaborate to modify the
risk of pancreatic cancer in a Chinese population.

Zhu B(1), Tian J(2), Zhong R(1), Tian Y(2), Chen W(1), Qian J(3), Zou L(1), Xiao 
M(2), Shen N(1), Yang H(3), Lou J(1), Qiu Q(2), Ke J(1), Lu X(3), Song W(2), Li
H(2), Liu L(4), Wang L(2), Miao X(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environment Health (Incubation), MOE (Ministry of
Education) Key Laboratory of Environment & Health, Ministry of Environmental
Protection Key Laboratory of Environment and Health (Wuhan), and Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (2)Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences; School of Basic Medicine Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing, China. (3)Division of Gastroenterology, Peking Union Medical
College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences; Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing, China. (4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and
Guangdong Key Lab of Molecular Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Guangdong
Pharmaceutical University, Guangzhou, China.

Pancreatic cancer (PC) is an aggressive malignancy with extremely low 5-year
survival rate (<5%). SWItch/Sucrose Non Fermentable (SWI/SNF) complex is a core
factor for chromatin-remodeling that utilize energy of ATP hydrolysis to mobilize
nucleosomes, and modulate gene transcription. Recent studies have identified
recurrent mutations in major components of SWI/SNF in a variety of human cancers,
including PC. We conducted a two-stage case-control study to investigate the
associations between 14 common variants in 6 genes (SMARCA4, SMCRB1, PBRM1, BRD7,
ARID1, and ARID2) encoding major components of the SWI/SNF complex and the risk
of PC. Three promising variants, rs11644043, rs11085754, and rs2073389 in the
discovery stage comprising 310 cases and 457 controls were further genotyped in
the validation stage containing 429 cases and 585 controls. rs11644043 in BRD7
and rs11085754 in SMARCA4 showed consistent significant association with
increased risk of PC in both stages, with odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
interval (CI) of 2.04 (1.17-3.56) and 1.64 (1.16-2.33) in stage one, and 1.97
(1.24-3.14) and 1.45 (1.04-2.02) in stage two, respectively in a recessive model.
Furthermore, the accumulative effects of rs11644043, rs11085754, and rs2073389 in
SMARCB1 were observed (P for trend <0.0001). Intriguingly, gene-environmental
interactions analysis consistently revealed the potential interactions of
rs2073389 (P(add) <U+2009>-<U+2009>FDR<U+2009>=<U+2009>6.00<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-4), P(mul) <U+2009>-<U+2009>FDR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.50<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-2)) and
rs11085754 (P(add) <U+2009>-<U+2009>FDR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03) collaborating with smoking to modify the risk
of PC. In conclusion, the current study provides evidence that genetic variants
of SWI/SNF may contribute to the susceptibility of PC in the Chinese population.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24585446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Am J Pathol. 2014 Mar;184(3):584-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.11.023. Epub 2014
Jan 3.

Primary urethral clear-cell adenocarcinoma: comprehensive analysis by surgical
pathology, cytopathology, and next-generation sequencing.

Mehra R(1), Vats P(2), Kalyana-Sundaram S(2), Udager AM(3), Roh M(3), Alva A(4), 
Pan J(5), Lonigro RJ(6), Siddiqui J(7), Weizer A(8), Lee C(8), Cao X(7), Wu
YM(7), Robinson DR(7), Dhanasekaran SM(7), Chinnaiyan AM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor,
Michigan; Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan Health System, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan; Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Ann Arbor,
Michigan. Electronic address: mrohit@med.umich.edu. (2)Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Michigan Center for
Translational Pathology, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (3)Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (4)Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, Michigan;
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor,
Michigan. (5)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Ann Arbor, Michigan;
Department of Urology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou, China. (6)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan Health
System, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Ann
Arbor, Michigan. (7)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Ann Arbor,
Michigan. (8)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan Health System,
Ann Arbor, Michigan; Department of Urology, University of Michigan Health System,
Ann Arbor, Michigan. (9)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Health
System, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan 
Health System, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan; Department of Urology, University of Michigan Health System,
Ann Arbor, Michigan; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Primary clear-cell adenocarcinoma of the urethra, a rare tumor that
histomorphologically resembles clear-cell carcinoma of the female genital tract, 
occurs predominantly in women and is associated with a relatively poor prognosis.
The histogenesis of this rare urethral neoplasm has not been completely resolved,
but it is thought to arise from either müllerian rests or metaplastic urothelium.
Herein, we present comprehensive surgical pathological and cytopathological
findings from a patient with primary urethral clear-cell adenocarcinoma and
describe next-generation sequencing results for this patient's unique tumor-the
first such reported characterization of molecular aberrations in urethral
clear-cell adenocarcinoma at the transcriptomic and genomic levels. Transcriptome
analysis revealed novel gene fusion candidates, including ANKRD28-FNDC3B.
Whole-exome analysis demonstrated focal copy number loss at the SMAD4 and ARID2
loci and 38 somatic mutations, including a truncating mutation in ATM and a novel
nonsynonymous mutation in ALK.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3936309
PMID: 24389164  [PubMed - in process]


28. Int J Cancer. 2014 Aug 1;135(3):611-23. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28705. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Exome sequencing reveals frequent inactivating mutations in ARID1A, ARID1B, ARID2
and ARID4A in microsatellite unstable colorectal cancer.

Cajuso T(1), Hänninen UA, Kondelin J, Gylfe AE, Tanskanen T, Katainen R, Pitkänen
E, Ristolainen H, Kaasinen E, Taipale M, Taipale J, Böhm J, Renkonen-Sinisalo L, 
Mecklin JP, Järvinen H, Tuupanen S, Kilpivaara O, Vahteristo P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics Genome-Scale Biology Research Program,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

ARID1A has been identified as a novel tumor suppressor gene in ovarian cancer and
subsequently in various other tumor types. ARID1A belongs to the ARID domain
containing gene family, which comprises of 15 genes involved, for example, in
transcriptional regulation, proliferation and chromatin remodeling. In this
study, we used exome sequencing data to analyze the mutation frequency of all the
ARID domain containing genes in 25 microsatellite unstable (MSI) colorectal
cancers (CRCs) as a first systematic effort to characterize the mutation pattern 
of the whole ARID gene family. Genes which fulfilled the selection criteria in
this discovery set (mutations in at least 4/25 [16%] samples, including at least 
one nonsense or splice site mutation) were chosen for further analysis in an
independent validation set of 21 MSI CRCs. We found that in addition to ARID1A,
which was mutated in 39% of the tumors (18/46), also ARID1B (13%, 6/46), ARID2
(13%, 6/46) and ARID4A (20%, 9/46) were frequently mutated. In all these genes,
the mutations were distributed along the entire length of the gene, thus
distinguishing them from typical MSI target genes previously described. Our
results indicate that in addition to ARID1A, other members of the ARID gene
family may play a role in MSI CRC.

© 2013 UICC.

PMID: 24382590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Dec 21;19(47):8873-9. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i47.8873.

Target genes discovery through copy number alteration analysis in human
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Gu DL(1), Chen YH(1), Shih JH(1), Lin CH(1), Jou YS(1), Chen CF(1).

Author information: 
(1)De-Leung Gu, Yen-Hsieh Chen, Jou-Ho Shih, Yuh-Shan Jou, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan.

High-throughput short-read sequencing of exomes and whole cancer genomes in
multiple human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cohorts confirmed previously
identified frequently mutated somatic genes, such as TP53, CTNNB1 and AXIN1, and 
identified several novel genes with moderate mutation frequencies, including
ARID1A, ARID2, MLL, MLL2, MLL3, MLL4, IRF2, ATM, CDKN2A, FGF19, PIK3CA, RPS6KA3, 
JAK1, KEAP1, NFE2L2, C16orf62, LEPR, RAC2, and IL6ST. Functional classification
of these mutated genes suggested that alterations in pathways participating in
chromatin remodeling, Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, JAK/STAT signaling, and oxidative 
stress play critical roles in HCC tumorigenesis. Nevertheless, because there are 
few druggable genes used in HCC therapy, the identification of new therapeutic
targets through integrated genomic approaches remains an important task. Because 
a large amount of HCC genomic data genotyped by high density single nucleotide
polymorphism arrays is deposited in the public domain, copy number alteration
(CNA) analyses of these arrays is a cost-effective way to reveal target genes
through profiling of recurrent and overlapping amplicons, homozygous deletions
and potentially unbalanced chromosomal translocations accumulated during HCC
progression. Moreover, integration of CNAs with other high-throughput genomic
data, such as aberrantly coding transcriptomes and non-coding gene expression in 
human HCC tissues and rodent HCC models, provides lines of evidence that can be
used to facilitate the identification of novel HCC target genes with the
potential of improving the survival of HCC patients.

PMCID: PMC3870538
PMID: 24379610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2873. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3873.

Mutational landscape of gingivo-buccal oral squamous cell carcinoma reveals new
recurrently-mutated genes and molecular subgroups.

India Project Team of the International Cancer Genome Consortium(1).

Collaborators: Maitra A, Biswas NK, Amin K, Kowtal P, Kumar S, Das S, Sarin R,
Majumder PP, Bagchi I, Bairagya BB, Basu A, Bhan MK, Chaturvedi P, Das D, D'Cruz 
A, Dhar R, Dutta D, Ganguli D, Gera P, Gupta T, Mahapatra S, Mujawar MH,
Mukherjee S, Nair S, Nikam S, Nobre M, Patil A, Patra S, Rama-Gowtham M, Rao TS, 
Roy B, Roychowdhury B, Sarkar D, Sarkar S, Sarkar-Roy N, Sutradhar D.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Netaji Subhas Sanatorium (2nd
Floor), Kalyani 741251, India.

Gingivo-buccal oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC-GB), an anatomical and clinical
subtype of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), is prevalent in regions
where tobacco-chewing is common. Exome sequencing (n=50) and recurrence testing
(n=60) reveals that some significantly and frequently altered genes are specific 
to OSCC-GB (USP9X, MLL4, ARID2, UNC13C and TRPM3), while some others are shared
with HNSCC (for example, TP53, FAT1, CASP8, HRAS and NOTCH1). We also find new
genes with recurrent amplifications (for example, DROSHA, YAP1) or homozygous
deletions (for example, DDX3X) in OSCC-GB. We find a high proportion of C>G
transversions among tobacco users with high numbers of mutations. Many pathways
that are enriched for genomic alterations are specific to OSCC-GB. Our work
reveals molecular subtypes with distinctive mutational profiles such as patients 
predominantly harbouring mutations in CASP8 with or without mutations in FAT1.
Mean duration of disease-free survival is significantly elevated in some
molecular subgroups. These findings open new avenues for biological
characterization and exploration of therapies.

PMCID: PMC3863896
PMID: 24292195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2013 Sep;43(9):849-55. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyt101. Epub 2013 Jul 
30.

Inactivating mutations in SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling genes in human cancer.

Oike T(1), Ogiwara H, Nakano T, Yokota J, Kohno T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genome Biology, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1,
Tsukiji 5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Chromosomal deoxyribonucleic acid and histone proteins form a highly condensed
structure known as chromatin. Chromatin remodeling proteins regulate
deoxyribonucleic acid transcription, synthesis and repair by changing nucleosomal
composition in an adenosine triphosphate-dependent manner and mediate access of
deoxyribonucleic acid-binding proteins to deoxyribonucleic acid double strands.
Recently, large-scale genome sequencing studies identified somatic mutations in
genes encoding chromatin remodeling proteins in a variety of human solid cancers.
Notably, inactivating mutations in genes encoding the catalytic and regulatory
subunits of the switch/sucrose non-fermenting chromatin remodeling complex have
been detected in several solid cancers: sucrose non-fermenting/switch/sucrose
non-fermenting-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of
chromatin, subfamily b, member 1/Brahma-related gene 1-associated factor
47/integrase interactor 1 mutations in rhabdoid tumors; AT-rich interactive
domain-containing protein 1 A/Brahma-related gene 1-associated factor 250a
mutations in ovarian clear cell carcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma and gastric
adenocarcinoma; polybromo 1/Brahma-related gene 1-associated factor 180 mutations
in renal clear cell carcinoma; Brahma-related gene 1/switch/sucrose
non-fermenting-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of
chromatin, subfamily a, member 4 mutations in non-small-cell lung carcinoma and
AT-rich interactive domain-containing protein 2/Brahma-related gene 1-associated 
factor 200 mutations in hepatocellular carcinoma and malignant melanoma. This
suggests that the switch/sucrose non-fermenting complex has a tumor-suppressive
function, and that switch/sucrose non-fermenting gene deficiencies may affect the
properties of cancer cells, which could be of value for the development of novel 
therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 23904343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cell Reprogram. 2013 Apr;15(2):126-33. doi: 10.1089/cell.2012.0060. Epub 2013 Mar
4.

Identifying candidate oocyte reprogramming factors using cross-species global
transcriptional analysis.

Awe JP(1), Byrne JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

There is mounting evidence to suggest that the epigenetic reprogramming capacity 
of the oocyte is superior to that of the current factor-based reprogramming
approaches and that some factor-reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs) retain a degree of epigenetic memory that can influence differentiation
capacity and may be linked to the observed expression of immunogenicity genes in 
iPSC derivatives. One hypothesis for this differential reprogramming capacity is 
the "chromatin loosening/enhanced reprogramming" concept, as previously described
by John Gurdon and Ian Wilmut, as well as others, which postulates that the
oocyte possesses factors that loosen the somatic cell chromatin structure,
providing the epigenetic and transcriptional regulatory factors more ready access
to repressed genes and thereby significantly increasing epigenetic reprogramming.
However, to empirically test this hypothesis a list of candidate oocyte
reprogramming factors (CORFs) must be ascertained that are significantly
expressed in metaphase II oocytes. Previous studies have focused on intraspecies 
or cross-species transcriptional analysis of up to two different species of
oocytes. In this study, we have identified eight CORFs (ARID2, ASF1A, ASF1B,
DPPA3, ING3, MSL3, H1FOO, and KDM6B) based on unbiased global transcriptional
analysis of oocytes from three different species (human, rhesus monkey, and
mouse) that both demonstrate significant (p<0.05, FC>3) expression in oocytes of 
all three species and have well-established roles in loosening/opening up
chromatin structure. We also identified an additional 15 CORFs that fit within
our proposed "chromatin opening/fate transformative" (COFT) model. These CORFs
may be able to augment Shinya Yamanaka's previously identified reprogramming
factors (OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, and cMYC) and potentially facilitate the removal of
epigenetic memory in iPSCs and/or reduce the expression of immunogenicity genes
in iPSC derivatives, and may have applications in future personalized pluripotent
stem cell based therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3616412
PMID: 23458164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55119. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055119. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

The spectrum of SWI/SNF mutations, ubiquitous in human cancers.

Shain AH(1), Pollack JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, United States of America.

SWI/SNF is a multi-subunit chromatin remodeling complex that uses the energy of
ATP hydrolysis to reposition nucleosomes, thereby modulating gene expression.
Accumulating evidence suggests that SWI/SNF functions as a tumor suppressor in
some cancers. However, the spectrum of SWI/SNF mutations across human cancers has
not been systematically investigated. Here, we mined whole-exome sequencing data 
from 24 published studies representing 669 cases from 18 neoplastic diagnoses.
SWI/SNF mutations were widespread across diverse human cancers, with an excess of
deleterious mutations, and an overall frequency approaching TP53 mutation.
Mutations occurred most commonly in the SMARCA4 enzymatic subunit, and in
subunits thought to confer functional specificity (ARID1A, ARID1B, PBRM1, and
ARID2). SWI/SNF mutations were not mutually-exclusive of other mutated cancer
genes, including TP53 and EZH2 (both previously linked to SWI/SNF). Our findings 
implicate SWI/SNF as an important but under-recognized tumor suppressor in
diverse human cancers, and provide a key resource to guide future investigations.

PMCID: PMC3552954
PMID: 23355908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Bull Cancer. 2012 Dec;99(12):1133-40. doi: 10.1684/bdc.2012.1664.

[Chromatin remodeling defects and cancer: the SWI/SNF example].

[Article in French]

Bourdeaut F(1), Bièche I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, département d'oncologie pédiatrique, Inserm U830-laboratoire
de génétique et biologie des cancers, 26, rue d'Ulm, 75248 Paris Cedex 05,
France. Franck.Bourdeaut@curie.fr

The SWI/SNF complex is a multiprotein complex essential for chromatin
remodelling. As such, it plays a key role in the epigenetic regulation of genome 
expression. This complex is composed of a dozen of proteins, some of which are
constant and ubiquitous, especially SMARCB1 and SMARCA4. Mutations in these genes
are now described in an increasing number of tumors. Mutations in
SMARCB1 characterize the majority of rhabdoid tumors, an aggressive malignancy
that exquisitely depends on this single genetic event. Rare rhabdoid tumors have 
mutation in SMARCA4, a genetic abnormality also found in some medulloblastomas.
Many other tumor types, of variable aggressiveness, show an abnormal loss of
expression of SMARCB1, but the genetic underlying cause most often remains
elusive. The recent sequencings of whole exomes have described frequent mutations
in other genes of the SWI/SNF complex: mutations in ARID1A in liver, gastric or
bladder carcinomas, and PBRM1 mutations in renal cancers. These data establish
the wide role of SWI/SNF complex in cancers and justify that major efforts should
now be devoted to this common mechanism of human oncogenesis.

PMID: 23222069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Nature. 2012 Nov 15;491(7424):399-405. doi: 10.1038/nature11547. Epub 2012 Oct
24.

Pancreatic cancer genomes reveal aberrations in axon guidance pathway genes.

Biankin AV, Waddell N, Kassahn KS, Gingras MC, Muthuswamy LB, Johns AL, Miller
DK, Wilson PJ, Patch AM, Wu J, Chang DK, Cowley MJ, Gardiner BB, Song S,
Harliwong I, Idrisoglu S, Nourse C, Nourbakhsh E, Manning S, Wani S, Gongora M,
Pajic M, Scarlett CJ, Gill AJ, Pinho AV, Rooman I, Anderson M, Holmes O, Leonard 
C, Taylor D, Wood S, Xu Q, Nones K, Fink JL, Christ A, Bruxner T, Cloonan N,
Kolle G, Newell F, Pinese M, Mead RS, Humphris JL, Kaplan W, Jones MD, Colvin EK,
Nagrial AM, Humphrey ES, Chou A, Chin VT, Chantrill LA, Mawson A, Samra JS, Kench
JG, Lovell JA, Daly RJ, Merrett ND, Toon C, Epari K, Nguyen NQ, Barbour A, Zeps
N; Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative, Kakkar N, Zhao F, Wu YQ, Wang 
M, Muzny DM, Fisher WE, Brunicardi FC, Hodges SE, Reid JG, Drummond J, Chang K,
Han Y, Lewis LR, Dinh H, Buhay CJ, Beck T, Timms L, Sam M, Begley K, Brown A, Pai
D, Panchal A, Buchner N, De Borja R, Denroche RE, Yung CK, Serra S, Onetto N,
Mukhopadhyay D, Tsao MS, Shaw PA, Petersen GM, Gallinger S, Hruban RH, Maitra A, 
Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Schulick RD, Wolfgang CL, Morgan RA, Lawlor RT, Capelli P, 
Corbo V, Scardoni M, Tortora G, Tempero MA, Mann KM, Jenkins NA, Perez-Mancera
PA, Adams DJ, Largaespada DA, Wessels LF, Rust AG, Stein LD, Tuveson DA, Copeland
NG, Musgrove EA, Scarpa A, Eshleman JR, Hudson TJ, Sutherland RL, Wheeler DA,
Pearson JV, McPherson JD, Gibbs RA, Grimmond SM.

Collaborators: Biankin AV, Johns AL, Mawson A, Chang DK, Scarlett CJ, Brancato
MA, Rowe SJ, Simpson SL, Martyn-Smith M, Thomas MT, Chantrill LA, Chin VT, Chou
A, Cowley MJ, Humphris JL, Jones MD, Mead R, Nagrial AM, Pajic M, Pettit J,
Pinese M, Rooman I, Wu J, Tao J, DiPietro R, Watson C, Wong R, Pinho AV,
Giry-Laterriere M, Daly RJ, Musgrove EA, Sutherland RL, Grimmond SM, Waddell N,
Kassahn KS, Miller DK, Wilson PJ, Patch AM, Song S, Harliwong I, Idrisoglu S,
Nourse C, Nourbakhsh E, Manning S, Wani S, Gongora M, Anderson M, Holmes O,
Leonard C, Taylor D, Wood S, Xu Q, Nones K, Fink J, Christ A, Bruxner T, Cloonan 
N, Newell F, Pearson JV, Samra JS, Gill AJ, Pavlakis N, Guminski A, Toon C,
Biankin AV, Asghari R, Merrett ND, Chang DK, Pavey DA, Das A, Cosman PH, Ismail
K, O'Connor C, Lam VW, McLeod D, Pleass HC, Richardson A, James V, Kench JG,
Cooper CL, Joseph D, Sandroussi C, Crawford M, Gallagher J, Texler M, Forrest C, 
Laycock A, Epari KP, Ballal M, Fletcher DR, Mukhedkar S, Spry NA, DeBoer B, Chai 
M, Zeps N, Beilin M, Feeney K, Nguyen NQ, Ruszkiewicz AR, Worthley C, Tan CP,
Debrencini T, Chen J, Brooke-Smith ME, Papangelis V, Tang H, Barbour AP, Clouston
AD, Martin P, O'Rourke TJ, Chiang A, Fawcett JW, Slater K, Yeung S, Hatzifotis M,
Hodgkinson P, Christophi C, Nikfarjam M, Mountain A, Eshleman JR, Hruban RH,
Maitra A, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Schulick RD, Wolfgang CL, Morgan RA, Hodgin MB,
Scarpa A, Lawlor RT, Capelli P, Beghelli S, Corbo V, Scardoni M, Pederzoli P,
Tortora G, Bassi C, Tempero MA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012 Dec;9(12):688.

Pancreatic cancer is a highly lethal malignancy with few effective therapies. We 
performed exome sequencing and copy number analysis to define genomic aberrations
in a prospectively accrued clinical cohort (n = 142) of early (stage I and II)
sporadic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Detailed analysis of 99 informative
tumours identified substantial heterogeneity with 2,016 non-silent mutations and 
1,628 copy-number variations. We define 16 significantly mutated genes,
reaffirming known mutations (KRAS, TP53, CDKN2A, SMAD4, MLL3, TGFBR2, ARID1A and 
SF3B1), and uncover novel mutated genes including additional genes involved in
chromatin modification (EPC1 and ARID2), DNA damage repair (ATM) and other
mechanisms (ZIM2, MAP2K4, NALCN, SLC16A4 and MAGEA6). Integrative analysis with
in vitro functional data and animal models provided supportive evidence for
potential roles for these genetic aberrations in carcinogenesis. Pathway-based
analysis of recurrently mutated genes recapitulated clustering in core signalling
pathways in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, and identified new mutated genes in
each pathway. We also identified frequent and diverse somatic aberrations in
genes described traditionally as embryonic regulators of axon guidance,
particularly SLIT/ROBO signalling, which was also evident in murine Sleeping
Beauty transposon-mediated somatic mutagenesis models of pancreatic cancer,
providing further supportive evidence for the potential involvement of axon
guidance genes in pancreatic carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3530898
PMID: 23103869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Int J Cancer. 2013 May 1;132(9):2217-21. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27900. Epub 2012 Nov
20.

Recurrent inactivating mutations of ARID2 in non-small cell lung carcinoma.

Manceau G(1), Letouzé E, Guichard C, Didelot A, Cazes A, Corté H, Fabre E,
Pallier K, Imbeaud S, Le Pimpec-Barthes F, Zucman-Rossi J, Laurent-Puig P, Blons 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Basis of Response to Xenobiotics, INSERM UMR-S775, Paris, France.

In eukaryotic cells, DNA is packaged into chromatin and this compact storage in
the nucleus promotes transcriptional repression of genes. Chromatin remodeling
complexes such as the SWI/SNF complex are involved in making DNA accessible to
transcription factors and thereby are implicated in the regulation of gene
expression. Mutations and altered expression of chromatin remodeling complex
genes have been described in cancer cells. Indeed, non-small cell lung cancer
cell lines have been shown to harbor mutations in SMARCA4 (BRG1), a member of the
SWI/SNF complex, but evidence has been less clear in primary tumors. Recently,
inactivating mutations in AT-rich interaction domain 2 (ARID2) were found in
liver cancer related to HCV infection and in melanoma. Here, we explored, using a
genome-wide strategy and subsequent sequencing of targeted genes, whether
chromatin remodeling is implicated in primary lung adenocarcinoma. Two genes were
individualized from the genome screening as homozygously deleted in a set of
samples: JARID2 and ARID2. Subsequent analysis of the entire coding sequences
showed that ARID2 loss-of-function mutations were found in 5% of nonsmall cell
lung cancers, thereby constituting one of the most frequently mutated genes in
this cancer type after TP53, KRAS, EGFR, CDKN2A and STK11.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 23047306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cell. 2012 Jul 20;150(2):251-63. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.024.

A landscape of driver mutations in melanoma.

Hodis E(1), Watson IR, Kryukov GV, Arold ST, Imielinski M, Theurillat JP,
Nickerson E, Auclair D, Li L, Place C, Dicara D, Ramos AH, Lawrence MS, Cibulskis
K, Sivachenko A, Voet D, Saksena G, Stransky N, Onofrio RC, Winckler W, Ardlie K,
Wagle N, Wargo J, Chong K, Morton DL, Stemke-Hale K, Chen G, Noble M, Meyerson M,
Ladbury JE, Davies MA, Gershenwald JE, Wagner SN, Hoon DS, Schadendorf D, Lander 
ES, Gabriel SB, Getz G, Garraway LA, Chin L.

Author information: 
(1)The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Despite recent insights into melanoma genetics, systematic surveys for driver
mutations are challenged by an abundance of passenger mutations caused by
carcinogenic UV light exposure. We developed a permutation-based framework to
address this challenge, employing mutation data from intronic sequences to
control for passenger mutational load on a per gene basis. Analysis of
large-scale melanoma exome data by this approach discovered six novel melanoma
genes (PPP6C, RAC1, SNX31, TACC1, STK19, and ARID2), three of which-RAC1, PPP6C, 
and STK19-harbored recurrent and potentially targetable mutations. Integration
with chromosomal copy number data contextualized the landscape of driver
mutations, providing oncogenic insights in BRAF- and NRAS-driven melanoma as well
as those without known NRAS/BRAF mutations. The landscape also clarified a
mutational basis for RB and p53 pathway deregulation in this malignancy. Finally,
the spectrum of driver mutations provided unequivocal genomic evidence for a
direct mutagenic role of UV light in melanoma pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3600117
PMID: 22817889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nat Genet. 2012 May 27;44(7):760-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.2291.

Whole-genome sequencing of liver cancers identifies etiological influences on
mutation patterns and recurrent mutations in chromatin regulators.

Fujimoto A(1), Totoki Y, Abe T, Boroevich KA, Hosoda F, Nguyen HH, Aoki M, Hosono
N, Kubo M, Miya F, Arai Y, Takahashi H, Shirakihara T, Nagasaki M, Shibuya T,
Nakano K, Watanabe-Makino K, Tanaka H, Nakamura H, Kusuda J, Ojima H, Shimada K, 
Okusaka T, Ueno M, Shigekawa Y, Kawakami Y, Arihiro K, Ohdan H, Gotoh K, Ishikawa
O, Ariizumi S, Yamamoto M, Yamada T, Chayama K, Kosuge T, Yamaue H, Kamatani N,
Miyano S, Nakagama H, Nakamura Y, Tsunoda T, Shibata T, Nakagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine, RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2013 Mar;58(3):622-4.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. We sequenced and analyzed the whole genomes of 27 HCCs, 25 of which
were associated with hepatitis B or C virus infections, including two sets of
multicentric tumors. Although no common somatic mutations were identified in the 
multicentric tumor pairs, their whole-genome substitution patterns were similar, 
suggesting that these tumors developed from independent mutations, although their
shared etiological backgrounds may have strongly influenced their somatic
mutation patterns. Statistical and functional analyses yielded a list of
recurrently mutated genes. Multiple chromatin regulators, including ARID1A,
ARID1B, ARID2, MLL and MLL3, were mutated in ~50% of the tumors. Hepatitis B
virus genome integration in the TERT locus was frequently observed in a high
clonal proportion. Our whole-genome sequencing analysis of HCCs identified the
influence of etiological background on somatic mutation patterns and subsequent
carcinogenesis, as well as recurrent mutations in chromatin regulators in HCCs.

PMID: 22634756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33834. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033834. Epub 2012 Mar 19.

SS18 together with animal-specific factors defines human BAF-type SWI/SNF
complexes.

Middeljans E(1), Wan X, Jansen PW, Sharma V, Stunnenberg HG, Logie C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Nucleosome translocation along DNA is catalyzed by eukaryotic
SNF2-type ATPases. One class of SNF2-ATPases is distinguished by the presence of 
a C-terminal bromodomain and is conserved from yeast to man and plants. This
class of SNF2 enzymes forms rather large protein complexes that are collectively 
called SWI/SNF complexes. They are involved in transcription and DNA repair. Two 
broad types of SWI/SNF complexes have been reported in the literature; PBAF and
BAF. These are distinguished by the inclusion or not of polybromo and several
ARID subunits. Here we investigated human SS18, a protein that is conserved in
plants and animals. SS18 is a putative SWI/SNF subunit which has been implicated 
in the etiology of synovial sarcomas by virtue of being a target for oncogenic
chromosomal translocations that underlie synovial sarcomas.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We pursued a proteomic approach whereby the SS18 
open reading frame was fused to a tandem affinity purification tag and expressed 
in amenable human cells. The fusion permitted efficient and exclusive
purification of so-called BAF-type SWI/SNF complexes which bear ARID1A/BAF250a or
ARID1B/BAF250b subunits. This demonstrates that SS18 is a BAF subtype-specific
SWI/SNF complex subunit. The same result was obtained when using the SS18-SSX1
oncogenic translocation product. Furthermore, SS18L1, DPF1, DPF2, DPF3, BRD9,
BCL7A, BCL7B and BCL7C were identified. 'Complex walking' showed that they all
co-purify with each other, defining human BAF-type complexes. By contrast,we
demonstrate that human PHF10 is part of the PBAF complex, which harbors both
ARID2/BAF200 and polybromo/BAF180 subunits, but not SS18 and nor the above
BAF-specific subunits.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: SWI/SNF complexes are found in most eukaryotes and in
the course of evolution new SWI/SNF subunits appeared. SS18 is found in plants as
well as animals. Our results suggest that in both protostome and deuterostome
animals, a class of BAF-type SWI/SNF complexes will be found that harbor SS18 or 
its paralogs, along with ARID1, DPF and BCL7 paralogs. Those BAF complexes are
proteomically distinct from the eukaryote-wide PBAF-type SWI/SNF complexes.
Finally, our results suggests that the human bromodomain factors BRD7 and BRD9
associate with PBAF and BAF, respectively.

PMCID: PMC3307773
PMID: 22442726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 10;287(7):5033-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.279968. Epub 2011 
Dec 19.

Essential role of ARID2 protein-containing SWI/SNF complex in tissue-specific
gene expression.

Xu F(1), Flowers S, Moran E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, New Jersey Medical School-University Hospital
Cancer Center, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New
Jersey 07103, USA.

Unfolding of the gene expression program that converts precursor cells to their
terminally differentiated counterparts is critically dependent on the
nucleosome-remodeling activity of the mammalian SWI/SNF complex. The complex can 
be powered by either of two alternative ATPases, BRM or BRG1. BRG1 is critical
for development and the activation of tissue specific genes and is found in two
major stable configurations. The complex of BRG1-associated factors termed BAF is
the originally characterized form of mammalian SWI/SNF. A more recently
recognized configuration shares many of the same subunits but is termed PBAF in
recognition of a unique subunit, the polybromo protein (PBRM1). Two other unique 
subunits, BRD7 and ARID2, are also diagnostic of PBAF. PBAF plays an essential
role in development, apparent from the embryonic lethality of Pbmr1-null mice,
but very little is known about the role of PBAF, or its signature subunits, in
tissue-specific gene expression in individual differentiation programs.
Osteoblast differentiation is an attractive model for tissue-specific gene
expression because the process is highly regulated and remains tightly
synchronized over a period of several weeks. This model was used here, with a
stable shRNA-mediated depletion approach, to examine the role of the signature
PBAF subunit, ARID2, during differentiation. This analysis identifies a critical 
role for ARID2-containing complexes in promoting osteoblast differentiation and
supports a view that the PBAF subset of SWI/SNF contributes importantly to
maintaining cellular identity and activating tissue-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3281626
PMID: 22184115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Oncotarget. 2011 Nov;2(11):886-91.

ARID2: a new tumor suppressor gene in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhao H(1), Wang J, Han Y, Huang Z, Ying J, Bi X, Zhao J, Fang Y, Zhou H, Zhou J, 
Li Z, Zhang Y, Yang X, Yan T, Wang L, Torbenson MS, Cai J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of abdominal surgical oncology, Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100021, PR China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common malignancies worldwide, 
however, genetic-environmental interactions and mechanisms associated with the
development of HCC remains largely unclear. Our recent work described novel
inactivating mutations of ARID2 (AT-rich interactive domain 2) in four major
subtypes of HCC through exomic sequencing of ten HCV-associated HCCs and
subsequent evaluation of the tumors from additional affected individuals. Here,
we summarize the current knowledge about the relevance of ARID2 in HCC and the
implication in future patient care.

PMCID: PMC3259997
PMID: 22095441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Nat Genet. 2011 Aug 7;43(9):828-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.903.

Inactivating mutations of the chromatin remodeling gene ARID2 in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Li M(1), Zhao H, Zhang X, Wood LD, Anders RA, Choti MA, Pawlik TM, Daniel HD,
Kannangai R, Offerhaus GJ, Velculescu VE, Wang L, Zhou S, Vogelstein B, Hruban
RH, Papadopoulos N, Cai J, Torbenson MS, Kinzler KW.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2012 Jun;56(6):1412-4.

Through exomic sequencing of ten hepatitis C virus (HCV)-associated
hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) and subsequent evaluation of additional affected 
individuals, we discovered novel inactivating mutations of ARID2 in four major
subtypes of HCC (HCV-associated HCC, hepatitis B virus (HBV)-associated HCC,
alcohol-associated HCC and HCC with no known etiology). Notably, 18.2% of
individuals with HCV-associated HCC in the United States and Europe harbored
ARID2 inactivation mutations, suggesting that ARID2 is a tumor suppressor gene
that is relatively commonly mutated in this tumor subtype.

PMCID: PMC3163746
PMID: 21822264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. BMC Evol Biol. 2010 Feb 19;10:53. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-53.

Characterization of the tandem CWCH2 sequence motif: a hallmark of inter-zinc
finger interactions.

Hatayama M(1), Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Behavioral and Developmental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The C2H2 zinc finger (ZF) domain is widely conserved among eukaryotic
proteins. In Zic/Gli/Zap1 C2H2 ZF proteins, the two N-terminal ZFs form a single 
structural unit by sharing a hydrophobic core. This structural unit defines a new
motif comprised of two tryptophan side chains at the center of the hydrophobic
core. Because each tryptophan residue is located between the two cysteine
residues of the C2H2 motif, we have named this structure the tandem CWCH2
(tCWCH2) motif.
RESULTS: Here, we characterized 587 tCWCH2-containing genes using data derived
from public databases. We categorized genes into 11 classes including
Zic/Gli/Glis, Arid2/Rsc9, PacC, Mizf, Aebp2, Zap1/ZafA, Fungl, Zfp106, Twincl,
Clr1, and Fungl-4ZF, based on sequence similarity, domain organization, and
functional similarities. tCWCH2 motifs are mostly found in organisms belonging to
the Opisthokonta (metazoa, fungi, and choanoflagellates) and Amoebozoa (amoeba,
Dictyostelium discoideum). By comparison, the C2H2 ZF motif is distributed widely
among the eukaryotes. The structure and organization of the tCWCH2 motif, its
phylogenetic distribution, and molecular phylogenetic analysis suggest that
prototypical tCWCH2 genes existed in the Opisthokonta ancestor. Within-group or
between-group comparisons of the tCWCH2 amino acid sequence identified three
additional sequence features (site-specific amino acid frequencies, longer linker
sequence between two C2H2 ZFs, and frequent extra-sequences within C2H2 ZF
motifs).
CONCLUSION: These features suggest that the tCWCH2 motif is a specialized motif
involved in inter-zinc finger interactions.

PMCID: PMC2837044
PMID: 20167128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Virol. 2008 Jun;82(11):5295-306. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02380-07. Epub 2008 Mar 26.

MicroRNA-155 is an Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene that modulates Epstein-Barr
virus-regulated gene expression pathways.

Yin Q(1), McBride J, Fewell C, Lacey M, Wang X, Lin Z, Cameron J, Flemington EK.

Author information: 
(1)Louisiana Cancer Research Consortium, New Orleans, USA.

The cellular microRNA miR-155 has been shown to be involved in lymphocyte
activation and is expressed in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-infected cells displaying
type III latency gene expression but not type I latency gene expression. We show 
here that the elevated levels of miR-155 in type III latency cells is due to EBV 
gene expression and not epigenetic differences in cell lines tested, and we show 
that expression in EBV-infected cells requires a conserved AP-1 element in the
miR-155 promoter. Gene expression analysis was carried out in a type I latency
cell line transduced with an miR-155-expressing retrovirus. This analysis
identified both miR-155-suppressed and -induced cellular mRNAs and suggested that
in addition to direct targeting of 3' untranslated regions (UTRs), miR-155 alters
gene expression in part through the alteration of signal transduction pathways.
3' UTR reporter analysis of predicted miR-155 target genes identified the
transcriptional regulatory genes encoding BACH1, ZIC3, HIVEP2, CEBPB, ZNF652,
ARID2, and SMAD5 as miR-155 targets. Western blot analysis of the most highly
suppressed of these, BACH1, showed lower expression in cells transduced with a
miR-155 retrovirus. Inspection of the promoters from genes regulated in
EBV-infected cells and in cells infected with an miR-155 retrovirus identified
potential binding sequences for BACH1 and ZIC3. Together, these experiments
suggest that the induction of miR-155 by EBV contributes to EBV-mediated
signaling in part through the modulation of transcriptional regulatory factors.

PMCID: PMC2395216
PMID: 18367535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Aug 4;346(3):794-801. Epub 2006 Jun 12.

Zipzap/p200 is a novel zinc finger protein contributing to cardiac gene
regulation.

Zhang X(1), Azhar G, Zhong Y, Wei JY.

Author information: 
(1)Donald W. Reynolds Department of Geriatrics, The University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences and Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Central 
Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.
zhangxiaomin@uams.edu

Serum response factor (SRF) plays an important role in the regulation of
immediate-early genes and muscle-specific genes, while SRF cofactors may
contribute significantly to assist in tissue-specific, development-stage related 
regulation of SRF-target genes. We recently cloned a novel SRF cofactor, termed
zipzap/p200, which is a zinc finger protein yet to be characterized. We
determined that zipzap/p200 is a 200-kDa protein with two classic C2H2 zinc
fingers at the carboxyl terminus where the nucleotide sequence was highly
conserved among human, mouse, and rat. The zipzap gene was expressed in multiple 
tissues and at multiple ages, including the fetal and adult heart. The zipzap
protein interacted with SRF in vivo and was found in protein complexes containing
SRF and other SRF cofactors, including p49/strap and Nkx2.5. Zipzap/p200
activated the promoter of cardiac genes and potentiated the effect of myocardin
on ANF promoter activity. Therefore, zipzap may serve as a transcription
co-activator for the regulation of cardiac gene expression. Our data support the 
notion that a number of SRF cofactors may participate in gene regulation and
thereby contribute to the delicate control of gene expression in complex
biological processes.

PMID: 16782067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


