
1. J Neurosci. 2016 Mar 2;36(9):2723-42. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2321-15.2016.

Essential Roles for ARID1B in Dendritic Arborization and Spine Morphology of
Developing Pyramidal Neurons.

Ka M(1), Chopra DA(2), Dravid SM(2), Kim WY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neuroscience, Munroe-Meyer Institute, University
of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198, and. (2)Department of
Pharmacology, Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska 68178. (3)Department of
Developmental Neuroscience, Munroe-Meyer Institute, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198, and wooyang.kim@unmc.edu.

De novo truncating mutations in ARID1B, a chromatin-remodeling gene, cause
Coffin-Siris syndrome, a developmental disorder characterized by intellectual
disability and speech impairment; however, how the genetic elimination leads to
cognitive dysfunction remains unknown. Thus, we investigated the neural functions
of ARID1B during brain development. Here, we show that ARID1B regulates dendritic
differentiation in the developing mouse brain. We knocked down ARID1B expression 
in mouse pyramidal neurons using in utero gene delivery methodologies. ARID1B
knockdown suppressed dendritic arborization of cortical and hippocampal pyramidal
neurons in mice. The abnormal development of dendrites accompanied a decrease in 
dendritic outgrowth into layer I. Furthermore, knockdown of ARID1B resulted in
aberrant dendritic spines and synaptic transmission. Finally, ARID1B deficiency
led to altered expression of c-Fos and Arc, and overexpression of these factors
rescued abnormal differentiation induced by ARID1B knockdown. Our results
demonstrate a novel role for ARID1B in neuronal differentiation and provide new
insights into the origin of cognitive dysfunction associated with developmental
intellectual disability.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Haploinsufficiency of ARID1B, a
component of chromatin remodeling complex, causes intellectual disability.
However, the role of ARID1B in brain development is unknown. Here, we demonstrate
that ARID1B is required for neuronal differentiation in the developing brain,
such as in dendritic arborization and synapse formation. Our findings suggest
that ARID1B plays a critical role in the establishment of cognitive circuitry by 
regulating dendritic complexity. Thus, ARID1B deficiency may cause intellectual
disability via abnormal brain wiring induced by the defective differentiation of 
cortical neurons.

Copyright © 2016 the authors 0270-6474/16/362723-20$15.00/0.

PMID: 26937011  [PubMed - in process]


2. BMC Cancer. 2016 Feb 26;16(1):165. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2210-8.

Analysis of functional germline variants in APOBEC3 and driver genes on breast
cancer risk in Moroccan study population.

Marouf C(1,)(2,)(3), Göhler S(4), Filho MI(5), Hajji O(6), Hemminki K(7,)(8),
Nadifi S(9,)(10), Försti A(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. maroufchaymaa@gmail.com. (2)Laboratory of Genetics
and Molecular Pathology-Medical School of Casablanca, Casablanca, Morocco.
maroufchaymaa@gmail.com. (3)University Hassan II Ain Chock, Center Of Doctoral
Sciences "In Health Sciences", Casablanca, Morocco. maroufchaymaa@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. s.goehler@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (5)Department of
Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany. m.inacio@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (6)Department of Oncology, Littoral Clinic,
Casablanca, Morocco. o.hajji@cliniquelelittoral.ma. (7)Department of Molecular
Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. 
k.hemminki@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (8)Center for Primary Health Care Research,
Clinical Research Center, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
k.hemminki@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (9)Laboratory of Genetics and Molecular
Pathology-Medical School of Casablanca, Casablanca, Morocco. nadifisel@yahoo.com.
(10)University Hassan II Ain Chock, Center Of Doctoral Sciences "In Health
Sciences", Casablanca, Morocco. nadifisel@yahoo.com. (11)Department of Molecular 
Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. 
a.foersti@dkfz-heidelberg.de. (12)Center for Primary Health Care Research,
Clinical Research Center, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
a.foersti@dkfz-heidelberg.de.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) is the most prevalent cancer in women and a major 
public health problem in Morocco. Several Moroccan studies have focused on
studying this disease, but more are needed, especially at the genetic and
molecular levels. Therefore, we investigated the potential association of several
functional germline variants in the genes commonly mutated in sporadic breast
cancer.
METHODS: In this case-control study, we examined 36 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 13 genes (APOBEC3A, APOBEC3B, ARID1B, ATR, MAP3K1, MLL2, 
MLL3, NCOR1, RUNX1, SF3B1, SMAD4, TBX3, TTN), which were located in the core
promoter, 5'-and 3'UTR or which were nonsynonymous SNPs to assess their potential
association with inherited predisposition to breast cancer development.
Additionally, we identified a ~29.5-kb deletion polymorphism between APOBEC3A and
APOBEC3B and explored possible associations with BC. A total of 226 Moroccan
breast cancer cases and 200 matched healthy controls were included in this study.
RESULTS: The analysis showed that12 SNPs in 8 driver genes, 4 SNPs in APOBEC3B
gene and 1 SNP in APOBEC3A gene were associated with BC risk and/or clinical
outcome at P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.05 level. RUNX1_rs8130963 (odds ratio (OR)<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.25; 95 % CI
1.42-3.56; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0005; dominant model), TBX3_rs8853 (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.04; 95 % CI
1.38-3.01; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0003; dominant model), TBX3_rs1061651 (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.14; 95 %
CI1.43-3.18; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0002; dominant model), TTN_rs12465459 (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.02; 95 %
confidence interval 1.33-3.07; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0009; dominant model), were the most
significantly associated SNPs with BC risk. A strong association with clinical
outcome were detected for the genes SMAD4 _rs3819122 with tumor size (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.45; 
95 % CI 0.25-0.82; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009) and TTN_rs2244492 with estrogen receptor
(OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.45; 95 % CI 0.25-0.82; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that genetic variations in driver and APOBEC3
genes were associated with the risk of BC and may have impact on clinical
outcome. However, the reported association between the deletion polymorphism and 
BC risk was not confirmed in the Moroccan population. These preliminary findings 
require replication in larger studies.

PMCID: PMC4768349
PMID: 26920143  [PubMed - in process]


3. Cell Rep. 2016 Mar 1;14(8):1979-90. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.01.074. Epub 2016 
Feb 18.

Insertional Mutagenesis Identifies a STAT3/Arid1b/ß-catenin Pathway Driving
Neurofibroma Initiation.

Wu J(1), Keng VW(2), Patmore DM(1), Kendall JJ(1), Patel AV(1), Jousma E(1),
Jessen WJ(1), Choi K(1), Tschida BR(3), Silverstein KA(4), Fan D(4), Schwartz
EB(5), Fuchs JR(5), Zou Y(6), Kim MO(6), Dombi E(7), Levy DE(8), Huang G(1),
Cancelas JA(9), Stemmer-Rachamimov AO(10), Spinner RJ(11), Largaespada DA(2),
Ratner N(12).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cancer and Blood
Diseases Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. (2)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Cell Biology and
Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA; Center for
Genome Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
(3)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA;
Center for Genome Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
USA. (4)Biostatistics and Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
55455, USA. (5)Ohio State University, College of Pharmacy, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA. (6)Division of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Research Foundation, Cincinnati Children's Hospital University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. (7)Pediatric Oncology Branch, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (8)Department of Pathology and New
York University Cancer Institute, New York University School of Medicine, 550
First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA. (9)Division of Experimental Hematology and
Cancer Biology, Cancer and Blood Diseases Institute, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA; Hoxworth Blood
Center, College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.
(10)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, 02114, USA. (11)Department of Neurologic Surgery, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (12)Division of Experimental Hematology and
Cancer Biology, Cancer and Blood Diseases Institute, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. Electronic address:
nancy.ratner@cchmc.org.

To identify genes and signaling pathways that initiate Neurofibromatosis type 1
(NF1) neurofibromas, we used unbiased insertional mutagenesis screening, mouse
models, and molecular analyses. We mapped an Nf1-Stat3-Arid1b/ß-catenin pathway
that becomes active in the context of Nf1 loss. Genetic deletion of Stat3 in
Schwann cell progenitors (SCPs) and Schwann cells (SCs) prevents neurofibroma
formation, decreasing SCP self-renewal and ß-catenin activity. ß-catenin
expression rescues effects of Stat3 loss in SCPs. Importantly, P-STAT3 and
ß-catenin expression correlate in human neurofibromas. Mechanistically, P-Stat3
represses Gsk3ß and the SWI/SNF gene Arid1b to increase ß-catenin. Knockdown of
Arid1b or Gsk3ß in Stat3(fl/fl);Nf1(fl/fl);DhhCre SCPs rescues neurofibroma
formation after in vivo transplantation. Stat3 represses Arid1b through histone
modification in a Brg1-dependent manner, indicating that epigenetic modification 
plays a role in early tumorigenesis. Our data map a neural tumorigenesis pathway 
and support testing JAK/STAT and Wnt/ß-catenin pathway inhibitors in neurofibroma
therapeutic trials.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4782770
PMID: 26904939  [PubMed - in process]


4. Mod Pathol. 2016 Apr;29(4):359-69. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2016.37. Epub 2016 Feb 
19.

The landscape of fusion transcripts in spitzoid melanoma and biologically
indeterminate spitzoid tumors by RNA sequencing.

Wu G(1), Barnhill RL(2), Lee S(3), Li Y(1), Shao Y(1), Easton J(1), Dalton J(3), 
Zhang J(1), Pappo A(4), Bahrami A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Biology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Institute Curie, and Faculty of
Medicine, University of Paris Descartes, Paris, France. (3)Department of
Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. (4)Department 
of Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.

Kinase activation by chromosomal translocations is a common mechanism that drives
tumorigenesis in spitzoid neoplasms. To explore the landscape of fusion
transcripts in these tumors, we performed whole-transcriptome sequencing using
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues in malignant or biologically
indeterminate spitzoid tumors from 7 patients (age 2-14 years). RNA sequence
libraries enriched for coding regions were prepared and the sequencing was
analyzed by a novel assembly-based algorithm designed for detecting complex
fusions. In addition, tumor samples were screened for hotspot TERT promoter
mutations, and telomerase expression was assessed by TERT mRNA in situ
hybridization (ISH). Two patients had widespread metastasis and subsequently died
of disease, and 5 patients had a benign clinical course on limited follow-up
(mean: 30 months). RNA sequencing and TERT mRNA ISH were successful in six tumors
and unsuccessful in one disseminating tumor because of low RNA quality. RNA
sequencing identified a kinase fusion in five of the six sequenced tumors:
TPM3-NTRK1 (2 tumors), complex rearrangements involving TPM3, ALK, and IL6R (1
tumor), BAIAP2L1-BRAF (1 tumor), and EML4-BRAF (1 disseminating tumor). All
predicted chimeric transcripts were expressed at high levels and contained the
intact kinase domain. In addition, two tumors each contained a second fusion
gene, ARID1B-SNX9 or PTPRZ1-NFAM1. The detected chimeric genes were validated by 
home-brew break-apart or fusion fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The
two disseminating tumors each harbored the TERT promoter -124C>T (Chr 5:1,295,228
hg19 coordinate) mutation, whereas the remaining five tumors retained the
wild-type gene. The presence of the -124C>T mutation correlated with telomerase
expression by TERT mRNA ISH. In summary, we demonstrated complex fusion
transcripts and novel partner genes for BRAF by RNA sequencing of FFPE samples.
The diversity of gene fusions demonstrated by RNA sequencing defines the
molecular heterogeneity of spitzoid neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC4811687 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26892443  [PubMed - in process]


5. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Jan 11. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37553. [Epub ahead of print]

Interstitial 6q25 microdeletion syndrome: ARID1B is the key gene.

Ronzoni L(1), Tagliaferri F(1), Tucci A(1), Baccarin M(2), Esposito S(1), Milani 
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and
Transplantation, Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. (2)Medical Genetics Laboratory,
Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.

Interstitial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 6 are rare. Clinically,
these deletions are considered to be part of a unique microdeletion syndrome
associated with intellectual disability and speech impairment, typical dysmorphic
features, structural anomalies of the brain, microcephaly, and non-specific
multiple organ anomalies. The critical region for the interstitial 6q
microdeletion phenotype was mapped to 6q24-6q25, particularly the 6q25.3 region
containing the genes ARID1B and ZDHHC14. It has been hypothesized that
haploinsufficiency of these genes impairs normal development of the brain and is 
responsible for the phenotype. This case report describes a girl presenting with 
typical features of 6q microdeletion syndrome, including global developmental
delay, speech impairment, distinct dysmorphic features, dysgenesis of the corpus 
callosum, common limb anomalies, and hearing loss. Chromosome analysis by
array-CGH revealed a small interstitial 6q deletion spanning approximately 1.1<U+2009>Mb
of DNA and containing only one coding gene, ARID1B. We suggest that ARID1B is the
key gene behind 6q microdeletion syndrome, and we discuss its possible role in
the phenotypic manifestations. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26754677  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 Jan 7;98(1):58-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.11.023. Epub
2015 Dec 31.

Genome Sequencing of Autism-Affected Families Reveals Disruption of Putative
Noncoding Regulatory DNA.

Turner TN(1), Hormozdiari F(1), Duyzend MH(1), McClymont SA(2), Hook PW(2),
Iossifov I(3), Raja A(4), Baker C(1), Hoekzema K(1), Stessman HA(1), Zody MC(5), 
Nelson BJ(1), Huddleston J(4), Sandstrom R(1), Smith JD(1), Hanna D(1), Swanson
JM(6), Faustman EM(7), Bamshad MJ(8), Stamatoyannopoulos J(1), Nickerson DA(1),
McCallion AS(2), Darnell R(9), Eichler EE(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (2)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (3)Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA; New York Genome Center, New
York, NY 10013, USA. (4)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (5)New York Genome Center, New 
York, NY 10013, USA. (6)Department of Pediatrics, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92612, USA. (7)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health
Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, USA. (8)Department of
Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, 
USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (9)New York Genome Center, New York, NY 10013, USA;
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195,
USA; Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA. (10)Department of Genome
Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA;
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195,
USA. Electronic address: eee@gs.washington.edu.

We performed whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of 208 genomes from 53 families
affected by simplex autism. For the majority of these families, no copy-number
variant (CNV) or candidate de novo gene-disruptive single-nucleotide variant
(SNV) had been detected by microarray or whole-exome sequencing (WES). We
integrated multiple CNV and SNV analyses and extensive experimental validation to
identify additional candidate mutations in eight families. We report that
compared to control individuals, probands showed a significant (p = 0.03)
enrichment of de novo and private disruptive mutations within fetal CNS DNase I
hypersensitive sites (i.e., putative regulatory regions). This effect was only
observed within 50 kb of genes that have been previously associated with autism
risk, including genes where dosage sensitivity has already been established by
recurrent disruptive de novo protein-coding mutations (ARID1B, SCN2A, NR3C2,
PRKCA, and DSCAM). In addition, we provide evidence of gene-disruptive CNVs (in
DISC1, WNT7A, RBFOX1, and MBD5), as well as smaller de novo CNVs and
exon-specific SNVs missed by exome sequencing in neurodevelopmental genes (e.g., 
CANX, SAE1, and PIK3CA). Our results suggest that the detection of smaller, often
multiple CNVs affecting putative regulatory elements might help explain
additional risk of simplex autism.

Copyright © 2016 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4716689 [Available on 2016-07-07]
PMID: 26749308  [PubMed - in process]


7. PLoS Genet. 2015 Dec 30;11(12):e1005748. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005748.
eCollection 2015.

Genome-Wide Transcriptional Regulation Mediated by Biochemically Distinct SWI/SNF
Complexes.

Raab JR(1,)(2), Resnick S(1), Magnuson T(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina, United States of America. (2)Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, United States of America.

Multiple positions within the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex can be filled 
by mutually exclusive subunits. Inclusion or exclusion of these proteins defines 
many unique forms of SWI/SNF and has profound functional consequences. Often this
complex is studied as a single entity within a particular cell type and we
understand little about the functional relationship between these biochemically
distinct forms of the remodeling complex. Here we examine the functional
relationships among three complex-specific ARID (AT-Rich Interacting Domain)
subunits using genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation, transcriptome analysis,
and transcription factor binding maps. We find widespread overlap in
transcriptional regulation and the genomic binding of distinct SWI/SNF complexes.
ARID1B and ARID2 participate in wide-spread cooperation to repress hundreds of
genes. Additionally, we find numerous examples of competition between ARID1A and 
another ARID, and validate that gene expression changes following loss of one
ARID are dependent on the function of an alternative ARID. These distinct
regulatory modalities are correlated with differential occupancy by transcription
factors. Together, these data suggest that distinct SWI/SNF complexes dictate
gene-specific transcription through functional interactions between the different
forms of the SWI/SNF complex and associated co-factors. Most genes regulated by
SWI/SNF are controlled by multiple biochemically distinct forms of the complex,
and the overall expression of a gene is the product of the interaction between
these different SWI/SNF complexes. The three mutually exclusive ARID family
members are among the most frequently mutated chromatin regulators in cancer, and
understanding the functional interactions and their role in transcriptional
regulation provides an important foundation to understand their role in cancer.

PMCID: PMC4699898
PMID: 26716708  [PubMed - in process]


8. Anticancer Res. 2015 Dec;35(12):6819-27.

Loss of ARID1A, ARID1B, and ARID2 Expression During Progression of Gastric
Cancer.

Aso T(1), Uozaki H(2), Morita S(1), Kumagai A(1), Watanabe M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
uozaki@med.teikyo-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Gastric cancer is a common cancer worldwide. Chromatin remodeling
complexes have emerged as tumor suppressors and include AT-rich interaction
domain-containing proteins (ARIDs) 1A, 1B, and 2. We examined their expression
and clarified their roles in gastric carcinogenesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The expression of ARIDs was studied by
immunohistochemistry in 469 gastric carcinoma and 47 adenoma samples and was
analyzed according to clinicopathological factors.
RESULTS: Low expression rates of ARID1A, 1B, and 2 in gastric carcinoma were 20%,
10%, and 15% respectively. ARIDs are correlated to each other. Low expression of 
ARID1A was related to advanced tumor and vessel infiltration. Loss of ARID1B and 
ARID2 was also related to tumor progression, but their relationship was weaker
than that of ARID1A.
CONCLUSION: ARID1A is the strongest tumor suppressor in gastric carcinogenesis
among ARIDs. Their aberration might be caused by shared mechanisms such as
mutation and methylation.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26637902  [PubMed - in process]


9. Neuron. 2015 Dec 2;88(5):910-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.11.009.

Targeted DNA Sequencing from Autism Spectrum Disorder Brains Implicates Multiple 
Genetic Mechanisms.

D'Gama AM(1), Pochareddy S(2), Li M(2), Jamuar SS(3), Reiff RE(1), Lam AT(1),
Sestan N(2), Walsh CA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Manton Center for Orphan Disease, and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115,
USA; Departments of Pediatrics and Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
02115, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Departments of Neuroscience, Genetics, and Psychiatry, and Kavli Institute for
Neuroscience, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA. (3)Division of
Genetics and Genomics, Manton Center for Orphan Disease, and Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Departments
of Pediatrics and Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of
Paediatrics, KK Women's and Children's Hospital, Singapore; Paediatrics Academic 
Clinical Programme, Duke-NUS Graduate School of Medicine, Singapore. (4)Division 
of Genetics and Genomics, Manton Center for Orphan Disease, and Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Departments
of Pediatrics and Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address:
christopher.walsh@childrens.harvard.edu.

Single nucleotide variants (SNVs), particularly loss-of-function mutations, are
significant contributors to autism spectrum disorder (ASD) risk. Here we report
the first systematic deep sequencing study of 55 postmortem ASD brains for SNVs
in 78 known ASD candidate genes. Remarkably, even without parental samples, we
find more ASD brains with mutations that are protein-altering (26/55 cases versus
12/50 controls, p = 0.015), deleterious (16/55 versus 5/50, p = 0.016), or
loss-of-function (6/55 versus 0/50, p = 0.028) compared to controls, with
recurrent deleterious mutations in ARID1B, SCN1A, SCN2A, and SETD2, suggesting
these mutations contribute to ASD risk. In several cases, the identified
mutations and medical records suggest syndromic ASD diagnoses. Two ASD and one
Fragile X premutation case showed deleterious somatic mutations, providing
evidence that somatic mutations occur in ASD cases, and supporting a model in
which a combination of germline and/or somatic mutations may contribute to ASD
risk on a case-by-case basis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4672379 [Available on 2016-12-02]
PMID: 26637798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Clin Transl Sci. 2015 Dec;8(6):740-5. doi: 10.1111/cts.12346. Epub 2015 Nov 6.

Unique DNA Methylation Patterns in Offspring of Hypertensive Pregnancy.

Julian CG(1), Pedersen BS(1), Salmon CS(2), Yang IV(1), Gonzales M(2), Vargas
E(2), Moore LG(3), Schwartz DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, USA. (2)Bolivian Institute of High Altitude Biology, La Paz, Bolivia.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

Epigenomic processes are believed to play a pivotal role for the effect of
environmental exposures in early life to modify disease risk throughout the
lifespan. Offspring of women with hypertensive complications of pregnancy
(HTNPREG ) have an increased risk of developing systemic and pulmonary vascular
dysfunction in adulthood. In this preliminary report, we sought to determine
whether epigenetic modifications of genes involved in the regulation of vascular 
function were present in HTNPREG offspring. We contrasted DNA methylation and
gene expression patterns of peripheral blood mononuclear cells obtained from
young male offspring of HTNPREG (n = 5) to those of normotensive controls (n =
19). In HTNPREG offspring we identified six differentially methylated regions
(DMRs) including three genes (SMOC2, ARID1B and CTRHC1) relevant to vascular
function. The transcriptional activity of ARID1B and CTRCH1 was inversely related
to methylation status. HTNPREG offspring had higher systolic pulmonary artery
pressure (sPPA ) versus controls. Our findings demonstrate that epigenetic marks 
are altered in offspring of HTNPREG with a modest elevation of sPPA and introduce
novel epigenomic targets for further study. On the basis of these findings we
speculate that epigenomic mechanisms may be involved in mediating the effect of
HTNPREG to raise the risk of vascular disease later in life.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4703563 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26546417  [PubMed - in process]


11. Eur J Med Genet. 2015 Dec;58(12):715-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.10.007. Epub
2015 Oct 24.

Penetrance of pathogenic mutations in haploinsufficient genes for intellectual
disability and related disorders.

Ropers HH(1), Wienker T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Human Genetics, University Medicine, Langenbeckstrasse 1,
Building 601, 55131 Mainz, Germany; Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 
Ihnestrasse 73, 14195 Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: ropers@molgen.mpg.de. 
(2)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 73, 14195 Berlin,
Germany.

De novo loss of function (LOF) mutations in the ASXL3 gene cause
Bainbridge-Ropers syndrome, a severe form of intellectual disability (ID) and
developmental delay, but there is evidence that they also occur in healthy
individuals. This has prompted us to look for non-pathogenic LOF variants in
other ID genes. Heterozygous LOF mutations in ASXL1, a paralog of ASXL3, are
known to cause Bohring-Opitz syndrome (BOS), and benign LOF mutations in this
gene have not been published to date. Therefore, we were surprised to find 56
ASXL1 LOF variants in the ExAC database (http://exac.broadinstitute.org),
comprising exomes from 60,706 individuals who had been selected to exclude severe
genetic childhood disorders. 4 of these variants have been described as
disease-causing in patients with BOS, which rules out the possibility that
pathogenic and clinically neutral LOF variants in this gene are functionally
distinct. Apparently benign LOF variants were also detected in several other
genes for ID and related disorders, including CDH15, KATNAL2, DEPDC5, ARID1B and 
AUTS2, both in the ExAC database and in the 6,500 exomes of the Exome Variant
Server (http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/). These observations argue for low
penetrance of LOF mutations in ASXL1 and other genes for ID and related
disorders, which could have far-reaching implications for genetic counseling and 
research.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26506440  [PubMed - in process]


12. Mutat Res. 2015 Nov;781:32-6. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2015.09.002. Epub 2015 Sep
10.

Target sequencing approach intended to discover new mutations in non-syndromic
intellectual disability.

Morgan A(1), Gandin I(1), Belcaro C(1), Palumbo P(2), Palumbo O(2), Biamino E(3),
Dal Col V(4), Laurini E(4), Pricl S(4), Bosco P(5), Carella M(2), Ferrero GB(3), 
Romano C(6), d'Adamo AP(1), Faletra F(7), Vozzi D(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Trieste, Italy. (2)Medical
Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, FG,
Italy. (3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.
(4)MOSE-DEA, University of Trieste, Piazzale Europa 1, 34127 Trieste, Italy.
(5)UOC Laboratory of Medical Genetics, IRCCS Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, 
94018 Troina, EN, Italy. (6)Unit of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, IRCCS
Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, 94018 Troina, EN, Italy. (7)Institute for
Maternal and Child Health-IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste, Italy. (8)Institute
for Maternal and Child Health-IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste, Italy. Electronic 
address: diego.vozzi@burlo.trieste.it.

The technological improvements over the last years made considerable progresses
in the knowledge of the etiology of intellectual Disability (ID). However, at
present very little is known about the genetic heterogeneity underlying the
non-syndromic form of ID (NS-ID). To investigate the genetic basis of NS-ID we
analyzed 43 trios and 22 isolated NS-ID patients using a targeted sequencing (TS)
approach. 71 NS-ID genes have been selected and sequenced in all subjects. We
found putative pathogenic mutations in 7 out of 65 patients. The pathogenic role 
of mutations was evaluated through sequence comparison and structural analysis
was performed to predict the effect of alterations in a 3D computational model
through molecular dynamics simulations. Additionally, a deep patient clinical
re-evaluation has been performed after the molecular results. This approach
allowed us to find novel pathogenic mutations with a detection rate close to 11% 
in our cohort of patients. This result supports the hypothesis that many NS-ID
related genes still remain to be discovered and that NS-ID is a more complex
phenotype compared to syndromic form, likely caused by a complex and broad
interaction between genes alterations and environment factors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26411299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Jan;170(1):156-61. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37405. Epub 2015
Sep 23.

Gonadal mosaicism in ARID1B gene causes intellectual disability and dysmorphic
features in three siblings.

Ben-Salem S(1), Sobreira N(2), Akawi NA(3), Al-Shamsi AM(4), John A(1), Pramathan
T(5), Valle D(2), Ali BR(1), Al-Gazali L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine and Heath Sciences, United Arab
Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates. (2)Institute of Genetic
Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge, United Kingdom. (4)Department of Paediatrics, Tawam Hospital, Al-Ain, 
United Arab Emirates. (5)Department of Paediatrics, College of Medicine and Heath
Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.

The gene encoding the AT-rich interaction domain-containing protein 1B (ARID1B)
has recently been shown to be one of the most frequently mutated genes in
patients with intellectual disability (ID). The phenotypic spectrums associated
with variants in this gene vary widely ranging for mild to severe non-specific ID
to Coffin-Siris syndrome. In this study, we evaluated three children from a
consanguineous Emirati family affected with ID and dysmorphic features. Genomic
DNA from all affected siblings was analyzed using CGH array and whole-exome
sequencing (WES). Based on a recessive mode of inheritance, homozygous or
compound heterozygous variants shared among all three affected children could not
be identified. However, further analysis revealed a heterozygous variant
(c.4318C>T; p.Q1440*) in the three affected children in an autosomal dominant ID 
causing gene, ARID1B. This variant was absent in peripheral blood samples
obtained from both parents and unaffected siblings. Therefore, we propose that
the most likely explanation for this situation is that one of the parents is a
gonadal mosaic for the variant. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
report of a gonadal mosaicism inheritance of an ARID1B variant leading to
familial ID recurrence. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26395437  [PubMed - in process]


14. BMC Genomics. 2015 Sep 16;16:701. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1898-1.

De novo mutations in ARID1B associated with both syndromic and non-syndromic
short stature.

Yu Y(1,)(2), Yao R(3), Wang L(4), Fan Y(5), Huang X(6), Hirschhorn J(7,)(8,)(9), 
Dauber A(10), Shen Y(11,)(12,)(13,)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology/Genetics, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Institute for Pediatric Research,
1665, Kongjiang Road, Shanghai, 200092, China. yuyongguo@shsmu.edu.cn.
(2)Division of Endocrinology and Genetic Metabolism, Department of Internal
Medicine, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, Shanghai Jiaotong University School
of Medicine, 1678 Dongfang Road, Shanghai, 200127, China. yuyongguo@shsmu.edu.cn.
(3)Medical Genetics Department, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, Shanghai
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, 1678 Dongfang Road, Shanghai, 200127,
China. yaoruen@126.com. (4)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology/Genetics, Xinhua
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Institute
for Pediatric Research, 1665, Kongjiang Road, Shanghai, 200092, China.
leafrose210@126.com. (5)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology/Genetics, Xinhua
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Institute
for Pediatric Research, 1665, Kongjiang Road, Shanghai, 200092, China.
fanyanjie13@163.com. (6)Division of Endocrinology and Genetic Metabolism,
Department of Internal Medicine, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, Shanghai
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, 1678 Dongfang Road, Shanghai, 200127,
China. jcperkesh@126.com. (7)Division of Endocrinology and Division of Genetics, 
Children's Hospital Boston, 300 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
joelh@broadinstitute.org. (8)Program in Medical and Population Genetics,
Metabolism Program, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, 02141, USA.
joelh@broadinstitute.org. (9)Center for Basic and Translational Obesity Research,
Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. joelh@broadinstitute.org.
(10)Division of Endocrinology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. Andrew.Dauber@cchmc.org. (11)Medical Genetics
Department, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, Shanghai Jiaotong University
School of Medicine, 1678 Dongfang Road, Shanghai, 200127, China.
yiping.shen@childrens.harvard.edu. (12)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. yiping.shen@childrens.harvard.edu.
(13)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
yiping.shen@childrens.harvard.edu. (14)Claritas Genomics, Cambridge, MA, 02139,
USA. yiping.shen@childrens.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Human height is a complex trait with a strong genetic basis.
Recently, a significant association between rare copy number variations (CNVs)
and short stature has been identified, and candidate genes in these rare CNVs are
being explored. This study aims to evaluate the association between mutations in 
ARID1B gene and short stature, both the syndromic and non-syndromic form.
RESULTS: Based on a case-control study of whole genome chromosome microarray
analysis (CMA), three overlapping CNVs were identified in patients with
developmental disorders who exhibited short stature. ARID1B, a causal gene for
Coffin Siris syndrome, is the only gene encompassed by all three CNVs. A
following retrospective genotype-phenotype analysis based on a literature review 
confirmed that short stature is a frequent feature in those Coffin-Siris syndrome
patients with ARID1B mutations. Mutation screening of ARID1B coding regions was
further conducted in a cohort of 48 non-syndromic short stature patients,andfour 
novel missense variants including two de novo mutations were found.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that haploinsufficient mutations of ARID1B are 
associated with syndromic short stature including Coffin-Siris syndrome and
intellectual disability, while rare missense variants in ARID1B are associated
with non-syndromic short stature. This study supports the notion that mutations
in genes related to syndromic short stature may exert milder effect and
contribute to short stature in the general population.

PMCID: PMC4574214
PMID: 26376624  [PubMed - in process]


15. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Dec;167(12):3186-91. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37356. Epub 2015 
Sep 14.

Report of a patient with a constitutional missense mutation in SMARCB1,
Coffin-Siris phenotype, and schwannomatosis.

Gossai N(1), Biegel JA(2), Messiaen L(3), Berry SA(4), Moertel CL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University of Minnesota Masonic
Children's Hospital, Minneapolis, Minnesota. (2)Department of Pediatrics, The
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (3)Department of
Genetics, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama. (4)Division of 
Genetics and Metabolism University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.

We report a patient with a constitutional missense mutation in SMARCB1,
Coffin-Siris Syndrome (CSS), and schwannomatosis. CSS is a rare congenital
syndrome with characteristic clinical findings. This thirty-three-year-old man
was diagnosed early in life with the constellation of moderate intellectual
disability, hypotonia, mild microcephaly, coarse facies, wide mouth with full
lips, hypoplasia of the digits, and general hirsutism. At age 26, he was found to
have schwannomatosis after presenting with acute spinal cord compression. Blood
and tissue analysis of multiple subsequent schwannoma resections revealed a
germline missense mutation of SMARCB1, acquired loss of 22q including SMARCB1 and
NF2 and mutation of the remaining NF2 wild-type allele-thus completing the
four-hit, three-event mechanism associated with schwannomatosis. Variations in
five genes have been associated with the Coffin-Siris phenotype: ARID1A, ARID1B, 
SMARCA4, SMARCB1, and SMARCE1. Of these genes, SMARCB1 has a well-established
association with schwannomatosis and malignancy. This is the first report of a
patient with a constitutional missense mutation of SMARCB1 resulting in CSS and
subsequent development of schwannomatosis. This finding demonstrates that a
SMARCB1 mutation may be the initial "hit" (constitutional) for a genetic disorder
with subsequent risk of developing schwannomas and other malignancies, and raises
the possibility that other patients with switch/sucrose non-fermenting (SWI/SNF) 
mutations may be at increased risk for tumors. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26364901  [PubMed - in process]


16. Hum Mutat. 2015 Dec;36(12):1197-204. doi: 10.1002/humu.22901. Epub 2015 Sep 30.

Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing Analysis of 1,000 Individuals with
Intellectual Disability.

Grozeva D(1), Carss K(2,)(3), Spasic-Boskovic O(1,)(4), Tejada MI(5,)(6), Gecz
J(7), Shaw M(7), Corbett M(7), Haan E(7), Thompson E(7), Friend K(8), Hussain
Z(1), Hackett A(9), Field M(9), Renieri A(10,)(11), Stevenson R(12), Schwartz
C(12), Floyd JA(2,)(13), Bentham J(14), Cosgrove C(14), Keavney B(15),
Bhattacharya S(14); Italian X-linked Mental Retardation Project; UK10K
Consortium; GOLD Consortium, Hurles M(2), Raymond FL(1).

Collaborators: Strangoni G, D' Avanzo G, Carnevale F, Resta N, Scarano G,
Mazzanti L, Borgatti R, Parini B, Marchina E, Strisciuglio P, Cavalli P, Bigoni
S, Zammarchi E, Faravelli F, Di Rocco M, Lerone M, Gaslini G, D'Alessandro E,
Selicorni A, Pantaleoni C, Bedeschi F, Rinaldi MM, Tenconi R, Verri A, Battaglia 
A, Guerrini R, Priolo M, Garavelli L, Neri G, Pergola M, Galasso C, Zelante L,
Renieri A, Ferrero G, Memo L, Turolla L, Hladnik U, Romano C, Durbin R, Barrett
J, Barroso I, Davey-Smith G, Farooqi IS, Hurles M, O' Rahilly S, Palotie A,
Soranzo N, Spector T, Zeggini E, Beales P, Bentham J, Bhattacharya S, Blackwood
D, Bolton P, Breen G, Chatterjee K, Collier D, Fitzpatrick D, Gallagher L,
Geschwind D, Gurling H, Humphries S, McGuffin P, Monaco A, Muntoni F, Owen M,
Raymond L, Savage D, Scambler P, Semple R, Skuse D, St Clair D, Timpson N, Van
der Aa N, Ahmed A, Ajith VK, Archer H, Armstrong R, Balasubramanian M, Baralle D,
Barnicoat A, Beales P, Bennett C, Bernhard B, Bianciardi L, Bitner-Glindzicz M,
Blair E, van Bokhoven H, van Bon B, Bradley L, Brady A, Brewer C, Brunner H,
Burke M, Caliebe A, Canham N, Castle B, Chandler K, Clarke A, Clayton-Smith J,
Clowes V, Cole T, Collins A, Cook J, Coughlin C, Cowe A, Cox H, Crow Y, Dabir T, 
Davies S, Deshpande D, Diderich KE, Dolling C, Donnai D, Donnelly D, Dooijes D,
Dupont J, Ellis I, Van Esch H, Field M, De Filippis R, Firth H, Fisher R,
Fitzpatrick D, Foulds N, Franco B, Fry A, Fryer A, Fuchs G, Garcia S, Gardiner C,
Gecz J, Gibbons R, Goodship J, Green A, Greenhalgh L, Guanti G, Guilbert P,
Hackett A, Halest MV, Haroon M, Harvey J, Henderson A, Hennekam R, Holden S,
Holder S, Homfray T, Hurst J, Ionnides A, Jarvis J, Johnson DS, Jones E, Jones L,
Jones L, Jongmans M, Josifova D, Joss S, Kenny J, Kerr B, Kingston H, Kini U,
Kivuva E, Kooy F, Kraus A, Kurian M, Lachlan K, Lam W, Lees M, Lindsay S, Longman
C, Lynch S, Magee A, Van Maldergem L, Male A, Mari F, McConnell V, McGeb A, McKee
S, McKeown C, McWilliam C, Medeira A, Mehta S, Metcalfe K, Mohammed S, Morton J, 
Murday V, Newbury-Ecob R, Nik-Zainal' S, Norman A, Park SM, Parker MJ, Prescott
K, Price S, Procter A, Quarrell O, Rankin J, Raymond L, Rea G, Reardon W, Renieri
A, Robert L, Rosser E, Sandford R, Schwartz C, Scott R, Scurr I, Senger G, Sharif
S, Shaw A, Shaw C, Shears D, Smithson S, Splitt M, Stevenson R, Stewart A,
Stewart F, Stewart H, Suri M, Sweeney E, Taffinder S, Tanteles G, Tejada MI,
Temple K, Thompson J, Tocher J, Tomkins S, Turner C, Turnpenny P, Vanderstein A, 
Vasudevan P, Villard L, Visser L, Wakeling E, Weber A, Williams D, Wilson L,
Woods G, Wright M, Writzl K, Yates L.

To identify genetic causes of intellectual disability (ID), we screened a cohort 
of 986 individuals with moderate to severe ID for variants in 565 known or
candidate ID-associated genes using targeted next-generation sequencing. Likely
pathogenic rare variants were found in ~11% of the cases (113 variants in 107/986
individuals: ~8% of the individuals had a likely pathogenic loss-of-function
[LoF] variant, whereas ~3% had a known pathogenic missense variant). Variants in 
SETD5, ATRX, CUL4B, MECP2, and ARID1B were the most common causes of ID. This
study assessed the value of sequencing a cohort of probands to provide a
molecular diagnosis of ID, without the availability of DNA from both parents for 
de novo sequence analysis. This modeling is clinically relevant as 28% of all UK 
families with dependent children are single parent households. In conclusion, to 
diagnose patients with ID in the absence of parental DNA, we recommend
investigation of all LoF variants in known genes that cause ID and assessment of 
a limited list of proven pathogenic missense variants in these genes. This will
provide 11% additional diagnostic yield beyond the 10%-15% yield from array CGH
alone.

© 2015 The Authors. **Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26350204  [PubMed - in process]


17. Pathol Int. 2015 Nov;65(11):595-602. doi: 10.1111/pin.12350. Epub 2015 Sep 8.

Frequent loss of the expression of multiple subunits of the SWI/SNF complex in
large cell carcinoma and pleomorphic carcinoma of the lung.

Yoshimoto T(1), Matsubara D(1,)(2), Nakano T(3), Tamura T(1), Endo S(3), Sugiyama
Y(4), Niki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Pathology, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke,
Japan. (2)Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Institute of Medical Science,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Division of General Thoracic Surgery, Jichi
Medical University, Shimotsuke, Japan. (4)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Jichi
Medical University, Shimotsuke, Japan.

The switch/sucrose non-fermenting (SWI/SNF) complex has recently emerged as a
novel tumor suppressor in various human cancers. In the present study, we
analyzed the expression of multiple SWI/SNF subunits in primary non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). A total of 133 NSCLC, consisting of 25 squamous cell
carcinomas (SCC), 70 adenocarcinomas (AD), 16 large cell carcinomas (LC), and 22 
pleomorphic carcinomas (PL), were immunohistochemically examined for the
expression of BRG1, BRM, BAF47, ARID1A, and ARID1B. The frequency at which
reductions in the expression of BRG1 were observed was significantly higher in
the LC-PL group (13/38, 34.2%) than in the SCC-AD group (7/95, 7.4%). Similarly, 
the frequency at which reductions in the expression of BRM were observed was
significantly higher in the LC-PL group (17/38, 44.7%) than in the SCC-AD group
(14/95, 14.7%). The loss of the expression of ARID1A, ARID1B, and BAF47 was
observed only in a fraction of NSCLC cases. Furthermore, the frequency at which
the concurrent loss of multiple subunits of the SWI/SNF complex was observed was 
significantly higher in the LC-PL group (10/38, 26.3%) than in the SCC-AD group
(8/95, 8.4%). Collectively, these results indicate that the loss of the SWI/SNF
complex was related to dedifferentiation in NSCLC.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Pathology and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 26345631  [PubMed - in process]


18. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Sep 3;97(3):445-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.08.002.

Chromatin-Remodeling-Factor ARID1B Represses Wnt/ß-Catenin Signaling.

Vasileiou G(1), Ekici AB(1), Uebe S(1), Zweier C(1), Hoyer J(1), Engels H(2),
Behrens J(3), Reis A(4), Hadjihannas MV(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. (2)Institute of Human Genetics,
University of Bonn, 53105 Bonn, Germany. (3)Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for
Molecular Medicine, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054
Erlangen, Germany. (4)Institute of Human Genetics,
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
Electronic address: andre.reis@uk-erlangen.de. (5)Institute of Human Genetics,
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany;
Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for Molecular Medicine, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

The link of chromatin remodeling to both neurodevelopment and cancer has recently
been highlighted by the identification of mutations affecting BAF
chromatin-remodeling components, such as ARID1B, in individuals with intellectual
disability and cancer. However, the underlying molecular mechanism(s) remains
unknown. Here, we show that ARID1B is a repressor of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.
Through whole-transcriptome analysis, we find that in individuals with
intellectual disability and ARID1B loss-of-function mutations, Wnt/ß-catenin
target genes are upregulated. Using cellular models of low and high Wnt/ß-catenin
activity, we demonstrate that knockdown of ARID1B activates Wnt/ß-catenin target 
genes and Wnt/ß-catenin-dependent transcriptional reporters in a
ß-catenin-dependent manner. Reciprocally, forced expression of ARID1B inhibits
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling downstream of the ß-catenin destruction complex. Both
endogenous and exogenous ARID1B associate with ß-catenin and repress
Wnt/ß-catenin-mediated transcription through the BAF core subunit BRG1.
Accordingly, mutations in ARID1B leading to partial or complete deletion of its
BRG1-binding domain, as is often observed in intellectual disability and cancers,
compromise association with ß-catenin, and the resultant ARID1B mutant proteins
fail to suppress Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Finally, knockdown of ARID1B in mouse
neuroblastoma cells leads to neurite outgrowth through ß-catenin. The data
suggest that aberrations in chromatin-remodeling factors, such as ARID1B, might
contribute to neurodevelopmental abnormalities and cancer through deregulation of
developmental and oncogenic pathways, such as the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
pathway.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4564991
PMID: 26340334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mod Pathol. 2015 Nov;28(11):1504-14. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.103. Epub 2015
Sep 4.

Targeted genomic profiling reveals recurrent KRAS mutations and gain of
chromosome 1q in mesonephric carcinomas of the female genital tract.

Mirkovic J(1,)(2), Sholl LM(1,)(2,)(3), Garcia E(3), Lindeman N(1,)(2,)(3),
MacConaill L(2,)(3,)(4), Hirsch M(1,)(2), Dal Cin P(1,)(2,)(3), Gorman M(1),
Barletta JA(1,)(2), Nucci MR(1,)(2), McCluggage WG(5), Howitt BE(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (3)Center for Advanced Molecular
Diagnostics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social
Care Trust, Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK.

Mesonephric carcinoma is a rare form of gynecologic cancer derived from
mesonephric remnants usually located in the lateral wall of the uterine cervix.
An analogous tumor occurs in the adnexa, female adnexal tumor of probable
Wolffian origin. The pathogenesis and molecular events in mesonephric carcinoma
are not known. The aim of this study was to examine the molecular alterations in 
mesonephric carcinoma to identify driver mutations and therapeutically targetable
mutations. This study consisted of 19 tumors from 17 patients: 18 mesonephric
carcinomas (15 primary tumors and three metastatic tumors) and 1 female adnexal
tumor of probable Wolffian origin. In two patients, both primary and metastatic
tumors were available. Genomic DNA was isolated and targeted next-generation
sequencing was performed to detect mutations, copy number variations, and
structural variants by surveying full exonic regions of 300 cancer genes and 113 
selected intronic regions across 35 genes. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) for 1p and 1q was performed in two cases. Eighty-one percent (13/16) of
mesonephric carcinomas had either a KRAS (n=12) or NRAS (n=1) mutation. Mutations
in chromatin remodeling genes (ARID1A, ARID1B, or SMARCA4) were present in 62% of
mesonephric carcinomas. All mesonephric carcinomas lacked mutations in PIK3CA and
PTEN. The most common copy number alteration was 1q gain, found in 12 (75%)
mesonephric carcinomas; this was confirmed by FISH in two cases. Mesonephric
carcinoma is characterized by molecular alterations that differ from those of
more common variants of cervical and endometrial adenocarcinoma, which harbor
KRAS/NRAS mutations in 7% and 25% of cases, respectively. KRAS/NRAS mutations are
common in mesonephric carcinoma and are often accompanied by gain of 1q and
mutations in chromatin remodeling genes. Targeting inhibitors of the RAS/MAPK
pathway may be useful in the treatment of mesonephric carcinoma.

PMID: 26336887  [PubMed - in process]


20. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Jun 9;7(1):59. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0091-3. eCollection
2015.

Targeted next-generation sequencing reveals high frequency of mutations in
epigenetic regulators across treatment-naïve patient melanomas.

Lee JJ(1), Sholl LM(1), Lindeman NI(1), Granter SR(1), Laga AC(1), Shivdasani
P(1), Chin G(1), Luke JJ(2), Ott PA(2), Hodi FS(2), Mihm MC Jr(2), Lin JY(2),
Werchniak AE(2), Haynes HA(2), Bailey N(2), Liu R(1), Murphy GF(1), Lian CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
221 Longwood Avenue, EBRC Suite 401, Boston, MA 02115 USA. (2)Melanoma Center,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 450 Brookline Ave., Boston,
MA 02215-5450 USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent developments in genomic sequencing have advanced our
understanding of the mutations underlying human malignancy. Melanoma is a
prototype of an aggressive, genetically heterogeneous cancer notorious for its
biologic plasticity and predilection towards developing resistance to targeted
therapies. Evidence is rapidly accumulating that dysregulated epigenetic
mechanisms (DNA methylation/demethylation, histone modification, non-coding RNAs)
may play a central role in the pathogenesis of melanoma. Therefore, we sought to 
characterize the frequency and nature of mutations in epigenetic regulators in
clinical, treatment-naïve, patient melanoma specimens obtained from one academic 
institution.
RESULTS: Targeted next-generation sequencing for 275 known and investigative
cancer genes (of which 41 genes, or 14.9 %, encoded an epigenetic regulator) of
38 treatment-naïve patient melanoma samples revealed that 22.3 % (165 of 740) of 
all non-silent mutations affected an epigenetic regulator. The most frequently
mutated genes were BRAF, MECOM, NRAS, TP53, MLL2, and CDKN2A. Of the 40 most
commonly mutated genes, 12 (30.0 %) encoded epigenetic regulators, including
genes encoding enzymes involved in histone modification (MECOM, MLL2, SETD2),
chromatin remodeling (ARID1B, ARID2), and DNA methylation and demethylation
(TET2, IDH1). Among the 38 patient melanoma samples, 35 (92.1 %) harbored at
least one mutation in an epigenetic regulator. The genes with the highest number 
of total UVB-signature mutations encoded epigenetic regulators, including MLL2
(100 %, 16 of 16) and MECOM (82.6 %, 19 of 23). Moreover, on average, epigenetic 
genes harbored a significantly greater number of UVB-signature mutations per gene
than non-epigenetic genes (3.7 versus 2.4, respectively; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01).
Bioinformatics analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) melanoma mutation
dataset also revealed a frequency of mutations in the 41 epigenetic genes
comparable to that found within our cohort of patient melanoma samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified a high prevalence of somatic mutations in genes
encoding epigenetic regulators, including those involved in DNA demethylation,
histone modification, chromatin remodeling, and microRNA processing. Moreover,
UVB-signature mutations were found more commonly among epigenetic genes than in
non-epigenetic genes. Taken together, these findings further implicate epigenetic
mechanisms, particularly those involving the chromatin-remodeling enzyme
MECOM/EVI1 and histone-modifying enzyme MLL2, in the pathobiology of melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4517542
PMID: 26221190  [PubMed]


21. Heart Surg Forum. 2015 Feb 27;18(1):E1-5. doi: 10.1532/hsf.1214.

Genetic variants associated with vein graft stenosis after coronary artery bypass
grafting.

Shah AA(1), Haynes C(2), Craig DM(2), Sebek J(2), Grass E(2), Abramson K(2),
Hauser E(2), Gregory SG(2), Kraus WE(2,)(3), Smith PK(1), Shah SH(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC. Email:asad.shah@duke.edu. (2)Duke
Molecular Physiology Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC.

BACKGROUND: Vein graft stenosis after coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is
common. Identifying genes associated with vein graft stenosis after CABG could
reveal novel mechanisms of disease and discriminate patients at risk for graft
failure. We hypothesized that genome-wide association would identify these genes.
METHODS: We performed a genome-wide association study on a subset of patients
presenting for cardiac catheterization for concern of ischemic heart disease, who
also underwent CABG and subsequent coronary angiography after CABG for clinical
indications (n = 521). Cases were defined as individuals with =50% stenosis in
any vein graft on any cardiac catheterization, and controls were defined as those
who did not have vein graft stenosis on any subsequent cardiac catheterization.
Multivariable logistic regression was used to assess the association between
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and vein graft stenosis.
RESULTS: Sixty-nine percent of patients had vein graft failure after CABG. Seven 
SNPs were significantly associated with vein graft stenosis, including intronic
SNPs in the genes PALLD (Rs6854137, P = 3.77 × 10(-6)), ARID1B (Rs184074, P =
5.97 × 10(-6)), and TMEM123 (Rs11225247, P = 8.25 × 10(-6)); and intergenic SNPs 
near the genes ABCA13 (Rs10232860, P = 4.54 × 10(-6)), RMI2 (Rs9921338, P = 6.15 
× 10(-6)), PRM2 (Rs7198849, P = 7.27 × 10(-6)), and TNFSF4 (Rs17346536, P = 9.33 
× 10(-6)).
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified novel genetic variants that may predispose to
risk of vein graft failure after CABG, many within biologically plausible
pathways. These polymorphisms merit further investigation, as they could assist
in stratifying patients with multi-vessel coronary artery disease, which could
lead to alterations in management and revascularization strategy.

PMID: 25881214  [PubMed - in process]


22. Histopathology. 2015 Nov;67(5):709-18. doi: 10.1111/his.12701. Epub 2015 May 17.

Clinicopathological significance of ARID1B in breast invasive ductal carcinoma.

Shao F(1,)(2), Guo T(1), Chua PJ(1), Tang L(2), Thike AA(3), Tan PH(3), Bay
BH(1), Baeg GH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore. (2)Department of Breast Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central 
South University, Changsha, Hunan, China. (3)Department of Pathology, Singapore
General Hospital, Singapore.

AIMS: Identification of prognostic and predictive biomarkers for breast cancer is
essential to better stratify patients for treatment and evaluate patient outcome.
AT-rich interactive domain-containing protein 1B (ARID1B) is implicated in cell
proliferation, but its role in tumorigenesis remains unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Immunohistochemical analysis of ARID1B expression using
breast cancer tissue microarrays containing 156 breast invasive ductal carcinoma 
patient samples and subsequent statistical data analysis based on ARID1B
immunoreactivity score were performed to examine the correlation between
clinicopathological parameters in breast cancer and ARID1B expression. In-vitro
assays were also performed to study the role of ARID1B in cell cycle progression.
Univariate analysis revealed that high ARID1B expression is correlated closely
with histological grade (P = 0.045) and size (P = 0.043) of invasive breast
cancer. These findings were confirmed by multivariate analysis. Notably,
increased ARID1B expression was frequently detected in the aggressive
triple-negative breast cancer subtypes (P = 0.039) and associated with decreased 
5-year disease-free survival rate. Lastly, MDA-MB-231 cells with reduced ARID1B
activity displayed a delay in G1 to S phase cell cycle transition and
consequently showed a decrease in cell proliferation compared with controls (P < 
0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: ARID1B potentially serves as a valuable prognostic and predictive
biomarker as well as a therapeutic target in breast cancer.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25817822  [PubMed - in process]


23. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2015 May;38(3):437-43. doi: 10.1007/s10545-015-9823-y. Epub 
2015 Mar 4.

Whole exome sequencing of suspected mitochondrial patients in clinical practice.

Wortmann SB(1), Koolen DA, Smeitink JA, van den Heuvel L, Rodenburg RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen Centre for Mitochondrial
Disorders (NCMD), 774 Translational Metabolic Laboratory, P.O Box 9101, 6500 HB, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Mitochondrial disorders are characterized by a broad clinical spectrum. Identical
clinical signs and symptoms can be caused by mutations in different mitochondrial
or nuclear genes. Vice versa, the same mutation can lead to different phenotypes.
Genetic syndromes and neuromuscular disorders mimicking mitochondrial disorders
further complicate the diagnostic process. Whole exome sequencing (WES) is the
state of the art next generation sequencing technique to identify genetic defects
in mitochondrial disorders. Until recently it has mainly been used as a research 
tool. In this study, the use of WES in routine diagnostics is described. The WES 
data of 109 patients, referred under the suspicion of a mitochondrial disorder,
were examined in two steps. First, the data were filtered using a virtual gene
panel of genes known to be associated with mitochondrial disease. If negative,
the entire exome was examined. A molecular diagnosis was achieved in 39% of the
heterogeneous cohort, and in 57% of the subgroup of 42 patients with the highest 
suspicion for a mitochondrial disease. In addition to mutations in genes known to
be associated with mitochondrial disorders (e.g. TUFM, MTFMT, FBXL4), in the
subgroup of patients with the lowest suspicion for a mitochondrial disorder we
found mutations in several genes associated with neuromuscular disorders (e.g.
SEPN1, ACTA1) and genetic syndrome (e.g. SETBP1, ARID1B). Our results show that
WES technology has been successfully implemented as a state-of-the-art, molecular
diagnostic test for mitochondrial disorders as well as for the mimicking
disorders in daily clinical practice. It also illustrates that clinical and
biochemical phenotyping is essential for successful application of WES to
diagnose individual patients.

PMCID: PMC4432107
PMID: 25735936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Intractable Rare Dis Res. 2015 Feb;4(1):17-23. doi: 10.5582/irdr.2014.01021.

ARID1B-mediated disorders: Mutations and possible mechanisms.

Sim JC(1), White SM(2), Lockhart PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bruce Lefroy Centre for Genetic Health Research, Murdoch Childrens Research
Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; (2)Bruce Lefroy Centre for Genetic
Health Research, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia; ; Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia.

Mutations in the gene encoding AT-rich interactive domain-containing protein 1B
(ARID1B) were recently associated with multiple syndromes characterized by
developmental delay and intellectual disability, in addition to nonsyndromic
intellectual disability. While the majority of ARID1B mutations identified to
date are predicted to result in haploinsufficiency, the underlying pathogenic
mechanisms have yet to be fully understood. ARID1B is a DNA-binding subunit of
the Brahma-associated factor chromatin remodelling complexes, which play a key
role in the regulation of gene activity. The function of remodelling complexes
can be regulated by their subunit composition, and there is some evidence that
ARID1B is a component of the neuron-specific chromatin remodelling complex. This 
complex is involved in the regulation of stem/progenitor cells exiting the cell
cycle and differentiating into postmitotic neurons. Recent research has indicated
that alterations in the cell cycle contribute to the underlying pathogenesis of
syndromes associated with ARID1B haploinsufficiency in fibroblasts derived from
affected individuals. This review describes studies linking ARID1B to
neurodevelopmental disorders and it summarizes the function of ARID1B to provide 
insights into the pathogenic mechanisms underlying ARID1B-mediated disorders. In 
conclusion, ARID1B is likely to play a key role in neurodevelopment and reduced
levels of wild-type protein compromise normal brain development. Additional
studies are required to determine the mechanisms by which impaired neural
development contributes to the intellectual disability and speech impairment that
are consistently observed in individuals with ARID1B haploinsufficiency.

PMCID: PMC4322591
PMID: 25674384  [PubMed]


25. Discov Med. 2014 Dec;18(101):301-11.

Exome sequencing on malignant meningiomas identified mutations in
neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) and meningioma 1 (MN1) genes.

Zhang X(1), Jia H(2), Lu Y(3), Dong C(4), Hou J(5), Wang Z(6), Wang F(7), Zhong
H(7), Wang L(6), Wang K(8).

Author information: 
(1)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510641, China and BGI Diagnosis, Tianjin, Tianjin 300308,
China. (2)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA and The First Affiliated
Hospital, Jinan University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510632, China. (3)School of
Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510641, China. (4)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA. (5)Sun
Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510632, China. (6)Union
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, Hubei 430022, China. (7)BGI Tech Solutions, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518083,
China. (8)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute and Department of Psychiatry, University 
of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

BACKGROUND: Meningiomas are tumors originating from the membranous layers
surrounding the central nervous system, and are generally regarded as "benign"
tumors of the brain. Malignant meningiomas are rare and are typically associated 
with a higher risk of local tumor recurrence and a poorer prognosis (median
survival time <2 years). Previous genome-wide association studies and exome
sequencing studies have identified genes that play a role in susceptibility to
meningiomas, but these studies did not focus specifically on malignant tumors.
METHODS: We performed exome sequencing on five malignant meningiomas on the
Illumina HiSeq2000 platform using Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon kits. We used
wANNOVAR web server to annotate and prioritize variants, identified candidate
genes with recurrent mutations, and validated selected mutations by Sanger
sequencing. We next designed custom NimbleGen targeted region arrays on five
candidate genes, and sequenced four additional malignant meningiomas.
RESULTS: From exome sequencing data, we identified several frequently mutated
genes including NF2, MN1, ARID1B, SEMA4D, and MUC2, with private mutations in
tumors. We sequenced these genes in four additional samples and identified
potential driver mutations in NF2 (neurofibromatosis type 2) and MN1 (meningioma 
1).
CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed that mutations in NF2 may play a role in progression of
meningiomas, and nominated MN1 as a candidate gene for malignant transformation
of meningiomas. Our sample size is limited by the extreme rarity of malignant
meningiomas, but our study represents one of the first sequencing studies
focusing on the malignant subtype.

PMCID: PMC4720499
PMID: 25549701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Oncol Rep. 2015 Jan;33(1):283-91. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3584. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

Loss of function of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling genes leads to genome
instability of human lung cancer.

Huang HT(1), Chen SM(1), Pan LB(1), Yao J(1), Ma HT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, P.R. China.

SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes are frequently mutated in a variety of
human cancers. We investigated the mutation incidence and the role of mSWI/SNF
(BAF) complexes in human lung cancer. In the present study, we analyzed somatic
mutations of BAF complexes and other driver mutated genes of lung carcinoma
deposited in the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) database. BAF 
complexes were mutated in 282 of 803 (35.12%) lung carcinoma samples analyzed,
ranking second to TP53. Significantly, BAF-mutated samples exhibited more genomic
mutations than BAF wild-type ones. Moreover, a significant positive correlation
existed between the BAF mutations and overall genomic mutations in these lung
carcinoma samples (P<0.001, Pearson's correlation analysis). Specifically, the
mutant-typing of 6 BAF genes, SMARCA4, ARID2, ARID1B, BCL11A, BCL11B and BRD9 was
associated with more overall mutations in the lung carcinoma samples. A mutation 
reporter system was developed by means of the establishment of stable cell
sublines with slippage-luciferase transcript in a lung adenocarcinoma cell line, 
Calu-3. SMARCA4, the most frequently mutated BAF gene in lung cancer, was stably 
knocked down by pSUPER constructs carrying short hairpin RNA (shRNA). Mutation
ratios determined from the mutation reporters of Calu-3 cells were significantly 
increased upon stable SMARCA4 knockdown. We demonstrated that genetic mutations
of BAF complexes lead to genome instability of lung carcinoma. Therefore, BAF
complexes play an important role in maintaining genome stability in human lung
cancer.

PMID: 25370573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. PLoS Genet. 2014 Oct 30;10(10):e1004772. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004772.
eCollection 2014.

De novo mutations in moderate or severe intellectual disability.

Hamdan FF(1), Srour M(2), Capo-Chichi JM(1), Daoud H(3), Nassif C(1), Patry L(1),
Massicotte C(1), Ambalavanan A(3), Spiegelman D(3), Diallo O(3), Henrion E(3),
Dionne-Laporte A(3), Fougerat A(1), Pshezhetsky AV(1), Venkateswaran S(4),
Rouleau GA(3), Michaud JL(5).

Author information: 
(1)CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, Montreal, Canada. (2)CHU Sainte-Justine
Research Center, Montreal, Canada; Division of Pediatric Neurology, Montreal
Children's Hospital, Montreal, Canada. (3)Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Canada. (4)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of
Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Canada. (5)CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, Montreal,
Canada; Department of Pediatrics and Department of Neurosciences, University of
Montreal, Montreal, Canada.

Genetics is believed to have an important role in intellectual disability (ID).
Recent studies have emphasized the involvement of de novo mutations (DNMs) in ID 
but the extent to which they contribute to its pathogenesis and the identity of
the corresponding genes remain largely unknown. Here, we report a screen for DNMs
in subjects with moderate or severe ID. We sequenced the exomes of 41 probands
and their parents, and confirmed 81 DNMs affecting the coding sequence or
consensus splice sites (1.98 DNMs/proband). We observed a significant excess of
de novo single nucleotide substitutions and loss-of-function mutations in these
cases compared to control subjects, suggesting that at least a subset of these
variations are pathogenic. A total of 12 likely pathogenic DNMs were identified
in genes previously associated with ID (ARID1B, CHD2, FOXG1, GABRB3, GATAD2B,
GRIN2B, MBD5, MED13L, SETBP1, TBR1, TCF4, WDR45), resulting in a diagnostic yield
of ~29%. We also identified 12 possibly pathogenic DNMs in genes (HNRNPU, WAC,
RYR2, SET, EGR1, MYH10, EIF2C1, COL4A3BP, CHMP2A, PPP1CB, VPS4A, PPP2R2B) that
have not previously been causally linked to ID. Interestingly, no case was
explained by inherited mutations. Protein network analysis indicated that the
products of many of these known and candidate genes interact with each other or
with products of other ID-associated genes further supporting their involvement
in ID. We conclude that DNMs represent a major cause of moderate or severe ID.

PMCID: PMC4214635
PMID: 25356899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Dec;164A(12):3126-31. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36738. Epub 2014
Sep 22.

Disruption of the ARID1B and ADAMTS6 loci due to a t(5;6)(q12.3;q25.3) in a
patient with developmental delay.

Malli T(1), Duba HC, Erdel M, Marschon R, Kranewitter W, Deutschbauer S, Kralik
J, Diel E, Güenther B, Mueller D, Webersinke G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Biology and Tumor Cytogenetics, Department of
Internal Medicine I, Hospital Barmherzige Schwestern Linz, Upper Austria,
Austria.

Here, we report on a male patient with developmental delay, speech impairment,
mild dysmorphic features, and borderline intellectual disability, bearing a de
novo balanced t(5;6)(q11;q25.3). By combining FISH and long distance inverse PCR,
we identified two genes, ADAMTS6 and ARID1B, which were disrupted at the
translocation breakpoints. Due to the opposing transcriptional directions of the 
two genes, no fusion transcripts could be formed. ADAMTS6 on chromosome 5 encodes
a zinc metalloprotease. To date, there has been no information about the
substrates and the exact role of this enzyme protein. ARID1B on chromosome 6 is
involved in chromatin remodeling and transcriptional activation and is known to
play a role in neural development. To our knowledge, this is the fourth
translocation involving ARID1B reported in association with intellectual
disability. ARID1B haploinsufficiency has already been described in patients with
intellectual disabilities with or without corpus callosum abnormalities,
Coffin-Siris syndrome and autism (OMIM 614562 and OMIM 614556). A review of
patients with ARID1B mutations reveals their broad phenotypic variability. The
phenotype of the present patient is of the mildest described to date and further 
underscores this observation. We conclude that the most prominent and consistent 
clinical findings in patients with ARID1B haploinsufficiency are developmental
delay, speech impairment and intellectual disability and propose that patients
with unresolved genetic background and these clinical findings should be
considered for ARID1B mutation screening.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25250687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Brain Dev. 2015 May;37(5):527-36. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2014.08.009. Epub 2014 
Sep 22.

Coffin-Siris and Nicolaides-Baraitser syndromes are a common well recognizable
cause of intellectual disability.

Mari F(1), Marozza A(2), Mencarelli MA(3), Lo Rizzo C(3), Fallerini C(4), Dosa
L(3), Di Marco C(3), Carignani G(3), Baldassarri M(3), Cianci P(5), Vivarelli
R(6), Vascotto M(6), Grosso S(6), Rubegni P(7), Caffarelli C(8), Pretegiani E(9),
Fimiani M(7), Garavelli L(10), Cristofoli F(11), Vermeesch JR(11), Nuti R(8),
Dotti MT(9), Balestri P(6), Hayek J(12), Selicorni A(5), Renieri A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy; Genetica Medica, Azienda 
Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy. Electronic address:
francesca.mari@unisi.it. (2)Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria
Senese, Siena, Italy. (3)Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy;
Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy.
(4)Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. (5)Pediatric Department
at Monza Brianza per il Bambino e la sua Mamma (MBBM) Foundation, Pediatric
Genetic Unit, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy. (6)Pediatric Unit, University
of Siena, Siena, Italy. (7)Dept of Clinical Medicine and Immunological Science,
Dermatology Section, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. (8)Dept of Internal
Medicine, Endocrine-Metabolic Science and Biochemistry, University of Siena,
Italy. (9)Medical, Surgical and Neurological Sciences, Neurodegenerative Disease 
Unit, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. (10)Clinical Genetics Unit, Obstetric
and Paediatric Department, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico,
Arcispedale S Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy. (11)Center for Human Genetics,
KU Leuven, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium. (12)Child
Neuropsychiatry Unit, University Hospital, AOUS, Siena, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Nicolaides-Baraitser and Coffin-Siris syndromes are emerging
conditions with overlapping clinical features including intellectual disability
and typical somatic characteristics, especially sparse hair, low frontal
hairline, large mouth with thick and everted lips, and hands and feet anomalies. 
Since 2012, mutations in genes encoding six proteins of the BAF complex were
identified in both conditions.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We have clinically evaluated a cohort of 1161 patients with 
intellectual disability from three different Italian centers. A strong clinical
suspicion of either Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome or Coffin-Siris syndrome was
proposed in 11 cases who were then molecularly confirmed: 8 having de novo
missense mutations in SMARCA2, two frame-shift mutations in ARID1B and one
missense mutation in SMARCB1. Given the high frequency of the condition we set up
a one-step deep sequencing test for all 6 genes of the BAF complex.
CONCLUSIONS: These results prove that the frequency of these conditions may be as
high as the most common syndromes with intellectual deficit (about 1%). Clinical 
geneticists should be well aware of this group of disorders in the clinical
setting when ascertaining patients with intellectual deficit, the specific facial
features being the major diagnostic handle. Finally, this work adds information
on the clinical differences of the two conditions and presents a fast and
sensitive test for the molecular diagnosis.

Copyright © 2014 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25249037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Nat Commun. 2014 Sep 19;5:5006. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6006.

Genomic analyses of gynaecologic carcinosarcomas reveal frequent mutations in
chromatin remodelling genes.

Jones S(1), Stransky N(2), McCord CL(1), Cerami E(2), Lagowski J(3), Kelly D(3), 
Angiuoli SV(1), Sausen M(1), Kann L(1), Shukla M(1), Makar R(3), Wood LD(4), Diaz
LA Jr(5), Lengauer C(2), Velculescu VE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Personal Genome Diagnostics, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA. (2)Blueprint
Medicines, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA. (3)Knight Cancer Institute,
Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA. (4)Department 
of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA. (5)1] The
Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA [2] Swim Across America Laboratory and
the Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics at Johns Hopkins,
Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA. (6)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA.

Malignant mixed Müllerian tumours, also known as carcinosarcomas, are rare
tumours of gynaecological origin. Here we perform whole-exome analyses of 22
tumours using massively parallel sequencing to determine the mutational landscape
of this tumour type. On average, we identify 43 mutations per tumour, excluding
four cases with a mutator phenotype that harboured inactivating mutations in
mismatch repair genes. In addition to mutations in TP53 and KRAS, we identify
genetic alterations in chromatin remodelling genes, ARID1A and ARID1B, in histone
methyltransferase MLL3, in histone deacetylase modifier SPOP and in chromatin
assembly factor BAZ1A, in nearly two thirds of cases. Alterations in genes with
potential clinical utility are observed in more than three quarters of the cases 
and included members of the PI3-kinase and homologous DNA repair pathways. These 
findings highlight the importance of the dysregulation of chromatin remodelling
in carcinosarcoma tumorigenesis and suggest new avenues for personalized therapy.

PMCID: PMC4354107
PMID: 25233892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2014 Sep;166C(3):333-49. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31416. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

The role of BAF (mSWI/SNF) complexes in mammalian neural development.

Son EY, Crabtree GR.

The BAF (mammalian SWI/SNF) complexes are a family of multi-subunit ATP-dependent
chromatin remodelers that use ATP hydrolysis to alter chromatin structure.
Distinct BAF complex compositions are possible through combinatorial assembly of 
homologous subunit families and can serve non-redundant functions. In mammalian
neural development, developmental stage-specific BAF assemblies are found in
embryonic stem cells, neural progenitors and postmitotic neurons. In particular, 
the neural progenitor-specific BAF complexes are essential for controlling the
kinetics and mode of neural progenitor cell division, while neuronal BAF function
is necessary for the maturation of postmitotic neuronal phenotypes as well as
long-term memory formation. The microRNA-mediated mechanism for transitioning
from npBAF to nBAF complexes is instructive for the neuronal fate and can even
convert fibroblasts into neurons. The high frequency of BAF subunit mutations in 
neurological disorders underscores the rate-determining role of BAF complexes in 
neural development, homeostasis, and plasticity.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4405377
PMID: 25195934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2014 Sep;166C(3):241-51. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31415. Epub 2014 Aug 28.

Coffin-Siris syndrome and related disorders involving components of the BAF
(mSWI/SNF) complex: historical review and recent advances using next generation
sequencing.

Kosho T, Miyake N, Carey JC.

This issue of Seminars in Medical Genetics, American Journal of Medical Genetics 
Part C investigates the human diseases caused by mutations in the BAF complex
(also known as the mammalian SWI/SNF complex) genes, particularly focusing on
Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS). CSS is a rare congenital malformation syndrome
characterized by developmental delay or intellectual disability (ID), coarse
facial appearance, feeding difficulties, frequent infections, and
hypoplasia/aplasia of the fifth fingernails and fifth distal phalanges. In 2012, 
42 years after the first description of CSS in 1970, five causative genes
(SMARCB1, SMARCE1, SMARCA4, ARID1A, ARID1B), all encoding components of the BAF
complex, were identified as being responsible for CSS through whole exome
sequencing and pathway-based genetic screening. The identification of two
additional causative genes (PHF6, SOX11) followed. Mutations in another BAF
complex gene (SMARCA2) and (TBC1D24) were found to cause clinically similar
conditions with ID, Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome and DOORS syndrome,
respectively. Also, ADNP was found to be mutated in an autism/ID syndrome.
Furthermore, there is growing evidences for germline or somatic mutations in the 
BAF complex genes to be causal for cancer/cancer predisposition syndromes. These 
discoveries have highlighted the role of the BAF complex in the human development
and cancer formation. The biology of BAF is very complicated and much remains
unknown. Ongoing research is required to reveal the whole picture of the BAF
complex in human development, and will lead to the development of new targeted
therapies for related disorders in the future.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25169878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2014 Sep;166C(3):276-89. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31414. Epub 2014 Aug 28.

The ARID1B phenotype: what we have learned so far.

Santen GW, Clayton-Smith J; ARID1B-CSS consortium.

Collaborators: Adachi-Fukuda M, AlKindy A, Baban A, Berry K, Canham N, Collins A,
Chrzanowska K, Gardham A, Horn D, Kato M, Kosho T, Krajewska-Walasek M, Kramer N,
Maas S, Maystadt I, Mancini G, McKee S, Milunski J, Miyake N, Mizuno S, Ohashi H,
Okamoto N, Robertson S, Soares G, Tanabe S, Vincent-Delorme C, de Vries B,
Wieczorek D, Wilson L.

Evidence is now accumulating from a number of sequencing studies that ARID1B not 
only appears to be one of the most frequently mutated intellectual disability
(ID) genes, but that the range of phenotypes caused by ARID1B mutations seems to 
be extremely wide. Thus, it is one of the most interesting ID genes identified so
far in the exome sequencing era. In this article, we review the literature
surrounding ARID1B and attempt to delineate the ARID1B phenotype. The vast
majority of published ARID1B patients have been ascertained through studies of
Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS), which leads to bias when documenting the frequencies
of phenotypic features. Additional observations of those individuals ascertained 
through exome sequencing studies helps in delineation of the broader clinical
phenotype. We are currently establishing an ARID1B consortium, aimed at
collecting ARID1B patients identified through genome-wide sequencing strategies. 
We hope that this endeavor will eventually lead to a more comprehensive view of
the ARID1B phenotype.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25169814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2014 Sep;166C(3):262-75. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31407. Epub 2014 Aug 28.

Genotype-phenotype correlation of Coffin-Siris syndrome caused by mutations in
SMARCB1, SMARCA4, SMARCE1, and ARID1A.

Kosho T, Okamoto N; Coffin-Siris Syndrome International Collaborators.

Collaborators: Imai Y, Ohashi H, van Eerde AM, Chrzanowska K, Clayton-Smith J,
Kingston H, Mari F, Aggarwal S, Mowat D, Niikawa N, Hiraki Y, Matsumoto N,
Fukushima Y, Josifova D, Dean J, Smigiel R, Sakazume S, Silengo M, Tinschert S,
Kawame H, Yano S, Yamagata T, van Bon BW, Vulto-van Silfhout AT, Ben-Omran T,
Bigoni S, Alanay Y, Miyake N, Tsurusaki Y, Matsumoto N, Santen GW, Wieczorek D,
Wollnik B, Hennekam RC.

Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS) is a rare congenital malformation syndrome, recently 
found to be caused by mutations in several genes encoding components of the BAF
complex. To date, 109 patients have been reported with their mutations: SMARCB1
(12%), SMARCA4 (11%), SMARCE1 (2%), ARID1A (7%), ARID1B (65%), and PHF6 (2%). We 
review genotype-phenotype correlation of all previously reported patients with
mutations in SMARCB1, SMARCA4, SMARCE1, and ARID1A through reassessment of their 
clinical and molecular findings. Cardinal features of CSS included variable
degrees of intellectual disability (ID) predominantly affecting speech,
sucking/feeding difficulty, and craniofacial (thick eyebrows, long eyelashes),
digital (hypoplastic 5th fingers or toes, hypoplastic 5th fingernails or
toenails), and other characteristics (hypertrichosis). In addition, patients with
SMARCB1 mutations had severe neurodevelopmental deficits including severe ID,
seizures, CNS structural abnormalities, and no expressive words as well as
scoliosis. Especially, those with a recurrent mutation "p.Lys364del" represented 
strikingly similar phenotypes including characteristic facial coarseness.
Patients with SMARCA4 mutations had less coarse craniofacial appearances and
behavioral abnormalities. Patients with SMARCE1 mutations had a wide spectrum of 
manifestations from severe to moderate ID. Patients with ARID1A also had a wide
spectrum of manifestations from severe ID and serous internal complications that 
could result in early death to mild ID. Mutations in SMARCB1, SMARCA4, and
SMARCE1 are expected to exert dominant-negative or gain-of-function effects,
whereas those in ARID1A are expected to exert loss-of-function effects.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25168959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2014 Sep;166C(3):257-61. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31406. Epub 2014 Jul 31.

Numerous BAF complex genes are mutated in Coffin-Siris syndrome.

Miyake N, Tsurusaki Y, Matsumoto N.

Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS; OMIM#135900) is a rare congenital anomaly syndrome
characterized by intellectual disability, coarse face, hypertrichosis, and
absence/hypoplasia of the fifth digits' nails. As the majority of patients are
sporadic, an autosomal dominant inheritance model has been postulated. Recently, 
whole exome sequencing (WES) emerged as a comprehensive analytical method for
rare variants. We applied WES on five CSS patients and found two de novo
mutations in SMARCB1. SMARCB1 was completely sequenced in 23 CSS patients and the
mutations were found in two more patients. As SMARCB1 encodes a subunit of the
BAF complex functioning as a chromatin remodeling factor, mutations in 15 other
subunit genes may cause CSS and thus were analyzed in 23 CSS patients. We
identified heterozygous mutations in either of six genes (SMARCA4, SMARCB1,
SMARCA2, SMARCE1, ARID1A, and ARID1B) in 20 out of 23 CSS patients. The patient
with a SMARCA2 mutation was re-evaluated and identified as having
Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome (OMIM#601358), which is similar to but different
from CSS. Additionally, 49 more CSS patients were analyzed as a second cohort.
Together with the first cohort, 37 out of 71 (22 plus 49) patients were found to 
have a mutation in either one of five BAF complex genes. Furthermore, two CSS
patients were reported to have a PHF6 abnormality, which can also cause
Borjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome (OMIM#301900), an X-linked intellectual
disability syndrome with epilepsy and endocrine abnormalities. The current list
of mutated genes in CSS is far from being complete and analysis of more patients 
is required.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25081545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cancer Res. 2014 May 1;74(9):2465-75. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3608.

SWI/SNF factors required for cellular resistance to DNA damage include ARID1A and
ARID1B and show interdependent protein stability.

Watanabe R(1), Ui A, Kanno S, Ogiwara H, Nagase T, Kohno T, Yasui A.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Division of Dynamic Proteome in Cancer and Aging,
Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai; Division
of Genome Biology, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo; and
Department of Biotechnology Research, Kazusa DNA Research Institute, Chiba,
Japan.

The SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling family contains various protein complexes, which
regulate gene expression during cellular development and influence DNA damage
response in an ATP- and complex-dependent manner, of which details remain
elusive. Recent human genome sequencing of various cancer cells revealed frequent
mutations in SWI/SNF factors, especially ARID1A, a variant subunit in the
BRG1-associated factor (BAF) complex of the SWI/SNF family. We combined live-cell
analysis and gene-suppression experiments to show that suppression of either
ARID1A or its paralog ARID1B led to reduced nonhomologous end joining activity of
DNA double-strand breaks (DSB), decreased accumulation of KU70/KU80 proteins at
DSB, and sensitivity to ionizing radiation, as well as to cisplatin and UV. Thus,
in contrast to transcriptional regulation, both ARID1 proteins are required for
cellular resistance to various types of DNA damage, including DSB. The
suppression of other SWI/SNF factors, namely SNF5, BAF60a, BAF60c, BAF155, or
BAF170, exhibits a similar phenotype. Of these factors, ARID1A, ARID1B, SNF5, and
BAF60c are necessary for the immediate recruitment of the ATPase subunit of the
SWI/SNF complex to DSB, arguing that both ARID1 proteins facilitate the damage
response of the complex. Finally, we found interdependent protein stability among
the SWI/SNF factors, suggesting their direct interaction within the complex and
the reason why multiple factors are frequently lost in parallel in cancer cells. 
Taken together, we show that cancer cells lacking in the expression of certain
SWI/SNF factors, including ARID1A, are deficient in DNA repair and potentially
vulnerable to DNA damage.

©2014 AACR.

PMID: 24788099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Jul;164A(7):1857-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36515. Epub 2014
Apr 3.

Papillary thyroid cancer in a patient with interstitial 6q25 deletion including
ARID1B.

Vengoechea J(1), Carpenter L, Zárate YA.

Author information: 
(1)Divison of Genetics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences College of
Medicine, Little Rock, Arkansas.

PMID: 24700687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2014 Mar 27;9:43. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-9-43.

Expanding the phenotypic spectrum of ARID1B-mediated disorders and identification
of altered cell-cycle dynamics due to ARID1B haploinsufficiency.

Sim JC, White SM, Fitzpatrick E, Wilson GR, Gillies G, Pope K, Mountford HS,
Torring PM, McKee S, Vulto-van Silfhout AT, Jhangiani SN, Muzny DM, Leventer RJ, 
Delatycki MB, Amor DJ, Lockhart PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bruce Lefroy Centre for Genetic Health Research, Murdoch Childrens Research
Institute, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. paul.lockhart@mcri.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in genes encoding components of the Brahma-associated
factor (BAF) chromatin remodeling complex have recently been shown to contribute 
to multiple syndromes characterised by developmental delay and intellectual
disability. ARID1B mutations have been identified as the predominant cause of
Coffin-Siris syndrome and have also been shown to be a frequent cause of
nonsyndromic intellectual disability. Here, we investigate the molecular basis of
a patient with an overlapping but distinctive phenotype of intellectual
disability, plantar fat pads and facial dysmorphism.
METHODS/RESULTS: High density microarray analysis of the patient demonstrated a
heterozygous deletion at 6q25.3, which resulted in the loss of four genes
including AT Rich Interactive Domain 1B (ARID1B). Subsequent quantitative
real-time PCR analysis revealed ARID1B haploinsufficiency in the patient.
Analysis of both patient-derived and ARID1B knockdown fibroblasts after serum
starvation demonstrated delayed cell cycle re-entry associated with reduced cell 
number in the S1 phase. Based on the patient's distinctive phenotype, we
ascertained four additional patients and identified heterozygous de novo ARID1B
frameshift or nonsense mutations in all of them.
CONCLUSIONS: This study broadens the spectrum of ARID1B associated phenotypes by 
describing a distinctive phenotype including plantar fat pads but lacking the
hypertrichosis or fifth nail hypoplasia associated with Coffin-Siris syndrome. We
present the first direct evidence in patient-derived cells that alterations in
cell cycle contribute to the underlying pathogenesis of syndromes associated with
ARID1B haploinsufficiency.

PMCID: PMC4022252
PMID: 24674232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Clin Oncol. 2013 Jul;1(4):753-757. Epub 2013 May 21.

Jumonji/Arid1b (Jarid1b) protein modulates human esophageal cancer cell growth.

Kano Y(1), Konno M(2), Ohta K(1), Haraguchi N(3), Nishikawa S(1), Kagawa Y(3),
Hamabe A(1), Hasegawa S(1), Ogawa H(1), Fukusumi T(4), Noguchi Y(2), Ozaki M(1), 
Kudo T(2), Sakai D(2), Satoh T(2), Ishii M(5), Mizohata E(6), Inoue T(6), Mori
M(3), Doki Y(3), Ishii H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Frontier Science for Cancer and Chemotherapy, Osaka University,
Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871; ; Gastroenterological
Surgery, Osaka University, Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871;
(2)Departments of Frontier Science for Cancer and Chemotherapy, Osaka University,
Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871; (3)Gastroenterological
Surgery, Osaka University, Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871;
(4)Departments of Frontier Science for Cancer and Chemotherapy, Osaka University,
Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871; ; Otorhinolaryngology-Head
and Neck Surgery, Osaka University, Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka
565-0871; (5)Laboratory of Cellular Dynamics, WPI-Immunology Frontier Research
Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871; ; Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, Chiyoda, Tokyo
102-0075; (6)Osaka University, Graduate School of Technology, Suita, Osaka
565-0871, Japan.

Although esophageal cancer is highly heterogeneous and the involvement of
epigenetic regulation of cancer stem cells is highly suspected, the biological
significance of epigenetically modified molecules that regulate different
subpopulations remains to be firmly established. Using esophageal cancer cells,
we investigated the functional roles of the H3K4 demethylase Jumonji/Arid1b
(Jarid1b) (Kdm5b/Plu-1/Rbp2-h1), an epigenetic factor that is required for
continuous cell growth in melanoma. JARID1B knockdown resulted in the suppression
of esophageal cancer cell growth, sphere formation and invasion ability and was
associated with loss of epithelial marker expression. However, these inhibitory
effects observed on tumor formation were reverted subsequent to subcutaneous
inoculation of these cells into immune-deficient mice. These results indicated
that JARID1B plays a role in maintaining cancer stem cells in the esophagus and
justifies the rationale for studying the effects of continuous inhibition of this
epigenetic factor in esophageal cancer.

PMCID: PMC3915624
PMID: 24649241  [PubMed]


40. Am J Hum Genet. 2014 Mar 6;94(3):470-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.02.004.

Mutations in USP9X are associated with X-linked intellectual disability and
disrupt neuronal cell migration and growth.

Homan CC(1), Kumar R(2), Nguyen LS(3), Haan E(4), Raymond FL(5), Abidi F(6),
Raynaud M(7), Schwartz CE(6), Wood SA(8), Gecz J(9), Jolly LA(10).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, 
SA 5005, Australia. (2)Women's and Children's Health Research Institute, North
Adelaide, SA 5006, Australia; Discipline of Medicine, University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia; School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia. (3)School of Paediatrics
and Reproductive Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.
(4)School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia; South Australian Clinical Genetics Service, SA
Pathology at Women's and Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, SA 5006, Australia.
(5)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
CB2 0XY, UK. (6)J.C. Self Research Institute, Greenwood Genetics Centre,
Greenwood, SC 29646, USA. (7)CHRU de Tours, Service de Génétique, Tours 37000,
France; Inserm U930, UMR Imagerie et Cerveau, Tours 37000, France. (8)Eskitis
Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Brisbane, QLD 4111, Australia.
(9)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, 
SA 5005, Australia; Women's and Children's Health Research Institute, North
Adelaide, SA 5006, Australia; School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia; Robinson Institute,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia. Electronic address:
jozef.gecz@adelaide.edu.au. (10)School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia; Robinson Institute,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia. Electronic address:
lachlan.jolly@adelaide.edu.au.

With a wealth of disease-associated DNA variants being recently reported, the
challenges of providing their functional characterization are mounting.
Previously, as part of a large systematic resequencing of the X chromosome in 208
unrelated families with nonsyndromic X-linked intellectual disability, we
identified three unique variants (two missense and one protein truncating) in
USP9X. To assess the functional significance of these variants, we took advantage
of the Usp9x knockout mouse we generated. Loss of Usp9x causes reduction in both 
axonal growth and neuronal cell migration. Although overexpression of wild-type
human USP9X rescued these defects, all three USP9X variants failed to rescue
axonal growth, caused reduced USP9X protein localization in axonal growth cones, 
and (in 2/3 variants) failed to rescue neuronal cell migration. Interestingly, in
one of these families, the proband was subsequently identified to have a
microdeletion encompassing ARID1B, a known ID gene. Given our findings it is
plausible that loss of function of both genes contributes to the individual's
phenotype. This case highlights the complexity of the interpretations of genetic 
findings from genome-wide investigations. We also performed proteomics analysis
of neurons from both the wild-type and Usp9x knockout embryos and identified
disruption of the cytoskeleton as the main underlying consequence of the loss of 
Usp9x. Detailed clinical assessment of all three families with USP9X variants
identified hypotonia and behavioral and morphological defects as common features 
in addition to ID. Together our data support involvement of all three USP9X
variants in ID in these families and provide likely cellular and molecular
mechanisms involved.

Copyright © 2014 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3951929
PMID: 24607389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Nov;22(11):1327-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.25. Epub 2014 Feb
26.

Coffin-Siris Syndrome with obesity, macrocephaly, hepatomegaly and
hyperinsulinism caused by a mutation in the ARID1B gene.

Vals MA(1), Õiglane-Shlik E(2), Nõukas M(3), Shor R(4), Peet A(2), Kals M(5),
Kivistik PA(5), Metspalu A(3), Õunap K(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Paediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia [2]
Children's Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia [3] United
Laboratories, Department of Genetics, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. 
(2)1] Department of Paediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia [2]
Children's Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. (3)1] Estonian
Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia [2] Institute of Molecular and
Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. (4)Tallinn Children's
Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia. (5)Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu,
Tartu, Estonia. (6)1] Department of Paediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia [2] United Laboratories, Department of Genetics, Tartu University
Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.

Coffin-Siris Syndrome (CSS, MIM 135900) is a rare genetic disorder, and mutations
in ARID1B were recently shown to cause CSS. In this study, we report a novel
ARID1B mutation identified by whole-exome sequencing in a patient with clinical
features of CSS. We identified a novel heterozygous frameshift mutation
c.1584delG in exon 2 of ARID1B (NM_020732.3) predicting a premature stop codon
p.(Leu528Phefs*65). Sanger sequencing confirmed the c.1584delG mutation as a de
novo in the proband and that it was not present either in her parents,
half-sister or half-brother. Clinically, the patient presented with extreme
obesity, macrocephaly, hepatomegaly, hyperinsulinism and polycystic ovarian
syndrome (PCOS), which have previously not been described in CSS patients. We
suggest that obesity, macrocephaly, hepatomegaly and/or PCOS may be added to the 
list of clinical features of ARID1B mutations, but further clinical reports are
required to make a definite conclusion.

PMCID: PMC4200437
PMID: 24569609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Nat Med. 2014 Mar;20(3):251-4. doi: 10.1038/nm.3480. Epub 2014 Feb 23.

ARID1B is a specific vulnerability in ARID1A-mutant cancers.

Helming KC(1), Wang X(2), Wilson BG(3), Vazquez F(4), Haswell JR(3), Manchester
HE(3), Kim Y(3), Kryukov GV(5), Ghandi M(5), Aguirre AJ(6), Jagani Z(7), Wang
Z(8), Garraway LA(6), Hahn WC(6), Roberts CW(9).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [2] Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Department of Pediatrics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [4] Biological and Biomedical
Sciences Program, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [5]. (2)1] 
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [2] Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Department of Pediatrics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [4]. (3)1] Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Division 
of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
[3] Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)1] Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2]
Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (5)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA. (6)1] Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2]
Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [3] Center for Cancer Genome Discovery, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (7)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical
Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (8)Department of Cardiac Surgery,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. (9)1] Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Division 
of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
[3] Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
[4] Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [5] Center
for Cancer Genome Discovery, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

Recent studies have revealed that ARID1A, encoding AT-rich interactive domain 1A 
(SWI-like), is frequently mutated across a variety of human cancers and also has 
bona fide tumor suppressor properties. Consequently, identification of
vulnerabilities conferred by ARID1A mutation would have major relevance for human
cancer. Here, using a broad screening approach, we identify ARID1B, an ARID1A
homolog whose gene product is mutually exclusive with ARID1A in SWI/SNF
complexes, as the number 1 gene preferentially required for the survival of
ARID1A-mutant cancer cell lines. We show that loss of ARID1B in ARID1A-deficient 
backgrounds destabilizes SWI/SNF and impairs proliferation in both cancer cells
and primary cells. We also find that ARID1A and ARID1B are frequently co-mutated 
in cancer but that ARID1A-deficient cancers retain at least one functional ARID1B
allele. These results suggest that loss of ARID1A and ARID1B alleles
cooperatively promotes cancer formation but also results in a unique functional
dependence. The results further identify ARID1B as a potential therapeutic target
for ARID1A-mutant cancers.

PMCID: PMC3954704
PMID: 24562383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Int J Cancer. 2014 Aug 1;135(3):611-23. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28705. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Exome sequencing reveals frequent inactivating mutations in ARID1A, ARID1B, ARID2
and ARID4A in microsatellite unstable colorectal cancer.

Cajuso T(1), Hänninen UA, Kondelin J, Gylfe AE, Tanskanen T, Katainen R, Pitkänen
E, Ristolainen H, Kaasinen E, Taipale M, Taipale J, Böhm J, Renkonen-Sinisalo L, 
Mecklin JP, Järvinen H, Tuupanen S, Kilpivaara O, Vahteristo P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics Genome-Scale Biology Research Program,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

ARID1A has been identified as a novel tumor suppressor gene in ovarian cancer and
subsequently in various other tumor types. ARID1A belongs to the ARID domain
containing gene family, which comprises of 15 genes involved, for example, in
transcriptional regulation, proliferation and chromatin remodeling. In this
study, we used exome sequencing data to analyze the mutation frequency of all the
ARID domain containing genes in 25 microsatellite unstable (MSI) colorectal
cancers (CRCs) as a first systematic effort to characterize the mutation pattern 
of the whole ARID gene family. Genes which fulfilled the selection criteria in
this discovery set (mutations in at least 4/25 [16%] samples, including at least 
one nonsense or splice site mutation) were chosen for further analysis in an
independent validation set of 21 MSI CRCs. We found that in addition to ARID1A,
which was mutated in 39% of the tumors (18/46), also ARID1B (13%, 6/46), ARID2
(13%, 6/46) and ARID4A (20%, 9/46) were frequently mutated. In all these genes,
the mutations were distributed along the entire length of the gene, thus
distinguishing them from typical MSI target genes previously described. Our
results indicate that in addition to ARID1A, other members of the ARID gene
family may play a role in MSI CRC.

© 2013 UICC.

PMID: 24382590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Blood. 2014 Mar 13;123(11):1637-46. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-09-525808. Epub 2013 
Dec 23.

The genomic landscape of Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia is characterized by highly
recurring MYD88 and WHIM-like CXCR4 mutations, and small somatic deletions
associated with B-cell lymphomagenesis.

Hunter ZR(1), Xu L, Yang G, Zhou Y, Liu X, Cao Y, Manning RJ, Tripsas C,
Patterson CJ, Sheehy P, Treon SP.

Author information: 
(1)Bing Center for Waldenström's Macroglobulinemia, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA;

The genetic basis for Waldenström macroglobulinemia (WM) remains to be clarified.
Although 6q losses are commonly present, recurring gene losses in this region
remain to be defined. We therefore performed whole genome sequencing (WGS) in 30 
WM patients, which included germline/tumor sequencing for 10 patients. Validated 
somatic mutations occurring in >10% of patients included MYD88, CXCR4, and ARID1A
that were present in 90%, 27%, and 17% of patients, respectively, and included
the activating mutation L265P in MYD88 and warts, hypogammaglobulinemia,
infection, and myelokathexis-syndrome-like mutations in CXCR4 that previously
have only been described in the germline. WGS also delineated copy number
alterations (CNAs) and structural variants in the 10 paired patients. The CXCR4
and CNA findings were validated in independent expansion cohorts of 147 and 30 WM
patients, respectively. Validated gene losses due to CNAs involved PRDM2 (93%),
BTG1 (87%), HIVEP2 (77%), MKLN1 (77%), PLEKHG1 (70%), LYN (60%), ARID1B (50%),
and FOXP1 (37%). Losses in PLEKHG1, HIVEP2, ARID1B, and BCLAF1 constituted the
most common deletions within chromosome 6. Although no recurrent translocations
were observed, in 2 patients deletions in 6q corresponded with translocation
events. These studies evidence highly recurring somatic events, and provide a
genomic basis for understanding the pathogenesis of WM.

PMID: 24366360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Jun;22(6):792-800. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.248. Epub 2013
Nov 20.

Single exon-resolution targeted chromosomal microarray analysis of known and
candidate intellectual disability genes.

Tucker T(1), Zahir FR(2), Griffith M(3), Delaney A(3), Chai D(1), Tsang E(4),
Lemyre E(5), Dobrzeniecka S(5), Marra M(3), Eydoux P(1), Langlois S(6), Hamdan
FF(5), Michaud JL(5), Friedman JM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (2)1] Department of Medical
Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada [2]
Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada. (3)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. (4)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (5)CHU Sainte-Justine Research
Center, Montréal, Quebec, Canada. (6)1] Department of Medical Genetics,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada [2]
Provincial Medical Genetics Programme, Children's & Women's Health Centre of
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (7)1] Department of
Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada [2] Child & Family Research Institute, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada.

Intellectual disability affects about 3% of individuals globally, with~50%
idiopathic. We designed an exonic-resolution array targeting all known
submicroscopic chromosomal intellectual disability syndrome loci, causative genes
for intellectual disability, and potential candidate genes, all genes encoding
glutamate receptors and epigenetic regulators. Using this platform, we performed 
chromosomal microarray analysis on 165 intellectual disability trios (affected
child and both normal parents). We identified and independently validated 36 de
novo copy-number changes in 32 trios. In all, 67% of the validated events were
intragenic, involving only exon 1 (which includes the promoter sequence according
to our design), exon 1 and adjacent exons, or one or more exons excluding exon 1.
Seventeen of the 36 copy-number variants involve genes known to cause
intellectual disability. Eleven of these, including seven intragenic variants,
are clearly pathogenic (involving STXBP1, SHANK3 (3 patients), IL1RAPL1, UBE2A,
NRXN1, MEF2C, CHD7, 15q24 and 9p24 microdeletion), two are likely pathogenic
(PI4KA, DCX), two are unlikely to be pathogenic (GRIK2, FREM2), and two are
unclear (ARID1B, 15q22 microdeletion). Twelve individuals with genomic imbalances
identified by our array were tested with a clinical microarray, and six had a
normal result. We identified de novo copy-number variants within genes not
previously implicated in intellectual disability and uncovered pathogenic
variation of known intellectual disability genes below the detection limit of
standard clinical diagnostic chromosomal microarray analysis.

PMCID: PMC4023222
PMID: 24253858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Genet Epidemiol. 2014 Jan;38(1):84-93. doi: 10.1002/gepi.21771. Epub 2013 Nov 18.

Identification of new genetic susceptibility loci for breast cancer through
consideration of gene-environment interactions.

Schoeps A(1), Rudolph A, Seibold P, Dunning AM, Milne RL, Bojesen SE, Swerdlow A,
Andrulis I, Brenner H, Behrens S, Orr N, Jones M, Ashworth A, Li J, Cramp H,
Connley D, Czene K, Darabi H, Chanock SJ, Lissowska J, Figueroa JD, Knight J,
Glendon G, Mulligan AM, Dumont M, Severi G, Baglietto L, Olson J, Vachon C,
Purrington K, Moisse M, Neven P, Wildiers H, Spurdle A, Kosma VM, Kataja V,
Hartikainen JM, Hamann U, Ko YD, Dieffenbach AK, Arndt V, Stegmaier C, Malats N, 
Arias Perez JI, Benítez J, Flyger H, Nordestgaard BG, Truong T, Cordina-Duverger 
E, Menegaux F, dos Santos Silva I, Fletcher O, Johnson N, Häberle L, Beckmann MW,
Ekici AB, Braaf L, Atsma F, van den Broek AJ, Makalic E, Schmidt DF, Southey MC, 
Cox A, Simard J, Giles GG, Lambrechts D, Mannermaa A, Brauch H, Guénel P, Peto J,
Fasching PA, Hopper J, Flesch-Janys D, Couch F, Chenevix-Trench G, Pharoah PD,
Garcia-Closas M, Schmidt MK, Hall P, Easton DF, Chang-Claude J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany; Institute of Public Health, University of Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Genes that alter disease risk only in combination with certain environmental
exposures may not be detected in genetic association analysis. By using methods
accounting for gene-environment (G × E) interaction, we aimed to identify novel
genetic loci associated with breast cancer risk. Up to 34,475 cases and 34,786
controls of European ancestry from up to 23 studies in the Breast Cancer
Association Consortium were included. Overall, 71,527 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), enriched for association with breast cancer, were tested
for interaction with 10 environmental risk factors using three recently proposed 
hybrid methods and a joint test of association and interaction. Analyses were
adjusted for age, study, population stratification, and confounding factors as
applicable. Three SNPs in two independent loci showed statistically significant
association: SNPs rs10483028 and rs2242714 in perfect linkage disequilibrium on
chromosome 21 and rs12197388 in ARID1B on chromosome 6. While rs12197388 was
identified using the joint test with parity and with age at menarche (P-values = 
3 × 10(-07)), the variants on chromosome 21 q22.12, which showed interaction with
adult body mass index (BMI) in 8,891 postmenopausal women, were identified by all
methods applied. SNP rs10483028 was associated with breast cancer in women with a
BMI below 25 kg/m(2) (OR = 1.26, 95% CI 1.15-1.38) but not in women with a BMI of
30 kg/m(2) or higher (OR = 0.89, 95% CI 0.72-1.11, P for interaction = 3.2 ×
10(-05)). Our findings confirm comparable power of the recent methods for
detecting G × E interaction and the utility of using G × E interaction analyses
to identify new susceptibility loci.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMCID: PMC3995140
PMID: 24248812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Hum Mutat. 2013 Nov;34(11):1519-28. doi: 10.1002/humu.22394. Epub 2013 Aug 30.

Coffin-Siris syndrome and the BAF complex: genotype-phenotype study in 63
patients.

Santen GW(1), Aten E, Vulto-van Silfhout AT, Pottinger C, van Bon BW, van
Minderhout IJ, Snowdowne R, van der Lans CA, Boogaard M, Linssen MM, Vijfhuizen
L, van der Wielen MJ, Vollebregt MJ; Coffin-Siris consortium, Breuning MH, Kriek 
M, van Haeringen A, den Dunnen JT, Hoischen A, Clayton-Smith J, de Vries BB,
Hennekam RC, van Belzen MJ.

Collaborators: Almureikhi M, Baban A, Barbosa M, Ben-Omran T, Berry K, Bigoni S, 
Boute O, Brueton L, van der Burgt I, Canham N, Chandler KE, Chrzanowska K,
Collins AL, de Toni T, Dean J, den Hollander NS, Flore LA, Fryer A, Gardham A,
Graham JM Jr, Harrison V, Horn D, Jongmans MC, Josifova D, Kant SG, Kapoor S,
Kingston H, Kini U, Kleefstra T, Krajewska-Walasek M, Kramer N, Maas SM, Maciel
P, Mancini GM, Maystadt I, McKee S, Milunsky JM, Nampoothiri S, Newbury-Ecob R,
Nikkel SM, Parker MJ, Pérez-Jurado LA, Robertson SP, Rooryck C, Shears D, Silengo
M, Singh A, Smigiel R, Soares G, Splitt M, Stewart H, Sweeney E, Tassabehji M,
Tuysuz B, van Eerde AM, Vincent-Delorme C, Wilson LC, Yesil G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre,
Leiden, The Netherlands.

De novo germline variants in several components of the SWI/SNF-like BAF complex
can cause Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS), Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome (NCBRS), and
nonsyndromic intellectual disability. We screened 63 patients with a clinical
diagnosis of CSS for these genes (ARID1A, ARID1B, SMARCA2, SMARCA4, SMARCB1, and 
SMARCE1) and identified pathogenic variants in 45 (71%) patients. We found a high
proportion of variants in ARID1B (68%). All four pathogenic variants in ARID1A
appeared to be mosaic. By using all variants from the Exome Variant Server as
test data, we were able to classify variants in ARID1A, ARID1B, and SMARCB1
reliably as being pathogenic or nonpathogenic. For SMARCA2, SMARCA4, and SMARCE1 
several variants in the EVS remained unclassified, underlining the importance of 
parental testing. We have entered all variant and clinical information in
LOVD-powered databases to facilitate further genotype-phenotype correlations, as 
these will become increasingly important because of the uptake of targeted and
untargeted next generation sequencing in diagnostics. The emerging
phenotype-genotype correlation is that SMARCB1 patients have the most marked
physical phenotype and severe cognitive and growth delay. The variability in
phenotype seems most marked in ARID1A and ARID1B patients. Distal limbs anomalies
are most marked in ARID1A patients and least in SMARCB1 patients. Numbers are
small however, and larger series are needed to confirm this correlation.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMID: 23929686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Dec 20;22(25):5121-35. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt366. Epub 2013 Aug
1.

A comprehensive molecular study on Coffin-Siris and Nicolaides-Baraitser
syndromes identifies a broad molecular and clinical spectrum converging on
altered chromatin remodeling.

Wieczorek D(1), Bögershausen N, Beleggia F, Steiner-Haldenstätt S, Pohl E, Li Y, 
Milz E, Martin M, Thiele H, Altmüller J, Alanay Y, Kayserili H, Klein-Hitpass L, 
Böhringer S, Wollstein A, Albrecht B, Boduroglu K, Caliebe A, Chrzanowska K,
Cogulu O, Cristofoli F, Czeschik JC, Devriendt K, Dotti MT, Elcioglu N, Gener B, 
Goecke TO, Krajewska-Walasek M, Guillén-Navarro E, Hayek J, Houge G, Kilic E,
Simsek-Kiper PÖ, López-González V, Kuechler A, Lyonnet S, Mari F, Marozza A,
Mathieu Dramard M, Mikat B, Morin G, Morice-Picard F, Ozkinay F, Rauch A, Renieri
A, Tinschert S, Utine GE, Vilain C, Vivarelli R, Zweier C, Nürnberg P, Rahmann S,
Vermeesch J, Lüdecke HJ, Zeschnigk M, Wollnik B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik and.

Chromatin remodeling complexes are known to modify chemical marks on histones or 
to induce conformational changes in the chromatin in order to regulate
transcription. De novo dominant mutations in different members of the SWI/SNF
chromatin remodeling complex have recently been described in individuals with
Coffin-Siris (CSS) and Nicolaides-Baraitser (NCBRS) syndromes. Using a
combination of whole-exome sequencing, NGS-based sequencing of 23 SWI/SNF complex
genes, and molecular karyotyping in 46 previously undescribed individuals with
CSS and NCBRS, we identified a de novo 1-bp deletion (c.677delG,
p.Gly226Glufs*53) and a de novo missense mutation (c.914G>T, p.Cys305Phe) in PHF6
in two individuals diagnosed with CSS. PHF6 interacts with the nucleosome
remodeling and deacetylation (NuRD) complex implicating dysfunction of a second
chromatin remodeling complex in the pathogenesis of CSS-like phenotypes.
Altogether, we identified mutations in 60% of the studied individuals (28/46),
located in the genes ARID1A, ARID1B, SMARCB1, SMARCE1, SMARCA2, and PHF6. We show
that mutations in ARID1B are the main cause of CSS, accounting for 76% of
identified mutations. ARID1B and SMARCB1 mutations were also found in individuals
with the initial diagnosis of NCBRS. These individuals apparently belong to a
small subset who display an intermediate CSS/NCBRS phenotype. Our proposed
genotype-phenotype correlations are important for molecular screening strategies.

PMID: 23906836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Pain. 2013 Jul 8;9:34. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-9-34.

Genome-wide association study of sensory disturbances in the inferior alveolar
nerve after bilateral sagittal split ramus osteotomy.

Kobayashi D(1), Nishizawa D, Takasaki Y, Kasai S, Kakizawa T, Ikeda K, Fukuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Health and Clinical Science, Division of Dental
Anesthesiology, Orofacial Pain Center, Suidoubashi Hospital, Tokyo Dental
College, 2-9-18 Misaki-cho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0061, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Bilateral sagittal split ramus osteotomy (BSSRO) is a common
orthognatic surgical procedure. Sensory disturbances in the inferior alveolar
nerve, including hypoesthesia and dysesthesia, are frequently observed after
BSSRO, even without distinct nerve injury. The mechanisms that underlie
individual differences in the vulnerability to sensory disturbances have not yet 
been elucidated.
METHODS: The present study investigated the relationships between genetic
polymorphisms and the vulnerability to sensory disturbances after BSSRO in a
genome-wide association study (GWAS). A total of 304 and 303 patients who
underwent BSSRO were included in the analyses of hypoesthesia and dysesthesia,
respectively. Hypoesthesia was evaluated using the tactile test 1 week after
surgery. Dysesthesia was evaluated by interview 4 weeks after surgery.
Whole-genome genotyping was conducted using Illumina BeadChips including
approximately 300,000 polymorphism markers.
RESULTS: Hypoesthesia and dysesthesia occurred in 51 (16.8%) and 149 (49.2%)
subjects, respectively. Significant associations were not observed between the
clinical data (i.e., age, sex, body weight, body height, loss of blood volume,
migration length of bone fragments, nerve exposure, duration of anesthesia, and
duration of surgery) and the frequencies of hypoesthesia and dysesthesia.
Significant associations were found between hypoesthesia and the rs502281
polymorphism (recessive model: combined <U+03C7>² = 24.72, nominal P = 6.633 × 10<U+207B>7),
between hypoesthesia and the rs2063640 polymorphism (recessive model: combined <U+03C7>²
= 23.07, nominal P = 1.563 × 10<U+207B>6), and between dysesthesia and the nonsynonymous
rs2677879 polymorphism (trend model: combined <U+03C7>² = 16.56, nominal P = 4.722 ×
10<U+207B>5; dominant model: combined <U+03C7>² = 16.31, nominal P = 5.369 × 10<U+207B>5). The
rs502281 and rs2063640 polymorphisms were located in the flanking region of the
ARID1B and ZPLD1 genes on chromosomes 6 and 3, whose official names are "AT rich 
interactive domain 1B (SWI1-like)" and "zona pellucida-like domain containing 1",
respectively. The rs2677879 polymorphism is located in the METTL4 gene on
chromosome 18, whose official name is "methyltransferase like 4".
CONCLUSIONS: The GWAS of sensory disturbances after BSSRO revealed associations
between genetic polymorphisms located in the flanking region of the ARID1B and
ZPLD1 genes and hypoesthesia and between a nonsynonymous genetic polymorphism in 
the METTL4 gene and dysesthesia.

PMCID: PMC3723511
PMID: 23834954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Clin Genet. 2014 Jun;85(6):548-54. doi: 10.1111/cge.12225. Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Coffin-Siris syndrome is a SWI/SNF complex disorder.

Tsurusaki Y(1), Okamoto N, Ohashi H, Mizuno S, Matsumoto N, Makita Y, Fukuda M,
Isidor B, Perrier J, Aggarwal S, Dalal AB, Al-Kindy A, Liebelt J, Mowat D,
Nakashima M, Saitsu H, Miyake N, Matsumoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS) is a congenital disorder characterized by
intellectual disability, growth deficiency, microcephaly, coarse facial features,
and hypoplastic or absent fifth fingernails and/or toenails. We previously
reported that five genes are mutated in CSS, all of which encode subunits of the 
switch/sucrose non-fermenting (SWI/SNF) ATP-dependent chromatin-remodeling
complex: SMARCB1, SMARCA4, SMARCE1, ARID1A, and ARID1B. In this study, we
examined 49 newly recruited CSS-suspected patients, and re-examined three
patients who did not show any mutations (using high-resolution melting analysis) 
in the previous study, by whole-exome sequencing or targeted resequencing. We
found that SMARCB1, SMARCA4, or ARID1B were mutated in 20 patients. By examining 
available parental samples, we ascertained that 17 occurred de novo. All
mutations in SMARCB1 and SMARCA4 were non-truncating (missense or in-frame
deletion) whereas those in ARID1B were all truncating (nonsense or frameshift
deletion/insertion) in this study as in our previous study. Our data further
support that CSS is a SWI/SNF complex disorder.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23815551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Br J Cancer. 2013 May 28;108(10):2056-62. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.200. Epub 2013
May 9.

ARID1B, a member of the human SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex, exhibits
tumour-suppressor activities in pancreatic cancer cell lines.

Khursheed M(1), Kolla JN, Kotapalli V, Gupta N, Gowrishankar S, Uppin SG, Sastry 
RA, Koganti S, Sundaram C, Pollack JR, Bashyam MD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and
Diagnostics, Hyderabad, India.

BACKGROUND: The human ATP-dependent SWItch/sucrose nonfermentable (SWI/SNF)
complex functions as a primary chromatin remodeler during ontogeny, as well as in
adult life. Several components of the complex have been suggested to function as 
important regulators of tumorigenesis in various cancers. In the current study,
we have characterised a possible tumour suppressor role for the largest subunit
of the complex, namely the AT-rich interaction domain 1B (ARID1B).
METHODS: We performed Azacytidine and Trichostatin A treatments, followed by
bisulphite sequencing to determine the possible DNA methylation-induced
transcription repression of the gene in pancreatic cancer (PaCa) cell lines.
Functional characterisation of effect of ARID1B ectopic expression in MiaPaCa2
PaCa cell line, which harboured ARID1B homozygous deletion, was carried out.
Finally, we evaluated ARID1B protein expression in pancreatic tumour samples
using immunohistochemistry on a tissue microarray.
RESULTS: ARID1B was transcriptionally repressed due to promoter hypermethylation,
and ectopic expression severely compromised the ability of MiaPaCa2 cells to form
colonies in liquid culture and soft agar. In addition, ARID1B exhibited
significantly reduced/loss of expression in PaCa tissue, especially in samples
from advanced-stage tumours, when compared with normal pancreas.
CONCLUSION: The results therefore suggest a possible tumour-suppressor function
for ARID1B in PaCa, thus adding to the growing list of SWI/SNF components with a 
similar function. Given the urgent need to design efficient targeted therapies
for PaCa, our study assumes significance.

PMCID: PMC3670478
PMID: 23660946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jun;161A(6):1221-37. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35933. Epub 2013 
May 1.

Clinical correlations of mutations affecting six components of the SWI/SNF
complex: detailed description of 21 patients and a review of the literature.

Kosho T(1), Okamoto N, Ohashi H, Tsurusaki Y, Imai Y, Hibi-Ko Y, Kawame H, Homma 
T, Tanabe S, Kato M, Hiraki Y, Yamagata T, Yano S, Sakazume S, Ishii T, Nagai T, 
Ohta T, Niikawa N, Mizuno S, Kaname T, Naritomi K, Narumi Y, Wakui K, Fukushima
Y, Miyatake S, Mizuguchi T, Saitsu H, Miyake N, Matsumoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, Japan. ktomoki@shinshuu.ac.jp

Mutations in the components of the SWItch/sucrose nonfermentable (SWI/SNF)-like
chromatin remodeling complex have recently been reported to cause Coffin-Siris
syndrome (CSS), Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome (NCBRS), and ARID1B-related
intellectual disability (ID) syndrome. We detail here the genotype-phenotype
correlations for 85 previously published and one additional patient with
mutations in the SWI/SNF complex: four with SMARCB1 mutations, seven with SMARCA4
mutations, 37 with SMARCA2 mutations, one with an SMARCE1 mutation, three with
ARID1A mutations, and 33 with ARID1B mutations. The mutations were associated
with syndromic ID and speech impairment (severe/profound in SMARCB1, SMARCE1, and
ARID1A mutations; variable in SMARCA4, SMARCA2, and ARID1B mutations), which was 
frequently accompanied by agenesis or hypoplasia of the corpus callosum. SMARCB1 
mutations caused "classical" CSS with typical facial "coarseness" and significant
digital/nail hypoplasia. SMARCA4 mutations caused CSS without typical facial
coarseness and with significant digital/nail hypoplasia. SMARCA2 mutations caused
NCBRS, typically with short stature, sparse hair, a thin vermillion of the upper 
lip, an everted lower lip and prominent finger joints. A SMARCE1 mutation caused 
CSS without typical facial coarseness and with significant digital/nail
hypoplasia. ARID1A mutations caused the most severe CSS with severe physical
complications. ARID1B mutations caused CSS without typical facial coarseness and 
with mild digital/nail hypoplasia, or caused syndromic ID. Because of the common 
underlying mechanism and overlapping clinical features, we propose that these
conditions be referred to collectively as "SWI/SNF-related ID syndromes".

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23637025  [PubMed - in process]


53. Coffin-Siris Syndrome.

Schrier Vergano SA, Santen G, Wieczorek D, Wollnik B, Matsumoto N, Deardorff MA.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2013 Apr 4.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS) is characterized by aplasia
or hypoplasia of the distal phalanx or nail of the fifth digit, distinctive
facial features, and moderate to severe developmental/cognitive delay. Expressive
language is more severely affected than receptive language. On average, children 
with CSS learn to sit at 12 months, walk at 30 months, and speak their first
words at 24 months. Other findings commonly include failure to thrive, feeding
difficulties, short stature, ophthalmologic abnormalities, microcephaly, brain
malformations, and hearing loss.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Before the molecular basis was known, the diagnosis of CSS was
based strictly on clinical findings. With the recent detection of heterozygous
pathogenic variants in ARID1A, ARID1B, SMARCA4, SMARCB1, or SMARCE1 in some (but 
not all) individuals with CSS, it is likely that diagnostic criteria will evolve.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Occupational, physical, and/or speech
therapies to optimize developmental outcomes. Nutritional supplementation and/or 
gastrostomy tube placement as needed to meet nutritional needs. Routine
management of ophthalmologic abnormalities and hearing loss. Surveillance: Yearly
evaluation by a developmental pediatrician to assess developmental progress and
therapeutic and educational interventions; follow up with a gastroenterologist
and feeding specialists as needed to monitor feeding and weight gain. Routine
follow-up of ophthalmologic and/or audiologic abnormalities. Although pathogenic 
variants in a subset of the genes causing CSS have been implicated in
tumorigenesis, the rarity of tumors in CSS has precluded determination of the
utility of tumor surveillance.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CSS caused by a heterozygous pathogenic variant in one of
five genes (ARID1A, ARID1B, SMARCA4, SMARCB1, and SMARCE1) is inherited in an
autosomal dominant manner, but most commonly results from a de novo pathogenic
variant. (Of note, autosomal recessive inheritance cannot be excluded in the rare
instance of reports of recurrence in sibs with molecularly unconfirmed CSS.) If
the pathogenic variant has been identified in a family member, prenatal testing
for pregnancies at increased risk is possible either through laboratories
offering either testing for the gene of interest or custom testing. Note: With
the exception of one older report of parental transmission of molecularly
unconfirmed CSS, individuals with CSS typically do not reproduce.

PMID: 23556151  [PubMed]


54. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Mar 25;7:25. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-25.

MutComFocal: an integrative approach to identifying recurrent and focal genomic
alterations in tumor samples.

Trifonov V(1), Pasqualucci L, Dalla Favera R, Rabadan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, New York, NY 10032, USA.
vt2184@c2b2.columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Most tumors are the result of accumulated genomic alterations in
somatic cells. The emerging spectrum of alterations in tumors is complex and the 
identification of relevant genes and pathways remains a challenge. Furthermore,
key cancer genes are usually found amplified or deleted in chromosomal regions
containing many other genes. Point mutations, on the other hand, provide
exquisite information about amino acid changes that could be implicated in the
oncogenic process. Current large-scale genomic projects provide high throughput
genomic data in a large number of well-characterized tumor samples.
METHODS: We define a Bayesian approach designed to identify candidate cancer
genes by integrating copy number and point mutation information. Our method
exploits the concept that small and recurrent alterations in tumors are more
informative in the search for cancer genes. Thus, the algorithm (Mutations with
Common Focal Alterations, or MutComFocal) seeks focal copy number alterations and
recurrent point mutations within high throughput data from large panels of tumor 
samples.
RESULTS: We apply MutComFocal to Diffuse Large B-cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) data from 
four different high throughput studies, totaling 78 samples assessed for copy
number alterations by single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array analysis and 65 
samples assayed for protein changing point mutations by whole exome/whole
transcriptome sequencing. In addition to recapitulating known alterations,
MutComFocal identifies ARID1B, ROBO2 and MRS1 as candidate tumor suppressors and 
KLHL6, IL31 and LRP1 as putative oncogenes in DLBCL.
CONCLUSIONS: We present a Bayesian approach for the identification of candidate
cancer genes by integrating data collected in large number of cancer patients,
across different studies. When trained on a well-studied dataset, MutComFocal is 
able to identify most of the reported characterized alterations. The application 
of MutComFocal to large-scale cancer data provides the opportunity to pinpoint
the key functional genomic alterations in tumors.

PMCID: PMC3637169
PMID: 23531283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Mar;19(3):351-7. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.19. Epub 2013 Feb 19.

APOE and BCHE as modulators of cerebral amyloid deposition: a florbetapir PET
genome-wide association study.

Ramanan VK(1), Risacher SL(2), Nho K(2), Kim S(3), Swaminathan S(4), Shen L(3),
Foroud TM(5), Hakonarson H(6), Huentelman MJ(7), Aisen PS(8), Petersen RC(9),
Green RC(10), Jack CR(11), Koeppe RA(12), Jagust WJ(13), Weiner MW(14), Saykin
AJ(5); Alzheimers Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information: 
(1)1] Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences and
Indiana Alzheimer's Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN, USA [2] Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA [3] Medical Scientist
Training Program, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(2)Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences and
Indiana Alzheimer's Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN, USA. (3)1] Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and
Imaging Sciences and Indiana Alzheimer's Disease Center, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA [2] Center for Computational Biology
and Bioinformatics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(4)1] Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences and
Indiana Alzheimer's Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN, USA [2] Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. (5)1] Center for
Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences and Indiana
Alzheimer's Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
IN, USA [2] Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA [3] Center for Computational Biology
and Bioinformatics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(6)Center for Applied Genomics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (7)The Translational Genomics Institute (TGen), Phoenix,
AZ, USA. (8)Department of Neuroscience, University of California, San Diego, CA, 
USA. (9)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic Minnesota, Rochester, MN, USA.
(10)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (11)Department of Radiology, Mayo
Clinic Minnesota, Rochester, MN, USA. (12)Department of Radiology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (13)Department of Neurology, University of
California, Berkeley, CA, USA. (14)1] Departments of Radiology, Medicine, and
Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA [2] Department of
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Deposition of amyloid-ß (Aß) in the cerebral cortex is thought to be a pivotal
event in Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis with a significant genetic
contribution. Molecular imaging can provide an early noninvasive phenotype, but
small samples have prohibited genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of cortical 
Aß load until now. We employed florbetapir ((18)F) positron emission tomography
(PET) imaging to assess brain Aß levels in vivo for 555 participants from the
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). More than six million common 
genetic variants were tested for association to quantitative global cortical Aß
load controlling for age, gender and diagnosis. Independent genome-wide
significant associations were identified on chromosome 19 within APOE
(apolipoprotein E) (rs429358, P=5.5 × 10(-14)) and on chromosome 3 upstream of
BCHE (butyrylcholinesterase) (rs509208, P=2.7 × 10(-8)) in a region previously
associated with serum BCHE activity. Together, these loci explained 15% of the
variance in cortical Aß levels in this sample (APOE 10.7%, BCHE 4.3%). Suggestive
associations were identified within ITGA6, near EFNA5, EDIL3, ITGA1, PIK3R1, NFIB
and ARID1B, and between NUAK1 and C12orf75. These results confirm the association
of APOE with Aß deposition and represent the largest known effect of BCHE on an
AD-related phenotype. BCHE has been found in senile plaques and this new
association of genetic variation at the BCHE locus with Aß burden in humans may
have implications for potential disease-modifying effects of BCHE-modulating
agents in the AD spectrum.

PMCID: PMC3661739
PMID: 23419831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55119. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055119. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

The spectrum of SWI/SNF mutations, ubiquitous in human cancers.

Shain AH(1), Pollack JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, United States of America.

SWI/SNF is a multi-subunit chromatin remodeling complex that uses the energy of
ATP hydrolysis to reposition nucleosomes, thereby modulating gene expression.
Accumulating evidence suggests that SWI/SNF functions as a tumor suppressor in
some cancers. However, the spectrum of SWI/SNF mutations across human cancers has
not been systematically investigated. Here, we mined whole-exome sequencing data 
from 24 published studies representing 669 cases from 18 neoplastic diagnoses.
SWI/SNF mutations were widespread across diverse human cancers, with an excess of
deleterious mutations, and an overall frequency approaching TP53 mutation.
Mutations occurred most commonly in the SMARCA4 enzymatic subunit, and in
subunits thought to confer functional specificity (ARID1A, ARID1B, PBRM1, and
ARID2). SWI/SNF mutations were not mutually-exclusive of other mutated cancer
genes, including TP53 and EZH2 (both previously linked to SWI/SNF). Our findings 
implicate SWI/SNF as an important but under-recognized tumor suppressor in
diverse human cancers, and provide a key resource to guide future investigations.

PMCID: PMC3552954
PMID: 23355908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Bull Cancer. 2012 Dec;99(12):1133-40. doi: 10.1684/bdc.2012.1664.

[Chromatin remodeling defects and cancer: the SWI/SNF example].

[Article in French]

Bourdeaut F(1), Bièche I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, département d'oncologie pédiatrique, Inserm U830-laboratoire
de génétique et biologie des cancers, 26, rue d'Ulm, 75248 Paris Cedex 05,
France. Franck.Bourdeaut@curie.fr

The SWI/SNF complex is a multiprotein complex essential for chromatin
remodelling. As such, it plays a key role in the epigenetic regulation of genome 
expression. This complex is composed of a dozen of proteins, some of which are
constant and ubiquitous, especially SMARCB1 and SMARCA4. Mutations in these genes
are now described in an increasing number of tumors. Mutations in
SMARCB1 characterize the majority of rhabdoid tumors, an aggressive malignancy
that exquisitely depends on this single genetic event. Rare rhabdoid tumors have 
mutation in SMARCA4, a genetic abnormality also found in some medulloblastomas.
Many other tumor types, of variable aggressiveness, show an abnormal loss of
expression of SMARCB1, but the genetic underlying cause most often remains
elusive. The recent sequencings of whole exomes have described frequent mutations
in other genes of the SWI/SNF complex: mutations in ARID1A in liver, gastric or
bladder carcinomas, and PBRM1 mutations in renal cancers. These data establish
the wide role of SWI/SNF complex in cancers and justify that major efforts should
now be devoted to this common mechanism of human oncogenesis.

PMID: 23222069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Nat Genet. 2013 Jan;45(1):12-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.2493. Epub 2012 Dec 2.

Integrated genomic analyses identify ARID1A and ARID1B alterations in the
childhood cancer neuroblastoma.

Sausen M(1), Leary RJ, Jones S, Wu J, Reynolds CP, Liu X, Blackford A, Parmigiani
G, Diaz LA Jr, Papadopoulos N, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW, Velculescu VE, Hogarty
MD.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics, The Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Neuroblastomas are tumors of peripheral sympathetic neurons and are the most
common solid tumor in children. To determine the genetic basis for neuroblastoma,
we performed whole-genome sequencing (6 cases), exome sequencing (16 cases),
genome-wide rearrangement analyses (32 cases) and targeted analyses of specific
genomic loci (40 cases) using massively parallel sequencing. On average, each
tumor had 19 somatic alterations in coding genes (range of 3-70). Among genes not
previously known to be involved in neuroblastoma, chromosomal deletions and
sequence alterations of the chromatin-remodeling genes ARID1A and ARID1B were
identified in 8 of 71 tumors (11%) and were associated with early treatment
failure and decreased survival. Using tumor-specific structural alterations, we
developed an approach to identify rearranged DNA fragments in sera, providing
personalized biomarkers for minimal residual disease detection and monitoring.
These results highlight the dysregulation of chromatin remodeling in pediatric
tumorigenesis and provide new approaches for the management of patients with
neuroblastoma.

PMCID: PMC3557959
PMID: 23202128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Psychiatry. 2013 Oct;18(10):1054-6. doi: 10.1038/mp.2012.148. Epub 2012 Nov
13.

Combined analysis of exome sequencing points toward a major role for
transcription regulation during brain development in autism.

Ben-David E(1), Shifman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University 
of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

PMID: 23147383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Nature. 2012 May 16;486(7403):400-4. doi: 10.1038/nature11017.

The landscape of cancer genes and mutational processes in breast cancer.

Stephens PJ(1), Tarpey PS, Davies H, Van Loo P, Greenman C, Wedge DC, Nik-Zainal 
S, Martin S, Varela I, Bignell GR, Yates LR, Papaemmanuil E, Beare D, Butler A,
Cheverton A, Gamble J, Hinton J, Jia M, Jayakumar A, Jones D, Latimer C, Lau KW, 
McLaren S, McBride DJ, Menzies A, Mudie L, Raine K, Rad R, Chapman MS, Teague J, 
Easton D, Langerød A; Oslo Breast Cancer Consortium (OSBREAC), Lee MT, Shen CY,
Tee BT, Huimin BW, Broeks A, Vargas AC, Turashvili G, Martens J, Fatima A, Miron 
P, Chin SF, Thomas G, Boyault S, Mariani O, Lakhani SR, van de Vijver M, van 't
Veer L, Foekens J, Desmedt C, Sotiriou C, Tutt A, Caldas C, Reis-Filho JS,
Aparicio SA, Salomon AV, Børresen-Dale AL, Richardson AL, Campbell PJ, Futreal
PA, Stratton MR.

Collaborators: Karesen R, Schlichting E, Naume B, Sauer T, Ottestad L.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome 
Campus, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK.

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2012;14(5):323.
    Nature. 2012 Jun 21;486(7403):328-9.

All cancers carry somatic mutations in their genomes. A subset, known as driver
mutations, confer clonal selective advantage on cancer cells and are causally
implicated in oncogenesis, and the remainder are passenger mutations. The driver 
mutations and mutational processes operative in breast cancer have not yet been
comprehensively explored. Here we examine the genomes of 100 tumours for somatic 
copy number changes and mutations in the coding exons of protein-coding genes.
The number of somatic mutations varied markedly between individual tumours. We
found strong correlations between mutation number, age at which cancer was
diagnosed and cancer histological grade, and observed multiple mutational
signatures, including one present in about ten per cent of tumours characterized 
by numerous mutations of cytosine at TpC dinucleotides. Driver mutations were
identified in several new cancer genes including AKT2, ARID1B, CASP8, CDKN1B,
MAP3K1, MAP3K13, NCOR1, SMARCD1 and TBX3. Among the 100 tumours, we found driver 
mutations in at least 40 cancer genes and 73 different combinations of mutated
cancer genes. The results highlight the substantial genetic diversity underlying 
this common disease.

PMCID: PMC3428862
PMID: 22722201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Nat Genet. 2012 May 27;44(7):760-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.2291.

Whole-genome sequencing of liver cancers identifies etiological influences on
mutation patterns and recurrent mutations in chromatin regulators.

Fujimoto A(1), Totoki Y, Abe T, Boroevich KA, Hosoda F, Nguyen HH, Aoki M, Hosono
N, Kubo M, Miya F, Arai Y, Takahashi H, Shirakihara T, Nagasaki M, Shibuya T,
Nakano K, Watanabe-Makino K, Tanaka H, Nakamura H, Kusuda J, Ojima H, Shimada K, 
Okusaka T, Ueno M, Shigekawa Y, Kawakami Y, Arihiro K, Ohdan H, Gotoh K, Ishikawa
O, Ariizumi S, Yamamoto M, Yamada T, Chayama K, Kosuge T, Yamaue H, Kamatani N,
Miyano S, Nakagama H, Nakamura Y, Tsunoda T, Shibata T, Nakagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine, RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2013 Mar;58(3):622-4.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. We sequenced and analyzed the whole genomes of 27 HCCs, 25 of which
were associated with hepatitis B or C virus infections, including two sets of
multicentric tumors. Although no common somatic mutations were identified in the 
multicentric tumor pairs, their whole-genome substitution patterns were similar, 
suggesting that these tumors developed from independent mutations, although their
shared etiological backgrounds may have strongly influenced their somatic
mutation patterns. Statistical and functional analyses yielded a list of
recurrently mutated genes. Multiple chromatin regulators, including ARID1A,
ARID1B, ARID2, MLL and MLL3, were mutated in ~50% of the tumors. Hepatitis B
virus genome integration in the TERT locus was frequently observed in a high
clonal proportion. Our whole-genome sequencing analysis of HCCs identified the
influence of etiological background on somatic mutation patterns and subsequent
carcinogenesis, as well as recurrent mutations in chromatin regulators in HCCs.

PMID: 22634756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Jun;158A(6):1395-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35361. Epub 2012
May 14.

Delineation of the interstitial 6q25 microdeletion syndrome: refinement of the
critical causative region.

Michelson M(1), Ben-Sasson A, Vinkler C, Leshinsky-Silver E, Netzer I, Frumkin A,
Kivity S, Lerman-Sagie T, Lev D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Jerusalem,
Israel.

Interstitial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 6 are rare. Clinically, this
is a recognizable microdeletion syndrome associated with intellectual disability 
(ID), acquired microcephaly, typical dysmorphic features, structural anomalies of
the brain, and nonspecific multiple organ anomalies. Most of the reported cases
have cytogenetically visible interstitial deletions or subtelomeric
microdeletions. We report on a boy with global developmental delay, distinct
dysmorphic features, dysgenesis of the corpus callosum, limb anomalies, and
genital hypoplasia who has a small interstitial deletion of the long arm of
chromosome 6 detected by comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). The deleted
region spans around 1 Mb of DNA and contains only two coding genes, ARID1B and
ZDHHC14. To the best of our knowledge, this case represents the typical phenotype
with the smallest deletion reported so far. We discuss the possible role of these
genes in the phenotypic manifestations.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22585544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33834. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033834. Epub 2012 Mar 19.

SS18 together with animal-specific factors defines human BAF-type SWI/SNF
complexes.

Middeljans E(1), Wan X, Jansen PW, Sharma V, Stunnenberg HG, Logie C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Nucleosome translocation along DNA is catalyzed by eukaryotic
SNF2-type ATPases. One class of SNF2-ATPases is distinguished by the presence of 
a C-terminal bromodomain and is conserved from yeast to man and plants. This
class of SNF2 enzymes forms rather large protein complexes that are collectively 
called SWI/SNF complexes. They are involved in transcription and DNA repair. Two 
broad types of SWI/SNF complexes have been reported in the literature; PBAF and
BAF. These are distinguished by the inclusion or not of polybromo and several
ARID subunits. Here we investigated human SS18, a protein that is conserved in
plants and animals. SS18 is a putative SWI/SNF subunit which has been implicated 
in the etiology of synovial sarcomas by virtue of being a target for oncogenic
chromosomal translocations that underlie synovial sarcomas.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We pursued a proteomic approach whereby the SS18 
open reading frame was fused to a tandem affinity purification tag and expressed 
in amenable human cells. The fusion permitted efficient and exclusive
purification of so-called BAF-type SWI/SNF complexes which bear ARID1A/BAF250a or
ARID1B/BAF250b subunits. This demonstrates that SS18 is a BAF subtype-specific
SWI/SNF complex subunit. The same result was obtained when using the SS18-SSX1
oncogenic translocation product. Furthermore, SS18L1, DPF1, DPF2, DPF3, BRD9,
BCL7A, BCL7B and BCL7C were identified. 'Complex walking' showed that they all
co-purify with each other, defining human BAF-type complexes. By contrast,we
demonstrate that human PHF10 is part of the PBAF complex, which harbors both
ARID2/BAF200 and polybromo/BAF180 subunits, but not SS18 and nor the above
BAF-specific subunits.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: SWI/SNF complexes are found in most eukaryotes and in
the course of evolution new SWI/SNF subunits appeared. SS18 is found in plants as
well as animals. Our results suggest that in both protostome and deuterostome
animals, a class of BAF-type SWI/SNF complexes will be found that harbor SS18 or 
its paralogs, along with ARID1, DPF and BCL7 paralogs. Those BAF complexes are
proteomically distinct from the eukaryote-wide PBAF-type SWI/SNF complexes.
Finally, our results suggests that the human bromodomain factors BRD7 and BRD9
associate with PBAF and BAF, respectively.

PMCID: PMC3307773
PMID: 22442726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Nat Genet. 2012 Mar 18;44(4):379-80. doi: 10.1038/ng.2217.

Mutations in SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex gene ARID1B cause Coffin-Siris 
syndrome.

Santen GW(1), Aten E, Sun Y, Almomani R, Gilissen C, Nielsen M, Kant SG, Snoeck
IN, Peeters EA, Hilhorst-Hofstee Y, Wessels MW, den Hollander NS, Ruivenkamp CA, 
van Ommen GJ, Breuning MH, den Dunnen JT, van Haeringen A, Kriek M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands. santen@lumc.nl

We identified de novo truncating mutations in ARID1B in three individuals with
Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS) by exome sequencing. Array-based copy-number
variation (CNV) analysis in 2,000 individuals with intellectual disability
revealed deletions encompassing ARID1B in 3 subjects with phenotypes partially
overlapping that of CSS. Taken together with published data, these results
indicate that haploinsufficiency of the ARID1B gene, which encodes an epigenetic 
modifier of chromatin structure, is an important cause of CSS and is potentially 
a common cause of intellectual disability and speech impairment.

PMID: 22426309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Nat Genet. 2012 Mar 18;44(4):376-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.2219.

Mutations affecting components of the SWI/SNF complex cause Coffin-Siris
syndrome.

Tsurusaki Y(1), Okamoto N, Ohashi H, Kosho T, Imai Y, Hibi-Ko Y, Kaname T,
Naritomi K, Kawame H, Wakui K, Fukushima Y, Homma T, Kato M, Hiraki Y, Yamagata
T, Yano S, Mizuno S, Sakazume S, Ishii T, Nagai T, Shiina M, Ogata K, Ohta T,
Niikawa N, Miyatake S, Okada I, Mizuguchi T, Doi H, Saitsu H, Miyake N, Matsumoto
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

By exome sequencing, we found de novo SMARCB1 mutations in two of five
individuals with typical Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS), a rare autosomal dominant
anomaly syndrome. As SMARCB1 encodes a subunit of the SWItch/Sucrose
NonFermenting (SWI/SNF) complex, we screened 15 other genes encoding subunits of 
this complex in 23 individuals with CSS. Twenty affected individuals (87%) each
had a germline mutation in one of six SWI/SNF subunit genes, including SMARCB1,
SMARCA4, SMARCA2, SMARCE1, ARID1A and ARID1B.

PMID: 22426308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Mar 9;90(3):565-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.02.007.

Haploinsufficiency of ARID1B, a member of the SWI/SNF-a chromatin-remodeling
complex, is a frequent cause of intellectual disability.

Hoyer J(1), Ekici AB, Endele S, Popp B, Zweier C, Wiesener A, Wohlleber E, Dufke 
A, Rossier E, Petsch C, Zweier M, Göhring I, Zink AM, Rappold G, Schröck E,
Wieczorek D, Riess O, Engels H, Rauch A, Reis A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany.

Intellectual disability (ID) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous common
condition that remains etiologically unresolved in the majority of cases.
Although several hundred diseased genes have been identified in X-linked,
autosomal-recessive, or syndromic types of ID, the establishment of an
etiological basis remains a difficult task in unspecific, sporadic cases. Just
recently, de novo mutations in SYNGAP1, STXBP1, MEF2C, and GRIN2B were reported
as relatively common causes of ID in such individuals. On the basis of a patient 
with severe ID and a 2.5 Mb microdeletion including ARID1B in chromosomal region 
6q25, we performed mutational analysis in 887 unselected patients with
unexplained ID. In this cohort, we found eight (0.9%) additional de novo nonsense
or frameshift mutations predicted to cause haploinsufficiency. Our findings
indicate that haploinsufficiency of ARID1B, a member of the SWI/SNF-A
chromatin-remodeling complex, is a common cause of ID, and they add to the
growing evidence that chromatin-remodeling defects are an important contributor
to neurodevelopmental disorders.

Copyright Â© 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3309205
PMID: 22405089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 31;109(5):E252-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1114817109. Epub 2012 Jan 10.

Convergent structural alterations define SWItch/Sucrose NonFermentable (SWI/SNF) 
chromatin remodeler as a central tumor suppressive complex in pancreatic cancer.

Shain AH(1), Giacomini CP, Matsukuma K, Karikari CA, Bashyam MD, Hidalgo M,
Maitra A, Pollack JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Defining the molecular genetic alterations underlying pancreatic cancer may
provide unique therapeutic insight for this deadly disease. Toward this goal, we 
report here an integrative DNA microarray and sequencing-based analysis of
pancreatic cancer genomes. Notable among the alterations newly identified,
genomic deletions, mutations, and rearrangements recurrently targeted genes
encoding components of the SWItch/Sucrose NonFermentable (SWI/SNF) chromatin
remodeling complex, including all three putative DNA binding subunits (ARID1A,
ARID1B, and PBRM1) and both enzymatic subunits (SMARCA2 and SMARCA4). Whereas
alterations of each individual SWI/SNF subunit occurred at modest-frequency, as
mutational "hills" in the genomic landscape, together they affected at least
one-third of all pancreatic cancers, defining SWI/SNF as a major mutational
"mountain." Consistent with a tumor-suppressive role, re-expression of SMARCA4 in
SMARCA4-deficient pancreatic cancer cell lines reduced cell growth and promoted
senescence, whereas its overexpression in a SWI/SNF-intact line had no such
effect. In addition, expression profiling analyses revealed that SWI/SNF likely
antagonizes Polycomb repressive complex 2, implicating this as one possible
mechanism of tumor suppression. Our findings reveal SWI/SNF to be a central tumor
suppressive complex in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3277150
PMID: 22233809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Clin Genet. 2012 Sep;82(3):248-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01755.x. Epub
2011 Aug 24.

Corpus callosum abnormalities, intellectual disability, speech impairment, and
autism in patients with haploinsufficiency of ARID1B.

Halgren C(1), Kjaergaard S, Bak M, Hansen C, El-Schich Z, Anderson CM, Henriksen 
KF, Hjalgrim H, Kirchhoff M, Bijlsma EK, Nielsen M, den Hollander NS, Ruivenkamp 
CA, Isidor B, Le Caignec C, Zannolli R, Mucciolo M, Renieri A, Mari F, Anderlid
BM, Andrieux J, Dieux A, Tommerup N, Bache I.

Author information: 
(1)Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. halgren@sund.ku.dk

Corpus callosum abnormalities, intellectual disability, speech impairment, and
autism in patients with haploinsufficiency of ARID1B. Corpus callosum
abnormalities are common brain malformations with a wide clinical spectrum
ranging from severe intellectual disability to normal cognitive function. The
etiology is expected to be genetic in as much as 30-50% of the cases, but the
underlying genetic cause remains unknown in the majority of cases. By
next-generation mate-pair sequencing we mapped the chromosomal breakpoints of a
patient with a de novo balanced translocation, t(1;6)(p31;q25), agenesis of
corpus callosum (CC), intellectual disability, severe speech impairment, and
autism. The chromosome 6 breakpoint truncated ARID1B which was also truncated in 
a recently published translocation patient with a similar phenotype. Quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) data showed that a primer set proximal to the
translocation showed increased expression of ARID1B, whereas primer sets spanning
or distal to the translocation showed decreased expression in the patient
relative to a non-related control set. Phenotype-genotype comparison of the
translocation patient to seven unpublished patients with various sized deletions 
encompassing ARID1B confirms that haploinsufficiency of ARID1B is associated with
CC abnormalities, intellectual disability, severe speech impairment, and autism. 
Our findings emphasize that ARID1B is important in human brain development and
function in general, and in the development of CC and in speech development in
particular.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3464360
PMID: 21801163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cell Tissue Res. 2011 Jul;345(1):137-48. doi: 10.1007/s00441-011-1182-x. Epub
2011 Jun 7.

Dynamics of expression of ARID1A and ARID1B subunits in mouse embryos and in
cells during the cell cycle.

Flores-Alcantar A(1), Gonzalez-Sandoval A, Escalante-Alcalde D, Lomelí H.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética del Desarrollo y Fisiología Molecular, Instituto de
Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.

The mammalian SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes play essential roles in cell
cycle control through the transcriptional regulation of cell-cycle-specific
genes. These complexes depend on the energy of ATP hydrolysis provided by the
BRG1 or BRM catalytic subunit. They contain seven or more noncatalytic subunits, 
some being constitutive components, with others having paralogs that assemble in 
a combinatory manner producing different SWI/SNF-related complexes with specific 
functions. ARID1A and ARID1B are mutually exclusive subunits of the BAF complex. 
The specific presence of these subunits in the complex has been demonstrated to
determine whether SWI/SNF functions as a corepressor (ARID1A) or as a coactivator
(ARID1B) of the cell cycle genes. Our aim has been to analyze the relevance of
the ARID1 subunits in development. We have compared the patterns of expression of
these two genes through various mouse embryonic stages. Arid1a is expressed
widely and intensively, whereas Arid1b is poorly transcribed and expressed in
selected regions. Moreover, ARID1A and ARID1B present different kinetics of
expression in the cell cycle. ARID1A accumulates in G0 and is downregulated
throughout the cell cycle phases but is completely eliminated during mitosis,
whereas ARID1B is expressed at comparable levels at all phases, even during
mitosis. These kinetics probably affect the incorporation patterns of the ARID1
proteins to the complex and hence modulate SWI/SNF activity during proliferation 
and arrest.

PMID: 21647563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Jun;19(6):727-31. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.24. Epub 2011 Mar 
30.

Reduced transcript expression of genes affected by inherited and de novo CNVs in 
autism.

Nord AS(1), Roeb W, Dickel DE, Walsh T, Kusenda M, O'Connor KL, Malhotra D,
McCarthy SE, Stray SM, Taylor SM, Sebat J; STAART Psychopharmacology Network,
King B, King MC, McClellan JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195,
USA. nordalex@u.washington.edu

Individuals with autism are more likely to carry rare inherited and de novo copy 
number variants (CNVs). However, further research is needed to establish which
CNVs are causal and the mechanisms by which these CNVs influence autism. We
examined genomic DNA of children with autism (N = 41) and healthy controls (N =
367) for rare CNVs using a high-resolution array comparative genomic
hybridization platform. We show that individuals with autism are more likely to
harbor rare CNVs as small as ~ 10 kb, a threshold not previously detectable, and 
that CNVs in cases disproportionately affect genes involved in transcription,
nervous system development, and receptor activity. We also show that a subset of 
genes that have known or suspected allele-specific or imprinting effects and are 
within rare-case CNVs may undergo loss of transcript expression. In particular,
expression of CNTNAP2 and ZNF214 are decreased in probands compared with their
unaffected transmitting parents. Furthermore, expression of PRODH and ARID1B, two
genes affected by de novo CNVs, are decreased in probands compared with controls.
These results suggest that for some genes affected by CNVs in autism, reduced
transcript expression may be a mechanism of pathogenesis during neurodevelopment.

PMCID: PMC3110052
PMID: 21448237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. N Engl J Med. 2011 Feb 3;364(5):483-4; author reply 484-5. doi:
10.1056/NEJMc1012780#SA2.

Endometriosis-associated ovarian carcinomas.

Birnbaum DJ, Birnbaum D, Bertucci F.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 14;363(16):1532-43.

PMID: 21288104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2011;132(3):135-43. doi: 10.1159/000321577. Epub 2010 Oct
30.

A balanced translocation t(6;14)(q25.3;q13.2) leading to reciprocal fusion
transcripts in a patient with intellectual disability and agenesis of corpus
callosum.

Backx L(1), Seuntjens E, Devriendt K, Vermeesch J, Van Esch H.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

We identified a male patient presenting with intellectual disability and agenesis
of the corpus callosum, carrying an apparently balanced, reciprocal, de novo
translocation t(6;14)(q25.3;q13.2). Breakpoint mapping, using array painting,
identified 2 interesting candidate genes, ARID1B and MRPP3, disrupted in the
patient. Unexpectedly, the rearrangement produced 3 in-frame reciprocal fusion
transcripts that were further characterized. Formation of fusion transcripts is
mainly reported in acquired malignancies and is very rarely observed in patients 
with intellectual disability (ID) and/or multiple congenital malformations (MCA).
Additional experimental results suggest that ARID1B, a gene involved in chromatin
remodeling, constitutes a good candidate for the central nervous system phenotype
present in the patient.

2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21042007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Apr;30(7):1673-88. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00540-09. Epub 2010 Jan
19.

Mammalian SWI/SNF--a subunit BAF250/ARID1 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that targets 
histone H2B.

Li XS(1), Trojer P, Matsumura T, Treisman JE, Tanese N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, NYU School of
Medicine, 550 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The mammalian SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex facilitates DNA access by
transcription factors and the transcription machinery. The characteristic member 
of human SWI/SNF-A is BAF250/ARID1, of which there are two isoforms,
BAF250a/ARID1a and BAF250b/ARID1b. Here we report that BAF250b complexes purified
from mammalian cells contain elongin C (Elo C), a BC box binding component of an 
E3 ubiquitin ligase. BAF250b was found to have a BC box motif, associate with Elo
C in a BC box-dependent manner, and, together with cullin 2 and Roc1, assemble
into an E3 ubiquitin ligase. The BAF250b BC box mutant protein was unstable in
vivo and was autoubiquitinated in a manner similar to that for the VHL BC box
mutants. The discovery that BAF250 is part of an E3 ubiquitin ligase adds an
enzymatic function to the chromatin-remodeling complex SWI/SNF-A. The
immunopurified BAF250b E3 ubiquitin ligase was found to target histone H2B at
lysine 120 for monoubiquitination in vitro. To date, all H2B monoubiquitination
was attributed to the human homolog of yeast Bre1 (RNF20/40). Mutation of
Drosophila osa, the homolog of BAF250, or depletion of BAF250 by RNA interference
(RNAi) in cultured human cells resulted in global decreases in monoubiquitinated 
H2B, implicating BAF250 in the cross talk of histone modifications.

PMCID: PMC2838063
PMID: 20086098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Biochem Genet. 2010 Feb;48(1-2):164-71. doi: 10.1007/s10528-009-9310-y. Epub 2009
Nov 26.

Expression of new red cell-related genes in erythroid differentiation.

De Andrade T(1), Moreira L, Duarte A, Lanaro C, De Albuquerque D, Saad S, Costa
F.

Author information: 
(1)Federal University of Alagoas, Campus Arapiraca, Arapiraca, AL, Brazil.
deandrade.tiago@gmail.com

Using a suppression subtractive hybridization method, we have previously
identified genes differentially expressed in erythroid cells heterozygous for
large deletions in beta-like globin cluster. Herein, we investigated the
expression of four newly detected red cell-related genes in erythroid
differentiation. ARID1B and TSPYL1, genes with chromatin remodeling properties,
presented similar patterns of expression with an upregulation after
erythropoietin (EPO) addition, similar to previous data found in reticulocytes.
ZHX2, a transcriptional repressor, was downregulated, and a redoxin-related gene,
SH3BGRL2, had higher levels of expression on differentiation. These are the first
investigations of these newly described genes in erythroid differentiation and
demonstrate that the expression of these genes is affected by EPO stimulation.
These genes may participate in globin regulation and may be important in the
normal physiology of erythrocytes.

PMID: 19941055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jul 1;18(13):2483-94. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp166. Epub 2009 Apr 
10.

Involvement of SMARCA2/BRM in the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex in
schizophrenia.

Koga M(1), Ishiguro H, Yazaki S, Horiuchi Y, Arai M, Niizato K, Iritani S,
Itokawa M, Inada T, Iwata N, Ozaki N, Ujike H, Kunugi H, Sasaki T, Takahashi M,
Watanabe Y, Someya T, Kakita A, Takahashi H, Nawa H, Muchardt C, Yaniv M, Arinami
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences, University of Tsukuba,Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Chromatin remodeling may play a role in the neurobiology of schizophrenia and the
process, therefore, may be considered as a therapeutic target. The SMARCA2 gene
encodes BRM in the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex, and associations of
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to schizophrenia were found in two linkage
disequilibrium blocks in the SMARCA2 gene after screening of 11 883 SNPs
(rs2296212; overall allelic P = 5.8 x 10(-5)) and subsequent screening of 22
genes involved in chromatin remodeling (rs3793490; overall allelic P = 2.0 x
10(-6)) in a Japanese population. A risk allele of a missense polymorphism
(rs2296212) induced a lower nuclear localization efficiency of BRM, and risk
alleles of intronic polymorphisms (rs3763627 and rs3793490) were associated with 
low SMARCA2 expression levels in the postmortem prefrontal cortex. A significant 
correlation in the fold changes of gene expression from schizophrenic prefrontal 
cortex (from the Stanley Medical Research Institute online genomics database) was
seen with suppression of SMARCA2 in transfected human cells by specific siRNA,
and of orthologous genes in the prefrontal cortex of Smarca2 knockout mice.
Smarca2 knockout mice showed impaired social interaction and prepulse inhibition.
Psychotogenic drugs lowered Smarca2 expression while antipsychotic drugs
increased it in the mouse brain. These findings support the existence of a role
for BRM in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.

PMID: 19363039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 21;283(47):32254-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806061200. Epub 2008
Sep 22.

BRD7, a novel PBAF-specific SWI/SNF subunit, is required for target gene
activation and repression in embryonic stem cells.

Kaeser MD(1), Aslanian A, Dong MQ, Yates JR 3rd, Emerson BM.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

The composition of chromatin-remodeling complexes dictates how these enzymes
control transcriptional programs and cellular identity. In the present study we
investigated the composition of SWI/SNF complexes in embryonic stem cells (ESCs).
In contrast to differentiated cells, ESCs have a biased incorporation of certain 
paralogous SWI/SNF subunits with low levels of BRM, BAF170, and ARID1B. Upon
differentiation, the expression of these subunits increases, resulting in a
higher diversity of compositionally distinct SWI/SNF enzymes. We also identified 
BRD7 as a novel component of the Polybromo-associated BRG1-associated factor
(PBAF) complex in both ESCs and differentiated cells. Using short hairpin
RNA-mediated depletion of BRG1, we showed that SWI/SNF can function as both a
repressor and an activator in pluripotent cells, regulating expression of
developmental modifiers and signaling components such as Nodal, ADAMTS1, BMI-1,
CRABP1, and thyroid releasing hormone. Knockdown studies of PBAF-specific BRD7
and of a signature subunit within the BAF complex, ARID1A, showed that these two 
subcomplexes affect SWI/SNF target genes differentially, in some cases even
antagonistically. This may be due to their different biochemical properties.
Finally we examined the role of SWI/SNF in regulating its target genes during
differentiation. We found that SWI/SNF affects recruitment of components of the
preinitiation complex in a promoter-specific manner to modulate transcription
positively or negatively. Taken together, our results provide insight into the
function of compositionally diverse SWI/SNF enzymes that underlie their inherent 
gene-specific mode of action.

PMCID: PMC2583284
PMID: 18809673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2006 Sep-Oct;37(2):82-90. Epub 2006 Sep 6.

Identification of novel candidate genes for globin regulation in erythroid cells 
containing large deletions of the human beta-globin gene cluster.

de Andrade TG(1), Peterson KR, Cunha AF, Moreira LS, Fattori A, Saad ST, Costa
FF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical and Biological Sciences, Federal University of Alagoas,
Maceió, AL, Brazil. tgandrade@ig.com.br

The genetic mechanisms underlying the continued expression of the gamma-globin
genes during the adult stage in deletional hereditary persistence of fetal
hemoglobin (HPFH) and deltabeta-thalassemias are not completely understood.
Herein, we investigated the possible involvement of transcription factors, using 
the suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH) method as an initial screen to
identify differentially expressed transcripts in reticulocytes from a normal and 
a HPFH-2 subject. Some of the detectable transcripts may participate in globin
gene regulation. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) experiments confirmed the
downregulation of ZHX2, a transcriptional repressor, in two HPFH-2 subjects and
in a carrier of the Sicilian deltabeta-thalassemia trait. The chromatin
remodeling factors ARID1B and TSPYL1 had a very similar pattern of expression
with an incremental increase in HPFH and decreased expression in
deltabeta-thalassemia. These differences suggest a mechanism to explain the
heterocellular and pancellular distribution of fetal hemoglobin in
deltabeta-thalassemia and deletional HPFH, respectively. Interestingly,
alpha-globin mRNA levels were decreased, similar to beta-globin in all
reticulocyte samples analyzed.

PMID: 16952470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 1;66(3):1289-93.

The c-myc gene is a direct target of mammalian SWI/SNF-related complexes during
differentiation-associated cell cycle arrest.

Nagl NG Jr(1), Zweitzig DR, Thimmapaya B, Beck GR Jr, Moran E.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

The activity of mammalian SWI/SNF-related chromatin remodeling complexes is
crucial for differentiation, development, and tumor suppression. Cell
cycle-regulating activities dependent on the complexes include induction of the
p21(WAF1/CIP1) kinase inhibitor and repression of E2F-responsive promoters. These
responses are linked through effects on pRb phosphorylation, but the direct role 
of the SWI/SNF-related complexes in their regulation is not fully understood.
Results presented here reveal that the complexes are required for regulation of a
distinct pathway of proliferation control involving repression of c-myc
expression in differentiating cells. This involves direct promoter targeting of
the c-myc gene by the complexes. Induction of p21(WAF1/CIP1) is specifically
dependent on prior repression of c-myc, but repression of E2F-responsive genes is
dissociable from the regulation of c-myc and p21(WAF1/CIP1).

PMID: 16452181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Cancer Res. 2005 Oct 15;65(20):9236-44.

The p270 (ARID1A/SMARCF1) subunit of mammalian SWI/SNF-related complexes is
essential for normal cell cycle arrest.

Nagl NG Jr(1), Patsialou A, Haines DS, Dallas PB, Beck GR Jr, Moran E.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

Mammalian SWI/SNF-related complexes are ATPase-powered nucleosome remodeling
assemblies crucial for proper development and tissue-specific gene expression.
The ATPase activity of the complexes is also critical for tumor suppression. The 
complexes contain seven or more noncatalytic subunits; only one of which,
hSNF5/Ini1/BAF47, has been individually identified as a tumor suppressor thus
far. The noncatalytic subunits include p270/ARID1A, which is of particular
interest because tissue array analysis corroborated by screening of tumor cell
lines indicates that p270 may be deficient in as many as 30% of renal carcinomas 
and 10% of breast carcinomas. The complexes can also include an alternative
ARID1B subunit, which is closely related to p270, but the product of an
independent gene. The respective importance of p270 and ARID1B in the control of 
cell proliferation was explored here using a short interfering RNA approach and a
cell system that permits analysis of differentiation-associated cell cycle
arrest. The p270-depleted cells fail to undergo normal cell cycle arrest on
induction, as evidenced by continued synthesis of DNA. These lines fail to show
other characteristics typical of arrested cells, including up-regulation of p21
and down-regulation of cyclins. The requirement for p270 is evident separately in
both the up-regulation of p21 and the down-regulation of E2F-responsive products.
In contrast, the ARID1B-depleted lines behaved like the parental cells in these
assays. Thus, p270-containing complexes are functionally distinct from
ARID1B-containing complexes. These results provide a direct biological basis to
support the implication from tumor tissue screens that deficiency of p270 plays a
causative role in carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16230384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Oncogene. 2006 Feb 23;25(8):1261-71.

Small regions of overlapping deletions on 6q26 in human astrocytic tumours
identified using chromosome 6 tile path array-CGH.

Ichimura K(1), Mungall AJ, Fiegler H, Pearson DM, Dunham I, Carter NP, Collins
VP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Molecular Histopathology, University of
Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK. ki212@cam.ac.uk

Deletions of chromosome 6 are a common abnormality in diverse human malignancies 
including astrocytic tumours, suggesting the presence of tumour suppressor genes 
(TSG). In order to help identify candidate TSGs, we have constructed a chromosome
6 tile path microarray. The array contains 1,780 clones (778 P1-derived
artificial chromosome and 1,002 bacterial artificial chromosome) that cover 98.3%
of the published chromosome 6 sequences. A total of 104 adult astrocytic tumours 
(10 diffuse astrocytomas, 30 anaplastic astrocytomas (AA), 64 glioblastomas (GB))
were analysed using this array. Single copy number change was successfully
detected and the result was in general concordant with a microsatellite analysis.
The pattern of copy number change was complex with multiple interstitial
deletions/gains. However, a predominance of telomeric 6q deletions was seen. Two 
small common and overlapping regions of deletion at 6q26 were identified. One was
1,002 kb in size and contained PACRG and QKI, while the second was 199 kb and
harbours a single gene, ARID1B. The data show that the chromosome 6 tile path
array is useful in mapping copy number changes with high resolution and accuracy.
We confirmed the high frequency of chromosome 6 deletions in AA and GB, and
identified two novel commonly deleted regions that may harbour TSGs.

Oncogene (2006) 25, 1261-1271. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1209156; published online 3
October 2005.

PMCID: PMC2760128
PMID: 16205629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Biophys J. 2004 Sep;87(3):1964-71.

Using atomic force microscopy to study nucleosome remodeling on individual
nucleosomal arrays in situ.

Wang H(1), Bash R, Yodh JG, Hager G, Lindsay SM, Lohr D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 
85287, USA.

In eukaryotes, genomic processes like transcription, replication, repair, and
recombination typically require alterations in nucleosome structure on specific
DNA regions to operate. ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling complexes provide a
major mechanism for carrying out such alterations in vivo. To learn more about
the action of these important complexes, we have utilized an atomic force
microscopy in situ technique that permits comparison of the same individual
molecules before and after activation of a particular process, in this case
nucleosome remodeling. This direct approach was used to look for changes induced 
by the action of the human Swi-Snf remodeling complex on individual, single-copy 
mouse mammary tumor virus promoter nucleosomal arrays. Using this technique, we
detect a variety of changes on remodeling. Many of these changes are larger in
scale than suggested from previous studies and involve a number of DNA-mediated
events, including a preference for the removal of a complete turn (80 basepairs) 
of nucleosomal DNA. The latter result raises the possibility of an unanticipated 
mode of human Swi-Snf interaction with the nucleosome, namely via the 11-nm
histone surface.

PMCID: PMC1304599
PMID: 15345572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Biochem J. 2004 Oct 15;383(Pt 2):319-25.

Two related ARID family proteins are alternative subunits of human SWI/SNF
complexes.

Wang X(1), Nagl NG, Wilsker D, Van Scoy M, Pacchione S, Yaciuk P, Dallas PB,
Moran E.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

p270 (ARID1A) is a member of the ARID family of DNA-binding proteins and a
subunit of human SWI/SNF-related complexes, which use the energy generated by an 
integral ATPase subunit to remodel chromatin. ARID1B is an independent gene
product with an open reading frame that is more than 60% identical with p270. We 
have generated monoclonal antibodies specific for either p270 or ARID1B to
facilitate the investigation of ARID1B and its potential interaction with human
SWI/SNF complexes in vivo. Immunocomplex analysis provides direct evidence that
endogenous ARID1B is associated with SWI/SNF-related complexes and indicates that
p270 and ARID1B, similar to the ATPase subunits BRG1 and hBRM, are alternative,
mutually exclusive subunits of the complexes. The ARID-containing subunits are
not specific to the ATPases. Each associates with both BRG1 and hBRM, thus
increasing the number of distinct subunit combinations known to be present in
cells. Analysis of the panels of cell lines indicates that ARID1B, similar to
p270, has a broad tissue distribution. The ratio of p270/ARID1B in typical cells 
is approx. 3.5:1, and BRG1 is distributed proportionally between the two ARID
subunits. Analysis of DNA-binding behaviour indicates that ARID1B binds DNA in a 
non-sequence-specific manner similar to p270.

PMCID: PMC1134073
PMID: 15170388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Feb 24;32(4):1345-53. Print 2004.

The DNA-binding properties of the ARID-containing subunits of yeast and mammalian
SWI/SNF complexes.

Wilsker D(1), Patsialou A, Zumbrun SD, Kim S, Chen Y, Dallas PB, Moran E.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research, Temple University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

SWI/SNF complexes are ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complexes that are
highly conserved from yeast to human. From yeast to human the complexes contain a
subunit with an ARID (A-T-rich interaction domain) DNA-binding domain. In yeast
this subunit is SWI1 and in human there are two closely related alternative
subunits, p270 and ARID1B. We describe here a comparison of the DNA-binding
properties of the yeast and human SWI/SNF ARID-containing subunits. We have
determined that SWI1 is an unusual member of the ARID family in both its ARID
sequence and in the fact that its DNA-binding affinity is weaker than that of
other ARID family members, including its human counterparts, p270 and ARID1B.
Sequence analysis and substitution mutagenesis reveals that the weak DNA-binding 
affinity of the SWI1 ARID is an intrinsic feature of its sequence, arising from
specific variations in the major groove interaction site. In addition, this work 
confirms the finding that p270 binds DNA without regard to sequence specificity, 
excluding the possibility that the intrinsic role of the ARID is to recruit
SWI/SNF complexes to specific promoter sequences. These results emphasize that
care must be taken when comparing yeast and higher eukaryotic SWI/SNF complexes
in terms of DNA-binding mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC390273
PMID: 14982958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Am J Pathol. 2003 Dec;163(6):2485-94.

Ischemia induces early expression of a new transcription factor (6A3-5) in kidney
vascular smooth muscle cells: studies in rat and human renal pathology.

Garin G(1), Badid C, McGregor B, Vincent M, Guerret S, Zibara K, Hurlstone A,
Laville M, McGregor JL.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM XR331, EA 1582 Génomique Fonctionnelle de l'Athérothrombose, Faculté de
Médecine Laënnec, Lyon, France.

Acute renal failure, characterized by rapid decline in glomerular filtration
rate, is a major cause of morbidity and mortality. During the evolution of renal 
diseases chronic ischemia develops. Indeed, acute or chronic renal failure may
occur as a result of renal ischemia, which induces cells to dedifferentiate,
proliferate, or become apoptotic. In this study, we have investigated the
expression of a newly identified transcription factor, 6A3-5, under in vitro and 
in vivo conditions. Proliferating vascular smooth muscle were investigated in
response to different mitogenic agents. The 6A3-5 expression was then studied in 
ischemic rat kidney, induced by renal pedicle clamping, followed, or not, by
reperfusion. Subsequently human renal biopsies from early kidney grafts and
chronic renal diseases were also investigated for 6A3-5 protein expression by
immunohistochemistry. In vitro study shows an over-expression of 6A3-5 following 
2 to 4 hours stimulation by serum or Angiotensin II, of rat proliferating aortic 
smooth muscle cell. Moreover, in vivo study shows that this new protein is over
expressed in rat kidney submitted to 45 minutes ischemia. An anti-6A3-5 antibody 
shows the protein to be expressed in smooth muscle cells of the arterioles and
intermediate size arteries, in mesangial cells and interstitial myofibroblasts.
In human biopsies of early kidney grafts and renal disease, the same
up-regulation of 6A3-5, as in acute ischemic situation, is observed. This 6A3-5
expression is intimately associated with alpha-smooth muscle cell actin
expression in mesangial cells, arteriolar smooth muscle cells as well as
interstitial myofibroblasts. Transcription factor 6A3-5 could potentially be a
novel early vascular marker of acute and chronic renal ischemic stress implicated
in tissue remodeling.

PMCID: PMC1892391
PMID: 14633620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biomol NMR. 2003 Nov;27(3):277-8.

Assignment of 1H, 13C and 15N resonances of the ARID domain of P270.

Kim S, Zhu L, Yu B, Chen Y.

PMID: 12975585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Biochem J. 2002 May 15;364(Pt 1):255-64.

Cloning and characterization of hELD/OSA1, a novel BRG1 interacting protein.

Hurlstone AF(1), Olave IA, Barker N, van Noort M, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)University Medical Centre Utrecht, Department of Immunology, Heidelberglaan
100, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.

A highly conserved multisubunit enzymic complex, SWI/SNF, participates in the
regulation of eukaryote gene expression through its ability to remodel chromatin.
While a single component of SWI/SNF, Swi2 or a related protein, can perform this 
function in vitro, the other components appear to modulate the activity and
specificity of the complex in vivo. Here we describe the cloning of hELD/OSA1, a 
189 KDa human homologue of Drosophila Eld/Osa protein, a constituent of
Drosophila SWI/SNF. By comparing conserved peptide sequences in Eld/Osa
homologues we define three domains common to all family members. A putative DNA
binding domain, or ARID (AT-rich DNA-interacting domain), may function in
targetting SWI/SNF to chromatin. Two other domains unique to Eld/Osa proteins,
EHD1 and EHD2, map to the C-terminus. We show that EHD2 mediates binding to
Brahma-related gene 1 (BRG1), a human homologue of yeast Swi2. EHD1 and EHD2 also
appear capable of interacting with each other. Using an antibody raised against
EHD2 of hELD/OSA1, we detected Eld/Osa1 in endogenous SWI/SNF complexes derived
from mouse brain.

PMCID: PMC1222568
PMID: 11988099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Genomics. 2001 Apr 15;73(2):140-8.

Characterization of mammalian orthologues of the Drosophila osa gene: cDNA
cloning, expression, chromosomal localization, and direct physical interaction
with Brahma chromatin-remodeling complex.

Kozmik Z(1), Machon O, Králová J, Kreslová J, Paces J, Vlcek C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrated Genomics, Institute of Molecular Genetics, Flemingovo 2,
16637 Prague 6, Czech Republic. kozmik@img.cas.cz

The osa gene of Drosophila melanogaster encodes a nuclear protein that is a
component of the Brahma chromatin-remodeling complex. Osa is required for
embryonic segmentation, development of the notum and wing margin, and
photoreceptor differentiation. In these tissues, osa mutations have effects
opposite to those caused by wingless (wg) mutations, suggesting that osa
functions as an antagonist of wg signaling. Here we describe the cloning and
characterization of mammalian orthologues of osa. Three evolutionarily conserved 
domains were identified in Osa family members: the N-terminal Bright domain and
C-terminally located Osa homology domains 1 and 2. RNase protection analysis
indicates a widespread expression of the Osa1 gene during mouse development, in
adult tissues, and in cultured cell lines. The Osa1 gene was localized to mouse
chromosome 4, within the region syntenic to chromosomal position 1p35-p36 of its 
human counterpart. We present evidence that the OSA1 product is localized in the 
nucleus and associates with human Brahma complex, which suggests evolutionarily
conserved function for Osa in gene regulation between mammals and Drosophila.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11318604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


