
1. Joint Bone Spine. 2016 Jan 29. pii: S1297-319X(15)00281-X. doi:
10.1016/j.jbspin.2015.09.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of upstream regulators for synovial expression signature genes in 
osteoarthritis.

Fei Q(1), Lin J(1), Meng H(1), Wang B(1), Yang Y(1), Wang Q(1), Su N(1), Li J(1),
Li D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical
University, 95, Yong'an Road, Beijing 100050, China. (2)Department of
Orthopaedics, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University, 95,
Yong'an Road, Beijing 100050, China. Electronic address: spinefei@163.com.

OBJECTIVES: The detection of transcription factors (TFs) for OA signature genes
provides better clues to the underlying regulatory mechanisms and therapeutic
applications.
METHODS: We searched GEO database for synovial expression profiling from
different OA microarray studies to perform a systematic analysis. Functional
annotation of DEGs was conducted, including gene ontology (GO) enrichment
analysis and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment
analysis. Based on motif databases and the results from integrated analysis of
current gene expression data, a global transcriptional regulatory network was
constructed, and the upstream TFs were identified for OA signature genes.
RESULTS: Six GEO datasets were obtained. Totally, 805 genes across the studies
were consistently differentially expressed in OA (469 up-regulated and 336
down-regulated genes) with FDR=0.01. Supporting an involvement of ECM in the
development of OA, we showed that ECM-receptor interaction was the most
significant pathway in our KEGG analysis (P=5.92E-12). Sixty-one differentially
expressed TFs were identified with FDR=0.05. The constructed OA-specific
regulatory networks consisted of 648 TF-target interactions between 51 TFs and
429 DEGs in the context of OA. The top 10 TFs covering the most downstream DEGs
were identified as crucial TFs involved in the development of OA, including
ARID3A, NFIC, ZNF354C, NR4A2, BRCA1, EHF, FOXL1, FOXC1, EGR1, and HOXA5.
CONCLUSION: This integrated analysis has identified the OA signature, providing
clues to pathogenesis of OA at the molecular level, which may be also used as
diagnostic markers for OA. Some crucial upstream regulators, such as NR4A2, EHF, 
and EGR1 may be considered as potential new therapeutic targets for OA.

Copyright © 2015 Société française de rhumatologie. Published by Elsevier SAS.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 26832188  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Cell Rep. 2016 Jan 26;14(3):520-33. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.064. Epub 2016 
Jan 14.

let-7 Modulates Chromatin Configuration and Target Gene Repression through
Regulation of the ARID3B Complex.

Liao TT(1), Hsu WH(1), Ho CH(1), Hwang WL(2), Lan HY(1), Lo T(1), Chang CC(3),
Tai SK(4), Yang MH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, No. 155,
Section 2, Li-Nong Street, Taipei 11221, Taiwan. (2)The Ph.D. Program for
Translational Medicine, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical
University, No. 250, Wuxing Street, Taipei 11031, Taiwan. (3)Graduate Institute
of Oral Biology, School of Dentistry, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Changde 
Street, Taipei 10048, Taiwan. (4)Department of Otolaryngology, Taipei Veterans
General Hospital, No. 201, Section 2, Shih-Pai Road, Taipei 11217, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, No. 155,
Section 2, Li-Nong Street, Taipei 11221, Taiwan; Institute of Biotechnology in
Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, No. 155, Section 2, Li-Nong Street,
Taipei 11221, Taiwan; Genomic Research Center, National Yang-Ming University, No.
155, Section 2, Li-Nong Street, Taipei 11221, Taiwan; Division of Medical
Oncology, Department of Oncology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, No. 201,
Section 2, Shih-Pai Road, Taipei 11217, Taiwan; Genomic Research Center, Academia
Sinica, No. 128, Section 2, Academia Road, Taipei 11529, Taiwan. Electronic
address: mhyang2@vghtpe.gov.tw.

Let-7 is crucial for both stem cell differentiation and tumor suppression. Here, 
we demonstrate a chromatin-dependent mechanism of let-7 in regulating target gene
expression in cancer cells. Let-7 directly represses the expression of AT-rich
interacting domain 3B (ARID3B), ARID3A, and importin-9. In the absence of let-7, 
importin-9 facilitates the nuclear import of ARID3A, which then forms a complex
with ARID3B. The nuclear ARID3B complex recruits histone demethylase 4C to reduce
histone 3 lysine 9 trimethylation and promotes the transcription of stemness
factors. Functionally, expression of ARID3B is critical for the tumor initiation 
in let-7-depleted cancer cells. An inverse association between let-7 and
ARID3A/ARID3B and prognostic significance is demonstrated in head and neck cancer
patients. These results highlight a chromatin-dependent mechanism where let-7
regulates cancer stemness through ARID3B.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26776511  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Immunol. 2016 Jan 15;196(2):614-23. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500355. Epub 2015
Dec 18.

The Transcription Factor ARID3a Is Important for In Vitro Differentiation of
Human Hematopoietic Progenitors.

Ratliff ML(1), Mishra M(2), Frank MB(1), Guthridge JM(1), Webb CF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104; (2)Walter Reed 
Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, MD 20910; (3)Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104; Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104; and
Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104 carol-webb@ouhsc.edu.

We recently reported that the transcription factor ARID3a is expressed in a
subset of human hematopoietic progenitor stem cells in both healthy individuals
and in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. Numbers of ARID3a(+) lupus
hematopoietic stem progenitor cells were associated with increased production of 
autoreactive Abs when those cells were introduced into humanized mouse models.
Although ARID3a/Bright knockout mice died in utero, they exhibited decreased
numbers of hematopoietic stem cells and erythrocytes, indicating that ARID3a is
functionally important for hematopoiesis in mice. To explore the requirement for 
ARID3a for normal human hematopoiesis, hematopoietic stem cell progenitors from
human cord blood were subjected to both inhibition and overexpression of ARID3a
in vitro. Inhibition of ARID3a resulted in decreased B lineage cell production
accompanied by increases in cells with myeloid lineage markers. Overexpression of
ARID3a inhibited both myeloid and erythroid differentiation. Additionally,
inhibition of ARID3a in hematopoietic stem cells resulted in altered expression
of transcription factors associated with hematopoietic lineage decisions. These
results suggest that appropriate regulation of ARID3a is critical for normal
development of both myeloid and B lineage pathways.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26685208  [PubMed - in process]


4. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Dec 18;15:49. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0096-3.

Transcriptome profiling of bovine inner cell mass and trophectoderm derived from 
in vivo generated blastocysts.

Hosseini SM(1,)(2), Dufort I(3), Caballero J(4), Moulavi F(5), Ghanaei HR(6),
Sirard MA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biotechnology, Reproductive Biomedicine Research
Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan, Iran.
smhosseini@royaninstitute.org. (2)Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la
Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture et de l'Alimentation,
Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF, Université Laval, Québec, QC,
G1V 0A6, Canada. smhosseini@royaninstitute.org. (3)Centre de Recherche en
Biologie de la Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture et de
l'Alimentation, Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF, Université
Laval, Québec, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada. Isabelle.dufort@fsaa.ulaval.ca. (4)Centre de 
Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture
et de l'Alimentation, Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF,
Université Laval, Québec, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada. Julieta.caballero.1@ulaval.ca.
(5)Department of Reproductive Biotechnology, Reproductive Biomedicine Research
Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan, Iran.
f_moulavi@yahoo.com. (6)Department of Reproductive Biotechnology, Reproductive
Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan,
Iran. hamidghanai@yahoo.co.uk. (7)Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la
Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture et de l'Alimentation,
Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF, Université Laval, Québec, QC,
G1V 0A6, Canada. Marc-Andre.Sirard@fsaa.ulaval.ca.

BACKGROUND: This study describes the generation and analysis of the
transcriptional profile of bovine inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE),
obtained from in vivo developed embryos by using a bovine-embryo specific array
(EmbryoGENE) containing 37,238 probes.
RESULTS: A total of 4,689 probes were differentially expressed between ICM and
TE, among these, 2,380 and 2,309 probes were upregulated in ICM and TE tissues,
respectively (P = 0.01, FC = 2.0, FDR: 2.0). Ontological classification of the
genes predominantly expressed in ICM emerged a range of functional categories
with a preponderance of genes involved in basal and developmental signaling
pathways including P53, TGFß, IL8, mTOR, integrin, ILK, and ELF2 signalings.
Cross-referencing of microarray data with two available in vitro studies
indicated a marked reduction in ICM vs. TE transcriptional difference following
in vitro culture of bovine embryos. Moreover, a great majority of genes that were
found to be misregulated following in vitro culture of bovine embryos were known 
genes involved in epigenetic regulation of pluripotency and cell differentiation 
including DNMT1, GADD45, CARM1, ELF5 HDAC8, CCNB1, KDM6A, PRDM9, CDX2, ARID3A,
IL6, GADD45A, FGFR2, PPP2R2B, and SMARCA2. Cross-species referencing of
microarray data revealed substantial divergence between bovine and mouse and
human in signaling pathways involved in early lineage specification.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptional changes occur during ICM and TE lineages
specification in bovine is greater than previously understood. Therefore, this
array data establishes a standard to evaluate the in vitro imprint on the
transcriptome and to hypothesize the cross-species differences that allow in
vitro acquisition of pluripotent ICM in human and mice but hinder that process in
bovine.

PMCID: PMC4683974
PMID: 26681441  [PubMed - in process]


5. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Dec 4-11;468(1-2):248-54. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.121. Epub 2015 Oct 28.

Critical role of ARID3B in the expression of pro-apoptotic p53-target genes and
apoptosis.

Pratama E(1), Tian X(2), Lestari W(3), Iseki S(1), Ichwan SJ(3), Ikeda MA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Craniofacial Embryology, Graduate School of Medical
and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Oral Implantology and Regenerative Dental Medicine, Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Tokyo, Japan. (3)Faculty of Dentistry, International Islamic University Malaysia,
Kuantan, Malaysia. (4)Department of Molecular Craniofacial Embryology, Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: mikeda.emb@tmd.ac.jp.

ARID3A and ARID3B are transcriptional targets of p53. Recently, it has been
reported that ARID3A plays a critical role in the transcriptional activation of
pro-arrest p21 in response to DNA damage. However, the role of ARID3B in the p53 
regulatory pathway remains poorly understood. Here we show that ARID3A and ARID3B
specifically bind to putative ARID3-binding sites in p53 target genes in vitro
and in vivo. ARID3B and, to a lesser extent, ARID3A silencing blocked
transcriptional activation of pro-apoptotic p53 target genes, such as PUMA, PIG3,
and p53. Furthermore, ectopic ARID3B, to a lesser extent, ARID3A expression
activated the pro-apoptotic gene expression, and only ARID3B induced apoptosis.
Finally, ARID3B but not ARID3A silencing blocked apoptosis induction following
DNA damage. These results indicated that, although ARID3B and ARID3A share
overlapping functions, ARID3B play a key role in the expression of pro-apoptotic 
p53-target genes and apoptosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26519881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Physiol Rep. 2015 Oct;3(10). pii: e12537. doi: 10.14814/phy2.12537.

Renal stromal miRNAs are required for normal nephrogenesis and glomerular
mesangial survival.

Phua YL(1), Chu JY(1), Marrone AK(1), Bodnar AJ(1), Sims-Lucas S(1), Ho J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Rangos Research Center, School of Medicine, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh 
of UPMC University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Department of
Pediatrics, Division of Nephrology, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (2)Rangos Research Center, School of Medicine,
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania Department of Pediatrics, Division of Nephrology, School of
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
jacqueline.ho2@chp.edu.

MicroRNAs are small noncoding RNAs that post-transcriptionally regulate mRNA
levels. While previous studies have demonstrated that miRNAs are indispensable in
the nephron progenitor and ureteric bud lineage, little is understood about
stromal miRNAs during kidney development. The renal stroma (marked by expression 
of FoxD1) gives rise to the renal interstitium, a subset of peritubular
capillaries, and multiple supportive vascular cell types including pericytes and 
the glomerular mesangium. In this study, we generated FoxD1(GC);Dicer(fl/fl)
transgenic mice that lack miRNA biogenesis in the FoxD1 lineage. Loss of Dicer
activity resulted in multifaceted renal anomalies including perturbed
nephrogenesis, expansion of nephron progenitors, decreased renin-expressing
cells, fewer smooth muscle afferent arterioles, and progressive mesangial cell
loss in mature glomeruli. Although the initial lineage specification of FoxD1(+) 
stroma was not perturbed, both the glomerular mesangium and renal interstitium
exhibited ectopic apoptosis, which was associated with increased expression of
Bcl2l11 (Bim) and p53 effector genes (Bax, Trp53inp1, Jun, Cdkn1a, Mmp2, and
Arid3a). Using a combination of high-throughput miRNA profiling of the
FoxD1(+)-derived cells and mRNA profiling of differentially expressed transcripts
in FoxD1(GC);Dicer(fl/fl) kidneys, at least 72 miRNA:mRNA target interactions
were identified to be suppressive of the apoptotic program. Together, the results
support an indispensable role for stromal miRNAs in the regulation of apoptosis
during kidney development.

© 2015 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of the American Physiological Society and The Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4632944
PMID: 26438731  [PubMed]


7. Genes Dev. 2015 Sep 1;29(17):1890.

Corrigendum: Arid3a is essential to execution of the first cell fate decision via
direct embryonic and extraembryonic transcriptional regulation.

Rhee C, Lee BK, Beck S, Anjum A, Cook KR, Popowski M, Tucker HO, Kim J.

Erratum for
    Genes Dev. 2014 Oct 15;28(20):2219-32.

PMCID: PMC4573860
PMID: 26341560  [PubMed]


8. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Nov;45(11):2978-84. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445146. Epub 2015 Sep
23.

Perspectives on fetal derived CD5+ B1 B cells.

Hardy RR(1), Hayakawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

CD5(+) B-cell origins and their predisposition to lymphoma are long-standing
issues. Transfer of fetal and adult liver BM Pro-B cells generates B cells with
distinct phenotypes: fetal cells generate IgM(high) IgD(low) CD5(+) , whereas
adult cells IgM(low) IgD(high) CD5(-) . This suggests a developmental switch in B
lymphopoiesis, similar to the switch in erythropoiesis. Comparison of mRNA and
miRNA expression in fetal and adult Pro-B cells revealed differential expression 
of Lin28b mRNA and Let-7 miRNA, providing evidence that this regulatory axis
functions in the switch. Recent work has shown that Arid3a is a key transcription
factor mediating fetal-type B-cell development. Lin28b-promoted fetal development
generates CD5(+) B cells as a consequence of positively selected self-reactivity.
CD5(+) B cells play important roles in clearance of apoptotic cells and in
protective immune responses, but also pose a risk of progression to
leukemia/lymphoma. Differential Lin28b expression in fetal and adult human B-cell
precursors showed that human B-cell development may resemble mouse, with
self-reactive "innate-like" B cells generated early in life. It remains to be
determined whether such human B cells have a higher propensity to leukemic
progression. This review describes our recent research with CD5(+) B cells and
presents our perspective on their role in disease.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4674377 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26339791  [PubMed - in process]


9. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 29;10(6):e0131961. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131961.
eCollection 2015.

ARID3B Directly Regulates Ovarian Cancer Promoting Genes.

Bobbs A(1), Gellerman K(2), Hallas WM(2), Joseph S(1), Yang C(2), Kurkewich J(3),
Cowden Dahl KD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine-South Bend, South Bend, Indiana, United States of America; Harper Cancer
Research Institute, South Bend, Indiana, United States of America. (2)Harper
Cancer Research Institute, South Bend, Indiana, United States of America;
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
Indiana, United States of America. (3)Harper Cancer Research Institute, South
Bend, Indiana, United States of America; Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, United States of America.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine-South Bend, South Bend, Indiana, United States of America; Harper Cancer
Research Institute, South Bend, Indiana, United States of America; Department of 
Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, United
States of America; Indiana University Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center,
Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of America.

The DNA-binding protein AT-Rich Interactive Domain 3B (ARID3B) is elevated in
ovarian cancer and increases tumor growth in a xenograft model of ovarian cancer.
However, relatively little is known about ARID3B's function. In this study we
perform the first genome wide screen for ARID3B direct target genes and ARID3B
regulated pathways. We identified and confirmed numerous ARID3B target genes by
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) followed by microarray and quantitative
RT-PCR. Using motif-finding algorithms, we characterized a binding site for
ARID3B, which is similar to the previously known site for the ARID3B paralogue
ARID3A. Functionality of this predicted site was demonstrated by ChIP analysis.
We next demonstrated that ARID3B induces expression of its targets in ovarian
cancer cell lines. We validated that ARID3B binds to an epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) enhancer and increases mRNA expression. ARID3B also binds to the 
promoter of Wnt5A and its receptor FZD5. FZD5 is highly expressed in ovarian
cancer cell lines, and is upregulated by exogenous ARID3B. Both ARID3B and FZD5
expression increase adhesion to extracellular matrix (ECM) components including
collagen IV, fibronectin and vitronectin. ARID3B-increased adhesion to collagens 
II and IV require FZD5. This study directly demonstrates that ARID3B binds target
genes in a sequence-specific manner, resulting in increased gene expression.
Furthermore, our data indicate that ARID3B regulation of direct target genes in
the Wnt pathway promotes adhesion of ovarian cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4486168
PMID: 26121572  [PubMed - in process]


10. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Aug 7;463(4):1334-40. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.06.130. Epub 2015 Jun 23.

A developmentally plastic adult mouse kidney cell line spontaneously generates
multiple adult kidney structures.

Webb CF(1), Ratliff ML(2), Powell R(3), Wirsig-Wiechmann CR(4), Lakiza O(5),
Obara T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK, USA; Immunobiology and Cancer Research, Oklahoma Medical
Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, USA; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK,
USA. Electronic address: carol-webb@omrf.org. (2)Immunobiology and Cancer
Research, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
Electronic address: michelle-ratliff@omrf.org. (3)Department of Cell Biology,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. Electronic
address: rebeccapowell@gmail.com. (4)Department of Cell Biology, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. Electronic address:
celeste-wirsig@ouhsc.edu. (5)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. Electronic address:
olga-lakiza@ouhsc.edu. (6)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. Electronic address:
tomoko-obara@ouhsc.edu.

Despite exciting new possibilities for regenerative therapy posed by the ability 
to induce pluripotent stem cells, recapitulation of three-dimensional kidneys for
repair or replacement has not been possible. ARID3a-deficient mouse tissues
generated multipotent, developmentally plastic cells. Therefore, we assessed the 
adult mouse ARID3a-/- kidney cell line, KKPS5, which expresses renal progenitor
surface markers as an alternative cell source for modeling kidney development.
Remarkably, these cells spontaneously developed into multicellular nephron-like
structures in vitro, and engrafted into immunocompromised medaka mesonephros,
where they formed mouse nephron structures. These data implicate KKPS5 cells as a
new model system for studying kidney development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4526183
PMID: 26111446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Int J Dev Biol. 2015;59(4-6):241-6. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.140263ho.

Identification of distal enhancers for Six2 expression in pronephros.

Suzuki N(1), Hirano K, Ogino H, Ochi H.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Yamagata University, Yamagata-shi, Yamagata, Japan.

The embryonic nephric mesenchyme contains pluripotent progenitor cells. Six2, a
homeodomain transcription factor, is expressed in a subset of the nephric
mesenchyme, and it functions to maintain a progenitor state by suppressing
nephrogenesis. Despite the functional significance of Six2 in nephric
development, its regulatory mechanisms remain unclear. To identify the
cis-regulatory elements for Six2, we focused on the evolutionarily conserved
sequences known as conserved noncoding sequences (CNSs) associated with the Six2 
locus. Transgenic experiments using Xenopus laevis embryos revealed that three of
the eight CNSs located within a 317-kb segment of the Six2 genomic locus were
nephric enhancers. Motif analysis of transcription factors combined with
phylogenetic footprinting revealed the enrichment of putative T-cell factor
(Tcf)-, Hox-, and SWI/SNF complex helicase-like transcription factor (Hltf)- and 
AT-rich interactive domain 3A (Arid3a)-binding motif sequences in these
enhancers.

PMID: 26009236  [PubMed - in process]


12. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2015 Dec;1362:8-15. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12769. Epub 2015 Apr 30.

A developmental switch between fetal and adult B lymphopoiesis.

Li YS(1), Zhou Y(1), Tang L(1), Shinton SA(1), Hayakawa K(1), Hardy RR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)-purified pro-B cells from fetal liver 
and adult bone marrow generate B cells with distinct phenotypes: fetal cells
generate few IgD(high) B cells and half express CD5, whereas adult cells generate
mostly IgD(high) cells and few express CD5. These results led us to propose a
model of a developmental switch in B lymphopoiesis, similar to the well-known
switch in fetal to adult erythropoiesis. More recent global analysis of mRNA and 
microRNA expression comparing these two types of pro-B cells revealed
differential expression of Lin28b and microRNAs from the Let-7 family, indicating
that this regulatory axis plays a role in the switch. Further analysis has
provided data supporting this model, implicating Arid3a as a key transcription
factor in mediating fetal-type B cell development. Function of this regulatory
axis in human B lineage precursors may also explain the predominance of CD5(+) B 
cells in cord blood. We suggest that Lin28b-promoted B cell development generates
many cells expressing CD5 as a consequence of positively selected
self-reactivity. While such cells serve a useful role in clearance of senescent
cells and in certain immune responses, they also carry the risk of progression to
leukemia/lymphoma later in life.

© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 25931205  [PubMed - in process]


13. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Mar 26;7(1):34. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0064-6.
eCollection 2015.

Age-associated DNA methylation changes in immune genes, histone modifiers and
chromatin remodeling factors within 5 years after birth in human blood
leukocytes.

Acevedo N(1), Reinius LE(2), Vitezic M(3), Fortino V(4), Söderhäll C(2), Honkanen
H(5), Veijola R(6), Simell O(7), Toppari J(8), Ilonen J(9), Knip M(10), Scheynius
A(11), Hyöty H(12), Greco D(4), Kere J(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine Solna, Translational Immunology Unit, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden ; Department of Biosciences and Nutrition,
Center for Innovative Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Center for Innovative Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Department of Biology,
Bioinformatics Centre, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (4)Unit of 
Systems Toxicology, Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland. 
(5)Department of Virology, School of Medicine, University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Oulu University Hospital, University of
Oulu, Oulu, Finland. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital,
Research Centre of Applied and Preventive Cardiovascular Medicine, University of 
Turku, Turku, Finland. (8)Department of Physiology and Pediatrics, Turku
University Hospital, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. (9)Immunogenetics
Laboratory, University of Turku, Finland and Department of Clinical Microbiology,
University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland. (10)Children's Hospital, Helsinki
University Central Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland ;
Department of Paediatrics, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland ;
Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, and Research Programs Unit,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (11)Department of Medicine Solna,
Translational Immunology Unit, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(12)Department of Virology, School of Medicine, University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland ; Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere, Finland. (13)Department of Biosciences
and Nutrition, Center for Innovative Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden ; Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, and Research Programs Unit, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Age-related changes in DNA methylation occurring in blood leukocytes 
during early childhood may reflect epigenetic maturation. We hypothesized that
some of these changes involve gene networks of critical relevance in leukocyte
biology and conducted a prospective study to elucidate the dynamics of DNA
methylation. Serial blood samples were collected at 3, 6, 12, 24, 36, 48 and
60 months after birth in ten healthy girls born in Finland and participating in
the Type 1 Diabetes Prediction and Prevention Study. DNA methylation was measured
using the HumanMethylation450 BeadChip.
RESULTS: After filtering for the presence of polymorphisms and
cell-lineage-specific signatures, 794 CpG sites showed significant DNA
methylation differences as a function of age in all children (41.6%
age-methylated and 58.4% age-demethylated, Bonferroni-corrected P value <0.01).
Age-methylated CpGs were more frequently located in gene bodies and within +5 to 
+50 kilobases (kb) of transcription start sites (TSS) and enriched in
developmental, neuronal and plasma membrane genes. Age-demethylated CpGs were
associated to promoters and DNAse-I hypersensitivity sites, located within -5 to 
+5 kb of the nearest TSS and enriched in genes related to immunity, antigen
presentation, the polycomb-group protein complex and cytoplasm.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals that susceptibility loci for complex inflammatory
diseases (for example, IRF5, NOD2, and PTGER4) and genes encoding histone
modifiers and chromatin remodeling factors (for example, HDAC4, KDM2A, KDM2B,
JARID2, ARID3A, and SMARCD3) undergo DNA methylation changes in leukocytes during
early childhood. These results open new perspectives to understand leukocyte
maturation and provide a catalogue of CpG sites that may need to be corrected for
age effects when performing DNA methylation studies in children.

PMCID: PMC4396570
PMID: 25874017  [PubMed]


14. J Exp Med. 2015 Apr 6;212(4):569-80. doi: 10.1084/jem.20141510. Epub 2015 Mar 9.

Lin28b promotes fetal B lymphopoiesis through the transcription factor Arid3a.

Zhou Y(1), Li YS(1), Bandi SR(1), Tang L(1), Shinton SA(1), Hayakawa K(1), Hardy 
RR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111. (2)Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, PA 19111 richard.hardy@fccc.edu.

Mouse B cell precursors from fetal liver and adult bone marrow (BM) generate
distinctive B cell progeny when transplanted into immunodeficient recipients,
supporting a two-pathway model for B lymphopoiesis, fetal "B-1" and adult "B-2." 
Recently, Lin28b was shown to be important for the switch between fetal and adult
pathways; however, neither the mechanism of Lin28b action nor the importance of B
cell antigen receptor (BCR) signaling in this process was addressed. Here, we
report key advances in our understanding of the regulation of B-1/B-2
development. First, modulation of Let-7 in fetal pro-B cells is sufficient to
alter fetal B-1 development to produce B cells resembling the progeny of adult
B-2 development. Second, intact BCR signaling is required for the generation of
B1a B cells from Lin28b-transduced BM progenitors, supporting a requirement for
ligand-dependent selection, as is the case for normal B1a B cells. Third, the VH 
repertoire of Lin28b-induced BM B1a B cells differs from that of normal B1a,
suggesting persisting differences from fetal progenitors. Finally, we identify
the Arid3a transcription factor as a key target of Let-7, whose ectopic
expression is sufficient to induce B-1 development in adult pro-B cells and whose
silencing by knockdown blocks B-1 development in fetal pro-B cells.

© 2015 Zhou et al.

PMCID: PMC4387290
PMID: 25753579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Immunol. 2015 Feb 1;194(3):940-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401941. Epub 2014 Dec 
22.

Differential expression of the transcription factor ARID3a in lupus patient
hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Ratliff ML(1), Ward JM(2), Merrill JT(3), James JA(4), Webb CF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104; (2)Immunobiology and Cancer Research
Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104;
Microbiology and Immunology Program, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104; (3)Clinical Pharmacology Program, Oklahoma
Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104; (4)Microbiology and
Immunology Program, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City,
OK 73104; Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104; Department of Medicine, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104; and. (5)Immunobiology
and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City,
OK 73104; Microbiology and Immunology Program, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104; Department of Cell Biology, University 
of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104 carol-webb@omrf.org.

Although hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) are used for
transplantation, characterization of the multiple subsets within this population 
in humans has lagged behind similar studies in mice. We found that expression of 
the DNA-binding protein, ARID3a, in mouse stem cells was important for normal
development of hematopoietic lineages; however, progenitors expressing ARID3a in 
humans have not been defined. We previously showed increased numbers of ARID3a(+)
B cells in nearly half of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients, and total 
numbers of ARID3a(+) B cells were associated with increased disease severity.
Because expression of ARID3a in those SLE patients occurred throughout all B cell
subsets, we hypothesized that ARID3a expression in patient HSPCs might also be
increased relative to expression in healthy controls. Our data now show that
ARID3a expression is not limited to any defined subset of HSPCs in either healthy
controls or SLE patients. Numbers of ARID3a(+) HSPCs in SLE patients were
increased over numbers of ARID3a(+) cells in healthy controls. Although all
SLE-derived HSPCs exhibited poor colony formation in vitro compared with
controls, SLE HSPCs with high numbers of ARID3a(+) cells yielded increased
numbers of cells expressing the early progenitor marker, CD34. SLE HSPCs with
high numbers of ARID3a(+) cells also more readily generated
autoantibody-producing cells than HSPCs with lower levels of ARID3a in a
humanized mouse model. These data reveal new functions for ARID3a in early
hematopoiesis and suggest that knowledge regarding ARID3a levels in HSPCs could
be informative for applications requiring transplantation of those cells.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4297684
PMID: 25535283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Genes Dev. 2014 Oct 15;28(20):2219-32. doi: 10.1101/gad.247163.114.

Arid3a is essential to execution of the first cell fate decision via direct
embryonic and extraembryonic transcriptional regulation.

Rhee C(1), Lee BK(1), Beck S(1), Anjum A(2), Cook KR(2), Popowski M(1), Tucker
HO(3), Kim J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology. (2)Department of Molecular Biosciences. (3)Department of Molecular
Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology,
jonghwankim@mail.utexas.edu haleytucker@austin.utexas.edu. (4)Department of
Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center for
Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas
78712, USA jonghwankim@mail.utexas.edu haleytucker@austin.utexas.edu.

Erratum in
    Genes Dev. 2015 Sep 1;29(17):1890.

Despite their origin from the inner cell mass, embryonic stem (ES) cells undergo 
differentiation to the trophectoderm (TE) lineage by repression of the ES cell
master regulator Oct4 or activation of the TE master regulator Caudal-type
homeobox 2 (Cdx2). In contrast to the in-depth studies of ES cell self-renewal
and pluripotency, few TE-specific regulators have been identified, thereby
limiting our understanding of mechanisms underlying the first cell fate decision.
Here we show that up-regulation and nuclear entry of AT-rich interactive domain
3a (Arid3a) drives TE-like transcriptional programs in ES cells, maintains
trophoblast stem (TS) cell self-renewal, and promotes further trophoblastic
differentiation both upstream and independent of Cdx2. Accordingly, Arid3a(-/-)
mouse post-implantation placental development is severely impaired, resulting in 
early embryonic death. We provide evidence that Arid3a directly activates
TE-specific and trophoblast lineage-specific genes while directly repressing
pluripotency genes via differential regulation of epigenetic acetylation or
deacetylation. Our results identify Arid3a as a critical regulator of TE and
placental development through execution of the commitment and differentiation
phases of the first cell fate decision.

© 2014 Rhee et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4201284
PMID: 25319825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Sep 4;10(9):e1003744. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003744.
eCollection 2014.

Communication routes in ARID domains between distal residues in helix 5 and the
DNA-binding loops.

Invernizzi G(1), Tiberti M(2), Lambrughi M(2), Lindorff-Larsen K(1), Papaleo
E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology and NMR Laboratory, Department of Biology, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)Structural Biology and NMR Laboratory,
Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department 
of Biotechnology and Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.

ARID is a DNA-binding domain involved in several transcriptional regulatory
processes, including cell-cycle regulation and embryonic development. ARID
domains are also targets of the Human Cancer Protein Interaction Network. Little 
is known about the molecular mechanisms related to conformational changes in the 
family of ARID domains. Thus, we have examined their structural dynamics to
enrich the knowledge on this important family of regulatory proteins. In
particular, we used an approach that integrates atomistic simulations and methods
inspired by graph theory. To relate these properties to protein function we
studied both the free and DNA-bound forms. The interaction with DNA not only
stabilizes the conformations of the DNA-binding loops, but also strengthens
pre-existing paths in the native ARID ensemble for long-range communication to
those loops. Residues in helix 5 are identified as critical mediators for
intramolecular communication to the DNA-binding regions. In particular, we
identified a distal tyrosine that plays a key role in long-range communication to
the DNA-binding loops and that is experimentally known to impair DNA-binding.
Mutations at this tyrosine and in other residues of helix 5 are also
demonstrated, by our approach, to affect the paths of communication to the
DNA-binding loops and alter their native dynamics. Overall, our results are in
agreement with a scenario in which ARID domains exist as an ensemble of
substates, which are shifted by external perturbation, such as the interaction
with DNA. Conformational changes at the DNA-binding loops are transmitted
long-range by intramolecular paths, which have their heart in helix 5.

PMCID: PMC4154638
PMID: 25187961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2014 Dec;66(12):3404-12. doi: 10.1002/art.38857.

Disease activity in systemic lupus erythematosus correlates with expression of
the transcription factor AT-rich-interactive domain 3A.

Ward JM(1), Rose K, Montgomery C, Adrianto I, James JA, Merrill JT, Webb CF.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation and Oklahoma University Health Sciences
Center, Oklahoma City.

OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex and multifactorial
autoimmune disease with striking clinical, immunologic, and genetic
heterogeneity, despite nearly ubiquitous antinuclear antibody (ANA) production.
Multiple gene polymorphisms have been associated with the disease, but these
individually account for only a very small percentage of overall SLE risk. In
earlier studies, constitutive expression of the DNA-binding protein
AT-rich-interactive domain 3A (ARID3a) in transgenic mouse B lymphocyte lineage
cells led to spontaneous ANA production and preferential development of B cells
associated with production of polyreactive antibodies. Therefore, we undertook
this study to determine whether ARID3a was overexpressed in B lymphocytes of SLE 
patients and whether ARID3a expression was associated with disease severity.
METHODS: A cross-section of SLE patients, rheumatoid arthritis patients, and age-
and sex-matched controls was analyzed longitudinally for lupus disease activity, 
numbers of ARID3a+ peripheral blood mononuclear B cells from multiple B cell
subsets, and immunoglobulin and cytokine levels.
RESULTS: Fifty of 115 SLE patients (43%) had dramatically increased numbers of
ARID3a+ B cells compared to healthy controls. ARID3a was not expressed in naive B
cells of healthy controls, but was abundant in these precursors of
antibody-secreting cells in SLE patients. Total numbers of ARID3a+ B cells
correlated with increased disease activity as defined by SLE Disease Activity
Index scores in individuals assessed at 3 time points.
CONCLUSION: These findings identify B cell anomalies in SLE that allow
stratification of patient samples based on ARID3a expression and implicate ARID3a
as a potential marker of CD19+ B lymphocytes correlated with disease activity.

Copyright © 2014 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC4245462
PMID: 25185498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Gene. 2014 Jun 10;543(1):174-80. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.04.007. Epub 2014 Apr
3.

Differential expression of ARID3B in normal adult tissue and carcinomas.

Samyesudhas SJ(1), Roy L(2), Cowden Dahl KD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, South Bend, IN, USA. Electronic address: serenejudith@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, South Bend, IN, USA. Electronic address: roy.lynnm@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, South Bend, IN, USA; Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Notre
Dame University, Notre Dame, IN, USA; Eck Institute for Global Health, Notre Dame
University, Notre Dame, IN, USA; Indiana University Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer 
Center, Indianapolis, IN, USA. Electronic address: kcowdend@iupui.edu.

ARID3B is a DNA binding protein that is overexpressed in neuroblastoma and
ovarian cancer. To understand the extent that ARID3B participates in tumor
development, we assessed protein expression of ARID3B in normal adult and
malignant tissues. We found that ARID3B is highly expressed in differentiated
layers of squamous epithelium. We also examined expression of an alternative
splice form of ARID3B and found that it has similar but not identical expression 
patterns to the full length ARID3B isoform. ARID3B has two closely related
paralogues, ARID3A and ARID3C. Each of these 3 family members exhibits different 
patterns of expression. Of the ARID3 family members, ARID3B is the most widely
expressed and is particularly expressed in epithelium. In addition to examining
normal tissue, we investigated ARID3B expression in a variety of tumor types.
Most notably we found that ARID3B expression is decreased in esophagus and
stomach tumors compared to normal corresponding tissues. Our results indicate
that the different patterns of ARID3B in normal tissues translate into different 
roles for ARID3B in carcinomas.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24704276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Front Immunol. 2014 Mar 19;5:113. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00113. eCollection
2014.

The Bright Side of Hematopoiesis: Regulatory Roles of ARID3a/Bright in Human and 
Mouse Hematopoiesis.

Ratliff ML(1), Templeton TD(2), Ward JM(3), Webb CF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation ,
Oklahoma City, OK , USA. (2)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center , Oklahoma City, OK , USA. (3)Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center , Oklahoma City, OK
, USA. (4)Immunobiology and Cancer Research, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation
, Oklahoma City, OK , USA ; Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center , Oklahoma City, OK , USA ; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center , Oklahoma City, OK ,
USA.

ARID3a/Bright is a DNA-binding protein that was originally discovered for its
ability to increase immunoglobulin transcription in antigen-activated B cells. It
interacts with DNA as a dimer through its ARID, or A/T-rich interacting domain.
In association with other proteins, ARID3a increased transcription of the
immunoglobulin heavy chain and led to improved chromatin accessibility of the
heavy chain enhancer. Constitutive expression of ARID3a in B lineage cells
resulted in autoantibody production, suggesting its regulation is important.
Abnormal ARID3a expression has also been associated with increased proliferative 
capacity and malignancy. Roles for ARID3a in addition to interactions with the
immunoglobulin locus were suggested by transgenic and knockout mouse models.
Over-expression of ARID3a resulted in skewing of mature B cell subsets and
altered gene expression patterns of follicular B cells, whereas loss of function 
resulted in loss of B1 lineage B cells and defects in hematopoiesis. More recent 
studies showed that loss of ARID3a in adult somatic cells promoted developmental 
plasticity, alterations in gene expression patterns, and lineage fate decisions. 
Together, these data suggest new regulatory roles for ARID3a. The genes
influenced by ARID3a are likely to play pivotal roles in lineage decisions,
highlighting the importance of this understudied transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC3958700
PMID: 24678314  [PubMed]


21. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Jan 14;2(1):26-35. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.12.002.
eCollection 2014.

Bright/Arid3A acts as a barrier to somatic cell reprogramming through direct
regulation of Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog.

Popowski M(1), Templeton TD(2), Lee BK(1), Rhee C(1), Li H(2), Miner C(2), Dekker
JD(1), Orlanski S(3), Bergman Y(3), Iyer VR(1), Webb CF(2), Tucker H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712, USA. (2)Immunobiology and Cancer Program, Oklahoma Medical
Research Foundation, Departments of Cell Biology and Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.
(3)Department of Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, The Hebrew University
Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

We show here that singular loss of the Bright/Arid3A transcription factor leads
to reprograming of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and enhancement of standard
four-factor (4F) reprogramming. Bright-deficient MEFs bypass senescence and,
under standard embryonic stem cell (ESC) culture conditions, spontaneously form
clones that in vitro express pluripotency markers, differentiate to all germ
lineages, and in vivo form teratomas and chimeric mice. We demonstrate that
BRIGHT binds directly to the promoter/enhancer regions of Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog
to contribute to their repression in both MEFs and ESCs. Thus, elimination of the
BRIGHT barrier may provide an approach for somatic cell reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC3916758
PMID: 24511468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014 Dec;21 Suppl 4:S481-9. doi: 10.1245/s10434-013-3435-2. Epub 
2013 Dec 24.

High expression of AT-rich interactive domain 3A (ARID3A) is associated with good
prognosis in colorectal carcinoma.

Song M(1), Kim H, Kim WK, Hong SP, Lee C, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: AT-rich interactive domain 3A (ARID3A) is a member of the ARID family
of DNA-binding proteins. Previous reports have shown that ARID3A controls cell
growth in a p53-dependent manner. Recently, it has been reported that expression 
of the ARID3A protein was markedly increased in colon cancer tissue compared with
matched normal colonic mucosa. However, little is currently known about the role 
of ARID3A in colorectal cancer (CRC). The aim of this study was to investigate
the clinical significance of ARID3A expression in CRC.
METHODS: We examined ARID3A expression in 690 CRC patients using tissue
microarray and immunohistochemistry. Kaplan-Meier analysis and Cox proportional
hazard models were used to estimate the impact of ARID3A expression on overall
survival.
RESULTS: Of the 690 cases, 195 tumors were strongly positive for ARID3A, 187 were
weakly positive, and 308 were negative. ARID3A expression in CRC was
significantly correlated with age, degree of differentiation, depth of invasion, 
lymph node metastasis, distant metastasis, tumor-node-metastasis stage, status of
microsatellite instability, and carcinoembryonic antigen levels. The overall
survival of CRC patients with strong ARID3A expression was significantly longer
than that of patients with weak or negative ARID3A expression. We also performed 
an additional survival analysis on 388 colon cancer patients and 302 rectal
cancer patients. In doing so, a favorable prognostic effect of ARID3A expression 
was revealed only in the colon cancer group (p = 0.002), not in rectal cancer.
Moreover, we showed that the effect of ARID3A on the survival was correlated with
p53 status. Using multivariate analysis, we found that strong expression of
ARID3A was an independent predictor for better prognosis in CRC.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggested that strong expression of ARID3A may predict a
good prognosis in patients with CRC.

PMID: 24366420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Kokubyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2013 Mar;80(1):15-20.

[Role of ARID3A in E2F target gene expression and cell growth].

[Article in Japanese]

Saadat KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Craniofacial Embryology, Department of Maxillofacial and 
Neck Reconstruction, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University.

ARID3A is a member of the AT-rich interaction domain (ARID) family of DNA-binding
proteins. ARID3A was isolated as proteins binding to E2F1, and stimulates
transcription mediated by the E2F transcription factor that plays a central role 
in regulating cell cycle progression. However, the function of ARID3A in
E2F-target-gene expression has not been fully understood.METHODS: Gene-silencing 
and overexpression experiments were carried out using siRNA and recombinant
adenoviruses, respectively. E2F responsive gene expression was measured by
RT-PCR. Effects of ARID3A silencing on DNA synthesis and cell growth were
determined by EdU incorporation and colony formation assay, respectively.
RESULTS: siRNA mediated gene silencing of ARID3A blocked the transcription of
E2F-target genes, such as E2F1, p107, CDC2 and CDC6 in normal human dermal
fibroblasts (NHDFs). Although adenoviral-mediated overexpression of ARID3A did
not up-regulate the transcription of these E2F-target genes in quiescent NHDFs,
E2F1 overexpression was unable to overcome the blockade of CDC6 expression by
ARID3A silencing. Furthermore, ARID3A silencing attenuated S phase entry of
NHDFs, and suppressed growth of human tumor cell lines.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that ARID3A plays an important role for
E2F-mediated transcriptional activation and cell growth.

PMID: 23659165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55895. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055895. Epub 2013 Feb 12.

A microarray platform-independent classification tool for cell of origin class
allows comparative analysis of gene expression in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Care MA(1), Barrans S, Worrillow L, Jack A, Westhead DR, Tooze RM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Haematology, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom.

Cell of origin classification of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) identifies
subsets with biological and clinical significance. Despite the established nature
of the classification existing studies display variability in classifier
implementation, and a comparative analysis across multiple data sets is lacking. 
Here we describe the validation of a cell of origin classifier for DLBCL, based
on balanced voting between 4 machine-learning tools: the DLBCL automatic
classifier (DAC). This shows superior survival separation for assigned Activated 
B-cell (ABC) and Germinal Center B-cell (GCB) DLBCL classes relative to a range
of other classifiers. DAC is effective on data derived from multiple microarray
platforms and formalin fixed paraffin embedded samples and is parsimonious, using
20 classifier genes. We use DAC to perform a comparative analysis of gene
expression in 10 data sets (2030 cases). We generate ranked meta-profiles of
genes showing consistent class-association using =6 data sets as a cut-off: ABC
(414 genes) and GCB (415 genes). The transcription factor ZBTB32 emerges as the
most consistent and differentially expressed gene in ABC-DLBCL while other
transcription factors such as ARID3A, BATF, and TCF4 are also amongst the 24
genes associated with this class in all datasets. Analysis of enrichment of 12323
gene signatures against meta-profiles and all data sets individually confirms
consistent associations with signatures of molecular pathways, chromosomal
cytobands, and transcription factor binding sites. We provide DAC as an open
access Windows application, and the accompanying meta-analyses as a resource.

PMCID: PMC3570548
PMID: 23424639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Leukemia. 2012 Oct;26(10):2224-32. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.95. Epub 2012 Apr 3.

B-cell regulator of immunoglobulin heavy-chain transcription (Bright)/ARID3a is a
direct target of the oncomir microRNA-125b in progenitor B-cells.

Puissegur MP(1), Eichner R, Quelen C, Coyaud E, Mari B, Lebrigand K, Broccardo C,
Nguyen-Khac F, Bousquet M, Brousset P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1037, Centre de
Recherches en Cancérologie de Toulouse, 31300 Toulouse, France.

B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) is often associated with chromosomal 
translocations leading to the deregulation of proto-oncogenes. MicroRNAs can also
be affected by chromosomal alterations and thus contribute to carcinogenesis. The
microRNA, miR-125b-1, is overexpressed in B-ALL cases with the t(11;14)(q24;q32) 
translocation; therefore, we sought to determine the role of this microRNA in
B-cell fate. We used murine pre-BI cells alongside murine and human leukemic
B-cell lines to show that miR-125b expression enhances proliferation by targeting
B-cell regulator of immunoglobulin heavy-chain transcription (Bright)/ARID3a, an 
activator of immunoglobulin heavy-chain transcription. Accordingly, this target
gene was downregulated in B-ALL patients with the t(11;14)(q24;q32)
translocation. Repression of Bright/ARID3a blocked differentiation and conferred 
a survival advantage to Ba/F3 cells under interleukin-3 starvation. In addition, 
overexpression of miR-125b protected pre-BI and leukemic B-cell lines from
apoptosis by blockade of caspase activation by a mechanism that was independent
of p53 and BAK1. In summary, miR-125b can act as an oncogene in B-ALL by
targeting ARID3a and mediating its repression, thus leading to a blockage in
differentiation, increased proliferation and inhibition of apoptosis.

PMID: 22469780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Gen Virol. 2012 May;93(Pt 5):1065-75. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.038752-0. Epub 2012
Feb 1.

E2F1, ARID3A/Bright and Oct-2 factors bind to the Epstein-Barr virus C promoter, 
EBNA1 and oriP, participating in long-distance promoter-enhancer interactions.

Boreström C(1), Forsman A, Rüetschi U, Rymo L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Institute of
Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, University of Gothenburg, SE-41345 
Gothenburg, Sweden.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) C promoter (Cp) regulates several genes required for
B-cell proliferation in latent EBV infection. The family of repeats (FR) region
of the latent origin of plasmid replication (oriP) functions as an Epstein-Barr
nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1)-dependent distant enhancer of Cp activity, and the
enhancer-promoter interaction is mediated by a higher-order multi-protein complex
containing several copies of EBNA1. Using DNA-affinity purification with a 170 bp
region of the Cp in combination with mass spectrometry, we identified the cell
cycle-regulatory protein E2F1, the E2F-binding protein ARID3A, and the
B-cell-specific transcription factor Oct-2 as components of this multi-protein
complex. Binding of the three factors to the FR region of oriP was determined by 
DNA-affinity and immunoblot analysis. Co-immunoprecipitation and proximity
ligation analysis revealed that the three factors, E2F1, ARID3A and Oct-2,
interact with each other as well as with EBNA1 in the nuclei of EBV-positive
cells. Using the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we showed that E2F1 and
Oct-2 interacted with the FR part of oriP and the Cp, but the ARID3A interaction 
was, however, only detected at the Cp. Our findings support the hypothesis that
EBNA1 initiates transcription at the Cp via interactions between multiple EBNA1
homodimers and cellular transcription factors in a large molecular machinery that
forms a dynamic interaction between Cp and FR.

PMID: 22302879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jan 13;417(2):710-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.12.003. Epub 2011 Dec 8.

Cooperation between ARID3A and p53 in the transcriptional activation of p21WAF1
in response to DNA damage.

Lestari W(1), Ichwan SJ, Otsu M, Yamada S, Iseki S, Shimizu S, Ikeda MA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Craniofacial Embryology, Graduate School of Medical and
Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

ARID3A/DRIL1/Bright is a family member of the AT rich interaction domain (ARID)
DNA-binding proteins that are involved in diverse biological processes. We have
reported that p53 activates ARID3A transcription, and ARID3A overexpression
induces G1 arrest. However, the role of ARID3A in the p53 pathway remains
unclear. Here, we show that ARID3A cooperates with p53 to transcriptionally
activate p21(WAF1), a p53-target gene important for cell-cycle arrest. ARID3A
bound to its binding sites in the p21(WAF1) promoter in vivo and in vitro, and
induced p21(WAF1) transcription in U2OS cells expressing wild-type p53 but not
Saos-2 cells lacking p53. The co-expression of ARID3A with p53 cooperates to
activate p21(WAF1) transcription and the stably transfected p21(WAF1) promoter.
Mutation of the ARID3A binding sites reduced the p21(WAF1) promoter activity, and
siRNA-based ARID3A knockdown suppressed the transcription of p21(WAF1), but not
the proapoptotic NOXA and PUMA in response to DNA damage. Furthermore, p53
knockdown decreased ARID3A transcription, and, conversely, ARID3A overexpression 
and knockdown resulted in an increase or decrease in p53 stability, respectively.
These results indicate both cooperative and interdependent roles for ARID3A and
p53 in the transcriptional activation of p21(WAF1) in response to DNA damage.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22172947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Int J Oral Sci. 2011 Oct;3(4):200-8. doi: 10.4248/IJOS11071.

E2FBP1 antagonizes the p16(INK4A)-Rb tumor suppressor machinery for growth
suppression and cellular senescence by regulating promyelocytic leukemia protein 
stability.

Fukuyo Y(1), Takahashi A, Hara E, Horikoshi N, Pandita TK, Nakajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tulane National Primate Research Center, Covington, 
LA 70433, USA.

Cellular senescence is an irreversible cell cycle arrest triggered by the
activation of oncogenes or mitogenic signaling as well as the enforced expression
of tumor suppressors such as p53, p16(INK4A) and promyelocytic leukemia protein
(PML) in normal cells. E2F-binding protein 1 (E2FBP1), a transcription regulator 
for E2F, induces PML reduction and suppresses the formation of PML-nuclear
bodies, whereas the down-regulation of E2FBP1 provokes the PML-dependent
premature senescence in human normal fibroblasts. Here we report that the
depletion of E2FBP1 induces the accumulation of PML through the Ras-dependent
activation of MAP kinase signaling. The cellular levels of p16(INK4A) and p53 are
elevated during premature senescence induced by depletion of E2FBP1, and the
depletion of p16(INK4A), but not p53 rescued senescent cells from growth arrest. 
Therefore, the premature senescence induced by E2FBP1 depletion is achieved
through the p16(INK4A)-Rb pathway. Similar to human normal fibroblasts, the
growth inhibition induced by E2FBP1 depletion is also observed in human tumor
cells with intact p16(INK4A) and Rb. These results suggest that E2FBP1 functions 
as a critical antagonist to the p16(INK4A)-Rb tumor suppressor machinery by
regulating PML stability.

PMCID: PMC3469977
PMID: 22010578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Immunol. 2011 Oct;49(1-2):367-79. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.09.008. Epub
2011 Oct 2.

The transcription factor Bright plays a role in marginal zone B lymphocyte
development and autoantibody production.

Oldham AL(1), Miner CA, Wang HC, Webb CF.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Previous data suggested that constitutive expression of the transcription factor 
Bright (B cell regulator of immunoglobulin heavy chain transcription), normally
tightly regulated during B cell differentiation, was associated with autoantibody
production. Here we show that constitutive Bright expression results in skewing
of mature B lineage subpopulations toward marginal zone cells at the expense of
the follicular subpopulation. C57Bl/6 transgenic mice constitutively expressing
Bright in B lineage cells generated autoantibodies that were not the result of
global increases in immunoglobulin or of breaches in key tolerance checkpoints
typically defective in other autoimmune mouse models. Rather, autoimmunity
correlated with increased numbers of marginal zone B cells and alterations in the
phenotype and gene expression profiles of lymphocytes within the follicular B
cell compartment. These data suggest a novel role for Bright in the normal
development of mature B cell subsets and in autoantibody production.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3205293
PMID: 21963220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Immunol. 2011 Oct;49(1-2):260-72. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.08.025. Epub
2011 Sep 28.

Characterization of a new ARID family transcription factor (Brightlike/ARID3C)
that co-activates Bright/ARID3A-mediated immunoglobulin gene transcription.

Tidwell JA(1), Schmidt C, Heaton P, Wilson V, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Section of Molecular Genetics
and Microbiology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Two members, Bright/ARID3A and Bdp/ARID3B, of the ARID (AT-Rich Interaction
Domain) transcription family are distinguished by their ability to specifically
bind to DNA and to self-associate via a second domain, REKLES. Bright and Bdp
positively regulate immunoglobulin heavy chain gene (IgH) transcription by
binding to AT-rich motifs within Matrix Associating Regions (MARs) residing
within a subset of V(H) promoters and the Eµ intronic enhancer. In addition,
REKLES provides Bright nuclear export function, and a small pool of Bright is
directed to plasma membrane sub-domains/lipid rafts where it associates with and 
modulates signaling of the B cell antigen receptor (BCR). Here, we characterize a
third, highly conserved, physically condensed ARID3 locus, Brightlike/ARID3C.
Brightlike encodes two alternatively spliced, SUMO-I-modified isoforms that
include or exclude (<U+0394>6) the REKLES-encoding exon 6. Brightlike transcripts and
proteins are expressed preferentially within B lineage lymphocytes and coordinate
with highest Bright expression in activated follicular B cells. Brightlike, but
not Brightlike<U+0394>6, undergoes nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling with a fraction
localizing within lipid rafts following BCR stimulation. Brightlike, but not
Brightlike<U+0394>6, associates with Bright in solution, at common DNA binding sites in 
vitro, and is enriched at Bright binding sites in chromatin. Although possessing 
little transactivation capacity of its own, Brightlike significantly co-activates
Bright-dependent IgH transcription with maximal activity mediated by the
unsumoylated form. In sum, this report introduces Brightlike as an additional
functional member of the family of ARID proteins, which should be considered in
regulatory circuits, previously ascribed to be mediated by Bright.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3205283
PMID: 21955986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Virol. 2011 Apr;85(7):3356-66. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02105-10. Epub 2011 Jan 19.

The herpes simplex virus immediate-early ubiquitin ligase ICP0 induces
degradation of the ICP0 repressor protein E2FBP1.

Fukuyo Y(1), Horikoshi N, Ishov AM, Silverstein SJ, Nakajima T.

Author information: 
(1)California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, 475 Brannan Street,
Suite 220, San Francisco, California 94107, USA.

E2FBP1/hDRIL1, a DNA-binding A/T-rich interaction domain (ARID) family
transcription factor, is expressed ubiquitously in human tissues and plays an
essential role in maintaining the proliferation potential of passage-limited
human fibroblasts by dissociating promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies
(PML-NBs). This effect on PML-NBs is similar to that of viral immediate-early
gene products, such as infected cellular protein 0 (ICP0) from human herpes
simplex virus 1 (HSV-1), which also disrupts PML-NBs to override the intrinsic
cellular defense. Here we report that E2FBP1 inhibits accumulation of ICP0 RNA
and, at the same time, is degraded via ICP0's herpes ubiquitin ligase 2 (HUL-2)
activity upon HSV-1 infection. These reciprocal regulatory roles of ICP0 and
E2FBP1 are linked in an ARID-dependent fashion. Our results suggest that E2FBP1
functions as an intrinsic cellular defense factor in spite of its PML-NB
dissociation function.

PMCID: PMC3067832
PMID: 21248039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Mar;31(5):1041-53. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01448-10. Epub 2011 Jan
3.

The ARID family transcription factor bright is required for both hematopoietic
stem cell and B lineage development.

Webb CF(1), Bryant J, Popowski M, Allred L, Kim D, Harriss J, Schmidt C, Miner
CA, Rose K, Cheng HL, Griffin C, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73126, USA.

Bright/Arid3a has been characterized both as an activator of immunoglobulin
heavy-chain transcription and as a proto-oncogene. Although Bright expression is 
highly B lineage stage restricted in adult mice, its expression in the earliest
identifiable hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) population suggests that Bright might 
have additional functions. We showed that >99% of Bright(-/-) embryos die at
midgestation from failed hematopoiesis. Bright(-/-) embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5)
fetal livers showed an increase in the expression of immature markers.
Colony-forming assays indicated that the hematopoietic potential of Bright(-/-)
mice is markedly reduced. Rare survivors of lethality, which were not compensated
by the closely related paralogue Bright-derived protein (Bdp)/Arid3b, suffered
HSC deficits in their bone marrow as well as B lineage-intrinsic developmental
and functional deficiencies in their peripheries. These include a reduction in a 
natural antibody, B-1 responses to phosphocholine, and selective T-dependent
impairment of IgG1 class switching. Our results place Bright/Arid3a on a select
list of transcriptional regulators required to program both HSC and
lineage-specific differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3067827
PMID: 21199920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Stem Cells. 2010 Sep;28(9):1560-7. doi: 10.1002/stem.491.

Loss of Bright/ARID3a function promotes developmental plasticity.

An G(1), Miner CA, Nixon JC, Kincade PW, Bryant J, Tucker PW, Webb CF.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.

B-cell regulator of immunoglobulin heavy chain transcription (Bright)/ARID3a, an 
A+T-rich interaction domain protein, was originally discovered in B lymphocyte
lineage cells. However, expression patterns and high lethality levels in knockout
mice suggested that it had additional functions. Three independent lines of
evidence show that functional inhibition of Bright results in increased
developmental plasticity. Bright-deficient cells from two mouse models expressed 
a number of pluripotency-associated gene products, expanded indefinitely, and
spontaneously differentiated into cells of multiple lineages. Furthermore, direct
knockdown of human Bright resulted in colonies capable of expressing multiple
lineage markers. These data suggest that repression of this single molecule
confers adult somatic cells with new developmental options.

PMCID: PMC2977942
PMID: 20680960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Proteins. 2010 Jul;78(9):2170-5. doi: 10.1002/prot.22718.

Solution NMR structure of the ARID domain of human AT-rich interactive
domain-containing protein 3A: a human cancer protein interaction network target.

Liu G(1), Huang YJ, Xiao R, Wang D, Acton TB, Montelione GT.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Department of Molecular
Biology and Biochemistry, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA. gliu@cabm.rutgers.edu

PMCID: PMC2869213
PMID: 20455271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biomol NMR Assign. 2009 Jun;3(1):85-7. doi: 10.1007/s12104-009-9147-7. Epub 2009 
Feb 24.

1H, 13C, 15N backbone and side-chain resonance assignments of the Bright/ARID
domain from the human histone demethylase JARID1B.

Yao W(1), Peng Y, Chen Q, Lin D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Optical and Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy, East China
Normal University, Shanghai, 200062, China.

We report backbone and side-chain resonance assignments of the Bright/ARID domain
from the human JARID1B protein. These assignments provide a basis for the
detailed structural investigation of the interaction between DNA and ARID
domains.

PMID: 19636953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2009;4(5):e5542. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005542. Epub 2009 May 14.

SUMOylation of DRIL1 directs its transcriptional activity towards leukocyte
lineage-specific genes.

Prieur A(1), Nacerddine K, van Lohuizen M, Peeper DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.

DRIL1 is an ARID family transcription factor that can immortalize primary mouse
fibroblasts, bypass RAS(V12)-induced cellular senescence and collaborate with
RAS(V12) or MYC in mediating oncogenic transformation. It also activates
immunoglobulin heavy chain transcription and engages in heterodimer formation
with E2F to stimulate E2F-dependent transcription. Little, however, is known
about the regulation of DRIL1 activity. Recently, DRIL1 was found to interact
with the SUMO-conjugating enzyme Ubc9, but the functional relevance of this
association has not been assessed. Here, we show that DRIL1 is sumoylated both in
vitro and in vivo at lysine 398. Moreover, we provide evidence that PIASy
functions as a specific SUMO E3-ligase for DRIL1 and promotes its sumoylation
both in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, consistent with the subnuclear
localization of PIASy in the Matrix-Associated Region (MAR), SUMO-modified DRIL1 
species are found exclusively in the MAR fraction. This post-translational
modification interferes neither with the subcellular localization nor the
DNA-binding activity of the protein. In contrast, DRIL1 sumoylation impairs its
interaction with E2F1 in vitro and modifies its transcriptional activity in vivo,
driving transcription of subset of genes regulating leukocyte fate. Taken
together, these results identify sumoylation as a novel post-translational
modification of DRIL1 that represents an important mechanism for targeting and
modulating DRIL1 transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC2677661
PMID: 19436740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. EMBO J. 2009 Mar 18;28(6):711-24. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.20. Epub 2009 Feb 12.

Signalling of the BCR is regulated by a lipid rafts-localised transcription
factor, Bright.

Schmidt C(1), Kim D, Ippolito GC, Naqvi HR, Probst L, Mathur S, Rosas-Acosta G,
Wilson VG, Oldham AL, Poenie M, Webb CF, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Regulation of BCR signalling strength is crucial for B-cell development and
function. Bright is a B-cell-restricted factor that complexes with Bruton's
tyrosine kinase (Btk) and its substrate, transcription initiation factor-I
(TFII-I), to activate immunoglobulin heavy chain gene transcription in the
nucleus. Here we show that a palmitoylated pool of Bright is diverted to lipid
rafts of resting B cells where it associates with signalosome components. After
BCR ligation, Bright transiently interacts with sumoylation enzymes, blocks
calcium flux and phosphorylation of Btk and TFII-I and is then discharged from
lipid rafts as a Sumo-I-modified form. The resulting lipid raft concentration of 
Bright contributes to the signalling threshold of B cells, as their sensitivity
to BCR stimulation decreases as the levels of Bright increase. Bright regulates
signalling independent of its role in IgH transcription, as shown by specific
dominant-negative titration of rafts-specific forms. This study identifies a BCR 
tuning mechanism in lipid rafts that is regulated by differential
post-translational modification of a transcription factor with implications for
B-cell tolerance and autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC2666038
PMID: 19214191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Immunol. 2008 Nov 15;181(10):6913-22.

Transgenic mice expressing dominant-negative bright exhibit defects in B1 B
cells.

Nixon JC(1), Ferrell S, Miner C, Oldham AL, Hochgeschwender U, Webb CF.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

The transcription factor Bright up-regulates Ig H chain production from select V 
region promoters and requires Bright dimerization, Bruton's tyrosine kinase
(Btk), and the Btk substrate, TFII-I, for this activity. Defects in Btk cause
X-linked immunodeficiency disease in mice and humans. Btk-deficient mice exhibit 
decreased serum IgM production, B cell developmental blocks, absence of
peritoneal B1 cells, and subnormal immune responses against Ags, including
phosphorylcholine, which confer protection against Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Transgenic mice expressing dominant-negative Bright share similarities with
Btk-deficient mice, including decreased serum IgM, poor anti-phosphorylcholine
responses, and slightly reduced numbers of mature B cells. Although
dominant-negative Bright mice developed B1 B cells, these were functionally
deficient in Ig secretion. These data suggest a mechanistic explanation for the
abnormal responses to phosphorylcholine observed in Btk-deficient mice, and
indicate that Bright functions in a subset of Btk-dependent pathways in vivo,
particularly those responses dominated by B1 B cells.

PMCID: PMC2636627
PMID: 18981111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Am J Pathol. 2008 Aug;173(2):337-46. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.070915. Epub 2008
Jun 26.

Cross talk between Id1 and its interactive protein Dril1 mediate fibroblast
responses to transforming growth factor-beta in pulmonary fibrosis.

Lin L(1), Zhou Z, Zheng L, Alber S, Watkins S, Ray P, Kaminski N, Zhang Y, Morse 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15217, USA.

The presence of activated fibroblasts or myofibroblasts represents a hallmark of 
progressive lung fibrosis. Because the transcriptional response of fibroblasts to
transforming growth factor-beta(1) (TGF-beta(1)) is a determinant of disease
progression, we investigated the role of the transcriptional regulator inhibitor 
of differentiation-1 (Id1) in the setting of lung fibrosis. Mice lacking the gene
for Id1 had increased susceptibility to bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis, and
fibroblasts lacking Id1 exhibited enhanced responses to TGF-beta(1). Because the 
effect of Id1 on fibrosis could not be explained by known mechanisms, we
performed protein interaction screening and identified a novel binding partner
for Id1, known as dead ringer-like-1 (Dril1). Dril1 shares structural
similarities with Id1 and was recently implicated in TGF-beta(1) signaling during
embryogenesis. To date, little is known about the function of Dril1 in humans.
Although it has not been previously implicated in fibrotic disease, we found that
Dril1 was highly expressed in lungs from patients with idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis and was regulated by TGF-beta(1) in human fibroblasts. Dril1 enhanced
activation of TGF-beta(1) target genes, whereas Id1 decreased expression of these
same molecules. Id1 inhibited DNA binding by Dril1, and the two proteins
co-localized in vitro and in vivo, providing a potential mechanism for
suppression of fibrosis by Id1 through inhibition of the profibrotic function of 
Dril1.

PMCID: PMC2475772
PMID: 18583319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 25;282(21):15768-77. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

REKLES is an ARID3-restricted multifunctional domain.

Kim D(1), Probst L, Das C, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and Institute of Cell and
Molecular Biology, University of Texas, Austin, Texas 78712-0162, USA.

Bright/Dril1/ARID3a is a B cell-specific, matrix association (or attachment)
region-binding transcriptional regulator of immunoglobulin heavy chain genes and 
of E2F1-dependent cell cycle progression. Bright contains a central DNA binding
domain termed ARID (AT-rich interacting domain) and a C-terminal region termed
REKLES (for a conserved amino acid motif). The ARID domain has been identified in
seven highly conserved families of metazoan proteins (ARID1-5 and JARID1-2),
whereas REKLES is found only in the ARID3 subfamily (composed of Bright/ARID3a,
Bdp/ARID3b, and Bright-like/ARID3c). REKLES consists of two subdomains: a
modestly conserved N-terminal REKLESalpha and a highly conserved (among ARID3
orthologous proteins) C-terminal REKLESbeta. Previously we showed that Bright
undergoes nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and that REKLESalpha and -beta were
required, respectively, for nuclear import and Crm1-dependent nuclear export.
Here we show that Bright further requires REKLESbeta for self-association or
paralogue association and for nuclear matrix targeting. REK-LES promotes and
regulates the extent of Bright multimerization, which occurs in the absence or
presence of target DNA and is necessary for specific DNA binding.
REKLESbeta-mediated interaction of Bright with Bdp, which localizes strictly to
the nucleus, traps Bright within the nucleus via neutralization of its nuclear
export activity. These results identify REKLES as a multifunctional domain that
has co-evolved with and regulates functional properties of the ARID3 DNA binding 
domain.

PMID: 17400556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cancer. 2007 Mar 26;6:23.

Bright/ARID3A contributes to chromatin accessibility of the immunoglobulin heavy 
chain enhancer.

Lin D(1), Ippolito GC, Zong RT, Bryant J, Koslovsky J, Tucker P.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and Institute of Cell and
Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA.
djlin@mail.utexas.edu

Bright/ARID3A is a nuclear matrix-associated transcription factor that stimulates
immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) expression and Cyclin E1/E2F-dependent cell
cycle progression. Bright positively activates IgH transcriptional initiation by 
binding to ATC-rich P sites within nuclear matrix attachment regions (MARs)
flanking the IgH intronic enhancer (Emu). Over-expression of Bright in cultured B
cells was shown to correlate with DNase hypersensitivity of Emu. We report here
further efforts to analyze Bright-mediated Emu enhancer activation within the
physiological constraints of chromatin. A system was established in which VH
promoter-driven in vitro transcription on chromatin- reconstituted templates was 
responsive to Emu. Bright assisted in blocking the general repression caused by
nucleosome assembly but was incapable of stimulating transcription from prebound 
nucleosome arrays. In vitro transcriptional derepression by Bright was enhanced
on templates in which Emu is flanked by MARs and was inhibited by competition
with high affinity Bright binding (P2) sites. DNase hypersensitivity of
chromatin-reconstituted Emu was increased when prepackaged with B cell nuclear
extract supplemented with Bright. These results identify Bright as a contributor 
to accessibility of the IgH enhancer.

PMCID: PMC1852116
PMID: 17386101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Immunol. 2007 Mar 1;178(5):2996-3006.

Anti-nuclear antibody production and autoimmunity in transgenic mice that
overexpress the transcription factor Bright.

Shankar M(1), Nixon JC, Maier S, Workman J, Farris AD, Webb CF.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 825 NE 13th Street, Oklahoma City,
OK 73104, USA.

The B cell-restricted transcription factor, B cell regulator of Ig(H)
transcription (Bright), up-regulates Ig H chain transcription 3- to 7-fold in
activated B cells in vitro. Bright function is dependent upon both active
Bruton's tyrosine kinase and its substrate, the transcription factor, TFII-I. In 
mouse and human B lymphocytes, Bright transcription is down-regulated in mature B
cells, and its expression is tightly regulated during B cell differentiation. To 
determine how Bright expression affects B cell development, transgenic mice were 
generated that express Bright constitutively in all B lineage cells. These mice
exhibited increases in total B220(+) B lymphocyte lineage cells in the bone
marrow, but the relative percentages of the individual subpopulations were not
altered. Splenic immature transitional B cells were significantly expanded both
in total cell numbers and as increased percentages of cells relative to other B
cell subpopulations. Serum Ig levels, particularly IgG isotypes, were increased
slightly in the Bright-transgenic mice compared with littermate controls.
However, immunization studies suggest that responses to all foreign Ags were not 
increased globally. Moreover, 4-wk-old Bright-transgenic mice produced
anti-nuclear Abs. Older animals developed Ab deposits in the kidney glomeruli,
but did not succumb to further autoimmune sequelae. These data indicate that
enhanced Bright expression results in failure to maintain B cell tolerance and
suggest a previously unappreciated role for Bright regulation in immature B
cells. Bright is the first B cell-restricted transcription factor demonstrated to
induce autoimmunity. Therefore, the Bright transgenics provide a novel model
system for future analyses of B cell autoreactivity.

PMCID: PMC2705967
PMID: 17312145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jun;26(12):4758-68.

Induction of immunoglobulin heavy-chain transcription through the transcription
factor Bright requires TFII-I.

Rajaiya J(1), Nixon JC, Ayers N, Desgranges ZP, Roy AL, Webb CF.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Immunobiology and Cancer Research
Program, 825 N. E. 13th Street, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Bright/ARID3a/Dril1, a member of the ARID family of transcription factors, is
expressed in a highly regulated fashion in B lymphocytes, where it enhances
immunoglobulin transcription three- to sixfold. Recent publications from our lab 
indicated that functional, but not kinase-inactive, Bruton's tyrosine kinase
(Btk) is critical for Bright activity in an in vitro model system, yet Bright
itself is not appreciably tyrosine phosphorylated. These data suggested that a
third protein, and Btk substrate, must contribute to Bright-enhanced
immunoglobulin transcription. The ubiquitously expressed transcription factor
TFII-I was identified as a substrate for Btk several years ago. In this work, we 
show that TFII-I directly interacts with human Bright through amino acids in
Bright's protein interaction domain and that specific tyrosine residues of TFII-I
are essential for Bright-induced activity of an immunoglobulin reporter gene.
Moreover, inhibition of TFII-I function in a B-cell line resulted in decreased
heavy-chain transcript levels. These data suggest that Bright functions as a
three-component protein complex in the immunoglobulin locus and tie together
previous data indicating important roles for Btk and TFII-I in B lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC1489113
PMID: 16738337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Mar;26(6):2187-201.

A regulated nucleocytoplasmic shuttle contributes to Bright's function as a
transcriptional activator of immunoglobulin genes.

Kim D(1), Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas at Austin, Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, 1
University Station A5000, Room ESB-532, Austin, TX 78712-0162, USA.

Bright/ARID3a has been implicated in mitogen- and growth factor-induced
up-regulation of immunoglobulin heavy-chain (IgH) genes and in E2F1-dependent
G1/S cell cycle progression. For IgH transactivation, Bright binds to nuclear
matrix association regions upstream of certain variable region promoters and
flanking the IgH intronic enhancer. While Bright protein was previously shown to 
reside within the nuclear matrix, we show here that a significant amount of
Bright resides in the cytoplasm of normal and transformed B cells. Leptomycin B, 
chromosome region maintenance 1 (CRM1) overexpression, and heterokaryon
experiments indicate that Bright actively shuttles between the nucleus and the
cytoplasm in a CRM1-dependent manner. We mapped the functional nuclear
localization signal to the N-terminal region of REKLES, a domain conserved within
ARID3 paralogues. Residues within the C terminus of REKLES contain its nuclear
export signal, whose regulation is primarily responsible for Bright shuttling.
Growth factor depletion and cell synchronization experiments indicated that
Bright shuttling during S phase of the cell cycle leads to an increase in its
nuclear abundance. Finally, we show that shuttle-incompetent Bright point
mutants, even if sequestered within the nucleus, are incapable of transactivating
an IgH reporter gene. Therefore, regulation of Bright's cellular localization
appears to be required for its function.

PMCID: PMC1430300
PMID: 16507996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2004 Dec;24(12):1556-9.

[A DRIFTS study of SO2 oxidation on the surface of CaCO3 particles].

[Article in Chinese]

Li L(1), Chen ZM, Ding J, Zhu T, Zhang YH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Environmental Sciences, State Key Joint Laboratory of Environmental
Simulation and Pollution Control, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

CaCO3 is an important component of mineral dust aerosols in the atmosphere, but
its role in atmospheric heterogeneous chemistry is still unclear. In this paper, 
the oxidation of SO2 on CaCO3 particles was studied using diffuse reflectance
infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS). Formation of sulfite and
sulfate was identified on the surface, and the role of O3 on the oxidation
process is determined by comparing the experiments in different conditions.
DRIFTS is proved as a useful tool for studying heterogeneous reactions on CaCO3
particles. The results show that in the presence of O3, SO2 can be oxidized into 
sulfate on the surface of CaCO3 particles. A two-step mechanism that involves
adsorption of SO2 followed by oxidation is presented.

PMID: 15828326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Mar;25(6):2073-84.

Bruton's tyrosine kinase regulates immunoglobulin promoter activation in
association with the transcription factor Bright.

Rajaiya J(1), Hatfield M, Nixon JC, Rawlings DJ, Webb CF.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Immunobiology and Cancer Research
Program, 825 N.E. 13th St., Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Bright (B-cell regulator of immunoglobulin heavy chain transcription) binding to 
immunoglobulin heavy chain loci after B-cell activation is associated with
increased heavy chain transcription. Our earlier reports demonstrated that Bright
coimmunoprecipitates with Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) and that these proteins 
associate in a DNA-binding complex in primary B cells. B cells from
immunodeficient mice with a mutation in Btk failed to produce stable Bright
DNA-binding complexes. In order to determine if Btk is important for Bright
function, a transcription activation assay was established and analyzed using
real-time PCR technology. Cells lacking both Bright and Btk were transfected with
Bright and/or Btk along with an immunoglobulin heavy chain reporter construct.
Immunoglobulin gene transcription was enhanced when Bright and Btk were
coexpressed. In contrast, neither Bright nor Btk alone led to activation of heavy
chain transcription. Furthermore, Bright function required both Btk kinase
activity and sequences within the pleckstrin homology domain of Btk. Bright was
not appreciably phosphorylated by Btk; however, a third tyrosine-phosphorylated
protein coprecipitated with Bright. Thus, the ability of Bright to enhance
immunoglobulin transcription critically requires functional Btk.

PMCID: PMC1061591
PMID: 15743806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 10;279(50):52465-72. Epub 2004 Sep 27.

Mutations in the DNA-binding domain of the transcription factor Bright act as
dominant negative proteins and interfere with immunoglobulin transactivation.

Nixon JC(1), Rajaiya J, Webb CF.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 825 N. E. 13 Street, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma 73104, USA.

Bright, for B cell regulator of immunoglobulin heavy chain transcription, binds
A+T-rich sequences in the intronic enhancer regions of the murine heavy chain
locus and 5'-flanking sequences of some variable heavy chain promoters. Most
resting B cells do not express Bright; however, it is induced after stimulation
with antigen or polyclonal mitogens. Bright activation results in up-regulation
of mu transcription; however, it is not clear whether Bright function is critical
for normal B cell development. To begin to address Bright function during B cell 
development, seven mutated forms of Bright were produced. Five of the seven
mutants revealed little or no DNA binding activity. Furthermore, because Bright
binds DNA as a dimer, two of the mutants formed complexes with wild type Bright
and acted in a dominant negative fashion. Dominant negative Bright prevented the 
up-regulation of mu transcription in transfected Chinese hamster ovary cells
transfected with wild type Bright. These data identify regions within Bright that
are required for the DNA binding activity of Bright and for its function as a
transcription factor.

PMID: 15456761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cell Immunol. 2004 Mar;228(1):42-53.

The transcription factor, Bright, is not expressed in all human B lymphocyte
subpopulations.

Nixon JC(1), Rajaiya JB, Ayers N, Evetts S, Webb CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Bright is an ARID family transcription factor that increases immunoglobulin heavy
chain transcription. In the mouse, Bright expression is tightly regulated and B
cell-restricted and the Bright protein associates with Bruton's tyrosine kinase
(Btk), the defective enzyme in X-linked immunodeficiency. Human X-linked
agammaglobulinemia results from defects in Btk and leads to early blocks in B
lymphocyte development. Because so little is known about human Bright, we sought 
to determine where human Bright is expressed in normal B cell differentiation and
whether it also forms complexes with Btk. Although human and mouse Bright
exhibited similar expression patterns in normal B cells, many human transformed B
cell lines did not express Bright protein. However, the human protein bound
prototypic Bright DNA-binding motifs and, like mouse Bright, was capable of
associating with Btk. These data suggest potentially important similarities exist
in Bright expression and activity in human and mouse B lymphocytes.

PMID: 15203319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cell Death Differ. 2004 Jul;11(7):747-59.

E2FBP1/hDril1 modulates cell growth through downregulation of promyelocytic
leukemia bodies.

Fukuyo Y(1), Mogi K, Tsunematsu Y, Nakajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cellular Oncology and Microbiology, Graduate School,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549,
Japan.

Promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) comprise multiple regulatory
factors and play crucial roles in the maintenance of cellular integrity, while
unregulated activation of PML-NBs induces death and premature senescence. Hence, 
the function of PML-NBs must be directed properly; however, the mechanism that
regulates PML-NBs remains unclear. In this paper, we show that PML-NBs are
disintegrated by an AT-rich interaction domain family protein E2FBP1/hDril1
through specific desumoylation of promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) in vivo
and in vitro. RNA interference-mediated downregulation of E2FBP1/hDril1 results
in hyperplasis of PML-NBs and consequent commitment to PML-dependent premature
senescence. Thus, the function of E2FBP1/hDril1 is required for maintenance of
survival potential of the cells. Our data suggest a novel mechanism to govern
cellular integrity through the modulation of nuclear depots.

PMID: 15017387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Cancer Res. 2003 Apr;1(6):438-44.

E2FBP1/DRIL1, an AT-rich interaction domain-family transcription factor, is
regulated by p53.

Ma K(1), Araki K, Ichwan SJ, Suganuma T, Tamamori-Adachi M, Ikeda MA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Embryology, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

E2FBP1/DRIL1 is an AT-rich interaction domain DNA-binding protein and is
ubiquitously expressed in various tissues. It has been shown that Bright, the
mouse orthologue of E2FBP1/DRIL1, exhibits sequence-specific DNA binding and
regulates immunoglobulin transcription. Here we show a novel connection between
E2FBP1/DRIL1 and the p53 tumor suppressor, a key regulator of growth arrest or
apoptosis in response to cellular stress. We found a putative p53-binding site,
which specifically responded to p53, in the second intron of the E2FBP1/DRIL1
gene. E2FBP1/DRIL1was induced by p53 and up-regulated following DNA damage caused
by UV radiation or doxorubicin treatment in a manner dependent on endogenous p53.
The ectopic expression of E2FBP1/DRIL1 induced growth arrest in U2OS cells
expressing normal p53, but not Saos-2 cells lacking p53. These results suggest
that E2FBP1/DRIL1 may play a role in growth suppression mediated by p53.

PMID: 12692263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Immunol. 2002 Sep 1;169(5):2477-87.

High frequency of matrix attachment regions and cut-like protein
x/CCAAT-displacement protein and B cell regulator of IgH transcription binding
sites flanking Ig V region genes.

Goebel P(1), Montalbano A, Ayers N, Kompfner E, Dickinson L, Webb CF, Feeney AJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

A major component in controlling V(D)J recombination is differential
accessibility through localized changes in chromatin structure. Attachment of DNA
to the nuclear matrix via matrix attachment region (MAR) sequences, and
interaction with MAR-binding proteins have been shown to alter chromatin
conformation, promote histone acetylation, and influence gene transcription. In
this study, the flanking regions of several human and mouse Ig V(H) and Ig Vkappa
genes were analyzed extensively for the presence of MARs by in vitro
matrix-binding assay, and for interaction with the MAR-binding proteins cut-like 
protein x/CCAAT-displacement protein (Cux/CDP), B cell regulator of IgH
transcription (Bright), and special AT-rich sequence-binding protein (SATB1) by
EMSA. Cux/CDP and SATB1 are associated with repression, while Bright is an
activator of Ig transcription. Binding sites were identified in the vicinity of
all analyzed Ig V genes, and were also found flanking TCR Vbeta genes. We also
show that the binding sites of the different factors do not always occur at MAR
sequences. MAR sequences were also found within the Ig V loci at a much higher
frequency than throughout the rest of the genome. Overall, the frequency and
location of binding sites relative to the coding regions, and the strength of
DNA-protein interaction showed much heterogeneity. Thus, variations in factor
binding and MAR activity could potentially influence the extent of localized
accessibility to V(D)J recombination and thus could play a role in unequal
rearrangement of individual V genes. These sites could also contribute to
effective transcription of Ig genes in mature and/or activated B cells, bringing 
both the promoter as well as the enhancer regions into close proximity at the
nuclear matrix.

PMID: 12193717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Kokubyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2002 Jun;69(2):152-61.

[Involvement of E2FBP1, an ARID family member protein, in the p53 regulatory
pathway].

[Article in Japanese]

Kaiwen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Embryology, Department of Maxillofacial Biology, Division
of Maxillofacial/Neck Reconstruction, Graduate School of Tokyo Medical and Dental
University.

E2FBP1, an ARID (AT-rich interaction domain) family protein, has been isolated as
a protein that interacts with E2F-1, a member for the E2F family transcription
factor. The closely related Bright binds to specific AT-rich DNA sequences and
regulates B-cell-specific gene expression. Although Bright is specifically
expressed in differentiating and matured B cells, E2FBP1 is expressed
ubiquitously in a variety of tissues, suggesting that E2FBP1 plays a role in
different biological processes. However, the function of E2FBP1 remains largely
unknown. The present work showed that expression of E2FBP1 protein was
up-regulated by forced expression of p53, and its expression levels were low, in 
tumor cells lacking wild-type p53. Furthermore, E2FBP1 levels were increased
following DNA damage, in parallel with levels of p53 and p21 Waf1/Cip1. In
addition, coimmunoprecipitation assays indicated that E2FBP1 could interact with 
p53 in vivo. These results suggest the possibility that E2FBP1 is involved in the
p53 regulatory pathway.

PMID: 12136662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nat Cell Biol. 2002 Feb;4(2):148-53.

A functional screen identifies hDRIL1 as an oncogene that rescues RAS-induced
senescence.

Peeper DS(1), Shvarts A, Brummelkamp T, Douma S, Koh EY, Daley GQ, Bernards R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis and Center for Biomedical Genetics, The
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Primary fibroblasts respond to activated H-RAS(V12) by undergoing premature
arrest, which resembles replicative senescence. This irreversible 'fail-safe
mechanism' requires p19(ARF), p53 and the Retinoblastoma (Rb) family: upon their 
disruption, RAS(V12)-expressing cells fail to undergo senescence and continue to 
proliferate. Similarly, co-expression of oncogenes such as c-MYC or E1A rescues
RAS(V12)-induced senescence. To identify novel genes that allow escape from
RAS(V12)-induced senescence, we designed an unbiased, retroviral complementary
DNA library screen. We report on the identification of DRIL1, the human
orthologue of the mouse Bright and Drosophila dead ringer transcriptional
regulators. DRIL1 renders primary murine fibroblasts unresponsive to
RAS(V12)-induced anti-proliferative signalling by p19(ARF)/p53/p21(CIP1), as well
as by p16(INK4a). In this way, DRIL1 not only rescues RAS(V12)-induced senescence
but also causes these fibroblasts to become highly oncogenic. Furthermore, DRIL1 
immortalizes mouse fibroblasts, in the presence of high levels of p16(INK4a).
Immortalization by DRIL1, whose product binds the pRB-controlled transcription
factor E2F1 (ref. 8), is correlated with induction of E2F1 activity.
Correspondingly, DRIL1 induces the E2F1 target Cyclin E1, overexpression of which
is sufficient to trigger escape from senescence. Thus, DRIL1 disrupts cellular
protection against RAS(V12)-induced proliferation downstream of the p19(ARF)/p53 
pathway.

PMID: 11812999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 15;276(24):21325-30. Epub 2001 Apr 6.

Transcriptional activation by a matrix associating region-binding protein.
contextual requirements for the function of bright.

Kaplan MH(1), Zong RT, Herrscher RF, Scheuermann RH, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas 78712-1075, USA.

Bright (B cell regulator of IgH transcription) is a B cell-specific, matrix
associating region-binding protein that transactivates gene expression from the
IgH intronic enhancer (E mu). We show here that Bright has multiple contextual
requirements to function as a transcriptional activator. Bright cannot
transactivate via out of context, concatenated binding sites. Transactivation is 
maximal on integrated substrates. Two of the three previously identified binding 
sites in E mu are required for full Bright transactivation. The Bright DNA
binding domain defined a new family, which includes SWI1, a component of the
SWI.SNF complex shown to have high mobility group-like DNA binding
characteristics. Similar to one group of high mobility group box proteins, Bright
distorts E mu binding site-containing DNA on binding, supporting the concept that
it mediates E mu remodeling. Transfection studies further implicate Bright in
facilitating spatially separated promoter-enhancer interactions in both transient
and stable assays. Finally, we show that overexpression of Bright leads to
enhanced DNase I sensitivity of the endogenous E mu matrix associating regions.
These data further suggest that Bright may contribute to increased gene
expression by remodeling the immunoglobulin locus during B cell development.

PMID: 11294836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1999;64:109-18.

Differential regulation of immunoglobulin gene transcription via nuclear
matrix-associated regions.

Webb C(1), Zong RT, Lin D, Wang Z, Kaplan M, Paulin Y, Smith E, Probst L, Bryant 
J, Goldstein A, Scheuermann R, Tucker P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology and Cancer, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

PMID: 11232275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Immunol. 2000 Dec 15;165(12):6956-65.

The transcription factor Bright associates with Bruton's tyrosine kinase, the
defective protein in immunodeficiency disease.

Webb CF(1), Yamashita Y, Ayers N, Evetts S, Paulin Y, Conley ME, Smith EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology and Cancer, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 
and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Oklahoma University Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Binding of the transcription factor Bright to Ig heavy chain loci after B cell
activation is associated with increased heavy chain transcription. We now report 
that Bright coprecipitates with Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk), the defective
enzyme in X-linked immunodeficiency disease (xid). Furthermore, we observed Btk
in the nucleus of activated murine B cells, and mobility shift assays suggest
that it is a component of the Bright DNA-binding complex. While BRIGHT protein
was synthesized in activated spleen cells from xid mice, it did not bind DNA or
associate stably with Btk. These data suggest that deficiencies in BRIGHT
DNA-binding activity may contribute to the defects in Ig production seen in xid
mice.

PMID: 11120822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. EMBO J. 2000 Aug 1;19(15):4123-33.

Regulation of matrix attachment region-dependent, lymphocyte-restricted
transcription through differential localization within promyelocytic leukemia
nuclear bodies.

Zong RT(1), Das C, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and The Institute for Cellular and Molecular 
Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Bright (B cell regulator of IgH transcription) transactivates the immunoglobulin 
heavy chain (IgH) intronic enhancer, Emicro, by binding to matrix attachment
regions (MARs), sites necessary for DNA attachment to the nuclear matrix. Here we
report that Bright interacts with the ubiquitous autoantigen Sp100, a component
of promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML NBs), and with LYSp100B/Sp140, the 
lymphoid-restricted homolog of Sp100. Both in intact cells and in nuclear matrix 
preparations, the majority of Bright and Sp100 colocalize within PML NBs. In
contrast, Bright colocalizes with only a small fraction of LYSp100B while
inducing a redistribution of the majority of LYSp100B from its associated nuclear
domains (LANDs) into nucleoplasm and cytoplasm. Sp100 represses the MAR-binding
and transactivation activity of Bright. LYSp100B interacts more weakly with
Bright but requires significantly higher levels than Sp100 to inhibit MAR
binding. However, it strongly stimulates Bright transactivation through E mu. We 
suggest that Sp100 and LYSp100B interactions with Bright have different
consequences for IgH transcription, potentially through differential association 
of E mu MARs with nuclear matrix- associated PML NBs and LANDs.

PMCID: PMC306587
PMID: 10921892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Cancer Res. 1999 Aug 1;59(15):3741-7.

Bdp, a new member of a family of DNA-binding proteins, associates with the
retinoblastoma gene product.

Numata S(1), Claudio PP, Dean C, Giordano A, Croce CM.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

We have cloned a gene, BDP, encoding a protein with homology to the
retinoblastoma-binding proteins Rbp1 and Rbp2. It also has homology to
DNA-binding proteins such as Bright, a B-cell-specific trans-activator, and the
Drosophila melanogaster dead ringer gene product. Like MyoD, Bdp binds to the
COOH-terminal region of pRb through its conserved region and to
hypophosphorylated pRb. It also binds to the MAR of the immunoglobulin
heavy-chain locus. Thus Bdp may contribute to the transcriptional regulation of
genes involved in differentiation and tissue-specific expression.

PMID: 10446990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):284-95.

Cux/CDP homeoprotein is a component of NF-muNR and represses the immunoglobulin
heavy chain intronic enhancer by antagonizing the bright transcription activator.

Wang Z(1), Goldstein A, Zong RT, Lin D, Neufeld EJ, Scheuermann RH, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, The University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75235-9072, USA.

Nuclear matrix attachment regions (MARs) flanking the immunoglobulin heavy chain 
intronic enhancer (Emu) are the targets of the negative regulator, NF-muNR, found
in non-B and early pre-B cells. Expression library screening with NF-muNR binding
sites yielded a cDNA clone encoding an alternatively spliced form of the Cux/CDP 
homeodomain protein. Cux/CDP fulfills criteria required for NF-muNR identity. It 
is expressed in non-B and early pre-B cells but not mature B cells. It binds to
NF-muNR binding sites within Emu with appropriate differential affinities.
Antiserum specific for Cux/CDP recognizes a polypeptide of the predicted size in 
affinity-purified NF-muNR preparations and binds NF-muNR complexed with DNA.
Cotransfection with Cux/CDP represses the activity of Emu via the MAR sequences
in both B and non-B cells. Cux/CDP antagonizes the effects of the Bright
transcription activator at both the DNA binding and functional levels. We propose
that Cux/CDP regulates cell-type-restricted, differentiation stage-specific Emu
enhancer activity by interfering with the function of nuclear matrix-bound
transcription activators.

PMCID: PMC83886
PMID: 9858552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Oncogene. 1998 Aug 20;17(7):853-65.

A novel E2F binding protein with Myc-type HLH motif stimulates E2F-dependent
transcription by forming a heterodimer.

Suzuki M(1), Okuyama S, Okamoto S, Shirasuna K, Nakajima T, Hachiya T, Nojima H, 
Sekiya S, Oda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
Chiba, Japan.

The human embryonal carcinoma cells NEC14 can be induced to differentiate
morphologically by the addition of 10(-2) M N, N'-hexamethylene-bis-acetamide and
cease to grow in several days. Transcription factors of the E2F/DP family have
been shown to be closely related to the regulation of cell proliferation. To
analyse cellular proteins which interact with E2F in NEC14 cells, cDNA clones
encoding E2F binding proteins were isolated from a lambdaZAP II NEC14 cell
library with the 32P-labeled GST (Glutathione S-transferase)-E2F-1 fusion protein
as a probe. One of the clones encodes E2FBP1 which has the helix-loop-helix (HLH)
motif, but lacks the basic domain and the zipper structure usually found at N-
and C-terminal sides to the HLH motif, respectively. The arrangement of amino
acids in the helix 1 and helix 2 regions is quite similar to those of Mxi and
Mad, but different from those of E2F-1 and DP-1. Western blot analysis of the
immunoprecipitates prepared with anti-E2FBP1 antibody showed that E2FBP1
associates with both E2F-1 and DP-1 in vivo. E2FBP1 alone has no DNA binding
activity, but bind to the E2F site through heterodimerization with E2F-1 but not 
with DP-1. Although E2FBP1 lacks the transactivation domain, it stimulates E2F
site-dependent transcription in cooperation with E2F-1.

PMID: 9780002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Genomics. 1998 Jul 15;51(2):288-92.

The human dead ringer/bright homolog, DRIL1: cDNA cloning, gene structure, and
mapping to D19S886, a marker on 19p13.3 that is strictly linked to the
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.

Kortschak RD(1), Reimann H, Zimmer M, Eyre HJ, Saint R, Jenne DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

The Drosophila gene dead ringer (dri) was isolated as a novel gene encoding a
sequence-specific DNA-binding protein. DRI is a founding member of a growing
protein family whose members share a conserved DNA binding domain termed the
A/T-rich interaction domain. dri is developmentally regulated, being expressed in
a restricted set of cells including some neural cells and differentiating cells
of the gut and salivary gland ducts. The mouse homolog of dri, bright, has been
shown to be expressed in mature B-cells in the immune system, its product
trans-activating expression through an IgH enhancer in transient transfection
assays. We have cloned a human dri/bright homolog, termed DRIL1. Here we report
the exon-intron structure of the gene and show physical linkage within 80 kb to
the D19S886 marker on 19p13.3. As this marker is intimately linked to the
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome in several large pedigrees, human dri (DRIL1) is a
candidate gene for this disorder.

PMID: 9722953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Immunol. 1998 May 15;160(10):4747-54.

Expression of bright at two distinct stages of B lymphocyte development.

Webb CF(1), Smith EA, Medina KL, Buchanan KL, Smithson G, Dou S.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City 73104, USA. webb@omrf.ouhsc.edu

The B cell regulator of Ig heavy chain transcription (Bright) is a DNA-binding
protein that was originally discovered in a mature Ag-specific B cell line after 
stimulation with IL-5 and Ag. It binds to the intronic heavy chain enhancer and
5' of the V1 S107 family V(H) promoter. Several studies suggested that Bright may
increase transcription of the heavy chain locus, and expression in cell lines was
limited to those representing mature B cells. We have now analyzed normal
hemopoietic tissues for the expression of Bright during B lymphocyte
differentiation. We expected to find Bright expression in a subset of mature
spleen cells, but also observed Bright in a subset of normal B lymphocytic
progenitors in both adult bone marrow (BM) and in fetal liver as early as day 12 
of gestation. Bright was also expressed in the small percentage of CD4(low) cells
in the thymus that are newly arrived from the BM and are not yet committed to the
T lymphocyte lineage, but was not observed at later stages of T cell
differentiation in either the spleen or thymus. Bright mRNA was not detected in
the immature B lymphocytes that initially populate the spleen after migration
from the BM. In addition, new splice variants of Bright were observed in fetal
tissues. Thus, Bright expression is highly regulated in normal murine lymphocytes
and occurs both early and late during B cell differentiation. These findings may 
have important implications for the function of Bright in regulating Ig
transcription.

PMID: 9590220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Genes Dev. 1995 Dec 15;9(24):3067-82.

The immunoglobulin heavy-chain matrix-associating regions are bound by Bright: a 
B cell-specific trans-activator that describes a new DNA-binding protein family.

Herrscher RF(1), Kaplan MH, Lelsz DL, Das C, Scheuermann R, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235-9048, USA.

B lymphocyte-restricted transcription of immunoglobulin heavy-chain (IgH) genes
is specified by elements within the variable region (VH) promoter and the
intronic enhancer (E mu). The gene encoding a protein that binds a VH promoter
proximal site necessary for induced mu-heavy-chain transcription has been cloned.
This B-cell specific protein, termed Bright (B cell regulator of IgH
transcription), is found in both soluble and matrix insoluble nuclear fractions. 
Bright binds the minor groove of a restricted ATC sequence that is sufficient for
nuclear matrix association. This sequence motif is present in previously
described matrix-associating regions (MARs) proximal to the promoter and flanking
E mu. Bright can activate E mu-driven transcription by binding these sites, but
only when they occur in their natural context and in cell lines permissive for E 
mu activity. To bind DNA, Bright requires a novel tetramerization domain and a
previously undescribed domain that shares identity with several proteins,
including SWI1, a component of the SWI/SNF complex.

PMID: 8543152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


