
1. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2016 Mar 28. pii: ocw007. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocw007. [Epub
ahead of print]

A network-based drug repositioning infrastructure for precision cancer medicine
through targeting significantly mutated genes in the human cancer genomes.

Cheng F(1), Zhao J(1), Fooksa M(2), Zhao Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37203, USA. (2)Department of Biomedical Informatics,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37203, USA Chemical and
Physical Biology Program, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN
37232, USA. (3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University School
of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37203, USA Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA Department of Psychiatry,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37212, USA Center for
Precision Health, School of Biomedical Informatics, The University of Texas
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA
zhongming.zhao@uth.tmc.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Development of computational approaches and tools to effectively
integrate multidomain data is urgently needed for the development of newly
targeted cancer therapeutics.
METHODS: We proposed an integrative network-based infrastructure to identify new 
druggable targets and anticancer indications for existing drugs through targeting
significantly mutated genes (SMGs) discovered in the human cancer genomes. The
underlying assumption is that a drug would have a high potential for anticancer
indication if its up-/down-regulated genes from the Connectivity Map tended to be
SMGs or their neighbors in the human protein interaction network.
RESULTS: We assembled and curated 693 SMGs in 29 cancer types and found 121
proteins currently targeted by known anticancer or noncancer (repurposed) drugs. 
We found that the approved or experimental cancer drugs could potentially target 
these SMGs in 33.3% of the mutated cancer samples, and this number increased to
68.0% by drug repositioning through surveying exome-sequencing data in
approximately 5000 normal-tumor pairs from The Cancer Genome Atlas. Furthermore, 
we identified 284 potential new indications connecting 28 cancer types and 48
existing drugs (adjustedP<U+2009><<U+2009>.05), with a 66.7% success rate validated by
literature data. Several existing drugs (e.g., niclosamide, valproic acid,
captopril, and resveratrol) were predicted to have potential indications for
multiple cancer types. Finally, we used integrative analysis to showcase a
potential mechanism-of-action for resveratrol in breast and lung cancer treatment
whereby it targets several SMGs (ARNTL,ASPM, CTTN, EIF4G1, FOXP1,andSTIP1).
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, we demonstrated that our integrative network-based
infrastructure is a promising strategy to identify potential druggable targets
and uncover new indications for existing drugs to speed up molecularly targeted
cancer therapeutics.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American
Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 27026610  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Chronobiol Int. 2016 Mar 22:1-23. [Epub ahead of print]

Lithium and bipolar disorder: Impacts from molecular to behavioural circadian
rhythms.

Moreira J(1,)(2,)(3), Geoffroy PA(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)a Inserm , U1144 , Paris , France. (2)b Université Paris Descartes , UMR-S
1144 , Paris , France. (3)c Université Paris Diderot , Sorbonne Paris Cité, UMR-S
1144 , Paris , France. (4)d AP-HP, GH Saint-Louis - Lariboisière - F. Widal, Pôle
de Psychiatrie et de Médecine Addictologique , Paris cedex , France. (5)e
Fondation FondaMental , Créteil , France.

Bipolar disorder (BD) is a severe and common psychiatric disorder. BD
pathogenesis, clinical manifestations and relapses are associated with numerous
circadian rhythm abnormalities. Lithium (Li) is the first-line treatment in BD,
and its therapeutic action has been related to its ability to alter circadian
rhythms. We systematically searched the PubMed database until January 2016,
aiming to critically examine published studies investigating direct and indirect 
effects of Li on circadian rhythms. The results, from the 95 retained studies,
indicated that Li: acts directly on the molecular clocks; delays the phase of
sleep-wakefulness rhythms and the peak elevation of diurnal cycle body
temperature; reduces the amplitude and shortens the duration of activity rhythms 
and lengthens free-running rhythms. Chronic Li treatment stabilizes free-running 
activity rhythms, by improving day-to-day rhythmicity of the activity, with
effects that appear to be dose related. Pharmacogenetics demonstrate several
associations of Li's response with circadian genes (NR1D1, GSK3ß, CRY1, ARNTL,
TIM, PER2). Finally, Li acts on the retinal-hypothalamic pineal pathway,
influencing light sensitivity and melatonin secretion. Li is a highly
investigated chronobiologic agent, and although its chronobiological effects are 
not completely understood, it seems highly likely that they constitute an
inherent component of its therapeutic action in the treatment of mood disorders.

PMID: 27003509  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Indian J Psychiatry. 2016 Jan-Mar;58(1):57-60. doi: 10.4103/0019-5545.174374.

Circadian clock gene aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like
polymorphisms are associated with seasonal affective disorder: An Indian family
study.

Rajendran B(1), Janakarajan VN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development Centre, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, Tamil
Nadu, India. (2)Department of Biochemistry, IRT Perundurai Medical College,
Perundurai, Erode, Tamil Nadu, India.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Polymorphisms in aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator-like (ARNTL) gene, the key component of circadian clock manifests
circadian rhythm abnormalities. As seasonal affective disorder (SAD) is
associated with disrupted circadian rhythms, the main objective of this study was
to screen an Indian family with SAD for ARNTL gene polymorphisms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, 30 members of close-knit family with SAD,
30 age- and sex-matched controls of the same caste with no prior history of
psychiatric illness and 30 age- and sex-matched controls belonging to 17
different castes with no prior history of psychiatric illness were genotyped for 
five different single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ARNTL gene by TaqMan
allele-specific genotyping assay.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: Statistical significance was assessed by more powerful
quasi-likelihood score test-XM.
RESULTS: Most of the family members carried the risk alleles and we observed a
highly significant SNP rs2279287 (A/G) in ARNTL gene with an allelic frequency of
0.75.
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms in ARNTL gene disrupt circadian rhythms causing SAD
and genetic predisposition becomes more deleterious in the presence of adverse
environment.

PMCID: PMC4776583
PMID: 26985106  [PubMed]


4. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 28;14(4):18515-22. doi: 10.4238/2015.December.23.39.

Association between ARNTL (BMAL1) rs2278749 polymorphism T >C and susceptibility 
to Alzheimer disease in a Chinese population.

Chen Q(1), Peng XD(2), Huang CQ(3), Hu XY(1), Zhang XM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, The West-Hospital of Sichuan University, Chen-Du,
Sichuan, Sichuang Province, China. (2)Department of Oncology, The Second Hospital
of Sichuan, Sichuan, China. (3)Department of Geriatrics, The Third Hospital of
Mianyang, Mianyang, China.

In the present study, we examined whether the ARNTL (BMAL1) rs2278749 T/C
polymorphism was associated with the susceptibility to Alzheimer disease (AD).
This case-control study examined the genotypes of apolipoprotein E (APOE e4) and 
BMAL1 rs2278749 T/C using restriction fragment length polymorphism and the TaqMan
assay, respectively. A total of 296 unrelated AD patients and 423 control
subjects were included. Both in the entire sample and in APOE e4 non-carriers,
the prevalence of T carriers in BMAL1 rs2278749 T/C in AD patients was
significantly higher than that in control subjects (entire sample: <U+03C7>(2) = 12.950,
P < 0.0001; APOE e4 non-carriers: <U+03C7>(2) = 13.094, P < 0.0001). Both in the entire 
sample and in APOE e4 non-carriers, the prevalence of TT genotypes 2278749 in AD 
patients was also significantly higher than that in control subjects (entire
sample: <U+03C7>(2) = 7.765, P = 0.024; APOE e4 non-carriers: <U+03C7>(2) = 13.062, P <
0.0001). However, among APOE e4 carriers, the difference in the prevalence of T
carriers or TT genotypes in the BMAL1 rs2278749 T/C between patients and control 
subjects presents was not significant (T carriers: <U+03C7>(2) = 0.078, P = 0.851 or TT 
genotypes: <U+03C7>(2) = 2.576, P = 0.325). Among APOE e4 non-carriers, T carriers in
the BMAL1 rs2278749 T/C were associated with a high susceptibility to AD, but
among APOE e4 carriers, the association between AD and BMAL1 rs2278749 T/C was
not significant.

PMID: 26782499  [PubMed - in process]


5. Mol Cancer. 2016 Jan 15;15(1):6. doi: 10.1186/s12943-016-0492-8.

Deregulated expression of cryptochrome genes in human colorectal cancer.

Mazzoccoli G(1,)(2), Colangelo T(3), Panza A(4), Rubino R(5), De Cata A(5),
Tiberio C(5), Valvano MR(4), Pazienza V(4), Merla G(6), Augello B(6), Trombetta
D(7), Storlazzi CT(8), Macchia G(8), Gentile A(4), Tavano F(4), Vinciguerra
M(5,)(9,)(10,)(11), Bisceglia G(12), Rosato V(3), Colantuoni V(3), Sabatino L(3),
Piepoli A(13).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Internal Medicine and Chronobiology Unit, IRCCS Scientific
Institute and Regional General Hospital "Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza", San
Giovanni Rotondo, FG, Italy. g.mazzoccoli@operapadrepio.it. (2)Department of
Medical Sciences, Division of Internal Medicine and Chronobiology Unit, IRCCS
Scientific Institute and Regional General Hospital "Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza", San Giovanni Rotondo, FG, 71013, Italy.
g.mazzoccoli@operapadrepio.it. (3)Department of Sciences and Technologies,
University of Sannio, Benevento, Italy. (4)Division of Gastroenterology and
Research Laboratory, IRCCS Scientific Institute and Regional General Hospital
"Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza", San Giovanni Rotondo, FG, Italy. (5)Division of
Internal Medicine and Chronobiology Unit, IRCCS Scientific Institute and Regional
General Hospital "Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza", San Giovanni Rotondo, FG,
Italy. (6)Medical Genetics, IRCCS Scientific Institute and Regional General
Hospital "Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza", San Giovanni Rotondo, FG, Italy.
(7)Oncology-Research Laboratory, IRCCS Scientific Institute and Regional General 
Hospital "Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza", San Giovanni Rotondo, FG, Italy.
(8)Department of Biology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy. (9)Euro-Mediterranean 
Institute of Sciences and Technology (IEMEST), Palermo, Italy. (10)School of
Science and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, UK. (11)Division
of Medicine, University College London, Institute for Liver and Digestive Health,
Royal Free Campus, London, UK. (12)Division of Abdominal Surgery, IRCCS
Scientific Institute and Regional General Hospital "Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza", San Giovanni Rotondo, FG, Italy. (13)Division of Epidemiology and
Health Statistics, IRCCS Scientific Institute and Regional General Hospital "Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza", San Giovanni Rotondo, FG, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Circadian disruption and deranged molecular clockworks are involved
in carcinogenesis. The cryptochrome genes (CRY1 and CRY2) encode circadian
proteins important for the functioning of biological oscillators. Their
expression in human colorectal cancer (CRC) and in colon cancer cell lines has
not been evaluated so far.
METHODS: We investigated CRY1 and CRY2 expression in fifty CRCs and in the CaCo2,
HCT116, HT29, SW480 cell lines.
RESULTS: CRY1 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01) and CRY2 (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001) expression was significantly
changed in tumour tissue, as confirmed in a large independent CRC dataset. In
addition, lower CRY1 mRNA levels were observed in patients in the age range of
62-74 years (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.018), in female patients (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003) and in cancers located at
the transverse colon (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008). Lower CRY2 levels were also associated with
cancer location at the transverse colon (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007). CRC patients displaying CRY1
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.042) and CRY2 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.043) expression levels over the median were
hallmarked by a poorer survival rate. Survey of selected colon cancer cell lines 
evidenced variable levels of cryptochrome genes expression and time-dependent
changes in their mRNA levels. Moreover, they showed reduced apoptosis, increased 
proliferation and different response to 5-fluorouracil and oxaliplatin upon CRY1 
and CRY2 ectopic expression. The relationship with p53 status came out as an
additional layer of regulation: higher CRY1 and CRY2 protein levels coincided
with a wild type p53 as in HCT116 cells and this condition only marginally
affected the apoptotic and cell proliferation characteristics of the cells upon
CRY ectopic expression. Conversely, lower CRY and CRY2 levels as in HT29 and
SW480 cells coincided with a mutated p53 and a more robust apoptosis and
proliferation upon CRY transfection. Besides, an heterogeneous pattern of ARNTL, 
WEE and c-MYC expression hallmarked the chosen colon cancer cell lines and likely
influenced their phenotypic changes.
CONCLUSION: Cryptochrome gene expression is altered in CRC, particularly in
elderly subjects, female patients and cancers located at the transverse colon,
affecting overall survival. Altered CRY1 and CRY2 expression patterns and the
interplay with the genetic landscape in colon cancer cells may underlie
phenotypic divergence that could influence disease behavior as well as CRC
patients survival and response to chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4714521
PMID: 26768731  [PubMed - in process]


6. Diabetologia. 2016 Apr;59(4):734-43. doi: 10.1007/s00125-015-3859-2. Epub 2016
Jan 13.

Bmal1 is required for beta cell compensatory expansion, survival and metabolic
adaptation to diet-induced obesity in mice.

Rakshit K(1,)(2), Hsu TW(2), Matveyenko AV(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biomedical Engineering, Mayo Clinic School of
Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of California
Los Angeles, David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (3)Department
of Physiology and Biomedical Engineering, Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Mayo
Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
Matveyenko.Aleksey@mayo.edu. (4)Department of Medicine, Division of
Endocrinology, University of California Los Angeles, David Geffen School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Matveyenko.Aleksey@mayo.edu.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Obesity and consequent insulin resistance are known risk factors
for type 2 diabetes. A compensatory increase in beta cell function and mass in
response to insulin resistance permits maintenance of normal glucose homeostasis,
whereas failure to do so results in beta cell failure and type 2 diabetes. Recent
evidence suggests that the circadian system is essential for proper metabolic
control and regulation of beta cell function. We set out to address the
hypothesis that the beta cell circadian clock is essential for the appropriate
functional and morphological beta cell response to insulin resistance.
METHODS: We employed conditional deletion of the Bmal1 (also known as Arntl) gene
(encoding a key circadian clock transcription factor) in beta cells using the
tamoxifen-inducible CreER(T) recombination system. Upon adulthood, Bmal1 deletion
in beta cells was achieved and mice were exposed to either chow or high fat diet 
(HFD). Changes in diurnal glycaemia, glucose tolerance and insulin secretion were
longitudinally monitored in vivo and islet morphology and turnover assessed by
immunofluorescence. Isolated islet experiments in vitro were performed to
delineate changes in beta cell function and transcriptional regulation of cell
proliferation.
RESULTS: Adult Bmal1 deletion in beta cells resulted in failed metabolic
adaptation to HFD characterised by fasting and diurnal hyperglycaemia, glucose
intolerance and loss of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Importantly,
HFD-induced beta cell expansion was absent following beta cell Bmal1 deletion
indicating impaired beta cell proliferative and regenerative potential, which was
confirmed by assessment of transcriptional profiles in isolated islets.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Results of the study suggest that the beta cell
circadian clock is a novel regulator of compensatory beta cell expansion and
function in response to increased insulin demand associated with diet-induced
obesity.

PMCID: PMC4779402
PMID: 26762333  [PubMed - in process]


7. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 4;11(1):e0145563. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145563.
eCollection 2016.

Glucose-Raising Polymorphisms in the Human Clock Gene Cryptochrome 2 (CRY2)
Affect Hepatic Lipid Content.

Machicao F(1,)(2), Peter A(1,)(2,)(3), Machann J(1,)(2,)(4), Königsrainer I(5),
Böhm A(1,)(2,)(3), Lutz SZ(1,)(2,)(3), Heni M(1,)(2,)(3), Fritsche
A(1,)(2,)(3,)(6), Schick F(1,)(2,)(4), Königsrainer A(5), Stefan N(1,)(2,)(3),
Häring HU(1,)(2,)(3), Staiger H(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Diabetes Research and Metabolic Diseases of the Helmholtz Centre
Munich at the University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (2)German Center for
Diabetes Research (DZD), Tübingen, Germany. (3)Department of Internal Medicine,
Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology, Angiology, Nephrology and Clinical
Chemistry, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (4)Department of
Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Section on Experimental Radiology,
University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (5)Department of General,
Visceral, and Transplant Surgery, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany. (6)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nutritional and
Preventive Medicine, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Circadian rhythms govern vital functions. Their disruption provokes metabolic
imbalance favouring obesity and type-2 diabetes. The aim of the study was to
assess the role of clock genes in human prediabetes. To this end,
genotype-phenotype associations of 121 common single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) tagging ARNTL, ARNTL2, CLOCK, CRY1, CRY2, PER1, PER2, PER3, and TIMELESS
were assessed in a study population of 1,715 non-diabetic individuals
metabolically phenotyped by 5-point oral glucose tolerance tests. In subgroups,
hyperinsulinaemic-euglycaemic clamps, intravenous glucose tolerance tests, and
magnetic resonance imaging/spectroscopy were performed. None of the tested SNPs
was associated with body fat content, insulin sensitivity, or insulin secretion. 
Four CRY2 SNPs were associated with fasting glycaemia, as reported earlier.
Importantly, carriers of these SNPs' minor alleles revealed elevated fasting
glycaemia and, concomitantly, reduced liver fat content. In human liver tissue
samples, CRY2 mRNA expression was directly associated with hepatic triglyceride
content. Our data may point to CRY2 as a novel switch in hepatic fuel metabolism 
promoting triglyceride storage and, concomitantly, limiting glucose production.
The anti-steatotic effects of the glucose-raising CRY2 alleles may explain why
these alleles do not increase type-2 diabetes risk.

PMCID: PMC4699770
PMID: 26726810  [PubMed - in process]


8. Retrovirology. 2015 Dec 10;12:102. doi: 10.1186/s12977-015-0226-9.

Identification of novel HIV-1 dependency factors in primary CCR4(+)CCR6(+)Th17
cells via a genome-wide transcriptional approach.

Cleret-Buhot A(1,)(2), Zhang Y(3,)(4), Planas D(5,)(6), Goulet JP(7), Monteiro
P(8,)(9), Gosselin A(10), Wacleche VS(11,)(12), Tremblay CL(13,)(14), Jenabian
MA(15), Routy JP(16,)(17,)(18), El-Far M(19), Chomont N(20,)(21), Haddad EK(22), 
Sekaly RP(23), Ancuta P(24,)(25).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada. cleret.aurelie@gmail.com.
(2)CHUM-Research Centre, 900 rue Saint-Denis, Tour Viger, R09.416, Montreal,
QUÉBEC, H2X 0A9, Canada. cleret.aurelie@gmail.com. (3)Department of Microbiology,
Infectiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal,
Montreal, QC, Canada. yuwei.zhang@umontreal.ca. (4)CHUM-Research Centre, 900 rue 
Saint-Denis, Tour Viger, R09.416, Montreal, QUÉBEC, H2X 0A9, Canada.
yuwei.zhang@umontreal.ca. (5)Department of Microbiology, Infectiology and
Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada.
delphine.planas@umontreal.ca. (6)CHUM-Research Centre, 900 rue Saint-Denis, Tour 
Viger, R09.416, Montreal, QUÉBEC, H2X 0A9, Canada. delphine.planas@umontreal.ca. 
(7)Caprion, Montreal, QC, Canada. jp.goulet@umontreal.ca. (8)Department of
Microbiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Université de
Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada. patriciamonteiro2003@yahoo.fr. (9)CHUM-Research
Centre, 900 rue Saint-Denis, Tour Viger, R09.416, Montreal, QUÉBEC, H2X 0A9,
Canada. patriciamonteiro2003@yahoo.fr. (10)CHUM-Research Centre, 900 rue
Saint-Denis, Tour Viger, R09.416, Montreal, QUÉBEC, H2X 0A9, Canada.
annie.gosselin.chum@gmail.com. (11)Department of Microbiology, Infectiology and
Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada.
vanessa.sue.wacleche@umontreal.ca. (12)CHUM-Research Centre, 900 rue Saint-Denis,
Tour Viger, R09.416, Montreal, QUÉBEC, H2X 0A9, Canada.
vanessa.sue.wacleche@umontreal.ca. (13)Department of Microbiology, Infectiology
and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC,
Canada. c.tremblay@umontreal.ca. (14)CHUM-Research Centre, 900 rue Saint-Denis,
Tour Viger, R09.416, Montreal, QUÉBEC, H2X 0A9, Canada. c.tremblay@umontreal.ca. 
(15)Département des sciences biologiques, Université du Québec à Montréal,
Montreal, QC, Canada. jenabian.mohammad-ali@uqam.ca. (16)Chronic Viral Illness
Service, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.
jean-pierre.routy@mcgill.ca. (17)Research Institute, McGill University Health
Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada. jean-pierre.routy@mcgill.ca. (18)Division of
Hematology, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.
jean-pierre.routy@mcgill.ca. (19)CHUM-Research Centre, 900 rue Saint-Denis, Tour 
Viger, R09.416, Montreal, QUÉBEC, H2X 0A9, Canada. mohamed.el-far@hotmail.com.
(20)Department of Microbiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada. nicolas.chomont@umontreal.ca.
(21)CHUM-Research Centre, 900 rue Saint-Denis, Tour Viger, R09.416, Montreal,
QUÉBEC, H2X 0A9, Canada. nicolas.chomont@umontreal.ca. (22)Division of infectious
Diseases and HIV Medicine, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
elias.elhaddad@drexelmed.edu. (23)Center for AIDS Research, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH, USA. rafick.sekaly@case.edu. (24)Department of
Microbiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Université de
Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada. petronela.ancuta@umontreal.ca. (25)CHUM-Research 
Centre, 900 rue Saint-Denis, Tour Viger, R09.416, Montreal, QUÉBEC, H2X 0A9,
Canada. petronela.ancuta@umontreal.ca.

BACKGROUND: The HIV-1 infection is characterized by profound CD4(+) T cell
destruction and a marked Th17 dysfunction at the mucosal level. Viral suppressive
antiretroviral therapy restores Th1 but not Th17 cells. Although several key HIV 
dependency factors (HDF) were identified in the past years via genome-wide siRNA 
screens in cell lines, molecular determinants of HIV permissiveness in primary
Th17 cells remain to be elucidated.
RESULTS: In an effort to orient Th17-targeted reconstitution strategies, we
investigated molecular mechanisms of HIV permissiveness in Th17 cells.
Genome-wide transcriptional profiling in memory CD4(+) T-cell subsets enriched in
cells exhibiting Th17 (CCR4(+)CCR6(+)), Th1 (CXCR3(+)CCR6(-)), Th2
(CCR4(+)CCR6(-)), and Th1Th17 (CXCR3(+)CCR6(+)) features revealed remarkable
transcriptional differences between Th17 and Th1 subsets. The HIV-DNA integration
was superior in Th17 versus Th1 upon exposure to both wild-type and
VSV-G-pseudotyped HIV; this indicates that post-entry mechanisms contribute to
viral replication in Th17. Transcripts significantly enriched in Th17 versus Th1 
were previously associated with the regulation of TCR signaling (ZAP-70, Lck, and
CD96) and Th17 polarization (ROR<U+03B3>t, ARNTL, PTPN13, and RUNX1). A meta-analysis
using the NCBI HIV Interaction Database revealed a set of Th17-specific HIV
dependency factors (HDFs): PARG, PAK2, KLF2, ITGB7, PTEN, ATG16L1,
Alix/AIP1/PDCD6IP, LGALS3, JAK1, TRIM8, MALT1, FOXO3, ARNTL/BMAL1, ABCB1/MDR1,
TNFSF13B/BAFF, and CDKN1B. Functional studies demonstrated an increased ability
of Th17 versus Th1 cells to respond to TCR triggering in terms of NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear
translocation/DNA-binding activity and proliferation. Finally, RNA interference
studies identified MAP3K4 and PTPN13 as two novel Th17-specific HDFs.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptional program of Th17 cells includes molecules
regulating HIV replication at multiple post-entry steps that may represent
potential targets for novel therapies aimed at protecting Th17 cells from
infection and subsequent depletion in HIV-infected subjects.

PMCID: PMC4676116
PMID: 26654242  [PubMed - in process]


9. Diabetologia. 2016 Feb;59(2):354-62. doi: 10.1007/s00125-015-3807-1. Epub 2015
Nov 13.

RBP4 functions as a hepatokine in the regulation of glucose metabolism by the
circadian clock in mice.

Ma X(1,)(2), Zhou Z(1,)(2), Chen Y(1), Wu Y(1), Liu Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai, 200031, People's Republic of China.
(2)Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, University of the Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (3)Key Laboratory of Nutrition
and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai,
200031, People's Republic of China. liuyi@sibs.ac.cn.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: As one of the key adipokines, retinol binding protein 4 (RBP4)
is suggested to positively correlate with insulin resistance; however, not all
clinical studies support this association. Although some explanations are
proposed for this discrepancy, the temporal aspect of RBP4 secretion has not been
considered. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like (also known as
BMAL1) and its target D site-binding protein (DBP) are both pivotal transcription
factors of the circadian core clock. Given the overwhelming presence of circadian
control in metabolism and the principal role of the liver in RBP4 secretion, we
hypothesised that RBP4 may oscillate under the control of BMAL1 and act as a
hepatokine, participating in the maintenance of glucose homeostasis by the
circadian clock.
METHODS: We used liver-specific Bmal1 (also known as Arntl)-knockout mice and
recombinant adenoviruses expressing short-hairpin RNA (shRNA) specific for Dbp or
Rbp4 in the liver.
RESULTS: RBP4 displayed diurnal oscillations in the liver and plasma, which were 
dampened in liver-specific-Bmal1-knockout mice. BMAL1 regulated hepatic RBP4
expression via its direct target, DBP. Hepatic knockdown of RBP4 or DBP increased
whole-body insulin sensitivity in mice in a time-of-day-dependent manner.
Conversely, hepatic overexpression of RBP4 reversed the insulin-sensitising
effects of liver-specific depletion of BMAL1.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our results not only provide a novel mechanism for
circadian regulation of RBP4, but also unveil a critical role of RBP4, acting as 
a hepatokine in the regulation of glucose metabolism by the circadian clock.

PMID: 26564180  [PubMed - in process]


10. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 24;112(47):E6579-88. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1515308112. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

Circadian and feeding rhythms differentially affect rhythmic mRNA transcription
and translation in mouse liver.

Atger F(1), Gobet C(2), Marquis J(3), Martin E(4), Wang J(5), Weger B(4),
Lefebvre G(3), Descombes P(6), Naef F(7), Gachon F(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Circadian Rhythms, Nestlé Institute of Health
Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, University of Lausanne, CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland; (2)Department 
of Diabetes and Circadian Rhythms, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015
Lausanne, Switzerland; Institute of Bioengineering, School of Life Sciences,
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics,
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; (3)Functional Genomic, Nestlé Institute of Health 
Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; (4)Department of Diabetes and Circadian 
Rhythms, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland;
(5)Institute of Bioengineering, School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, CH-1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland; (6)Functional Genomic, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015 
Lausanne, Switzerland; Faculty of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. (7)Institute of Bioengineering, School
of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne and Swiss Institute of
Bioinformatics, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; felix.naef@epfl.ch
frederic.gachon@rd.nestle.com. (8)Department of Diabetes and Circadian Rhythms,
Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; Faculty of
Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland felix.naef@epfl.ch frederic.gachon@rd.nestle.com.

Diurnal oscillations of gene expression are a hallmark of rhythmic physiology
across most living organisms. Such oscillations are controlled by the interplay
between the circadian clock and feeding rhythms. Although rhythmic mRNA
accumulation has been extensively studied, comparatively less is known about
their transcription and translation. Here, we quantified simultaneously temporal 
transcription, accumulation, and translation of mouse liver mRNAs under
physiological light-dark conditions and ad libitum or night-restricted feeding in
WT and brain and muscle Arnt-like 1 (Bmal1)-deficient animals. We found that
rhythmic transcription predominantly drives rhythmic mRNA accumulation and
translation for a majority of genes. Comparison of wild-type and Bmal1 KO mice
shows that circadian clock and feeding rhythms have broad impact on rhythmic gene
expression, Bmal1 deletion affecting surprisingly both transcriptional and
posttranscriptional levels. Translation efficiency is differentially regulated
during the diurnal cycle for genes with 5'-Terminal Oligo Pyrimidine tract
(5'-TOP) sequences and for genes involved in mitochondrial activity, many
harboring a Translation Initiator of Short 5'-UTR (TISU) motif. The increased
translation efficiency of 5'-TOP and TISU genes is mainly driven by feeding
rhythms but Bmal1 deletion also affects amplitude and phase of translation,
including TISU genes. Together this study emphasizes the complex interconnections
between circadian and feeding rhythms at several steps ultimately determining
rhythmic gene expression and translation.

PMCID: PMC4664316
PMID: 26554015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Science. 2015 Nov 6;350(6261):aac4250. doi: 10.1126/science.aac4250.

Pancreatic ß cell enhancers regulate rhythmic transcription of genes controlling 
insulin secretion.

Perelis M(1), Marcheva B(1), Ramsey KM(1), Schipma MJ(2), Hutchison AL(3),
Taguchi A(1), Peek CB(1), Hong H(1), Huang W(1), Omura C(1), Allred AL(1),
Bradfield CA(4), Dinner AR(5), Barish GD(1), Bass J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular
Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA. (2)Center for Genetic Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, 
USA. (3)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA. Graduate Program in the Biophysical Sciences, University of Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. James Franck Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago,
IL 60637, USA. (4)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI 52705, USA. (5)Graduate Program in the Biophysical
Sciences, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. James Franck Institute, 
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. Department of Chemistry,
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (6)Department of Medicine,
Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
j-bass@northwestern.edu.

Comment in
    Science. 2015 Nov 6;350(6261):628-9.

The mammalian transcription factors CLOCK and BMAL1 are essential components of
the molecular clock that coordinate behavior and metabolism with the solar cycle.
Genetic or environmental perturbation of circadian cycles contributes to
metabolic disorders including type 2 diabetes. To study the impact of the
cell-autonomous clock on pancreatic ß cell function, we examined pancreatic
islets from mice with either intact or disrupted BMAL1 expression both throughout
life and limited to adulthood. We found pronounced oscillation of insulin
secretion that was synchronized with the expression of genes encoding secretory
machinery and signaling factors that regulate insulin release. CLOCK/BMAL1
colocalized with the pancreatic transcription factor PDX1 within active enhancers
distinct from those controlling rhythmic metabolic gene networks in liver. We
also found that ß cell clock ablation in adult mice caused severe glucose
intolerance. Thus, cell type-specific enhancers underlie the circadian control of
peripheral metabolism throughout life and may help to explain its dysregulation
in diabetes.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4669216 [Available on 2016-05-06]
PMID: 26542580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Placenta. 2015 Dec;36(12):1480-6. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2015.10.005. Epub 2015 
Oct 23.

Circadian clock-related genetic risk scores and risk of placental abruption.

Qiu C(1), Gelaye B(2), Denis M(3), Tadesse MG(4), Luque Fernandez MA(2),
Enquobahrie DA(5), Ananth CV(6), Sanchez SE(7), Williams MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Perinatal Studies, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
Electronic address: Chun-fang.Qiu@Swedish.org. (2)Department of Epidemiology,
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA. (3)UMR Amélioration
Génétique et Adaptation des Plantes méditerranéennes et tropicales (AGAP), CIRAD,
Montpellier, France. (4)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC, USA. (5)Center for Perinatal Studies, Swedish Medical
Center, Seattle, WA, USA; Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. (6)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, NY, USA; Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public
Health, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. (7)Sección de Post Grado,
Facultad de Medicina Humana, Universidad San Martín de Porres, Lima, Peru; A.C.
PROESA, Lima, Peru; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, San Marcos
University, Lima, Peru.

INTRODUCTION: The circadian clock plays an important role in several aspects of
female reproductive biology. Evidence linking circadian clock-related genes to
pregnancy outcomes has been inconsistent. We sought to examine whether variations
in single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of circadian clock genes are associated
with PA risk.
METHODS: Maternal blood samples were collected from 470 PA case and 473 controls.
Genotyping was performed using the Illumina Cardio-MetaboChip platform. We
examined 119 SNPs in 13 candidate genes known to control circadian rhythms (e.g.,
CRY2, ARNTL, and RORA). Univariate and penalized logistic regression models were 
fit to estimate odds ratios (ORs); and the combined effect of multiple SNPs on PA
risk was estimated using a weighted genetic risk score (wGRS).
RESULTS: A common SNP in the RORA gene (rs2899663) was associated with a 21%
reduced odds of PA (P < 0.05). The odds of PA increased with increasing wGRS
(Ptrend < 0.001). The corresponding ORs were 1.00, 1.83, 2.81 and 5.13 across
wGRS quartiles. Participants in the highest wGRS quartile had a 5.13-fold (95%
confidence interval: 3.21-8.21) higher odds of PA compared to those in the lowest
quartile. Although the test for interaction was not significant, the odds of PA
was substantially elevated for preeclamptics with the highest wGRS quartile
(OR = 14.44, 95%CI: 6.62-31.53) compared to normotensive women in the lowest wGRS
quartile.
DISCUSSION: Genetic variants in circadian rhythm genes may be associated with PA 
risk. Larger studies are needed to corroborate these findings and to further
elucidate the pathogenesis of this important obstetrical complication.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26515929  [PubMed - in process]


13. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 28;5:15891. doi: 10.1038/srep15891.

Association of ARNTL and PER1 genes with Parkinson's disease: a case-control
study of Han Chinese.

Gu Z(1), Wang B(2,)(3), Zhang YB(2), Ding H(1), Zhang Y(4), Yu J(2,)(3), Gu M(2),
Chan P(1,)(4), Cai Y(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University, Key
Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Ministry of Education, Beijing
100053, P.R. China. (2)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information,
Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, P.R. 
China. (3)National Research Institute for Family Planning, Beijing 100081, P.R.
China. (4)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University,
Key Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Ministry of Education,
Beijing 100053, P.R. China.

Circadian disruptions may result in sleep problems, oxidative stress and an
altered inflammatory response. These symptoms may contribute to PD pathogenesis, 
despite a lack of direct experimental evidence supporting this relationship.
Clock genes are essential to drive and maintain circadian rhythm. To elucidate
the possible role of circadian disruptions in PD, we investigated 132 tag
variants in eight clock genes. We genotyped these tags within 1,394 Chinese cases
and 1,342 controls using Illumina GoldenGate chips. We discovered that SNPs in
ARNTL (rs900147, P = 3.33 × 10(-5), OR = 0.80) and PER1 (rs2253820, P = 5.30 ×
10(-6), OR = 1.31) genes are significantly associated with PD risk. Moreover, the
positive association of the ARNTL rs900147 variant was more robust in tremor
dominant (TD) (P = 3.44 × 10(-4)) than postural instability and gait difficulty
(PIGD) cases (P = 6.06 × 10(-2)). The association of the PER1 rs2253820 variant
was more robust in PIGD (P = 5.42 × 10(-5)) than TD cases (P = 4.2 × 10(-2)).
Haplotype analysis also showed that ARNTL and PER1 were associated with PD.
Imputation analysis identified more SNPs within ARNTL and PER1 associated with
PD, some of which may affect gene expression through altering the transcription
factor binding site. In summary, our findings suggest that genetic polymorphisms 
in ARNTL and PER1 genes, as well as circadian disruptions, may contribute to PD
pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4623766
PMID: 26507264  [PubMed - in process]


14. Biol Open. 2015 Oct 9;4(11):1400-9. doi: 10.1242/bio.012617.

a1B-Adrenergic receptor signaling controls circadian expression of Tnfrsf11b by
regulating clock genes in osteoblasts.

Hirai T(1), Tanaka K(2), Togari A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, Aichi-Gakuin University,
Nagoya 464-8650, Japan togariaf@dpc.agu.ac.jp t-hirai@dpc.agu.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, Aichi-Gakuin University,
Nagoya 464-8650, Japan.

Circadian clocks are endogenous and biological oscillations that occur with a
period of <24 h. In mammals, the central circadian pacemaker is localized in the 
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) and is linked to peripheral tissues through neural 
and hormonal signals. In the present study, we investigated the physiological
function of the molecular clock on bone remodeling. The results of
loss-of-function and gain-of-function experiments both indicated that the
rhythmic expression of Tnfrsf11b, which encodes osteoprotegerin (OPG), was
regulated by Bmal1 in MC3T3-E1 cells. We also showed that REV-ERBa negatively
regulated Tnfrsf11b as well as Bmal1 in MC3T3-E1 cells. We systematically
investigated the relationship between the sympathetic nervous system and the
circadian clock in osteoblasts. The administration of phenylephrine, a
nonspecific a1-adrenergic receptor (AR) agonist, stimulated the expression of
Tnfrsf11b, whereas the genetic ablation of a1B-AR signaling led to the alteration
of Tnfrsf11b expression concomitant with Bmal1 and Per2 in bone. Thus, this study
demonstrated that the circadian regulation of Tnfrsf11b was regulated by the
clock genes encoding REV-ERBa (Nr1d1) and Bmal1 (Bmal1, also known as Arntl),
which are components of the core loop of the circadian clock in osteoblasts.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4728343
PMID: 26453621  [PubMed]


15. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 9;10(10):e0139963. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139963.
eCollection 2015.

Alterations in Hepatic FGF21, Co-Regulated Genes, and Upstream Metabolic Genes in
Response to Nutrition, Ketosis and Inflammation in Peripartal Holstein Cows.

Akbar H(1), Batistel F(1), Drackley JK(1), Loor JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences and Division of Nutritional Sciences, University
of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, United States of America.

In rodents, fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) has emerged as a key metabolic
regulator produced by liver. To gather preliminary data on the potential
importance of FGF1, co-regulated genes, and upstream metabolic genes, we examined
the hepatic mRNA expression in response to nutrition and inflammation in dairy
cows. In experiment 1, induction of ketosis through feed restriction on d 5
postpartum upregulated FGF21, its co-receptor KLB, and PPARA but only elicited a 
numerical increase in serum FGF21 concentration. In experiment 2, cows in control
(CON) or receiving 50 g/d of L-carnitine (C50) from -14 through 21 d had
increased FGF21, PPARA, and NFIL3 on d 10 compared with d 2 postpartum. In
contrast, compared with CON and C50, 100 g/d L-carnitine (C100) resulted in lower
FGF21, KLB, ANGPTL4, and ARNTL expression on d 10. In experiment 3, cows were fed
during the dry period either a higher-energy (OVE; 1.62 Mcal/kg DM) or
lower-energy (CON; 1.34 Mcal/kg DM) diet and received 0 (OVE:N, CON:N) or 200 µg 
of LPS (OVE:Y, CON:Y) into the mammary gland at d 7 postpartum. For FGF21 mRNA
expression in CON, the LPS challenge (CON:Y) prevented a decrease in expression
between d 7 and 14 postpartum such that cows in CON:N had a 4-fold lower
expression on d 14 compared with d 7. The inflammatory stimulus induced by LPS in
CON:Y resulted in upregulation of PPARA on d 14 to a similar level as cows in
OVE:N. In OVE:Y, expression of PPARA was lower than CON:N on d 7 and remained
unchanged on d 14. On d 7, LPS led to a 4-fold greater serum FGF21 only in OVE
but not in CON cows. In fact, OVE:Y reached the same serum FGF21 concentration as
CON:N, suggesting a carryover effect of dietary energy level on signaling
mechanisms within liver. Overall, results indicate that nutrition, ketosis, and
inflammation during the peripartal period can alter hepatic FGF21, co-regulated
genes, and upstream metabolic genes to various extents. The functional outcome of
these changes merits further study, and in particular the mechanisms regulating
transcription in response to changes in energy balance and feed intake.

PMCID: PMC4599736
PMID: 26451842  [PubMed - in process]


16. Pharmacogenomics. 2015;16(14):1547-63. doi: 10.2217/pgs.15.106. Epub 2015 Sep 7.

A glutamatergic network mediates lithium response in bipolar disorder as defined 
by epigenome pathway analysis.

Higgins GA(1,)(2), Allyn-Feuer A(1), Barbour E(1), Athey BD(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (2)Pharmacogenomic Science,
Assurex Health, Inc., Mason, OH 45040, USA. (3)Department of Psychiatry,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

AIM: A regulatory network in the human brain mediating lithium response in
bipolar patients was revealed by analysis of functional SNPs from genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) and published gene association studies, followed by
epigenome mapping.
METHODS: An initial set of 23,312 SNPs in linkage disequilibrium with lead SNPs, 
and sub-threshold GWAS SNPs rescued by pathway analysis, were studied in the same
populations. These were assessed using our workflow and annotation by the
epigenome roadmap consortium.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven percent of 802 SNPs that were associated with lithium
response (13 published studies gene association studies and two GWAS) were shared
in common with 1281 SNPs from 18 GWAS examining psychiatric disorders and adverse
events associated with lithium treatment. Nineteen SNPs were annotated as active 
regulatory elements such as enhancers and promoters in a tissue-specific manner. 
They were located within noncoding regions of ten genes: ANK3, ARNTL, CACNA1C,
CACNG2, CDKN1A, CREB1, GRIA2, GSK3B, NR1D1 and SLC1A2. Following gene set
enrichment and pathway analysis, these genes were found to be significantly
associated (p = 10(-27); Fisher exact test) with an AMPA2 glutamate receptor
network in human brain. Our workflow results showed concordance with annotation
of regulatory elements from the epigenome roadmap. Analysis of cognate mRNA and
enhancer RNA exhibited patterns consistent with an integrated pathway in human
brain.
CONCLUSION: This pharmacoepigenomic regulatory pathway is located in the same
brain regions that exhibit tissue volume loss in bipolar disorder. Although in
silico analysis requires biological validation, the approach provides value for
identification of candidate variants that may be used in pharmacogenomic testing 
to identify bipolar patients likely to respond to lithium.

PMID: 26343379  [PubMed - in process]


17. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2015 Oct;22(10):759-66. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.3076. Epub 2015
Aug 31.

Histone monoubiquitination by Clock-Bmal1 complex marks Per1 and Per2 genes for
circadian feedback.

Tamayo AG(1), Duong HA(1), Robles MS(2), Mann M(2), Weitz CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA. (2)Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of
Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.

Circadian rhythms in mammals are driven by a feedback loop in which the
transcription factor Clock-Bmal1 activates expression of Per and Cry proteins,
which together form a large nuclear complex (Per complex) that represses
Clock-Bmal1 activity. We found that mouse Clock-Bmal1 recruits the Ddb1-Cullin-4 
ubiquitin ligase to Per (Per1 and Per2), Cry (Cry1 and Cry2) and other circadian 
target genes. Histone H2B monoubiquitination at Per genes was rhythmic and
depended on Bmal1, Ddb1 and Cullin-4a. Depletion of Ddb1-Cullin-4a or an
independent decrease in H2B monoubiquitination caused defective circadian
feedback and decreased the association of the Per complex with DNA-bound
Clock-Bmal1. Clock-Bmal1 thus covalently marks Per genes for subsequent
recruitment of the Per complex. Our results reveal a chromatin-mediated signal
from the positive to the negative limb of the clock that provides a licensing
mechanism for circadian feedback.

PMCID: PMC4600324
PMID: 26323038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 31;10(8):e0136379. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136379.
eCollection 2015.

Genetics of Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) in a Ghanaian Population.

White MJ(1), Kodaman NM(1), Harder RH(2), Asselbergs FW(3), Vaughan DE(4), Brown 
NJ(5), Moore JH(2), Williams SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics Research, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America; Department of Genetics and Institute of
Quantitative Biomedical Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire,
United States of America. (2)Department of Genetics and Institute of Quantitative
Biomedical Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire, United States of 
America. (3)Department Heart & Lungs, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Heidelberglaan 100, 3584CX, Utrecht, the Netherlands; Institute of Cardiovascular
Science, University College London, 222 Euston Road, London, United Kingdom;
Durrer Center for Cardiogenetic Research, ICIN-Netherlands Heart Institute,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University,
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(5)Department of Medicine Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, United
States of America.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1), a major modulator of the fibrinolytic 
system, is an important factor in cardiovascular disease (CVD) susceptibility and
severity. PAI-1 is highly heritable, but the few genes associated with it explain
only a small portion of its variation. Studies of PAI-1 typically employ linear
regression to estimate the effects of genetic variants on PAI-1 levels, but PAI-1
is not normally distributed, even after transformation. Therefore, alternative
statistical methods may provide greater power to identify important genetic
variants. Additionally, most genetic studies of PAI-1 have been performed on
populations of European descent, limiting the generalizability of their results. 
We analyzed >30,000 variants for association with PAI-1 in a Ghanaian population,
using median regression, a non-parametric alternative to linear regression. Three
variants associated with median PAI-1, the most significant of which was in the
gene arylsulfatase B (ARSB) (p = 1.09 x 10(-7)). We also analyzed the upper
quartile of PAI-1, the most clinically relevant part of the distribution, and
found 19 SNPs significantly associated in this quartile. Of note an association
was found in period circadian clock 3 (PER3). Our results reveal novel
associations with median and elevated PAI-1 in an understudied population. The
lack of overlap between the two analyses indicates that the genetic effects on
PAI-1 are not uniform across its distribution. They also provide evidence of the 
generalizability of the circadian pathway's effect on PAI-1, as a recent
meta-analysis performed in Caucasian populations identified another circadian
clock gene (ARNTL).

PMCID: PMC4556460
PMID: 26322636  [PubMed - in process]


19. J Affect Disord. 2015 Nov 1;186:367-75. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2015.07.014. Epub 2015
Jul 31.

Identification of circadian gene variants in bipolar disorder in Latino
populations.

Gonzalez R(1), Gonzalez S(2), Villa E(2), Ramirez M(2), Zavala J(2), Armas R(3), 
Contreras J(4), Dassori A(5), Leach RJ(6), Flores D(7), Jerez A(8), Raventós
H(4), Ontiveros A(9), Nicolini H(10), Escamilla M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Center of Excellence for Neurosciences, Paul L.
Foster School of Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, El Paso,
TX, USA. Electronic address: Robert99.Gonzalez@ttuhsc.edu. (2)Department of
Psychiatry and Center of Excellence for Neurosciences, Paul L. Foster School of
Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, El Paso, TX, USA.
(3)Langley Porter Psychiatric Institute, University of California at San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (4)Centro de Investigación en Biología Celular
y Molecular y Escuela de Biologia, Universidad de Costa Rica, San Jose, Costa
Rica. (5)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Health Science Center at
San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA; South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San
Antonio, TX, USA. (6)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, University of
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA. (7)Los Angeles 
Biomedical Research Center at Harbor, University of California Los Angeles
Medical Center, Torrance, CA, USA. (8)Centro Internacional de Trastornos
Afectivos y de la Conducta Adictiva, Guatemala, Guatemala. (9)Instituto de
Información e Investigación en Salud Mental AC, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
(10)Grupo de Estudios Médicos y Familiares Carracci, S.C., México, D.F., Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Variations in circadian genes can impact biological rhythms. Given
the rhythm disturbances that characterize bipolar disorder (BD), genes encoding
components of molecular clocks are good candidate genes for the illness.
METHODS: A family based association analysis of circadian gene single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) and BD was conducted in Latino pedigrees. 884 individuals
from 207 pedigrees (473BP phenotype and 411 unaffected family members) were
genotyped. Family based single marker association testing was performed.
Ancestral haplotypes (SNPs found to be in strong LD defined using confidence
intervals) were also tested for association with BD.
RESULTS: Multiple suggestive associations between circadian gene SNPs and BD were
noted. These included CSNK1E (rs1534891, p=0.00689), ARNTL (rs3789327,
p=0.021172), CSNK1D (rs4510078, p=0.022801), CLOCK (rs17777927, p=0.031664).
Individually, none of the SNPs were significantly associated with BD after
correction for multiple testing. However, a 4-locus CSNK1E haplotype encompassing
the rs1534891 SNP (Z-score=2.685, permuted p=0.0076) and a 3-locus haplotype in
ARNTL (Z-score=3.269, permuted p=0.0011) showed a significant association with
BD.
LIMITATIONS: Larger samples are required to confirm these findings and assess the
relationship between circadian gene SNPs and BD in Latinos.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that ARNTL and CSKN1E variants may be associated
with BD. Further studies are warranted to assess the relationships between these 
genes and BD in Latino populations.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26283580  [PubMed - in process]


20. Trends Biochem Sci. 2015 Sep;40(9):489-90. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2015.07.006. Epub 
2015 Aug 7.

Cytosolic BMAL1 moonlights as a translation factor.

Michael AK(1), Asimgil H(1), Partch CL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Santa
Cruz, CA 95064, USA. (2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of
California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA. Electronic address: cpartch@ucsc.edu.

Comment on
    Cell. 2015 May 21;161(5):1138-51.

It is widely recognized that BMAL1 is an essential subunit of the primary
transcription factor that drives rhythmic circadian transcription in the nucleus.
In a surprising turn, Lipton et al. now show that BMAL1 rhythmically interacts
with translational machinery in the cytosol to stimulate protein synthesis in
response to mTOR signaling.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4578652 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26256246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Toxicol Sci. 2015 Nov;148(1):183-91. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfv170. Epub 2015 Aug 6.

Ecstasy (MDMA) Alters Cardiac Gene Expression and DNA Methylation: Implications
for Circadian Rhythm Dysfunction in the Heart.

Koczor CA(1), Ludlow I(2), Hight RS 2nd(2), Jiao Z(2), Fields E(2), Ludaway T(2),
Russ R(2), Torres RA(2), Lewis W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322
ckoczor@emory.edu. (2)Department of Pathology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia
30322.

MDMA (ecstasy) is an illicit drug that stimulates monoamine neurotransmitter
release and inhibits reuptake. MDMA's acute cardiotoxicity includes tachycardia
and arrhythmia which are associated with cardiomyopathy. MDMA acute
cardiotoxicity has been explored, but neither long-term MDMA cardiac pathological
changes nor epigenetic changes have been evaluated. Microarray analyses were
employed to identify cardiac gene expression changes and epigenetic DNA
methylation changes. To identify permanent MDMA-induced pathogenetic changes,
mice received daily 10- or 35-day MDMA, or daily 10-day MDMA followed by 25-day
saline washout (10 + 25 days). MDMA treatment caused differential gene expression
(p <<U+2009>.05, fold change >1.5) in 752 genes following 10 days, 558 genes following
35 days, and 113 genes following 10-day MDMA + 25-day saline washout. Changes in 
MAPK and circadian rhythm gene expression were identified as early as 10 days.
After 35 days, circadian rhythm genes (Per3, CLOCK, ARNTL, and NPAS2) persisted
to be differentially expressed. MDMA caused DNA hypermethylation and
hypomethylation that was independent of gene expression; hypermethylation of
genes was found to be 71% at 10 days, 68% at 35 days, and 91% at 10 + 25 days
washout. Differential gene expression paralleled DNA methylation in 22% of genes 
at 10-day treatment, 17% at 35 days, and 48% at 10 + 25 days washout. We show
here that MDMA induced cardiac epigenetic changes in DNA methylation where
hypermethylation predominated. Moreover, MDMA induced gene expression of key
elements of circadian rhythm regulatory genes. This suggests a fundamental
organism-level event to explain some of the etiologies of MDMA dysfunction in the
heart.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4731408 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26251327  [PubMed - in process]


22. Nature. 2015 Aug 20;524(7565):303-8. doi: 10.1038/nature14883. Epub 2015 Aug 5.

Structural integration in hypoxia-inducible factors.

Wu D(1), Potluri N(1), Lu J(1), Kim Y(2), Rastinejad F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Disease Program, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute,
Orlando, Florida 32827, USA. (2)Structural Biology Center, Biosciences Division, 
Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2015 Aug 20;524(7565):298-300.

The hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) coordinate cellular adaptations to low
oxygen stress by regulating transcriptional programs in erythropoiesis,
angiogenesis and metabolism. These programs promote the growth and progression of
many tumours, making HIFs attractive anticancer targets. Transcriptionally active
HIFs consist of HIF-a and ARNT (also called HIF-1ß) subunits. Here we describe
crystal structures for each of mouse HIF-2a-ARNT and HIF-1a-ARNT heterodimers in 
states that include bound small molecules and their hypoxia response element. A
highly integrated quaternary architecture is shared by HIF-2a-ARNT and
HIF-1a-ARNT, wherein ARNT spirals around the outside of each HIF-a subunit. Five 
distinct pockets are observed that permit small-molecule binding, including PAS
domain encapsulated sites and an interfacial cavity formed through subunit
heterodimerization. The DNA-reading head rotates, extends and cooperates with a
distal PAS domain to bind hypoxia response elements. HIF-a mutations linked to
human cancers map to sensitive sites that establish DNA binding and the stability
of PAS domains and pockets.

PMID: 26245371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Aug 28;464(3):826-32. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.07.046. Epub 2015 Jul 15.

FTO modulates circadian rhythms and inhibits the CLOCK-BMAL1-induced
transcription.

Wang CY(1), Shie SS(2), Hsieh IC(3), Tsai ML(3), Wen MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung
University College of Medicine, Taiwan. Electronic address: cwang@ocean.ag.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung
University College of Medicine, Taiwan. (3)Department of Cardiology, Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Taiwan.

Variations in the human fat mass and obesity-associated gene, which encodes FTO, 
an 2-oxoglutarate-dependent nucleic acid demethylase, are associated with
increased risk of obesity. These FTO variations were recently shown to affect
IRX3 and the exact function of FTO is still controversial. Obesity is closely
linked to circadian rhythm. To understand the role of FTO in circadian rhythm, we
analyzed the circadian rhythm of FTO deficient mice. FTO deficient mice had
robust circadian locomotor activity rhythms with prolonged periods. The
light-induced phase shifts of circadian rhythms were also significantly affected 
in FTO deficient mice. Tissue explants of FTO deficient mice maintained robust
peripheral rhythms with prolonged period. Overexpress of FTO represses the
transcriptional activation by CLOCK and BMAL1. Core clock genes expression of
mRNA and protein were also altered in FTO deficient mice. Furthermore, FTO
co-immunoprecipitated with CRY1/2 in a circadian manner. These results indicate a
fundamental link between the circadian rhythm and FTO and extend the function of 
FTO to the core clockwork machinery.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26188089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Sep;100(9):E1255-61. doi: 10.1210/JC.2015-2284.
Epub 2015 Jul 13.

Acute Sleep Loss Induces Tissue-Specific Epigenetic and Transcriptional
Alterations to Circadian Clock Genes in Men.

Cedernaes J(1), Osler ME(1), Voisin S(1), Broman JE(1), Vogel H(1), Dickson
SL(1), Zierath JR(1), Schiöth HB(1), Benedict C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience (J.C., S.V., J.E.B., H.B.S., C.B.), Uppsala
University, 751 24 Uppsala, Sweden; Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery 
(M.E.O., J.R.Z.), Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden; Department of 
Experimental Diabetology (H.V.), German Institute of Human Nutrition
Potsdam-Rehbruecke, 14558 Nuthetal, Germany; and Department of Physiology,
Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology (H.V., S.L.D.), The Sahlgrenska Academy 
at the University of Gothenburg, 411 37 Gothenburg, Sweden.

CONTEXT: Shift workers are at increased risk of metabolic morbidities. Clock
genes are known to regulate metabolic processes in peripheral tissues, eg,
glucose oxidation.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate how clock genes are affected at the
epigenetic and transcriptional level in peripheral human tissues following acute 
total sleep deprivation (TSD), mimicking shift work with extended wakefulness.
INTERVENTION: In a randomized, two-period, two-condition, crossover clinical
study, 15 healthy men underwent two experimental sessions: x sleep (2230-0700 h) 
and overnight wakefulness. On the subsequent morning, serum cortisol was
measured, followed by skeletal muscle and subcutaneous adipose tissue biopsies
for DNA methylation and gene expression analyses of core clock genes (BMAL1,
CLOCK, CRY1, PER1). Finally, baseline and 2-h post-oral glucose load plasma
glucose concentrations were determined.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: In adipose tissue, acute sleep deprivation vs sleep
increased methylation in the promoter of CRY1 (+4%; P = .026) and in two
promoter-interacting enhancer regions of PER1 (+15%; P = .036; +9%; P = .026). In
skeletal muscle, TSD vs sleep decreased gene expression of BMAL1 (-18%; P = .033)
and CRY1 (-22%; P = .047). Concentrations of serum cortisol, which can reset
peripheral tissue clocks, were decreased (2449 ± 932 vs 3178 ± 723 nmol/L; P =
.039), whereas postprandial plasma glucose concentrations were elevated after TSD
(7.77 ± 1.63 vs 6.59 ± 1.32 mmol/L; P = .011).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that a single night of wakefulness can
alter the epigenetic and transcriptional profile of core circadian clock genes in
key metabolic tissues. Tissue-specific clock alterations could explain why shift 
work may disrupt metabolic integrity as observed herein.

PMID: 26168277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Oct;1853(10 Pt A):2697-708. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.07.005. Epub 2015 Jul 9.

Sumoylation controls CLOCK-BMAL1-mediated clock resetting via CBP recruitment in 
nuclear transcriptional foci.

Lee Y(1), Chun SK(2), Kim K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences and School of Biological Sciences, 
College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic
of Korea; Department of Pharmacology and the Institute for Translational Medicine
and Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States. (2)Department of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences and School of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul
National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea; Department of Brain and
Cognitive Sciences, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), 
Daegu 711-583, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
and School of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea; Department of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), Daegu
711-583, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: kyungjin@dgist.ac.kr.

CLOCK-BMAL1 is a key transcription factor complex of the molecular clock system
that generates circadian gene expression and physiology in mammals. Here, we
demonstrate that sumoylation of BMAL1 mediates the rapid activation of
CLOCK-BMAL1 by CREB-binding protein (CBP) in nuclear foci and also the resetting 
of the circadian clock. Under physiological conditions, a bimolecular
fluorescence complementation-based fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(BiFC-FRET) assay revealed that CLOCK-BMAL1 rapidly dimerized and formed a
ternary complex with CBP in discrete nuclear foci in response to serum stimuli.
We found that the formation of this ternary complex requires sumoylation of BMAL1
by SUMO3. These processes were abolished by both the ectopic expression of the
SUMP2/3-specific protease, SUSP1, and mutation of the major sumoylation site
(Lys259) of BMAL1. Moreover, molecular inhibition of BMAL1 sumoylation abrogated 
acute Per1 transcription and severely dampened the circadian gene oscillation
triggered by clock synchronization stimuli. Taken together, these findings
suggest that sumoylation plays a critical role in the spatiotemporal
co-activation of CLOCK-BMAL1 by CBP for immediate-early Per induction and the
resetting of the circadian clock.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26164627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Chronobiol Int. 2015;32(6):785-91. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2015.1049613. Epub 2015 
Jul 2.

Association of CLOCK, ARNTL, and NPAS2 gene polymorphisms and seasonal variations
in mood and behavior.

Kim HI(1), Lee HJ, Cho CH, Kang SG, Yoon HK, Park YM, Lee SH, Moon JH, Song HM,
Lee E, Kim L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Korea University College of Medicine , Seoul , Korea
.

Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) is a condition of seasonal mood changes
characterized by recurrent depression in autumn or winter that spontaneously
remits in spring or summer. Evidence has suggested that circadian gene variants
contribute to the pathogenesis of SAD. In this study, we investigated
polymorphisms in the CLOCK, ARNTL, and NPAS2 genes in relation to seasonal
variation in 507 healthy young adults. Seasonal variations were assessed with the
Seasonality Pattern Assessment Questionnaire. The prevalence of SAD was 12.0%
(winter-type 9.3%, summer-type 2.8%). No significant difference was found between
the groups in the genotype distribution of ARNTL rs2278749 and NPAS2 rs2305160.
The T allele of CLOCK rs1801260 was significantly more frequent in seasonals
(SAD<U+2009>+<U+2009>subsyndromal SAD) compared with non-seasonals (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.020, odds
ratio<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.89, 95% confidence interval<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.09-3.27). Global seasonality score was 
significantly different among genotypes of CLOCK rs1801260, but not among
genotypes of ARNTL rs2278749 and NPAS2 rs2305160. However, statistical difference
was observed in the body weight and appetite subscales among genotypes of ARNTL
rs2278749 and in the body weight subscale among genotypes of NPAS2 rs2305160.
There was synergistic interaction between CLOCK rs1801260 and ARNTL rs2278749 on 
seasonality. To our knowledge, this study is the first to reveal an association
between the CLOCK gene and seasonal variations in mood and behavior in the Korean
population. Although we cannot confirm previous findings of an association
between SAD and the ARNTL and NPAS2 genes, these genes may influence seasonal
variations through metabolic factors such as body weight and appetite. The
interaction of the CLOCK and ARNTL genes contributes to susceptibility for SAD.

PMID: 26134245  [PubMed - in process]


27. FASEB J. 2015 Oct;29(10):4248-55. doi: 10.1096/fj.15-275339. Epub 2015 Jun 23.

Circadian timing in central and peripheral tissues in a migratory songbird:
dependence on annual life-history states.

Singh D(1), Trivedi AK(1), Rani S(1), Panda S(1), Kumar V(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Science and Technology-Intensification of Research in High
Priority Areas Center for Excellence in Biological Rhythms Research and Indo-U.S.
Center for Biological Timing, Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi, 
India; Department of Zoology, University of Lucknow, Lucknow, India; and
Regulatory Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California, USA. (2)*Department of Science and Technology-Intensification of
Research in High Priority Areas Center for Excellence in Biological Rhythms
Research and Indo-U.S. Center for Biological Timing, Department of Zoology,
University of Delhi, Delhi, India; Department of Zoology, University of Lucknow, 
Lucknow, India; and Regulatory Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological 
Studies, La Jolla, California, USA drvkumar11@yahoo.com.

Predictable seasonal change in photoperiod triggers a sequential change in the
daily activity-rest pattern, adaptive for migration in several bird species. The 
night-migratory black-headed bunting (Emberiza melanocephala) is day active under
short photoperiods (8 h light:16 h dark, short day sensitive). Under long
photoperiods (16 h light:8 h dark), the buntings are initially day active (long
day premigratory) but subsequently become intensely night active (long day
migratory) and after few weeks again return to a day active pattern (long day
refractory). However, it is unclear how the daily expression of circadian genes
changes during photoperiod-induced seasonal life-history states (LHSs). We
measured period 2 (Per2), cryptochrome 1 (Cry1), brain and muscle arnt-like
protein 1 (Bmal1), and circadian locomotor output cycles kaput (Clock) mRNA
expressions in various neural and peripheral tissues of buntings in different
LHSs and discovered differences of ~2 to 6 h in the phase and 2- to 4-fold in
amplitude of circadian oscillations of Per2, Cry1, and Bmal1 between
photoperiod-induced LHSs. Phase relationship in mRNA oscillations was altered
between oscillator components in the circadian pacemaker system (retina, pineal, 
hypothalamus) as well as in the peripheral (liver, muscle) tissues. These results
show for the first time altered waveforms of clock gene expressions in all
tissues in parallel with behavioral shifts and suggest the involvement of
circadian system in photoperiod induction of seasonal LHSs in a migratory
species.

© FASEB.

PMID: 26103987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Neurosci. 2015 Jun 3;35(22):8662-71. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0250-15.2015.

Circadian Activators Are Expressed Days before They Initiate Clock Function in
Late Pacemaker Neurons from Drosophila.

Liu T(1), Mahesh G(1), Houl JH(1), Hardin PE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Biological Clocks Research, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas 77845-3258. (2)Department of Biology and
Center for Biological Clocks Research, Texas A&M University, College Station,
Texas 77845-3258 phardin@bio.tamu.edu.

Circadian pacemaker neurons in the Drosophila brain control daily rhythms in
locomotor activity. These pacemaker neurons can be subdivided into early or late 
groups depending on whether rhythms in period (per) and timeless (tim) expression
are initiated at the first instar (L1) larval stage or during metamorphosis,
respectively. Because CLOCK-CYCLE (CLK-CYC) heterodimers initiate circadian
oscillator function by activating per and tim transcription, a Clk-GFP transgene 
was used to mark when late pacemaker neurons begin to develop. We were surprised 
to see that CLK-GFP was already expressed in four of five clusters of late
pacemaker neurons during the third instar (L3) larval stage. CLK-GFP is only
detected in postmitotic neurons from L3 larvae, suggesting that these four late
pacemaker neuron clusters are formed before the L3 larval stage. A GFP-cyc
transgene was used to show that CYC, like CLK, is also expressed exclusively in
pacemaker neurons from L3 larval brains, demonstrating that CLK-CYC is not
sufficient to activate per and tim in late pacemaker neurons at the L3 larval
stage. These results suggest that most late pacemaker neurons develop days before
novel factors activate circadian oscillator function during metamorphosis.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/358662-10$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4452561
PMID: 26041931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jul;16(7):390. doi: 10.1038/nrm4008. Epub 2015 Jun 3.

Circadian rhythms: Translating the clock.

Zlotorynski E.

Comment on
    Cell. 2015 May 21;161(5):1138-51.

PMID: 26038274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2015 Jun;22(6):435-6. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.3039.

Grab the wiggly tail: new insights into the dynamics of circadian clocks.

Hui KY(1), Ripperger JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Biology, Unit of Biochemistry, University of Fribourg, Fribourg,
Switzerland.

Comment on
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2015 Jun;22(6):476-84.

PMID: 26036566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Curr Biol. 2015 Jun 1;25(11):1502-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.04.017. Epub 2015
May 21.

Transcriptional regulation via nuclear receptor crosstalk required for the
Drosophila circadian clock.

Jaumouillé E(1), Machado Almeida P(2), Stähli P(3), Koch R(2), Nagoshi E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 4, 3012 Bern,
Switzerland; Department of Genetics and Evolution, Sciences III, University of
Geneva, 30 Quai Ernest-Ansermet, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. (2)Department of
Genetics and Evolution, Sciences III, University of Geneva, 30 Quai
Ernest-Ansermet, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. (3)Institute of Cell Biology,
University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 4, 3012 Bern, Switzerland. (4)Department of
Genetics and Evolution, Sciences III, University of Geneva, 30 Quai
Ernest-Ansermet, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland; PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology
Agency, 4-1-8 Honcho Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan. Electronic address:
emi.nagoshi@unige.ch.

Circadian clocks in large part rely on transcriptional feedback loops. At the
core of the clock machinery, the transcriptional activators CLOCK/BMAL1 (in
mammals) and CLOCK/CYCLE (CLK/CYC) (in Drosophila) drive the expression of the
period (per) family genes. The PER-containing complexes inhibit the activity of
CLOCK/BMAL1 or CLK/CYC, thereby forming a negative feedback loop [1]. In mammals,
the ROR and REV-ERB family nuclear receptors add positive and negative
transcriptional regulation to this core negative feedback loop to ensure
the generation of robust circadian molecular oscillation [2]. Despite the overall
similarities between mammalian and Drosophila clocks, whether comparable
mechanisms via nuclear receptors are required for the Drosophila clock remains
unknown. We show here that the nuclear receptor E75, the fly homolog of REV-ERB a
and REV-ERB ß, and the NR2E3 subfamily nuclear receptor UNF are components of the
molecular clocks in the Drosophila pacemaker neurons. In vivo assays in
conjunction with the in vitro experiments demonstrate that E75 and UNF bind
to per regulatory sequences and act together to enhance the CLK/CYC-mediated
transcription of the per gene, thereby completing the core transcriptional
feedback loop necessary for the free-running clockwork. Our results identify a
missing link in the Drosophila clock and highlight the significance of the
transcriptional regulation via nuclear receptors in metazoan circadian clocks.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4454776
PMID: 26004759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jun 9;112(23):7231-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1501327112. Epub 2015 May 20.

Circadian control of innate immunity in macrophages by miR-155 targeting Bmal1.

Curtis AM(1), Fagundes CT(2), Yang G(3), Palsson-McDermott EM(2), Wochal P(2),
McGettrick AF(2), Foley NH(2), Early JO(2), Chen L(3), Zhang H(4), Xue C(4),
Geiger SS(2), Hokamp K(5), Reilly MP(4), Coogan AN(6), Vigorito E(7), FitzGerald 
GA(8), O'Neill LA(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, 
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland; acurtis@tcd.ie garret@upenn.edu.
(2)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, 
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland; (3)Institute for Translational
Medicine and Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104; (4)The Cardiovascular Institute, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104;
(5)Department of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland;
(6)Department of Psychology, National University of Ireland, Maynooth, Ireland;
(7)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Signaling and Development, Babraham Institute,
Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, CB22 3AT, United Kingdom.
(8)Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104; acurtis@tcd.ie
garret@upenn.edu.

The response to an innate immune challenge is conditioned by the time of day, but
the molecular basis for this remains unclear. In myeloid cells, there is a
temporal regulation to induction by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) of the
proinflammatory microRNA miR-155 that correlates inversely with levels of BMAL1. 
BMAL1 in the myeloid lineage inhibits activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and miR-155 induction
and protects mice from LPS-induced sepsis. Bmal1 has two miR-155-binding sites in
its 3'-UTR, and, in response to LPS, miR-155 binds to these two target sites,
leading to suppression of Bmal1 mRNA and protein in mice and humans. miR-155
deletion perturbs circadian function, gives rise to a shorter circadian day, and 
ablates the circadian effect on cytokine responses to LPS. Thus, the molecular
clock controls miR-155 induction that can repress BMAL1 directly. This leads to
an innate immune response that is variably responsive to challenges across the
circadian day.

PMCID: PMC4466714
PMID: 25995365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Sci Rep. 2015 May 19;5:10232. doi: 10.1038/srep10232.

Genetic association study of circadian genes with seasonal pattern in bipolar
disorders.

Geoffroy PA(1), Lajnef M(2), Bellivier F(1), Jamain S(3), Gard S(4), Kahn JP(5), 
Henry C(6), Leboyer M(6), Etain B(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Inserm, U1144, Paris, F-75006, France [2] AP-HP, GH Saint-Louis -
Lariboisière - Fernand Widal, Pôle Neurosciences, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France
[3] Université Paris Descartes, UMR-S 1144, Paris, F-75006, France [4] Fondation 
FondaMental, Créteil, 94000, France. (2)1] Fondation FondaMental, Créteil, 94000,
France [2] INSERM, U955, Psychiatrie génétique, Créteil, 94000, France [3] AP-HP,
Hôpitaux Universitaires Albert Chenevier-Henri Mondor , DHU PePSY, Pôle de
Psychiatrie, Créteil, 94000, France. (3)1] Fondation FondaMental, Créteil, 94000,
France [2] INSERM, U955, Psychiatrie génétique, Créteil, 94000, France [3]
Université Paris Est, Faculté de médecine, Créteil, 94000, France. (4)1]
Fondation FondaMental, Créteil, 94000, France [2] Hôpital Charles Perrens, Centre
Expert Trouble Bipolaire, Service de psychiatrie adulte, Pôle 3-4-7, Bordeaux,
33000, France. (5)1] Fondation FondaMental, Créteil, 94000, France [2] Service de
Psychiatrie et Psychologie Clinique, CHU de Nancy, Hôpitaux de Brabois,
Vandoeuvre Les Nancy, 54500, France. (6)1] Fondation FondaMental, Créteil, 94000,
France [2] INSERM, U955, Psychiatrie génétique, Créteil, 94000, France [3] AP-HP,
Hôpitaux Universitaires Albert Chenevier-Henri Mondor , DHU PePSY, Pôle de
Psychiatrie, Créteil, 94000, France [4] Université Paris Est, Faculté de
médecine, Créteil, 94000, France.

About one fourth of patients with bipolar disorders (BD) have depressive episodes
with a seasonal pattern (SP) coupled to a more severe disease. However, the
underlying genetic influence on a SP in BD remains to be identified. We studied
269 BD Caucasian patients, with and without SP, recruited from
university-affiliated psychiatric departments in France and performed a genetic
single-marker analysis followed by a gene-based analysis on 349 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning 21 circadian genes and 3 melatonin pathway genes. A
SP in BD was nominally associated with 14 SNPs identified in 6 circadian genes:
NPAS2, CRY2, ARNTL, ARNTL2, RORA and RORB. After correcting for multiple testing,
using a false discovery rate approach, the associations remained significant for 
5 SNPs in NPAS2 (chromosome 2:100793045-100989719): rs6738097 (pc<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006),
rs12622050 (pc<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006), rs2305159 (pc<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01), rs1542179 (pc<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01), and
rs1562313 (pc<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02). The gene-based analysis of the 349 SNPs showed that
rs6738097 (NPAS2) and rs1554338 (CRY2) were significantly associated with the SP 
phenotype (respective Empirical p-values of 0.0003 and 0.005). The associations
remained significant for rs6738097 (NPAS2) after Bonferroni correction. The
epistasis analysis between rs6738097 (NPAS2) and rs1554338 (CRY2) suggested an
additive effect. Genetic variations in NPAS2 might be a biomarker for a seasonal 
pattern in BD.

PMCID: PMC4437291
PMID: 25989161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cell. 2015 May 21;161(5):1138-51. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.04.002. Epub 2015 May 
14.

The Circadian Protein BMAL1 Regulates Translation in Response to S6K1-Mediated
Phosphorylation.

Lipton JO(1), Yuan ED(2), Boyle LM(2), Ebrahimi-Fakhari D(2), Kwiatkowski E(2),
Nathan A(2), Güttler T(3), Davis F(4), Asara JM(5), Sahin M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Kirby Neurobiology Center, Children's Hospital,
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Division of Sleep Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Department of Neurology, Kirby Neurobiology Center,
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Department of Cell Biology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (4)Department of Biology,
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (5)Department of Medicine,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Division of Signal Transduction,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (6)Department of
Neurology, Kirby Neurobiology Center, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
Electronic address: mustafa.sahin@childrens.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jul;16(7):390.
    Trends Biochem Sci. 2015 Sep;40(9):489-90.

The circadian timing system synchronizes cellular function by coordinating
rhythmic transcription via a transcription-translational feedback loop. How the
circadian system regulates gene expression at the translational level remains a
mystery. Here, we show that the key circadian transcription factor BMAL1
associates with the translational machinery in the cytosol and promotes protein
synthesis. The mTOR-effector kinase, ribosomal S6 protein kinase 1 (S6K1), an
important regulator of translation, rhythmically phosphorylates BMAL1 at an
evolutionarily conserved site. S6K1-mediated phosphorylation is critical for
BMAL1 to both associate with the translational machinery and stimulate protein
synthesis. Protein synthesis rates demonstrate circadian oscillations dependent
on BMAL1. Thus, in addition to its critical role in circadian transcription,
BMAL1 is a translation factor that links circadian timing and the mTOR signaling 
pathway. More broadly, these results expand the role of the circadian clock to
the regulation of protein synthesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4447213 [Available on 2016-05-21]
PMID: 25981667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2015 Jun;22(6):476-84. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.3018. Epub 2015 May
11.

Cryptochrome 1 regulates the circadian clock through dynamic interactions with
the BMAL1 C terminus.

Xu H(1), Gustafson CL(2), Sammons PJ(2), Khan SK(3), Parsley NC(2), Ramanathan
C(3), Lee HW(2), Liu AC(1), Partch CL(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biological Sciences, University of Memphis, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA. [2] Feinstone Center for Genomic Research, University of Memphis,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA. (2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University 
of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California, USA. (3)Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee, USA. (4)1]
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Santa Cruz,
Santa Cruz, California, USA. [2] Center for Circadian Biology, University of
California, San Diego, San Diego, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2015 Jun;22(6):435-6.

The molecular circadian clock in mammals is generated from transcriptional
activation by the bHLH-PAS transcription factor CLOCK-BMAL1 and subsequent
repression by PERIOD and CRYPTOCHROME (CRY). The mechanism by which CRYs repress 
CLOCK-BMAL1 to close the negative feedback loop and generate 24-h timing is not
known. Here we show that, in mouse fibroblasts, CRY1 competes for binding with
coactivators to the intrinsically unstructured C-terminal transactivation domain 
(TAD) of BMAL1 to establish a functional switch between activation and repression
of CLOCK-BMAL1. TAD mutations that alter affinities for co-regulators affect the 
balance of repression and activation to consequently change the intrinsic
circadian period or eliminate cycling altogether. Our results suggest that CRY1
fulfills its role as an essential circadian repressor by sequestering the TAD
from coactivators, and they highlight regulation of the BMAL1 TAD as a critical
mechanism for establishing circadian timing.

PMCID: PMC4456216
PMID: 25961797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 Jun 8;54(24):7193-7. doi: 10.1002/anie.201502942.
Epub 2015 May 8.

C-H activation generates period-shortening molecules that target cryptochrome in 
the mammalian circadian clock.

Oshima T(1,)(2), Yamanaka I(1), Kumar A(1), Yamaguchi J(1,)(2), Nishiwaki-Ohkawa 
T(1,)(3), Muto K(1,)(2), Kawamura R(1,)(3), Hirota T(1,)(4), Yagita K(5), Irle
S(6,)(7), Kay SA(1,)(8), Yoshimura T(9,)(10,)(11), Itami K(12,)(13,)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Transformative Bio-Molecules (WPI-ITbM), Nagoya University,
Chikusa, Nagoya, 464-8601 (Japan). (2)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of
Science, Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya, 464-8602 (Japan). (3)Graduate School
of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya, 464-8601
(Japan). (4)JST, PRESTO, Chikusa, Nagoya, 464-8602 (Japan). (5)Department of
Physiology and Systems Bioscience, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Kyoto 602-8566 (Japan). (6)Institute of Transformative Bio-Molecules (WPI-ITbM), 
Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya, 464-8601 (Japan). sirle@chem.nagoya-u.ac.jp. 
(7)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Chikusa, Nagoya, 464-8602 (Japan). sirle@chem.nagoya-u.ac.jp. (8)Dornsife College
of Letters, Arts and Sciences, University of Southern California, 3430 S. Vermont
Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90089-3301 (USA). (9)Institute of Transformative
Bio-Molecules (WPI-ITbM), Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya, 464-8601 (Japan).
takashiy@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp. (10)Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences,
Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya, 464-8601 (Japan).
takashiy@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp. (11)National Institute for Basic Biology,
Myodaiji-cho, Okazaki 444-8585 (Japan). takashiy@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp.
(12)Institute of Transformative Bio-Molecules (WPI-ITbM), Nagoya University,
Chikusa, Nagoya, 464-8601 (Japan). itami@chem.nagoya-u.ac.jp. (13)Department of
Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya,
464-8602 (Japan). itami@chem.nagoya-u.ac.jp. (14)JST, ERATO, Itami Molecular
Nanocarbon Project, Chikusa, Nagoya, 464-8602 (Japan). itami@chem.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

The synthesis and functional analysis of KL001 derivatives, which are modulators 
of the mammalian circadian clock, are described. By using cutting-edge C-H
activation chemistry, a focused library of KL001 derivatives was rapidly
constructed, which enabled the identification of the critical sites on KL001
derivatives that induce a rhythm-changing activity along with the components that
trigger opposite modes of action. The first period-shortening molecules that
target the cryptochrome (CRY) were thus discovered. Detailed studies on the
effects of these compounds on CRY stability implicate the existence of an as yet 
undiscovered regulatory mechanism.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25960183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Brain Dev. 2016 Jan;38(1):91-9. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2015.04.006. Epub 2015
May 6.

Circadian-relevant genes are highly polymorphic in autism spectrum disorder
patients.

Yang Z(1), Matsumoto A(1), Nakayama K(2), Jimbo EF(1), Kojima K(1), Nagata K(3), 
Iwamoto S(2), Yamagata T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi,
Japan. (2)Division of Human Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi
Medical University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan. (3)Department of Molecular
Neurobiology, Institute for Developmental Research, Aichi Human Service Center,
Kasugai, Aichi, Japan. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Jichi Medical University,
Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan. Electronic address: takanori@jichi.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The genetic background of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is
considered a multi-genetic disorder with high heritability. Autistic children
present with a higher prevalence of sleep disorders than has been observed in
children with normal development. Some circadian-relevant genes have been
associated with ASD (e.g., PER1, PER2, NPAS2, MTNR1A, and MTNR1B).
METHODS: We analyzed 28 ASD patients (14 with sleep disorders and 14 without) and
23 control subjects of Japanese descent. The coding regions of 18 canonical clock
genes and clock-controlled genes were sequenced. Detected mutations were verified
by direct sequencing analysis, and additional control individuals were screened.
RESULTS: Thirty-six base changes with amino acid changes were detected in 11
genes. Six missense changes were detected only in individuals with ASD with sleep
disturbance: p.F498S in TIMELESS, p.S20R in NR1D1, p.R493C in PER3, p.H542R in
CLOCK, p.L473S in ARNTL2, and p.A325V in MTNR1B. Six missense changes were
detected only in individuals with ASD without sleep disturbance: p.S1241N in
PER1, p.A325T in TIMELESS, p.S13T in ARNTL, p.G24E in MTNR1B, p.G24E in PER2, and
p.T1177A in PER3. The p.R493C mutation in PER3 was detected in both groups. One
missense change, p.P932L in PER2, was detected only in the control group.
Mutations in NR1D1, CLOCK, and ARNTL2 were detected only in individuals with ASD 
with sleep disorder. The prevalence of the mutations detected only single time
differed significantly among all ASD patients and controls (p=0.003). Two kinds
of mutations detected only in individuals with ASD with sleep disorder, p.F498S
in TIMELESS and p.R366Q in PER3, were considered to affect gene function by three
different methods: PolyPhen-2, scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT)
prediction, and Mutation Taster (www.mutationtaster.org). The mutations p.S20R in
NR1D1, p.H542R in CLOCK, p.L473S in ARNTL2, p.A325T in TIMELESS, p.S13T in ARNTL,
and p.G24E in PER2 were diagnosed to negatively affect gene function by more than
one of these methods.
CONCLUSION: Mutations in circadian-relevant genes affecting gene function are
more frequent in patients with ASD than in controls. Circadian-relevant genes may
be involved in the psychopathology of ASD.

Copyright © 2015 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25957987  [PubMed - in process]


38. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jul 3;462(3):239-44. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.04.123. Epub 2015 May 6.

2,2,2-Trichloroethanol lengthens the circadian period of Bmal1-driven circadian
bioluminescence rhythms in U2OS cells.

Gao J(1), Yang C(1), Ding H(1), Zhang Y(1), Xue J(1), Cai Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University, Key
Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Ministry of Education,
Parkinson's Disease Center of Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Beijing
100053, PR China. (2)Department of Neurobiology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital
Medical University, Key Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Ministry
of Education, Parkinson's Disease Center of Beijing Institute for Brain
Disorders, Beijing 100053, PR China. Electronic address: Yanningcai@yahoo.com.

2,2,2-Trichloroethanol (TCOH) is responsible for the pharmacological actions of
chloral hydrate (CH), and is a major metabolite of trichloroethylene. Human
exposure to TCOH is known to be increasing. Recently, it was reported that TCOH
causes a significant phase delay of Per2 expression in mouse liver when injected 
daily over the course of several days. However, it is not clear whether TCOH
directly modulates the molecular clock. In the present study we used a cell-based
assay system to test this possibility. We found that the daily oscillation period
of Bmal1 was lengthened to 3 h following treatment with 1.5 mM TCOH, and
increased to 5 h with 3 mM TCOH treatment. However, low concentrations of TCOH
had no noticeable effects. The effect of TCOH on Per2 oscillation was marginal.
Interestingly, serum from rats anesthetized with CH also modulated Bmal1 period, 
suggesting that exposure to anesthesia should be taken into consideration for
circadian rhythm studies. In summary, our study reveals a direct regulation of
TCOH on molecular clock.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25956065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cell. 2015 Jun 4;58(5):743-54. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.03.031. Epub 2015
Apr 30.

Cancer/Testis Antigen PASD1 Silences the Circadian Clock.

Michael AK(1), Harvey SL(1), Sammons PJ(1), Anderson AP(2), Kopalle HM(1), Banham
AH(2), Partch CL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Santa
Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA. (2)Nuffield Division of Clinical Laboratory
Sciences, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU,
UK. (3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Santa 
Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA; Center for Circadian Biology, University of
California, San Diego, San Diego, CA 92093, USA. Electronic address:
cpartch@ucsc.edu.

The circadian clock orchestrates global changes in transcriptional regulation on 
a daily basis via the bHLH-PAS transcription factor CLOCK:BMAL1. Pathways driven 
by other bHLH-PAS transcription factors have a homologous repressor that
modulates activity on a tissue-specific basis, but none have been identified for 
CLOCK:BMAL1. We show here that the cancer/testis antigen PASD1 fulfills this role
to suppress circadian rhythms. PASD1 is evolutionarily related to CLOCK and
interacts with the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex to repress transcriptional activation.
Expression of PASD1 is restricted to germline tissues in healthy individuals but 
can be induced in cells of somatic origin upon oncogenic transformation. Reducing
PASD1 in human cancer cells significantly increases the amplitude of
transcriptional oscillations to generate more robust circadian rhythms. Our
results describe a function for a germline-specific protein in regulation of the 
circadian clock and provide a molecular link from oncogenic transformation to
suppression of circadian rhythms.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4458219 [Available on 2016-06-04]
PMID: 25936801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Dairy Sci. 2015 Jul;98(7):4601-12. doi: 10.3168/jds.2015-9430. Epub 2015 Apr
23.

Clock circadian regulator (CLOCK) gene network expression patterns in bovine
adipose, liver, and mammary gland at 3 time points during the transition from
pregnancy into lactation.

Wang M(1), Zhou Z(2), Khan MJ(2), Gao J(3), Loor JJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou
225009, Jiangsu Province, P. R. China; Mammalian NutriPhysioGenomics, Department 
of Animal Sciences and Division of Nutritional Sciences, University of Illinois, 
Urbana 61801. (2)Mammalian NutriPhysioGenomics, Department of Animal Sciences and
Division of Nutritional Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana 61801.
(3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou
225009, Jiangsu Province, P. R. China. (4)Mammalian NutriPhysioGenomics,
Department of Animal Sciences and Division of Nutritional Sciences, University of
Illinois, Urbana 61801. Electronic address: jloor@illinois.edu.

The transition from late gestation to early lactation is the most critical phase 
of the lactation cycle for mammals. Research in rodents has revealed changes in
the clock circadian regulator (CLOCK) gene network expression around parturition.
However, their expression profiles and putative functions during the
periparturient period in ruminants remain to be determined. The present study
aimed to investigate the expression pattern of the CLOCK network and selected
metabolic genes simultaneously in mammary gland (MG), liver (LIV), and
subcutaneous adipose tissue (AT). Seven dairy cows were biopsied at -10 (±2), 7, 
and 21 d relative to parturition. A day × tissue interaction was observed for
ARNTL, CRY1, and PER2 due to upregulation at 7 and 21 d postpartum, with their
expression being greater in AT and MG compared with LIV. No interaction was
detected for CLOCK, CRY2, PER1, and PER3. In general, the expression of NPAS2,
NR1D1, NR2F2, ALAS1, FECH, FBXW11, CCRN4L, PPARA, PPARGC1A, and FGF21 was lower
at -10 d but increased postpartum in all tissues. The interaction detected for
CSNK1D was associated with increased expression postpartum in AT and MG but not
LIV. The interaction detected for CPT1A was due to upregulation in AT and LIV
postpartum without a change in MG. In contrast, the interaction for PPARG was due
to upregulation in AT and MG postpartum but a downregulation in LIV. Leptin was
barely detectable in LIV, but there was an interaction effect in AT and MG
associated with upregulation postpartum in MG and downregulation in AT. Together,
these results suggest that the control of metabolic adaptations in LIV, MG, and
AT around parturition might be partly regulated through the CLOCK gene network.
Although the present study did not specifically address rhythmic control of
tissue metabolism via the CLOCK gene network, the difference in expression of
genes studied among tissues confirms that the behavior of circadian-controlled
metabolic genes around parturition differs by tissue and, as such, is closely
associated with the metabolic function of the organ.

Copyright © 2015 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25912864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Biosyst. 2015 Jul;11(7):1897-906. doi: 10.1039/c5mb00032g.

A metabolomic study of adipose tissue in mice with a disruption of the circadian 
system.

Castro C(1), Briggs W, Paschos GK, FitzGerald GA, Griffin JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, University of
Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2 1GA, UK.

Adipose tissue functions in terms of energy homeostasis as a rheostat for blood
triglyceride, regulating its concentration, in response to external stimuli. In
addition it acts as a barometer to inform the central nervous system of energy
levels which can vary dramatically between meals and according to energy demand. 
Here a metabolomic approach, combining both Mass Spectrometry and Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy, was used to analyse both white and brown adipose
tissue in mice with adipocyte-specific deletion of Arntl (also known as Bmal1), a
gene encoding a core molecular clock component. The results are consistent with a
peripheral circadian clock playing a central role in metabolic regulation of both
brown and white adipose tissue in rodents and show that Arntl induced global
changes in both tissues which were distinct for the two types. In particular,
anterior subcutaneous white adipose tissue (ASWAT) tissue was effected by a
reduction in the degree of unsaturation of fatty acids, while brown adipose
tissue (BAT) changes were associated with a reduction in chain length. In
addition the aqueous fraction of metabolites in BAT were profoundly affected by
Arntl disruption, consistent with the dynamic role of this tissue in maintaining 
body temperature across the day-night cycle and an upregulation in fatty acid
oxidation and citric acid cycle activity to generate heat during the day when
rats are inactive (increases in 3-hydroxybutyrate and glutamate), and increased
synthesis and storage of lipids during the night when rats feed more (increased
concentrations of glycerol, choline and glycerophosphocholine).

PMID: 25907923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Theriogenology. 2015 Jul 15;84(2):208-16. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2015.03.008. Epub 2015 Mar 21.

Evidence of a molecular clock in the ovine ovary and the influence of
photoperiod.

Murphy BA(1), Blake CM(1), Brown JA(1), Martin AM(1), Forde N(1), Sweeney LM(2), 
Evans AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture and Food Science, University College Dublin, Belfield,
Dublin, Ireland. (2)School of Agriculture and Food Science, University College
Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland. Electronic address:
lorna.sweeney.1@ucdconnect.ie.

The influence of the central circadian clock on reproductive timing is well
established. Much less is known about the role of peripheral oscillators such as 
those in the ovary. We investigated the influence of photoperiod and timing of
the LH surge on expression of circadian clock genes and genes involved in
steroidogenesis in ovine ovarian stroma. Seventy-two Suffolk cross ewes were
divided into two groups, and their estrous cycles were synchronized. Progestagen 
sponge removal was staggered by 12 hours between the groups such that expected LH
peak would occur midway through either the light or dark phase of the
photoperiodic cycle. Four animals from each group were killed, and their ovaries 
were harvested beginning 36 hours after sponge removal, at 6-hour intervals for
48 hours. Blood was sampled every 3 hours for the period 24 to 48 hours after
sponge removal to detect the LH surge. The interval to peak LH did not differ
between the groups (36.2 ± 1.2 and 35.6 ± 1.1 hours, respectively). There was an 
interaction between group and the time of sponge removal on the expression of the
core clock genes ARNTL, PER1, CRY1, CLOCK, and DBP (P < 0.01, P < 0.05, P < 0.01,
P < 0.01, and P < 0.01, respectively). As no significant interaction between
group and time of day was detected, the datasets were combined. Statistically
significant rhythmic oscillation was observed for ARNTL, CLOCK, CRY1 (P < 0.01,
respectively), PTGS2, DBP, PTGER2, and CYP17A1 (P < 0.05, respectively),
confirming the existence of a time-sensitive functionality within the ovary,
which may influence steroidogenesis and is independent of the ovulatory cycle.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25892340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Mol Neurodegener. 2015 Mar 19;10:13. doi: 10.1186/s13024-015-0007-x.

Aß-induced degradation of BMAL1 and CBP leads to circadian rhythm disruption in
Alzheimer's disease.

Song H(1), Moon M(2), Choe HK(3), Han DH(4), Jang C(5), Kim A(6), Cho S(7), Kim
K(8), Mook-Jung I(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Seoul
National University, 103 Daehak-ro, Seoul, 110-799, Jongno-gu, Korea.
eternalshd@snu.ac.kr. (2)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Konyang
University, Daejeon, 302-718, Korea. hominmoon@hanmail.net. (3)Department of
Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-742, Korea.
inc67@snu.ac.kr. (4)Department of Neuroscience and Neurodegeneration Control
Research Center, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, 130-701, Korea.
neodoit@hanmail.net. (5)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences,
College of Medicine, Seoul National University, 103 Daehak-ro, Seoul, 110-799,
Jongno-gu, Korea. chjang70@snu.ac.kr. (6)Department of Biochemistry and
Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, 103
Daehak-ro, Seoul, 110-799, Jongno-gu, Korea. dkqls0207@gmail.com. (7)Department
of Neuroscience and Neurodegeneration Control Research Center, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul, 130-701, Korea. sehyung@khu.ac.kr. (8)Department of Brain
Science, DGIST, Daegu, 711-873, Korea. kyungjin@snu.ac.kr. (9)Department of
Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Seoul National
University, 103 Daehak-ro, Seoul, 110-799, Jongno-gu, Korea. inhee@snu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) frequently experience
disruption of their circadian rhythms, but whether and how circadian clock
molecules are perturbed by AD remains unknown. AD is an age-related neurological 
disorder and amyloid-ß (Aß) is one of major causative molecules in the
pathogenesis of AD.
RESULTS: In this study, we investigated the role of Aß in the regulation of clock
molecules and circadian rhythm using an AD mouse model. These mice exhibited
altered circadian behavior, and altered expression patterns of the circadian
clock genes, Bmal1 and Per2. Using cultured cells, we showed that Aß induces
post-translational degradation of the circadian clock regulator CBP, as well as
the transcription factor BMAL1, which forms a complex with the master circadian
transcription factor CLOCK. Aß-induced degradation of BMAL1 and CBP correlated
with the reduced binding of transcription factors to the Per2 promoter, which in 
turn resulted in disruptions to PER2 protein expression and the oscillation of
Per2 mRNA levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results elucidate the underlying mechanisms for disrupted
circadian rhythm in AD.

PMCID: PMC4404698
PMID: 25888034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):10978-93.

Identification of new biomarkers for human papillary thyroid carcinoma employing 
NanoString analysis.

Chitikova Z(1), Pusztaszeri M(2), Makhlouf AM(1), Berczy M(2), Delucinge-Vivier
C(3), Triponez F(4), Meyer P(5), Philippe J(1,)(5), Dibner C(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Specialties, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, 
Geneva, Switzerland. (2)Division of Clinical Pathology, University Hospital of
Geneva, Switzerland. (3)iGE3Genomics Platform, University of Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Thoracic and Endocrine Surgery, University Hospital of Geneva,
Geneva, Switzerland. (5)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Hypertension and
Nutrition, University Hospital of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

We previously reported an upregulation of the clock transcript BMAL1, correlating
with TIMP1 expression in fresh-frozen samples from papillary thyroid carcinoma
(PTC). Since frozen postoperative biopsy samples are difficult to obtain, we
aimed to validate the application of high-precision NanoString analysis for
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) thyroid nodule samples and to screen for 
potential biomarkers associated with PTC. No significant differences were
detected between fresh-frozen and FFPE samples. NanoString analysis of 51
transcripts in 17 PTC and 17 benign nodule samples obtained from different donors
and in 24 pairs of benign and PTC nodules, obtained from the same donor
(multinodular goiters), confirmed significant alterations in the levels of BMAL1,
c-MET, c-KIT, TIMP1, and other transcripts. Moreover, we identified for the first
time alterations in CHEK1 and BCL2 levels in PTC. A predictive score was
established for each sample, based on the combined expression levels of BMAL1,
CHEK1, c-MET, c-KIT and TIMP1. In combination with BRAF mutation analysis, this
predictive score closely correlated with the clinicopathological characteristics 
of the analyzed thyroid nodules. Our study identified new thyroid transcripts
with altered levels in PTC using the NanoString approach. A predictive score
correlation coefficient might contribute to improve the preoperative diagnosis of
thyroid nodules.

PMCID: PMC4484433
PMID: 25868389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. FASEB J. 2015 Jul;29(7):2905-11. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-267575. Epub 2015 Mar 30.

Men and women differ in their diurnal expression of monocyte peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-a in the fed but not in the fasted state.

Wege N(1), Schutkowski A(1), Boenn M(1), Bialek J(1), Schlitt A(1), Noack F(1),
Grosse I(1), Stangl GI(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Institute of Agricultural and Nutritional Sciences, Institute of Computer
Science, and University Clinic Halle (Saale), Martin Luther University
Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany; Department of Soil Ecology, UFZ Helmholtz
Centre for Environmental Research, Halle, Germany; Paracelsus Harz Clinic Bad
Suderode, Quedlinburg, Germany; and German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity
Research Halle-Jena-Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (2)*Institute of Agricultural and 
Nutritional Sciences, Institute of Computer Science, and University Clinic Halle 
(Saale), Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany; Department of
Soil Ecology, UFZ Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, Halle, Germany;
Paracelsus Harz Clinic Bad Suderode, Quedlinburg, Germany; and German Centre for 
Integrative Biodiversity Research Halle-Jena-Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany
gabriele.stangl@landw.uni-halle.de.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-a (PPARa) plays a pivotal role in
regulating metabolic response to fasting and is an inhibitor of inflammatory
pathways in immune cells. It represents a therapeutic target for treatment of
several diseases, mainly hyperlipidemia. To shed light on PPARa expression
changes in response to fasting, young healthy male and female volunteers were fed
or fasted for 24 hours. Monocytes were analyzed every 2 hours to compile both
profiles of mRNA and protein expression of PPARa and its interactive partner, the
circadian pacemaker brain and muscle aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator like-1 (BMAL1). We found that women change their diurnal expression 
profiles of PPARa and BMAL1 when switching from the fed to the fasted state,
whereas men do not. Interestingly, the PPARa and BMAL1 profiles of men and women 
in the fed state are different, whereas the profiles in the fasted state are
virtually identical. The finding of diametrically opposite responses of male and 
female PPARa expression in the fed state might have practical implication in
human medicine as PPARa activators like fibrates are used for the therapy of
chronic lymphocytic leukemia, microvascular complications in diabetes, and kidney
diseases.

© FASEB.

PMID: 25825462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Neuron. 2015 Apr 8;86(1):264-75. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.02.036. Epub 2015 Mar
19.

Clock genes control cortical critical period timing.

Kobayashi Y(1), Ye Z(2), Hensch TK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Brain Science, Department of Molecular Cellular Biology, Harvard
University, 52 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; F.M. Kirby Neurobiology
Center, Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Center for Brain Science, 
Department of Molecular Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 52 Oxford Street,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. (3)Center for Brain Science, Department of Molecular
Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 52 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA;
F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Department of Neurology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
Electronic address: hensch@mcb.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2015 May;16(5):247.

Circadian rhythms control a variety of physiological processes, but whether they 
may also time brain development remains largely unknown. Here, we show that
circadian clock genes control the onset of critical period plasticity in the
neocortex. Within visual cortex of Clock-deficient mice, the emergence of
circadian gene expression was dampened, and the maturation of inhibitory
parvalbumin (PV) cell networks slowed. Loss of visual acuity in response to brief
monocular deprivation was concomitantly delayed and rescued by direct enhancement
of GABAergic transmission. Conditional deletion of Clock or Bmal1 only within PV 
cells recapitulated the results of total Clock-deficient mice. Unique downstream 
gene sets controlling synaptic events and cellular homeostasis for proper
maturation and maintenance were found to be mis-regulated by Clock deletion
specifically within PV cells. These data demonstrate a developmental role for
circadian clock genes outside the suprachiasmatic nucleus, which may contribute
mis-timed brain plasticity in associated mental disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4392344 [Available on 2016-04-08]
PMID: 25801703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Chronobiol Int. 2015 May;32(4):579-84. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2015.1012588. Epub
2015 Mar 23.

Depression-associated ARNTL and PER2 genetic variants in psychotic disorders.

Liu JJ(1), Sudic Hukic D, Forsell Y, Schalling M, Ösby U, Lavebratt C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Shandong University , Jinan , China .

Circadian rhythm disturbances overlap between psychotic disorders, e.g.
schizophrenia, and major depression. We hypothesized that circadian gene variants
previously associated with unipolar depression would be overrepresented also in
patients with psychotic disorder. Six genetic polymorphisms in ARNTL, PER2 and
CRY2 were genotyped in 566 schizophrenia spectrum disorder patients and 926
controls. The rs2290036-C variant of ARNTL was over-represented in psychosis
patients, and the variants rs934945-G and rs10462023-G of PER2 were associated
with a more severe psychotic disorder. The directions of these genetic
associations were in line with those previously identified for depression.

PMID: 25799324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Chronobiol Int. 2015 May;32(4):486-96. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2014.1003350. Epub
2015 Mar 23.

Atypical expression of circadian clock genes in denervated mouse skeletal muscle.

Nakao R(1), Yamamoto S, Horikawa K, Yasumoto Y, Nikawa T, Mukai C, Oishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Clock Research Group, Biomedical Research Institute, National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) , Tsukuba, Ibaraki
, Japan .

The central circadian clock in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus
synchronizes peripheral clocks through neural and humoral signals in most
mammalian tissues. Here, we analyzed the effects of unilateral sciatic
denervation on the expression of circadian clock- and clock-controlled genes in
the gastrocnemius muscles of mice twice per day on days 0, 3, 7, 9, 11 and 14
after denervation and six times on each of days 7 and 28 after denervation to
assess the regulation mechanism of the circadian clock in skeletal muscle.
Sciatic denervation did not affect systemic circadian rhythms since core body
temperature (Day 7), corticosterone secretion (Days 7 and 28), and hepatic clock 
gene expression remained intact (Days 7 and 28). Expression levels of most
circadian clock-related genes such as Arntl, Per1, Rora, Nr1d1 and Dbp were
reduced in accordance with the extent of muscle atrophy, although circadian Per2 
expression was significantly augmented (Day 28). Cosinor analysis revealed that
the circadian expression of Arntl (Days 7 and 28) and Dbp (Day 28) was phase
advanced in denervated muscle. The mRNA expression of Clock was significantly
increased in denervated muscle on Day 3 when the severe atrophy was absent, and
it was not affected by atrophic progression for 28 days. Sciatic denervation did 
not affect the expression of these genes in the contralateral muscle (Days 7 and 
28), suggesting that humoral changes were not involved in denervation-induced
muscle clock disruption. We then analyzed genome-wide gene expression using
microarrays to determine the effects of disrupting the molecular clock in muscle 
on circadian rhythms at Day 7. Among 478 circadian genes, 313 lost rhythmicity in
the denervated muscles. These denervation-sensitive genes included the lipid
metabolism-related genes, Nrip1, Bbs1, Ptgis, Acot1, Scd2, Hpgd, Insig1, Dhcr24, 
Ldlr and Mboat1. Our findings revealed that sciatic denervation disrupts the
circadian expression of clock and clock-controlled genes either directly or
indirectly via muscle atrophy in the gastrocnemius muscles of mice in a
gene-specific manner.

PMID: 25798696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Inflamm Res. 2015 May;64(5):343-61. doi: 10.1007/s00011-015-0815-z. Epub 2015 Mar
21.

RNA-sequencing studies identify genes differentially regulated during
inflammation-driven lung tumorigenesis and targeted by chemopreventive agents.

Qian X(1), Khammanivong A, Song JM, Teferi F, Upadhyaya P, Dickerson E, Kassie F.

Author information: 
(1)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Mayo Mail Code 806, 420
Delaware Street SE, Minneapolis, MN, 55455, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic pulmonary inflammation has been consistently shown to
increase the risk of lung cancer. Therefore, assessing the molecular links
between the two diseases and identification of chemopreventive agents that
inhibit inflammation-driven lung tumorigenesis is indispensable.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Female A/J mice were treated with the tobacco smoke
carcinogen 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) and
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a potent inflammatory agent and constituent of tobacco 
smoke, and maintained on control diet or diet supplemented with the
chemopreventive agents indole-3-carbinol (I3C) and/or silibinin (Sil). At the end
of the study, mice were sacrificed and tumors on the surface of the lung were
counted and gene expression levels in lung tissues were determined by RNA
sequencing.
RESULTS: The mean number of lung tumors induced by NNK and NNK + LPS was 5 and 15
tumors/mouse, respectively. Dietary supplementation with the combination of I3C
and Sil significantly reduced the size and multiplicity (by 50 %) of
NNK + LPS-induced lung tumors. Also, we found that 330, 2957, and 1143 genes were
differentially regulated in mice treated with NNK, LPS, and NNK + LPS,
respectively. The inflammatory response of lung tumors to LPS, as determined by
the number of proinflammatory genes with altered gene expression or the level of 
alteration, was markedly less than that of normal lungs. Among 1143 genes
differentially regulated in the NNK + LPS group, the expression of 162 genes and 
associated signaling pathways was significantly modulated by I3C and/or
Sil + I3C. These genes include cytokines, chemokines, putative oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes and Ros1, AREG, EREG, Cyp1a1, Arntl, and Npas2.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is the first report that provides insight into
genes that are differentially expressed during inflammation-driven lung
tumorigenesis and the modulation of these genes by chemopreventive agents.

PMCID: PMC4719774 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25795230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Neurochem Res. 2015 May;40(5):961-70. doi: 10.1007/s11064-015-1551-z. Epub 2015
Mar 7.

Glutamate-Dependent BMAL1 Regulation in Cultured Bergmann Glia Cells.

Chi-Castañeda D(1), Waliszewski SM, Zepeda RC, Hernández-Kelly LC, Caba M, Ortega
A.

Author information: 
(1)Doctorado en Ciencias Biomédicas, CIB, Universidad Veracruzana, Apartado
Postal 91-190, Xalapa, Veracruz, Mexico.

Glutamate, the major excitatory amino acid, activates a wide variety of signal
transduction cascades. This neurotransmitter is involved in photic entrainment of
circadian rhythms, which regulate physiological and behavioral functions. The
circadian clock in vertebrates is based on a transcription-translation feedback
loop in which Brain and muscle aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT)-like protein 1 (BMAL1) acts as transcriptional activator of others clock
genes. This protein is expressed in nearly all suprachiasmatic nucleus neurons,
as well as in the granular layer of the cerebellum. In this context, we decided
to investigate the role of glutamate in the molecular mechanisms involved in the 
processes of transcription/translation of BMAL1 protein. To this end, primary
cultures of chick cerebellar Bergmann glial cells were stimulated with
glutamatergic ligands and we found that BMAL1 levels increased in a dose- and
time dependent manner. Additionally, we studied the phosphorylation of serine
residues in BMAL1 under glutamate stimulation and we were able to detect an
increase in the phosphorylation of this protein. The increased expression of
BMAL1 is most probably the result of a stabilization of the protein after it has 
been phosphorylated by the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase and/or the
Ca(2+)/diacylglycerol dependent protein kinase. The present results strongly
suggest that glutamate participates in regulating BMAL1 in glial cells and that
these cells might prove to be important in the control of circadian rhythms in
the cerebellum.

PMID: 25749891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Cell Sci. 2015 May 1;128(9):1835-47. doi: 10.1242/jcs.167643. Epub 2015 Mar 6.

The adipocyte clock controls brown adipogenesis through the TGF-ß and BMP
signaling pathways.

Nam D(1), Guo B(2), Chatterjee S(1), Chen MH(3), Nelson D(4), Yechoor VK(5), Ma
K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Medicine, The Methodist Hospital
Research Institute, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. (2)Department of Cardiovascular
Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang,
050017, Hebei, China. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Nutrition Research 
Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. (4)Department of
Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030,
USA. (5)Diabetes and Endocrinology Research Center, Department of Medicine,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. (6)Center for Diabetes
Research, Department of Medicine, The Methodist Hospital Research Institute,
Houston, TX, 77030, USA kma@tmhs.org.

The molecular clock is intimately linked to metabolic regulation, and brown
adipose tissue plays a key role in energy homeostasis. However, whether the
cell-intrinsic clock machinery participates in brown adipocyte development is
unknown. Here, we show that Bmal1 (also known as ARNTL), the essential clock
transcription activator, inhibits brown adipogenesis to adversely affect brown
fat formation and thermogenic capacity. Global ablation of Bmal1 in mice
increases brown fat mass and cold tolerance, and adipocyte-selective inactivation
of Bmal1 recapitulates these effects and demonstrates its cell-autonomous role in
brown adipocyte formation. Further loss- and gain-of-function studies in
mesenchymal precursors and committed brown progenitors reveal that Bmal1 inhibits
brown adipocyte lineage commitment and terminal differentiation. Mechanistically,
Bmal1 inhibits brown adipogenesis through direct transcriptional control of key
components of the TGF-ß pathway together with reciprocally altered BMP signaling;
activation of TGF-ß or blockade of BMP pathways suppresses enhanced
differentiation in Bmal1-deficient brown adipocytes. Collectively, our study
demonstrates a novel temporal regulatory mechanism in fine-tuning brown adipocyte
lineage progression to affect brown fat formation and thermogenic regulation,
which could be targeted therapeutically to combat obesity.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4446734 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25749863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Neuron. 2015 Mar 4;85(5):1103-16. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.02.005.

Cellular clocks in AVP neurons of the SCN are critical for interneuronal coupling
regulating circadian behavior rhythm.

Mieda M(1), Ono D(2), Hasegawa E(3), Okamoto H(4), Honma K(5), Honma S(5),
Sakurai T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience and Integrative Physiology, Faculty of
Medicine, Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640,
Japan. Electronic address: mieda@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (2)Photonic Bioimaging
Section, Research Center for Cooperative Projects, Hokkaido University Graduate
School of Medicine, N-15, W-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-8638, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Neuroscience and Integrative Physiology, Faculty of
Medicine, Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640,
Japan. (4)Laboratory for Developmental Gene Regulation, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (5)Department of
Chronomedicine, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, N-15, W-7,
Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-8638, Japan.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2015 Mar 4;85(5):895-8.

The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the primary circadian pacemaker in mammals, is
a network structure composed of multiple types of neurons. Here, we report that
mice with a Bmal1 deletion specific to arginine vasopressin (AVP)-producing
neurons showed marked lengthening in the free-running period and activity time of
behavior rhythms. When exposed to an abrupt 8-hr advance of the light/dark cycle,
these mice reentrained faster than control mice did. In these mice, the circadian
expression of genes involved in intercellular communications, including Avp,
Prokineticin 2, and Rgs16, was drastically reduced in the dorsal SCN, where AVP
neurons predominate. In slices, dorsal SCN cells showed attenuated PER2::LUC
oscillation with highly variable and lengthened periods. Thus, Bmal1-dependent
oscillators of AVP neurons may modulate the coupling of the SCN network,
eventually coupling morning and evening behavioral rhythms, by regulating
expression of multiple factors important for the network property of these
neurons.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25741730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Neuron. 2015 Mar 4;85(5):895-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.02.037.

Short circuiting the circadian system with a new generation of precision tools.

Loh DH(1), Kudo T(1), Colwell CS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Circadian and Sleep Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, Semel
Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA. 
(2)Laboratory of Circadian and Sleep Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, Semel
Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA. 
Electronic address: ccolwell@mednet.ucla.edu.

Comment on
    Neuron. 2015 Mar 4;85(5):1103-16.
    Neuron. 2015 Mar 4;85(5):1086-102.

Circadian behavior in mammals is coordinated by neurons within the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). In this issue, Lee et al. (2015) and Mieda et al. 
(2015) applied state-of-the-art genetic tools to dissect the microcircuits within
the SCN generating circadian rhythmic behavior.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25741718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Mar 27;459(1):172-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.100. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

Interaction of pituitary hormones and expression of clock genes modulated by bone
morphogenetic protein-4 and melatonin.

Tsukamoto-Yamauchi N(1), Terasaka T(1), Iwasaki Y(2), Otsuka F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho,
Kitaku, Okayama 700-8558, Japan. (2)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and 
Nephrology, Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, Nankoku 783-8505, Japan.
(3)Department of General Medicine, Okayama University Graduate School of
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kitaku,
Okayama 700-8558, Japan. Electronic address: fumiotsu@md.okayama-u.ac.jp.

Functional interaction of clock genes and pituitary hormones was investigated by 
focusing on bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-4 and melatonin actions in anterior 
pituitary cells. A significant correlation between the mRNA expression of
proopiomelanocortin (POMC) and Per2 was revealed in serial cultures of
corticotrope AtT20 cells. Knockdown of Per2 expression by siRNA in AtT20 cells
resulted in a significant reduction of POMC mRNA level with or without
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) stimulation. Treatments with BMP-4 and
melatonin, both of which suppress POMC expression, reduced Per2 mRNA as well as
protein levels in AtT20 cells. On the other hand, in lactosomatotrope GH3 cells, 
an expressional correlation was found between prolactin (PRL) and Clock mRNA
levels, which was attenuated in the presence of forskolin treatment. The
siRNA-mediated knockdown of Clock expression, but not that of Bmal1,
significantly reduced PRL mRNA levels in GH3 cells. Interestingly, Clock mRNA and
protein levels did not fluctuate with melatonin, BMP-4 or forskolin treatment,
although Bmal1 expression was significantly increased by forskolin treatment.
Collectively, a significant correlation between the expression of POMC and Per2
and that between PRL and Clock were uncovered in corticotrope and
lactosomatotrope cells, respectively. Per2 expression was inhibited by POMC
modulators including melatonin and BMP-4, while Clock expression was steadily
maintained. Thus, the effects of melatonin and BMP-4 on clock gene expression may
imply differential stability of circadian rhythms of adrenocorticotropin (ACTH)
and PRL secreted from the anterior pituitary.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25727018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Rhythms. 2015 Apr;30(2):155-60. doi: 10.1177/0748730415573167. Epub 2015
Feb 27.

Circadian rhythmicity of active GSK3 isoforms modulates molecular clock gene
rhythms in the suprachiasmatic nucleus.

Besing RC(1), Paul JR(1), Hablitz LM(1), Rogers CO(1), Johnson RL(1), Young
ME(2), Gamble KL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurobiology. (2)Division of
Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Medicine; University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama. (3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Neurobiology klgamble@uab.edu.

The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) drives and synchronizes daily rhythms at the
cellular level via transcriptional-translational feedback loops comprising clock 
genes such as Bmal1 and Period (Per). Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), a
serine/threonine kinase, phosphorylates at least 5 core clock proteins and shows 
diurnal variation in phosphorylation state (inactivation) of the GSK3ß isoform.
Whether phosphorylation of the other primary isoform (GSK3a) varies across the
subjective day-night cycle is unknown. The purpose of this study was to determine
if the endogenous rhythm of GSK3 (a and ß) phosphorylation is critical for
rhythmic BMAL1 expression and normal amplitude and periodicity of the molecular
clock in the SCN. Significant circadian rhythmicity of phosphorylated GSK3 (a and
ß) was observed in the SCN from wild-type mice housed in constant darkness for 2 
weeks. Importantly, chronic activation of both GSK3 isoforms impaired rhythmicity
of the GSK3 target BMAL1. Furthermore, chronic pharmacological inhibition of GSK3
with 20 µM CHIR-99021 enhanced the amplitude and shortened the period of
PER2::luciferase rhythms in organotypic SCN slice cultures. These results support
the model that GSK3 activity status is regulated by the circadian clock and that 
GSK3 feeds back to regulate the molecular clock amplitude in the SCN.

© 2015 The Author(s).

PMCID: PMC4586074
PMID: 25724980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Psychiatry Res. 2015 Apr 30;226(2-3):517-20. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2015.01.010.
Epub 2015 Jan 16.

Suicidal behavior in the context of disrupted rhythmicity in bipolar
disorder--data from an association study of suicide attempts with clock genes.

Pawlak J(1), Dmitrzak-Weglarz M(2), Maciukiewicz M(3), Wilkosc M(4),
Leszczynska-Rodziewicz A(5), Zaremba D(2), Kapelski P(5), Hauser J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Psychiatric Genetics Unit, Department of Psychiatry, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Poland. Electronic address: joanna.pawlak@gmail.com.
(2)Psychiatric Genetics Unit, Department of Psychiatry, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Poland. (3)Psychiatric Genetics Unit, Department of Psychiatry,
Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poland; Pharmacogenetics Research Clinic, 
Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Department of Individual Differences,
Institute of Psychology, University of Bydgoszcz, Poland. (5)Psychiatric Genetics
Unit, Department of Psychiatry, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poland;
Department of Adult Psychiatry, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poland.

Suicidal behavior exhibits both circadian and annual rhythms. We were seeking an 
association between selected candidate clock genes and suicidal behavior in
bipolar patients. The study included 441 bipolar patients and 422 controls and we
genotyped 41 SNPs of the CLOCK, ARNTL, TIMELESS, PER3 genes. The main positive
findings built up associations between selected polymorphisms and.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25724486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Heart Rhythm. 2015 Jun;12(6):1306-14. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2015.02.019. Epub 2015
Feb 19.

The cardiomyocyte molecular clock regulates the circadian expression of Kcnh2 and
contributes to ventricular repolarization.

Schroder EA(1), Burgess DE(1), Zhang X(1), Lefta M(1), Smith JL(1), Patwardhan
A(2), Bartos DC(1), Elayi CS(3), Esser KA(1), Delisle BP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Muscle Biology, Department of Physiology. (2)Center for Biomedical 
Engineering. (3)Department of Cardiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington,
Kentucky. (4)Center for Muscle Biology, Department of Physiology.. Electronic
address: brian.delisle@uky.edu.

Comment in
    Heart Rhythm. 2015 Jun;12(6):1315-6.

BACKGROUND: Sudden cardiac death (SCD) follows a diurnal variation. Data suggest 
the timing of SCD is influenced by circadian (~24-hour) changes in neurohumoral
and cardiomyocyte-specific regulation of the heart's electrical properties. The
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors brain muscle arnt-like1 (BMAL1) and 
circadian locomotor output control kaput (CLOCK) coordinate the circadian
expression of select genes.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to test whether Bmal1 expression in cardiomyocytes
contributes to K(+) channel expression and diurnal changes in ventricular
repolarization.
METHODS: We used transgenic mice that allow for the inducible
cardiomyocyte-specific deletion of Bmal1 (iCS<U+0394>Bmal1(-/-)). We used quantitative
polymerase chain reaction, voltage clamping, promoter-reporter bioluminescence
assays, and electrocardiographic telemetry.
RESULTS: Although several K(+) channel gene transcripts were downregulated in
iCS<U+0394>Bmal1(-/-)mouse hearts, only Kcnh2 exhibited a robust circadian pattern of
expression that was disrupted in iCS<U+0394>Bmal1(-/-) hearts. Kcnh2 underlies the
rapidly activating delayed-rectifier K(+) current, and the rapidly activating
delayed-rectifier K(+) current recorded from iCS<U+0394>Bmal1(-/-) ventricular
cardiomyocytes was ~50% smaller than control ventricular myocytes.
Promoter-reporter assays demonstrated that the human Kcnh2 promoter is
transactivated by the coexpression of BMAL1 and CLOCK. Electrocardiographic
analysis showed that iCS<U+0394>Bmal1(-/-) mice developed a prolongation in the heart
rate-corrected QT interval during the light (resting) phase. This was secondary
to an augmented circadian rhythm in the uncorrected QT interval without a
corresponding change in the RR interval.
CONCLUSION: The molecular clock in the heart regulates the circadian expression
of Kcnh2, modifies K(+) channel gene expression, and is important for normal
ventricular repolarization. Disruption of the cardiomyocyte circadian clock
mechanism likely unmasks diurnal changes in ventricular repolarization that could
contribute to an increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias/SCD.

Copyright © 2015 Heart Rhythm Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4541807 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25701773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Poult Sci. 2015 May;94(5):836-40. doi: 10.3382/ps/pev057. Epub 2015 Feb 19.

The effect of new monochromatic light regimes on egg production and expression of
the circadian gene BMAL1 in pigeons1.

Wang Y(1), Ding JT(2), Yang HM(2), Cao W(1), Li YB(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou,
Jiangsu Province 225009, P. R. China. (2)College of Animal Science and
Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu Province 225009, P. R. China
jtding@yzu.edu.cn yhmdlp@qq.com.

We examined the effect of monochromatic light supplementation on pigeon
reproductive performance and on the expression of the brain and muscle aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like (BMAL1) protein in the
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis. White King pigeons were selected
randomly from 4 lofts (510 pairs/loft) with 3 subgroups/loft. The lofts were
exposed to one of 4 light treatments for 3 months administered in the morning and
evening as follows: blue light (480 nm), green light (540 nm), red light (660
nm), and control white light. The laying rate, fertility rate, and birth rate
were recorded. After 3 months, 48 birds were selected randomly from the 4 lofts
(6 females and 6 males from each loft), sacrificed, and the HPG axis was
isolated. Following exposure to red light, laying rate was greater than the
control group (P = 0.013), but there were no significant differences in the
fertility rate (P = 0.41) or birth rate (P = 0.66). Expression of BMAL1 in the
hypothalamus was unaffected by the light regime but was greater in the pituitary 
of females exposed to red light (P = 0.046) and in the pituitary of males exposed
to the control white light (P = 0.059). The change in BMAL1 expression in the
pituitary of females was negatively correlated with birth rate in monochromatic
light (P = 0.021). We suggest that reproductive performance of pigeons is
improved by light supplementation in the morning and evening. According to these 
data, 100 pigeons exposed to red light could lay 26.68 more eggs per month than
the control group. Additionally, BMAL1 expression in the HPG axis of pigeons
exposed to monochromatic light correlated with birth rate.

© 2015 Poultry Science Association Inc.

PMID: 25701204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Alcohol. 2015 Jun;49(4):359-65. doi: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2014.08.013. Epub 2015 Jan
16.

Clock genes in human alcohol abuse and comorbid conditions.

Partonen T(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Health and Welfare, Department of Mental Health and
Substance Abuse Services, P.O. Box 30, FI-00271 Helsinki, Finland. Electronic
address: timo.partonen@thl.fi.

Alcohol-use disorders are often comorbid conditions with mood and anxiety
disorders. Clinical studies have demonstrated that there are abnormalities in
circadian rhythms and clocks in patients with alcohol-use disorders. Circadian
clock gene variants are therefore a fruitful target of interest. Concerning
alcohol use, the current findings give support, but are preliminary to, the
associations of ARNTL (BMAL1) rs6486120 with alcohol consumption, ARNTL2
rs7958822 and ARNTL2 rs4964057 with alcohol abuse, and PER1 rs3027172 and PER2
rs56013859 with alcohol dependence. Furthermore, it is of interest that CLOCK
rs2412646 and CLOCK rs11240 associate with alcohol-use disorders only if comorbid
with depressive disorders. The mechanistic basis of these associations and the
intracellular actions for the encoded proteins in question remain to be
elucidated in order to have the first insight of the potential small-molecule
options for treatment of alcohol-use disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25677407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2015 May;59(5):865-78. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201400571. Epub 2015 
Mar 23.

Dietary proanthocyanidins modulate melatonin levels in plasma and the expression 
pattern of clock genes in the hypothalamus of rats.

Ribas-Latre A(1), Del Bas JM, Baselga-Escudero L, Casanova E, Arola-Arnal A,
Salvadó MJ, Arola L, Bladé C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Nutrigenomic Research Group,
Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona, Spain.

SCOPE: Circadian rhythms allow organisms to anticipate and adapt to environmental
changes, and food components can adjust internal rhythms. Proanthocyanidins
improve cardiovascular risk factors that exhibit circadian oscillations.
Therefore, the aim of the current study was to determine whether
proanthocyanidins can modulate body rhythms.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Male Wistar rats were orally gavaged with 250 mg grape seed 
proanthocyanidin extract (GSPE)/kg body weight at zeitgeber time (ZT) 0 (light
on). Phenotypic biorhythm was evaluated by measuring the concentration of plasma 
melatonin and metabolites, using MNR-metabolomics, at several ZT. Remarkably,
GSPE treatment maintained nocturnal melatonin levels at ZT3 and altered the
oscillations of some metabolites in plasma. Quantification of expression of
clock-core (Clock, Bmal1, Per2, Rora, Rev-erba) and clock-controlled (Nampt)
genes in the hypothalamus by RT-PCR showed that this phenotypic alteration was
concomitant with the modulation of the expression pattern of Bmal1 and Nampt.
However, GSPE did not modulate the nocturnal expression of clock genes when
administered at ZT12 (light off).
CONCLUSION: PAs could have chronobiological properties, although their activity
depends largely on the time of administration.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25677201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Physiol Res. 2014;63 Suppl 4:S573-84.

Different effects of phase advance and delay in rotating light-dark regimens on
clock and natriuretic peptide gene expression in the rat heart.

Herichová I(1), Ambruová J, Molcan L, Veselá A, Svitok P, Zeman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Physiology and Ethology, Faculty of Natural Sciences,
Comenius University Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovak Republic.
herichova@fns.uniba.sk.

Under physiological conditions the mammalian circadian system is synchronized to 
a cyclic environment. The central oscillator in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) 
responds predominantly to an external light (L) dark (D) cycle. Peripheral
oscillators are more efficiently synchronized by metabolic cues. When the
circadian system is exposed to opposing synchronizing cues, peripheral
oscillators uncouple from the SCN. To consider influence of phase advances and
delays in light regimens mimicking shift work, we analyzed the expression of
clock genes (per2, bmal1) and natriuretic peptides (anp, bnp) in the heart of
male rats. Experimental groups were exposed to a rotating LD regimen with either 
8 h phase advance or delay for 11 weeks. Samples were taken for a 24 h cycle in 4
h intervals. Peripheral oscillators responded to rotating phase advance by
decreasing rhythm robustness, while phase delay mostly influenced the phase angle
between the acrophase of rhythmic gene expression and the external LD cycle. The 
expression of anp was arrhythmic in the heart of control rats and was not
influenced by rotating LD regimens. The expression of bnp showed a daily rhythm
with a nadir during the active phase. The daily rhythm in bnp expression
diminished under rotating LD regimen conditions.

PMID: 25669688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Sleep Med. 2015 Feb;16(2):217-24. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2014.11.003. Epub 2014 Dec
5.

Genetic variants associated with sleep disorders.

Kripke DF(1), Kline LE(2), Nievergelt CM(3), Murray SS(4), Shadan FF(2), Dawson
A(2), Poceta JS(2), Cronin J(2), Jamil SM(2), Tranah GJ(5), Loving RT(6), Grizas 
AP(7), Hahn EK(8).

Author information: 
(1)Viterbi Family Sleep Center, Scripps Clinic, La Jolla, CA, USA; Department of 
Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. Electronic
address: dkripke1@san.rr.com. (2)Viterbi Family Sleep Center, Scripps Clinic, La 
Jolla, CA, USA. (3)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego,
La Jolla, CA, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, Center for Advanced Laboratory
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA. (5)California Pacific
Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco, CA, USA. (6)Sharp Mesa Vista
Hospital, San Diego, CA, USA. (7)The Advisory Board Company, Washington, DC, USA.
(8)CTICU, Children's Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The diagnostic boundaries of sleep disorders are under considerable
debate. The main sleep disorders are partly heritable; therefore, defining
heritable pathophysiologic mechanisms could delineate diagnoses and suggest
treatment. We collected clinical data and DNA from consenting patients scheduled 
to undergo clinical polysomnograms, to expand our understanding of the
polymorphisms associated with the phenotypes of particular sleep disorders.
METHODS: Patients at least 21 years of age were recruited to contribute research 
questionnaires, and to provide access to their medical records, saliva for
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), and polysomnographic data. From these complex data, 
38 partly overlapping phenotypes were derived indicating complaints, subjective
and objective sleep timing, and polysomnographic disturbances. A custom chip was 
used to genotype 768 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Additional assays
derived ancestry-informative markers (eg, 751 participants of European ancestry).
Linear regressions controlling for age, gender, and ancestry were used to assess 
the associations of each phenotype with each of the SNPs, highlighting those with
Bonferroni-corrected significance.
RESULTS: In peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, coactivator 1 beta 
(PPARGC1B), rs6888451 was associated with several markers of obstructive sleep
apnea. In aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like (ARNTL), rs10766071
was associated with decreased polysomnographic sleep duration. The association of
rs3923809 in BTBD9 with periodic limb movements in sleep was confirmed. SNPs in
casein kinase 1 delta (CSNK1D rs11552085), cryptochrome 1 (CRY1 rs4964515), and
retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor A (RORA rs11071547) were less
persuasively associated with sleep latency and time of falling asleep.
CONCLUSIONS: SNPs associated with several sleep phenotypes were suggested, but
due to risks of false discovery, independent replications are needed before the
importance of these associations can be assessed, followed by investigation of
molecular mechanisms.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4352103
PMID: 25660813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Curr Biol. 2015 Mar 2;25(5):537-45. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.12.047. Epub 2015 Feb
5.

Ube3a imprinting impairs circadian robustness in Angelman syndrome models.

Shi SQ(1), Bichell TJ(2), Ihrie RA(3), Johnson CH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235,
USA. (2)Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235,
USA. (3)Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235,
USA; Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, USA.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235,
USA; Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, USA;
Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN 37235, USA. Electronic address: carl.h.johnson@vanderbilt.edu.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2015 Mar 2;25(5):R201-3.

BACKGROUND: The paternal allele of Ube3a is silenced by imprinting in neurons,
and Angelman syndrome (AS) is a disorder arising from a deletion or mutation of
the maternal Ube3a allele, which thereby eliminates Ube3a neuronal expression.
Sleep disorders such as short sleep duration and increased sleep onset latency
are very common in AS.
RESULTS: We found a unique link between neuronal imprinting of Ube3a and
circadian rhythms in two mouse models of AS, including enfeebled circadian
activity behavior and slowed molecular rhythms in ex vivo brain tissues. As a
consequence of compromised circadian behavior, metabolic homeostasis is also
disrupted in AS mice. Unsilencing the paternal Ube3a allele restores functional
circadian periodicity in neurons deficient in maternal Ube3a but does not affect 
periodicity in peripheral tissues that are not imprinted for uniparental Ube3a
expression. The ubiquitin ligase encoded by Ube3a interacts with the central
clock components BMAL1 and BMAL2. Moreover, inactivation of Ube3a expression
elevates BMAL1 levels in brain regions that control circadian behavior of
AS-model mice, indicating an important role for Ube3a in modulating BMAL1
turnover.
CONCLUSIONS: Ube3a expression constitutes a direct mechanistic connection between
symptoms of a human neurological disorder and the central circadian clock
mechanism. The lengthened circadian period leads to delayed phase, which could
explain the short sleep duration and increased sleep onset latency of AS
subjects. Moreover, we report the pharmacological rescue of an AS phenotype, in
this case, altered circadian period. These findings reveal potential treatments
for sleep disorders in AS patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4348236
PMID: 25660546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Apr 15;308(8):E650-61. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00533.2014. Epub 2015 Feb 3.

Removal of Rev-erba inhibition contributes to the prostaglandin G/H synthase 2
expression in rat endometrial stromal cells.

Isayama K(1), Zhao L(1), Chen H(1), Yamauchi N(1), Shigeyoshi Y(2), Hashimoto
S(3), Hattori MA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Marine Bioresource Sciences, Graduate School of
Agriculture, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan; (2)Department of Anatomy and
Neurobiology, Kinki University School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan; and. (3)Graduate
School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of
Animal and Marine Bioresource Sciences, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan; mhattori@agr.kyushu-u.ac.jp ma_hattori@kyudai.jp.

The rhythmic expression of clock genes in the uterus is attenuated during
decidualization. This study focused on Ptgs2, which is essential for
decidualization, as a putative clock-controlled gene, and aimed to reveal the
functions of clock genes in relation to Ptgs2 during decidualization. We compared
the transcript levels of clock genes in the rat uterus on days 4.5 (D4.5) and 6.5
of pregnancy. The transcript levels of clock genes (Per2, Bmal1, Rora, and
Rev-erba) had decreased at implantation sites on day 6.5 (D6.5e) compared with
those on D4.5, whereas Ptgs2 transcripts had increased on D6.5e. Similar
observations of Rev-erba and Ptgs2 were also obtained in the endometrium on D6.5e
by immunohistochemistry. In the decidual cells induced by medroxyprogesterone and
2-O-dibutyryl-cAMP, the rhythmic expression levels of clock genes were
attenuated, whereas Ptgs2 transcription was induced. These results indicate that 
decidualization causes the attenuation of clock genes and the induction of Ptgs2.
Furthermore, in the experiment of Bmal1 siRNA, the rhythmic expression of clock
genes and Ptgs2 was attenuated by the siRNA. Transcript levels of Ptgs2 and
prostaglandin (PG)E2 production were increased by treatment with the Rev-erba
antagonist, suggesting the contribution of the nuclear receptor Rev-erba to Ptgs2
expression. Moreover, Rev-erba knockdown enhanced the induction of Ptgs2
transcription and PGE2 production by forskolin. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-PCR
analysis revealed that Rev-erba could directly bind to a proximal RORE site of
Ptgs2. Collectively, this study demonstrates that the attenuation of the
circadian clock, especially its core component Rev-erba, contributes to the
induction of Ptgs2 during decidualization.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 25648833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2015 Mar;186:54-8. doi:
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2015.01.003. Epub 2015 Jan 17.

Influence of menstrual cycle on the expression of clock genes in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells in Macaca fascicularis.

Xu J(1), Xu Y(2), Miao B(3), Deng M(3), Wang Y(3), Xiang P(4), Zhou C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center,
Guangzhou, China; Reproductive Medicine Center, First Affiliated Hospital of Sun 
Yat-Sen University, 58 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou 510080, China; Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Reproductive Medicine Center, First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University, 58 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou 510080, China; Guangdong Provincial
Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address:
xuyanwen@live.cn. (3)Reproductive Medicine Center, First Affiliated Hospital of
Sun Yat-Sen University, 58 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou 510080, China; Guangdong 
Provincial Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Guangzhou, China. (4)Center
for Stem Cell Biology and Tissue Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 
China. (5)Reproductive Medicine Center, First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen 
University, 58 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou 510080, China; Guangdong Provincial
Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address:
gzzhoucanquan@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether the expression patterns of periphery clock
genes were influenced by menstrual cycle in a monkey model.
STUDY DESIGN: In this preliminary study, the expression patterns of four clock
genes (Bmal1, Clock, Cry1 and Per2) in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
from 6 female Macaca fascicularis in menstrual, late follicular and mid luteal
phases of menstrual cycle were determined by qrt-PCR.
RESULTS: Bmal1 and Per2 mRNA levels were found to exhibit significant diurnal
rhythms in all phases of the menstrual cycle. The expression of Cry1 mRNA was
statistically rhythmic in late follicular and mid luteal phases. A main effect of
menstrual cycle existed on the rhythms of Bmal1, Cry1 and Per2 expression, but
not Clock expression. No significant differences were detected between menstrual 
phase and late follicular phase in all clock genes. Significant differences were 
found on the expression of Bmal1, Cry1 or Per2 mRNA between late follicular phase
and mid luteal phase, when no difference existed in estrogen level, indicating
the role of progesterone on biological clock gene expression. Furthermore, the
peak of Bmal1 mRNA level slightly advanced in mid luteal phase compared with that
in menstrual and late follicular phases.
CONCLUSION: The expression patterns of clock genes in PBMCs were influenced by
menstrual cycle, potentially by the change of progesterone levels, and this
effect maybe correlated with early pregnancy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25637813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Curr Biol. 2015 Jan 5;25(1):R49-51. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.11.022.

Sleep: the sound of a local alarm clock.

Adamantidis AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Bern, Department of Neurology, Inselspital University Hospital, 
Bern, Switzerland; McGill University, Department of Psychiatry, Douglas
Institute, Montreal, Canada. Electronic address:
antoine.adamantidis@dkf.unibe.ch.

Comment on
    Curr Biol. 2014 Dec 1;24(23):2838-44.

Besides the master clock located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the
brain, additional clocks are distributed across the central nervous system and
the body. The role of these 'secondary' clocks remains unclear. A new study shows
that the lack of an internal clock in histamine neurons profoundly perturbs
sleep.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25562304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mamm Genome. 2015 Feb;26(1-2):43-56. doi: 10.1007/s00335-014-9553-8. Epub 2015
Jan 6.

Influence of sex on genetic regulation of "drinking in the dark" alcohol
consumption.

Vanderlinden LA(1), Saba LM, Bennett B, Hoffman PL, Tabakoff B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Skaggs School of Pharmacy &
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 12850 E.
Montview Blvd., Campus Box: C238, Aurora, CO, 80045, USA,
lauren.vanderlinden@ucdenver.edu.

The ILSXISS (LXS) recombinant inbred (RI) panel of mice is a valuable resource
for genetic mapping studies of complex traits, due to its genetic diversity and
large number of strains. Male and female mice from this panel were used to
investigate genetic influences on alcohol consumption in the "drinking in the
dark" (DID) model. Male mice (38 strains) and female mice (36 strains) were given
access to 20% ethanol during the early phase of their circadian dark cycle for
four consecutive days. The first principal component of alcohol consumption
measures on days 2, 3, and 4 was used as a phenotype (DID phenotype) to calculate
QTLs, using a SNP marker set for the LXS RI panel. Five QTLs were identified,
three of which included a significant genotype by sex interaction, i.e., a
significant genotype effect in males and not females. To investigate candidate
genes associated with the DID phenotype, data from brain microarray analysis
(Affymetrix Mouse Exon 1.0 ST Arrays) of male LXS RI strains were combined with
RNA-Seq data (mouse brain transcriptome reconstruction) from the parental ILS and
ISS strains in order to identify expressed mouse brain transcripts. Candidate
genes were determined based on common eQTL and DID phenotype QTL regions and
correlation of transcript expression levels with the DID phenotype. The resulting
candidate genes (in particular, Arntl/Bmal1) focused attention on the influence
of circadian regulation on the variation in the DID phenotype in this population 
of mice.

PMCID: PMC4306387
PMID: 25559016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 13;290(7):4367-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.605022. Epub 2014 
Dec 28.

The zebrafish period2 protein positively regulates the circadian clock through
mediation of retinoic acid receptor (RAR)-related orphan receptor a (Rora).

Wang M(1), Zhong Z(1), Zhong Y(1), Zhang W(1), Wang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Circadian Clocks and School of Biology and Basic Medical
Sciences, Medical College, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, Jiangsu, China.
(2)From the Center for Circadian Clocks and School of Biology and Basic Medical
Sciences, Medical College, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, Jiangsu, China
han.wang88@gmail.com wanghan@suda.edu.cn.

We report the characterization of a null mutant for zebrafish circadian clock
gene period2 (per2) generated by transcription activator-like effector nuclease
and a positive role of PER2 in vertebrate circadian regulation. Locomotor
experiments showed that per2 mutant zebrafish display reduced activities under
light-dark and 2-h phase delay under constant darkness, and quantitative real
time PCR analyses showed up-regulation of cry1aa, cry1ba, cry1bb, and aanat2 but 
down-regulation of per1b, per3, and bmal1b in per2 mutant zebrafish, suggesting
that Per2 is essential for the zebrafish circadian clock. Luciferase reporter
assays demonstrated that Per2 represses aanat2 expression through E-box and
enhances bmal1b expression through the Ror/Rev-erb response element, implicating 
that Per2 plays dual roles in the zebrafish circadian clock. Cell transfection
and co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Per2 enhances bmal1b expression
through binding to orphan nuclear receptor Rora. The enhancing effect of mouse
PER2 on Bmal1 transcription is also mediated by RORa even though it binds to
REV-ERBa. Moreover, zebrafish Per2 also appears to have tissue-specific
regulatory roles in numerous peripheral organs. These findings help define the
essential functions of Per2 in the zebrafish circadian clock and in particular
provide strong evidence for a positive role of PER2 in the vertebrate circadian
system.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4326843
PMID: 25544291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cell Rep. 2015 Jan 6;10(1):1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.12.007. Epub 2014 Dec 
24.

In vivo single-cell detection of metabolic oscillations in stem cells.

Stringari C(1), Wang H(2), Geyfman M(3), Crosignani V(4), Kumar V(5), Takahashi
JS(5), Andersen B(6), Gratton E(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fluorescence Dynamics, Biomedical Engineering Department,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92037, USA; Laboratory for Optics
and Biosciences, École Polytechnique, 91128 Palaiseau Cedex, France.
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92037, USA; State Key Laboratory for
Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100193, China. (3)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92037, USA. (4)Laboratory of
Fluorescence Dynamics, Biomedical Engineering Department, University of
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92037, USA. (5)Department of Neuroscience,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (6)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92037, USA; Department of Medicine, 
School of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92037, USA;
Center for Complex Biological System, University of California, Irvine, Irvine,
CA 92037, USA; Institute for Genomics and Bioinformatics, University of
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92037, USA. Electronic address: bogi@uci.edu.
(7)Laboratory of Fluorescence Dynamics, Biomedical Engineering Department,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92037, USA; Center for Complex
Biological System, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92037, USA.
Electronic address: egratton@uci.edu.

Through the use of bulk measurements in metabolic organs, the circadian clock was
shown to play roles in organismal energy homeostasis. However, the relationship
between metabolic and circadian oscillations has not been studied in vivo at a
single-cell level. Also, it is unknown whether the circadian clock controls
metabolism in stem cells. We used a sensitive, noninvasive method to detect
metabolic oscillations and circadian phase within epidermal stem cells in live
mice at the single-cell level. We observe a higher NADH/NAD+ ratio, reflecting an
increased glycolysis/oxidative phosphorylation ratio during the night compared to
the day. Furthermore, we demonstrate that single-cell metabolic heterogeneity
within the basal cell layer correlates with the circadian clock and that diurnal 
fluctuations in NADH/NAD+ ratio are Bmal1 dependent. Our data show that, in
proliferating stem cells, the circadian clock coordinates activities of oxidative
phosphorylation and glycolysis with DNA synthesis, perhaps as a protective
mechanism against genotoxicity.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4340841
PMID: 25543138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Nat Commun. 2014 Dec 23;5:5759. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6759.

Pharmacological targeting of the mammalian clock regulates sleep architecture and
emotional behaviour.

Banerjee S(1), Wang Y(2), Solt LA(1), Griffett K(2), Kazantzis M(1), Amador A(1),
El-Gendy BM(1), Huitron-Resendiz S(3), Roberts AJ(3), Shin Y(1), Kamenecka TM(1),
Burris TP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter,
Florida 33458, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacological and Physiological Science,
Saint Louis University School of Medicine, 1402 South Grand Boulevard, St Louis, 
Missouri 63104, USA. (3)Department of Molecular and Integrative Neurosciences,
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2015 Feb;14(2):92.

Synthetic drug-like molecules that directly modulate the activity of key clock
proteins offer the potential to directly modulate the endogenous circadian rhythm
and treat diseases associated with clock dysfunction. Here we demonstrate that
synthetic ligands targeting a key component of the mammalian clock, the nuclear
receptors REV-ERBa and ß, regulate sleep architecture and emotional behaviour in 
mice. REV-ERB agonists induce wakefulness and reduce REM and slow-wave sleep.
Interestingly, REV-ERB agonists also reduce anxiety-like behaviour. These data
are consistent with increased anxiety-like behaviour of REV-ERBß-null mice, in
which REV-ERB agonists have no effect. These results indicate that
pharmacological targeting of REV-ERB may lead to the development of novel
therapeutics to treat sleep disorders and anxiety.

PMCID: PMC4495958
PMID: 25536025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Elife. 2014 Dec 19;3. doi: 10.7554/eLife.04617.

Differential effects of light and feeding on circadian organization of peripheral
clocks in a forebrain Bmal1 mutant.

Izumo M(1), Pejchal M(2), Schook AC(2), Lange RP(2), Walisser JA(3), Sato TR(4), 
Wang X(5), Bradfield CA(3), Takahashi JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, United States. (2)Department of Neurobiology, Northwestern University,
Evanston, United States. (3)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, United States. (4)Werner Reichardt Centre for Integrative
Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (5)Department of
Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, United States.

In order to assess the contribution of a central clock in the hypothalamic
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) to circadian behavior and the organization of
peripheral clocks, we generated forebrain/SCN-specific Bmal1 knockout mice by
using floxed Bmal1 and pan-neuronal Cre lines. The forebrain knockout mice showed
>90% deletion of BMAL1 in the SCN and exhibited an immediate and complete loss of
circadian behavior in constant conditions. Circadian rhythms in peripheral
tissues persisted but became desynchronized and damped in constant darkness. The 
loss of synchrony was rescued by light/dark cycles and partially by restricted
feeding (only in the liver and kidney but not in the other tissues) in a distinct
manner. These results suggest that the forebrain/SCN is essential for internal
temporal order of robust circadian programs in peripheral clocks, and that
individual peripheral clocks are affected differently by light and feeding in the
absence of a functional oscillator in the forebrain.

PMCID: PMC4298698
PMID: 25525750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 30;111(52):18757-62. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1421708111. Epub 2014 Dec 15.

Hepatocyte circadian clock controls acetaminophen bioactivation through
NADPH-cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase.

Johnson BP(1), Walisser JA(1), Liu Y(1), Shen AL(1), McDearmon EL(2), Moran
SM(1), McIntosh BE(1), Vollrath AL(1), Schook AC(2), Takahashi JS(3), Bradfield
CA(4).

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
53792; (2)Department of Neurobiology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208; and. (3)Department of Neuroscience
and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390 Joseph.Takahashi@UTSouthwestern.edu
bradfield@oncology.wisc.edu. (4)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53792; Joseph.Takahashi@UTSouthwestern.edu
bradfield@oncology.wisc.edu.

The diurnal variation in acetaminophen (APAP) hepatotoxicity (chronotoxicity)
reportedly is driven by oscillations in metabolism that are influenced by the
circadian phases of feeding and fasting. To determine the relative contributions 
of the central clock and the hepatocyte circadian clock in modulating the
chronotoxicity of APAP, we used a conditional null allele of brain and muscle
Arnt-like 1 (Bmal1, aka Mop3 or Arntl) allowing deletion of the clock from
hepatocytes while keeping the central and other peripheral clocks (e.g., the
clocks controlling food intake) intact. We show that deletion of the hepatocyte
clock dramatically reduces APAP bioactivation and toxicity in vivo and in vitro
because of a reduction in NADPH-cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase gene expression,
protein, and activity.

PMCID: PMC4284582
PMID: 25512522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 11;9(12):e112451. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112451.
eCollection 2014.

Circadian mechanisms of food anticipatory rhythms in rats fed once or twice
daily: clock gene and endocrine correlates.

Patton DF(1), Katsuyama AM(2), Pavlovski I(1), Michalik M(1), Patterson Z(3),
Parfyonov M(1), Smit AN(1), Marchant EG(1), Chung SH, Abizaid A(3), Storch KF(4),
de la Iglesia H(2), Mistlberger RE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States of
America. (3)Department of Neuroscience, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada. 
(4)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, PQ, Canada.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0120223. Chung, John [corrected to Chung, Seung Hwan].

Circadian clocks in many brain regions and peripheral tissues are entrained by
the daily rhythm of food intake. Clocks in one or more of these locations
generate a daily rhythm of locomotor activity that anticipates a regular
mealtime. Rats and mice can also anticipate two daily meals. Whether this
involves 1 or 2 circadian clocks is unknown. To gain insight into how the
circadian system adjusts to 2 daily mealtimes, male rats in a 12:12 light-dark
cycle were fed a 2 h meal either 4 h after lights-on or 4 h after lights-off, or 
a 1 h meal at both times. After 30 days, brain, blood, adrenal and stomach tissue
were collected at 6 time points. Multiple clock genes from adrenals and stomachs 
were assayed by RT-PCR. Blood was assayed for corticosterone and ghrelin. Bmal1
expression was quantified in 14 brain regions by in situ hybridization. Clock
gene rhythms in adrenal and stomach from day-fed rats oscillated in antiphase
with the rhythms in night-fed rats, and at an intermediate phase in rats fed
twice daily. Corticosterone and ghrelin in 1-meal rats peaked at or prior to the 
expected mealtime. In 2-meal rats, corticosterone peaked only prior the nighttime
meal, while ghrelin peaked prior to the daytime meal and then remained elevated. 
The olfactory bulb, nucleus accumbens, dorsal striatum, cerebellum and arcuate
nucleus exhibited significant daily rhythms of Bmal1 in the night-fed groups that
were approximately in antiphase in the day-fed groups, and at intermediate levels
(arrhythmic) in rats anticipating 2 daily meals. The dissociations between
anticipatory activity and the peripheral clocks and hormones in rats anticipating
2 daily meals argue against a role for these signals in the timing of behavioral 
rhythms. The absence of rhythmicity at the tissue level in brain regions from
rats anticipating 2 daily meals support behavioral evidence that circadian clock 
cells in these tissues may reorganize into two populations coupled to different
meals.

PMCID: PMC4263600
PMID: 25502949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 11;9(12):e114899. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114899.
eCollection 2014.

The nuclear receptor genes HR3 and E75 are required for the circadian rhythm in a
primitive insect.

Kamae Y(1), Uryu O(1), Miki T(2), Tomioka K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Okayama University,
Okayama, 700-8530, Japan. (2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Okayama
University, Okayama, 700-8530, Japan.

Insect circadian rhythms are generated by a circadian clock consisting of
transcriptional/translational feedback loops, in which CYCLE and CLOCK are the
key elements in activating the transcription of various clock genes such as
timeless (tim) and period (per). Although the transcriptional regulation of Clock
(Clk) has been profoundly studied, little is known about the regulation of cycle 
(cyc). Here, we identify the orphan nuclear receptor genes HR3 and E75, which are
orthologs of mammalian clock genes, Rora and Rev-erba, respectively, as factors
involved in the rhythmic expression of the cyc gene in a primitive insect, the
firebrat Thermobia domestica. Our results show that HR3 and E75 are rhythmically 
expressed, and their normal, rhythmic expression is required for the persistence 
of locomotor rhythms. Their RNAi considerably altered the rhythmic transcription 
of not only cyc but also tim. Surprisingly, the RNAi of HR3 revealed the rhythmic
expression of Clk, suggesting that this ancestral insect species possesses the
mechanisms for rhythmic expression of both cyc and Clk genes. When either HR3 or 
E75 was knocked down, tim, cyc, and Clk or tim and cyc, respectively, oscillated 
in phase, suggesting that the two genes play an important role in the regulation 
of the phase relationship among the clock genes. Interestingly, HR3 and E75 were 
also found to be involved in the regulation of ecdysis, suggesting that they
interconnect the circadian clock and developmental processes.

PMCID: PMC4263706
PMID: 25502221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. FASEB J. 2015 Apr;29(4):1360-70. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-265686. Epub 2014 Dec 12.

Glucocorticoids entrain molecular clock components in human peripheral cells.

Cuesta M(1), Cermakian N(1), Boivin DB(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Centre for Study and Treatment of Circadian Rhythms, Laboratory of Molecular 
Chronobiology, and Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Department of
Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (2)*Centre for Study and
Treatment of Circadian Rhythms, Laboratory of Molecular Chronobiology, and
Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Department of Psychiatry, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada diane.boivin@douglas.mcgill.ca.

In humans, shift work induces a desynchronization between the circadian system
and the outside world, which contributes to shift work-associated medical
disorders. Using a simulated night shift experiment, we previously showed that 3 
d of bright light at night fully synchronize the central clock to the inverted
sleep schedule, whereas the peripheral clocks located in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) took longer to reset. This underlines the need for
testing the effects of synchronizers on both the central and peripheral clocks.
Glucocorticoids display circadian rhythms controlled by the central clock and are
thought to act as synchronizers of rodent peripheral clocks. In the present
study, we tested whether the human central and peripheral clocks were sensitive
to exogenous glucocorticoids (Cortef) administered in the late afternoon. We
showed that 20 mg Cortef taken orally acutely increased PER1 expression in PBMC
peripheral clocks. After 6 d of Cortef administration, the phases of central
markers were not affected, whereas those of PER2-3 and BMAL1 expression in PBMCs 
were shifted by ~ 9.5-11.5 h. These results demonstrate, for the first time, that
human peripheral clocks are entrained by glucocorticoids. Importantly, they
suggest innovative interventions for shift workers and jet-lag travelers,
combining synchronizing agents for the central and peripheral clocks.

© FASEB.

PMID: 25500935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Clin Invest. 2015 Jan;125(1):324-36. doi: 10.1172/JCI76881. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

Smooth-muscle BMAL1 participates in blood pressure circadian rhythm regulation.

Xie Z, Su W, Liu S, Zhao G, Esser K, Schroder EA, Lefta M, Stauss HM, Guo Z, Gong
MC.

As the central pacemaker, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) has long been
considered the primary regulator of blood pressure circadian rhythm; however,
this dogma has been challenged by the discovery that each of the clock genes
present in the SCN is also expressed and functions in peripheral tissues. The
involvement and contribution of these peripheral clock genes in the circadian
rhythm of blood pressure remains uncertain. Here, we demonstrate that selective
deletion of the circadian clock transcriptional activator aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator-like (Bmal1) from smooth muscle, but not from
cardiomyocytes, compromised blood pressure circadian rhythm and decreased blood
pressure without affecting SCN-controlled locomotor activity in murine models. In
mesenteric arteries, BMAL1 bound to the promoter of and activated the
transcription of Rho-kinase 2 (Rock2), and Bmal1 deletion abolished the
time-of-day variations in response to agonist-induced vasoconstriction, myosin
phosphorylation, and ROCK2 activation. Together, these data indicate that
peripheral inputs contribute to the daily control of vasoconstriction and blood
pressure and suggest that clock gene expression outside of the SCN should be
further evaluated to elucidate pathogenic mechanisms of diseases involving blood 
pressure circadian rhythm disruption.

PMCID: PMC4382248
PMID: 25485682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(20):3282-91. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.954454.

Loss of circadian clock gene expression is associated with tumor progression in
breast cancer.

Cadenas C(1), van de Sandt L, Edlund K, Lohr M, Hellwig B, Marchan R, Schmidt M, 
Rahnenführer J, Oster H, Hengstler JG.

Author information: 
(1)a Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment an Human Factors (ifADo) at 
the TU Dortmund University ; Dortmund , Germany.

Several studies suggest a link between circadian rhythm disturbances and
tumorigenesis. However, the association between circadian clock genes and
prognosis in breast cancer has not been systematically studied. Therefore, we
examined the expression of 17 clock components in tumors from 766 node-negative
breast cancer patients that were untreated in both neoadjuvant and adjuvant
settings. In addition, their association with metastasis-free survival (MFS) and 
correlation to clinicopathological parameters were investigated. Aiming to
estimate functionality of the clockwork, we studied clock gene expression
relationships by correlation analysis. Higher expression of several clock genes
(e.g., CLOCK, PER1, PER2, PER3, CRY2, NPAS2 and RORC) was found to be associated 
with longer MFS in univariate Cox regression analyses (HR<1 and FDR-adjusted P < 
0.05). Stratification according to molecular subtype revealed prognostic
relevance for PER1, PER3, CRY2 and NFIL3 in the ER+/HER2- subgroup, CLOCK and
NPAS2 in the ER-/HER2- subtype, and ARNTL2 in HER2+ breast cancer. In the
multivariate Cox model, only PER3 (HR = 0.66; P = 0.016) and RORC (HR = 0.42; P =
0.003) were found to be associated with survival outcome independent of
established clinicopathological parameters. Pairwise correlations between
functionally-related clock genes (e.g., PER2-PER3 and CRY2-PER3) were stronger in
ER+, HER2- and low-grade carcinomas; whereas, weaker correlation coefficients
were observed in ER- and HER2+ tumors, high-grade tumors and tumors that
progressed to metastatic disease. In conclusion, loss of clock genes is
associated with worse prognosis in breast cancer. Coordinated co-expression of
clock genes, indicative of a functional circadian clock, is maintained in ER+,
HER2-, low grade and non-metastasizing tumors but is compromised in more
aggressive carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC4613905
PMID: 25485508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 23;290(4):2189-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.612358. Epub 2014 
Dec 5.

Glucagon-CREB/CRTC2 signaling cascade regulates hepatic BMAL1 protein.

Sun X(1), Dang F(1), Zhang D(1), Yuan Y(1), Zhang C(2), Wu Y(2), Wang Y(3), Liu
Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road Shanghai 200031, the University of the Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing 100049, and. (2)From the Key Laboratory of Nutrition and
Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road Shanghai
200031. (3)the Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics,
Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China. (4)From the Key Laboratory of Nutrition and
Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road Shanghai
200031, liuyi@sibs.ac.cn.

Energy metabolism follows a diurnal pattern responding to the cycles of light and
food exposures. Although food availability is a potent synchronizer of peripheral
circadian clock in mammals, the underlying mechanism remains elusive. Here, we
found that the temporal signals of fasting and refeeding hormones regulate the
transcription of Bmal1, a key transcription activator of molecular clock, in the 
liver. During fasting, glucagon, a major fasting hormone, activates CREB/CRTC2
transcriptional complex that is recruited to Bmal1 promoter to induce its
expression. Furthermore, we showed that CRTC2 is required for basal
transcriptional regulation of Bmal1 by experiments using either
adenovirus-mediated CRTC2 RNAi knockdown or primary Crtc2 null hepatocytes. On
the other hand, insulin suppresses fasting-induced Bmal1 expression by inhibiting
CRTC2 activity after refeeding. Taken together, our results indicate CRTC2 as a
key component of the circadian oscillator that integrates the mammalian clock and
energy metabolism.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4303670
PMID: 25480789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Nutr Biochem. 2015 Feb;26(2):112-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2014.09.006. Epub
2014 Oct 13.

Chronic consumption of dietary proanthocyanidins modulates peripheral clocks in
healthy and obese rats.

Ribas-Latre A(1), Baselga-Escudero L(1), Casanova E(1), Arola-Arnal A(1), Salvadó
MJ(1), Arola L(2), Bladé C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Universitat Rovira i Virgili,
Tarragona, Spain. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Universitat
Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona, Spain. Electronic address: lluis.arola@urv.cat.

Circadian rhythm plays an important role in maintaining homeostasis, and its
disruption increases the risk of developing metabolic syndrome. Circadian rhythm 
is maintained by a central clock in the hypothalamus that is entrained by light, 
but circadian clocks are also present in peripheral tissues. These peripheral
clocks are trained by other cues, such as diet. The aim of this study was to
determine whether proanthocyanidins, the most abundant polyphenols in the human
diet, modulate the expression of clock and clock-controlled genes in the liver,
gut and mesenteric white adipose tissue (mWAT) in healthy and obese rats. Grape
seed proanthocyanidin extracts (GSPEs) were administered for 21 days at 5, 25 or 
50 mg GSPE/kg body weight in healthy rats and 25 mg GSPE/kg body weight in rats
with diet-induced obesity. In healthy animals, GSPE administration led to the
overexpression of core clock genes in a positive dose-dependent manner. Moreover,
the acetylated BMAL1 protein ratio increased with the same pattern in the liver
and mWAT. With regards to clock-controlled genes, Per2 was also overexpressed,
whereas Rev-erba and RORa were repressed in a negative dose-dependent manner.
Diet-induced obesity always resulted in the overexpression of some core clock and
clock-related genes, although the particular gene affected was tissue specific.
GSPE administration counteracted disturbances in the clock genes in the liver and
gut but was less effective in normalizing the clock gene disruption in WAT. In
conclusion, proanthocyanidins have the capacity to modulate peripheral molecular 
clocks in both healthy and obese states.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25459887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Curr Biol. 2014 Dec 1;24(23):2838-44. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.10.019. Epub 2014
Nov 13.

Circadian factor BMAL1 in histaminergic neurons regulates sleep architecture.

Yu X(1), Zecharia A(1), Zhang Z(1), Yang Q(1), Yustos R(1), Jager P(1), Vyssotski
AL(2), Maywood ES(3), Chesham JE(3), Ma Y(1), Brickley SG(1), Hastings MH(3),
Franks NP(4), Wisden W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Sir Ernst Chain
Building, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK. (2)Institute of Neuroinformatics, 
University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Winterhurerstrasse 190, Zurich 8057,
Switzerland. (3)Neurobiology Division, Medical Research Council Laboratory of
Molecular Biology, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge
CB2 0QH, UK. (4)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Sir Ernst
Chain Building, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK. Electronic address:
n.franks@imperial.ac.uk. (5)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London,
Sir Ernst Chain Building, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK. Electronic
address: w.wisden@imperial.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2015 Jan 5;25(1):R49-51.

Circadian clocks allow anticipation of daily environmental changes. The
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) houses the master clock, but clocks are also widely
expressed elsewhere in the body. Although some peripheral clocks have established
roles, it is unclear what local brain clocks do. We tested the contribution of
one putative local clock in mouse histaminergic neurons in the tuberomamillary
nucleus to the regulation of the sleep-wake cycle. Histaminergic neurons are
silent during sleep, and start firing after wake onset; the released histamine,
made by the enzyme histidine decarboxylase (HDC), enhances wakefulness. We found 
that hdc gene expression varies with time of day. Selectively deleting the Bmal1 
(also known as Arntl or Mop3) clock gene from histaminergic cells removes this
variation, producing higher HDC expression and brain histamine levels during the 
day. The consequences include more fragmented sleep, prolonged wake at night,
shallower sleep depth (lower nonrapid eye movement [NREM] d power), increased
NREM-to-REM transitions, hindered recovery sleep after sleep deprivation, and
impaired memory. Removing BMAL1 from histaminergic neurons does not, however,
affect circadian rhythms. We propose that for mammals with polyphasic/nonwake
consolidating sleep, the local BMAL1-dependent clock directs appropriately timed 
declines and increases in histamine biosynthesis to produce an appropriate
balance of wake and sleep within the overall daily cycle of rest and activity
specified by the SCN.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4252164
PMID: 25454592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Jan 5;399:284-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.10.018. Epub
2014 Oct 24.

The circadian clock machinery controls adiponectin expression.

Barnea M(1), Chapnik N(1), Genzer Y(1), Froy O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Food Science and Nutrition, The Robert H. Smith
Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
P.O. Box 12, Rehovot 76100, Israel. (2)Institute of Biochemistry, Food Science
and Nutrition, The Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environment, 
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, P.O. Box 12, Rehovot 76100, Israel.
Electronic address: oren.froy@mail.huji.ac.il.

Adiponectin, an adipokine involved in glucose and lipid metabolism, exhibits a
circadian manner of expression. Adiponectin expression is mediated by the
helix-loop-helix transcription factor sterol regulatory element binding protein
(SREBP)-1c. In this study, we tested whether the circadian clock helix-loop-helix
transcription factors CLOCK and BMAL1 regulate adiponectin expression. We found
that adiponectin expression is regulated by the clock through the circadian
expression of its transcription factor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) and its co-activator PPAR<U+03B3> co-activator 1a (PGC1a) in mouse white
adipose tissue and differentiated adipocytes. In addition, reconstitution of the 
core clock mechanism and siRNA experiments in cell culture suggest that the clock
directly activates the adiponectin promoter and mediates its expression. In
summary, adiponectin expression is regulated by the circadian clock and through
the circadian expression of its transcription factor PPAR<U+03B3> and its co-activator
PGC1a.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25448847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Biogerontology. 2015 Feb;16(1):109-23. doi: 10.1007/s10522-014-9541-0. Epub 2014 
Nov 28.

Daily rhythms of serotonin metabolism and the expression of clock genes in
suprachiasmatic nucleus of rotenone-induced Parkinson's disease male Wistar rat
model and effect of melatonin administration.

Mattam U(1), Jagota A.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology and Molecular Chronobiology Laboratory, Department of Animal
Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, 500046,
India.

The circadian system in suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) involves regulated
serotonin levels and coordinated expression of various clock genes. To understand
circadian disfunction in the age-related neurodegenerative disorder Parkinson's
disease (PD), the rotenone-induced PD (RIPD) male Wistar rat model was used. The 
alterations in the rhythmic dynamic equilibrium of interactions between the
various components of serotonin metabolism and the molecular clock were measured.
There was significant decrease in the mean 24 h levels of tryptophan,
5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), serotonin (5-HT), N-acetyl serotonin (NAS) and
melatonin (MEL) by approximately 63, 51, 76 and 96% respectively ( p = 0.05).
However significant increase in 5-methoxy indole acetic acid (5-MIAA), 5-methoxy 
tryptophol (5-MTOH), 5-hydroxy tryptophol (5-HTOH) indicated increased serotonin 
catabolism with the abolition of daily rhythms of MEL, 5-HTP and 5-MIAA in RIPD. 
24 h mean levels of rPer1, rCry1, rBmal1 reduced by about 0.5, 0.74 and 0.39-fold
and increased for rPer2 by about 1.7-fold. The daily pulse of rPer2, rCry1, rCry2
and rBmal1 significantly decreased by 0.36, 0.6, 0.14, 0.1 and 0.2-fold. As
melatonin, an antioxidant and an endogenous synchronizer of rhythm declined in
RIPD male Wistar rat model, the effects of melatonin-administration on the
rhythmic expression of various clock genes were studied. Interestingly,
melatonin-administration resulted in restoration of the phase of rPer1 daily
rhythm in RIPD indicating differential sensitivity of various clock components
towards melatonin. The animals which were administered both rotenone and MEL for 
48 days interestingly showed neuroprotective effects in dark phase on
correlations between expression of various genes.

PMID: 25430725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Chronobiol Int. 2015 Apr;32(3):358-67. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2014.982284. Epub
2014 Nov 25.

Clock-controlled StAR's expression and corticosterone production contribute to
the endotoxemia immune response.

Wang J(1), Luo Y, Wang K, Wang Y, Zhang X, Teng H, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institutes of Life Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing ,
China .

Increased studies have revealed that core mammalian clock genes regulate immune
functions. Previously, we reported Per2(m/m) mice displayed a down-regulated
circadian immune response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) challenge. However, the
mediators between Per2 and immune function and their underlying mechanisms remain
unclear. In this study, serum corticosterone (CORT), a hormone which played a
crucial role in immune suppression, was found to be significantly increased in
Per2(m/m) mice compared with the one in wild-type mice following LPS
administration at ZT3 and ZT8. The elevated level of serum CORT was correlated
with their higher survival rate, which could be further suppressed by
glucocorticoid receptor antagonist. Expression of StAR, a rate-limiting enzyme in
CORT synthesis, as well as the expression of core clock genes (Clock/Bmal1), was 
more strongly induced and longer lasting in Per2(m/m) mice in contrast to the
ones in control mice after LPS injection. Additionally, the binding of CLOCK and 
BMAL1 to StAR's promoter was elevated after LPS administration, and the binding
was higher in Per2(m/m) mice. Furthermore, loss of Clock function resulted in
lower survival and failed to induce the serum CORT production and StAR expression
in Clock(m/m) mice following LPS administration. Our results revealed that CORT, 
regulated by Bmal1/Clock transcriptional activation of StAR's expression, could
function as a mediator between clock system and immune response and contribute to
the endotoxemia resistance in Per2(m/m) mice.

PMID: 25421094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Colorectal Dis. 2015 Apr;17(4):290-7. doi: 10.1111/codi.12847.

Expression of core clock genes in colorectal tumour cells compared with normal
mucosa: a systematic review of clinical trials.

Fonnes S(1), Donatsky AM, Gögenur I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Perioperative Optimization, Department of Surgery, Herlev Hospital,
University of Copenhagen, Herlev, Denmark.

AIM: Experimental studies have shown that some circadian core clock genes may act
as tumour suppressors and have an important role in the response to oncological
treatment. This study investigated the evidence regarding modified expression of 
core clock genes in colorectal cancer and its correlation to clinicopathological 
features and survival.
METHOD: A systematic review was conducted without meta-analysis according to the 
PRISMA guidelines on 24 March 2014 using PubMed and EMBASE. Eligibility criteria 
were: study design, original research article, English language, human subjects
and gene expression of colorectal cancer cells compared with healthy mucosa cells
from specimens analysed by real-time or quantitative real-time polymer chain
reaction. The expression of the core clock genes Period, Cryptochrome, Bmal1 and 
Clock in colorectal tumours were compared with healthy mucosa and correlated with
clinicopathological features and survival.
RESULTS: Seventy-four articles were identified and 11 studies were included.
Overall, gene expression of Period was significantly decreased in colorectal
cancer cells compared with healthy mucosa cells. This tendency was also seen in
the gene expression of Clock. Other core clock genes did not appear to be
differentially expressed. Decreased Period gene expression was correlated to some
clinicopathological features.
CONCLUSION: The Period genes seemed to be modified in colorectal tumour cells
compared with normal mucosa. Core clock genes might be possible future biomarkers
in colorectal cancer.

Colorectal Disease © 2014 The Association of Coloproctology of Great Britain and 
Ireland.

PMID: 25418520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Nat Commun. 2014 Nov 24;5:5549. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6549.

Regulation of Drosophila circadian rhythms by miRNA let-7 is mediated by a
regulatory cycle.

Chen W(1), Liu Z(1), Li T(1), Zhang R(1), Xue Y(1), Zhong Y(1), Bai W(1), Zhou
D(1), Zhao Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, College of Agronomy and Biotechnology, China
Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.

MicroRNA-mediated post-transcriptional regulations are increasingly recognized as
important components of the circadian rhythm. Here we identify microRNA let-7,
part of the Drosophila let-7-Complex, as a regulator of circadian rhythms
mediated by a circadian regulatory cycle. Overexpression of let-7 in clock
neurons lengthens circadian period and its deletion attenuates the morning
activity peak as well as molecular oscillation. Let-7 regulates the circadian
rhythm via repression of CLOCKWORK ORANGE (CWO). Conversely, upregulated cwo in
cwo-expressing cells can rescue the phenotype of let-7-Complex overexpression.
Moreover, circadian prothoracicotropic hormone (PTTH) and CLOCK-regulated 20-OH
ecdysteroid signalling contribute to the circadian expression of let-7 through
the 20-OH ecdysteroid receptor. Thus, we find a regulatory cycle involving PTTH, 
a direct target of CLOCK, and PTTH-driven miRNA let-7.

PMID: 25417916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2014 Nov 14;11:61. doi: 10.1186/s12989-014-0061-5.

Pulmonary and hemostatic toxicity of multi-walled carbon nanotubes and zinc oxide
nanoparticles after pulmonary exposure in Bmal1 knockout mice.

Luyts K(1), Smulders S(2), Napierska D(3), Van Kerckhoven S(4), Poels K(5),
Scheers H(6), Hemmeryckx B(7), Nemery B(8), Hoylaerts MF(9), Hoet PH(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Occupational and Environmental
Toxicology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Katrien.luyts@med.kuleuven.be.
(2)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Occupational and Environmental
Toxicology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Stijn.smulders@med.kuleuven.be.
(3)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Occupational and Environmental
Toxicology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Dorota.napierska@gmail.com. (4)Department
of Cardiovascular sciences, Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium. Soetkin.VanKerckhoven@med.kuleuven.be. (5)Department of Public
Health and Primary Care, Laboratory for Occupational and Environmental Hygiene,
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Katrien.Poels@med.kuleuven.be. (6)Department of
Public Health and Primary Care, Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Hans.Scheers@med.kuleuven.be. (7)Department of
Cardiovascular sciences, Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium. Bianca.Hemmeryckx@med.kuleuven.be. (8)Department of Public
Health and Primary Care, Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium. Ben.Nemery@med.kuleuven.be. (9)Department of Cardiovascular
sciences, Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 
Marc.Hoylaerts@med.kuleuven.be. (10)Department of Public Health and Primary Care,
Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
peter.hoet@med.kuleuven.be.

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary exposure to nanoparticles (NPs) may affect, in addition to 
pulmonary toxicity, the cardiovascular system such as procoagulant effects,
vascular dysfunction and progression of atherosclerosis. However, only few
studies have investigated hemostatic effects after pulmonary exposure.
METHODS: We used Bmal1 (brain and muscle ARNT-like protein-1) knockout
(Bmal1(-/-)) mice which have a disturbed circadian rhythm and procoagulant
phenotype, to study the pulmonary and hemostatic toxicity of multi-walled carbon 
nanotubes (MWCNTs) and zinc oxide (ZnO) NPs after subacute pulmonary exposure.
Bmal1(-/-) and wild-type (Bmal1(+/+)) mice were exposed via oropharyngeal
aspiration, once a week, during 5 consecutive weeks, to a cumulative dose of 32
or 128 µg MWCNTs or 32 or 64 µg ZnO NPs.
RESULTS: MWCNTs caused a pronounced inflammatory response in the lung with
increased cell counts in the broncho-alveolar lavage and increased secretion of
interleukin-1ß and cytokine-induced neutrophil chemo-attractant (KC), oxidative
stress (increased ratio of oxidized versus reduced glutathione and decreased
total glutathione) as well as anemic and procoagulant effects as evidenced by a
decreased prothrombin time with increased fibrinogen concentrations and
coagulation factor (F)VII. In contrast, the ZnO NPs seemed to suppress the
inflammatory (decreased neutrophils in Bmal1(-/-) mice) and oxidative response
(increased total glutathione in Bmal1(-/-) mice), but were also procoagulant with
a significant increase of FVIII. The procoagulant effects, as well as the
significant correlations between the pulmonary endpoints (inflammation and
oxidative stress) and hemostasis parameters were more pronounced in Bmal1(-/-)
mice than in Bmal1(+/+) mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The Bmal1(-/-) mouse is a sensitive animal model to study the
procoagulant effects of engineered NPs. The MWCNTs and ZnO NPs showed different
pulmonary toxicity but both NPs induced procoagulant effects, suggesting
different mechanisms of affecting hemostasis. However, the correlation analysis
suggests a causal association between the observed pulmonary and procoagulant
effects.

PMCID: PMC4234845
PMID: 25394423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 12;9(11):e112811. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112811.
eCollection 2014.

The circadian clock maintains cardiac function by regulating mitochondrial
metabolism in mice.

Kohsaka A(1), Das P(1), Hashimoto I(1), Nakao T(1), Deguchi Y(1), Gouraud SS(1), 
Waki H(1), Muragaki Y(2), Maeda M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Wakayama Medical University School of Medicine,
Wakayama, Japan. (2)First Department of Pathology, Wakayama Medical University
School of Medicine, Wakayama, Japan.

Cardiac function is highly dependent on oxidative energy, which is produced by
mitochondrial respiration. Defects in mitochondrial function are associated with 
both structural and functional abnormalities in the heart. Here, we show that
heart-specific ablation of the circadian clock gene Bmal1 results in cardiac
mitochondrial defects that include morphological changes and functional
abnormalities, such as reduced enzymatic activities within the respiratory
complex. Mice without cardiac Bmal1 function show a significant decrease in the
expression of genes associated with the fatty acid oxidative pathway, the
tricarboxylic acid cycle, and the mitochondrial respiratory chain in the heart
and develop severe progressive heart failure with age. Importantly, similar
changes in gene expression related to mitochondrial oxidative metabolism are also
observed in C57BL/6J mice subjected to chronic reversal of the light-dark cycle; 
thus, they show disrupted circadian rhythmicity. These findings indicate that the
circadian clock system plays an important role in regulating mitochondrial
metabolism and thereby maintains cardiac function.

PMCID: PMC4229239
PMID: 25389966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 29;5:4926. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5926.

Novel loci affecting iron homeostasis and their effects in individuals at risk
for hemochromatosis.

Benyamin B(1), Esko T(2), Ried JS(3), Radhakrishnan A(4), Vermeulen SH(5),
Traglia M(6), Gögele M(7), Anderson D(8), Broer L(9), Podmore C(10), Luan J(10), 
Kutalik Z(11), Sanna S(12), van der Meer P(13), Tanaka T(14), Wang F(15), Westra 
HJ(16), Franke L(16), Mihailov E(17), Milani L(18), Hälldin J(18), Winkelmann
J(19), Meitinger T(20), Thiery J(21), Peters A(22), Waldenberger M(22), Rendon
A(23), Jolley J(24), Sambrook J(24), Kiemeney LA(25), Sweep FC(26), Sala CF(27), 
Schwienbacher C(7), Pichler I(7), Hui J(28), Demirkan A(29), Isaacs A(30), Amin
N(31), Steri M(12), Waeber G(32), Verweij N(13), Powell JE(33), Nyholt DR(34),
Heath AC(35), Madden PA(35), Visscher PM(33), Wright MJ(34), Montgomery GW(34),
Martin NG(34), Hernandez D(36), Bandinelli S(37), van der Harst P(38), Uda M(12),
Vollenweider P(32), Scott RA(10), Langenberg C(10), Wareham NJ(10); InterAct
Consortium, van Duijn C(39), Beilby J(28), Pramstaller PP(40), Hicks AA(7),
Ouwehand WH(24), Oexle K(41), Gieger C(42), Metspalu A(18), Camaschella C(43),
Toniolo D(27), Swinkels DW(26), Whitfield JB(34).

Collaborators: Langenberg C, Scott RA, Podmore C, Sharp SJ, Forouhi NG, Kerrison 
ND, Sims M, Barroso I, Deloukas P, McCarthy MI, Arriola L, Balkau B, Barricarte
A, Schulze MB, Meidtner K, Boeing H, Franks PW, Gonzalez C, Grioni S, Kaaks R,
Key TJ, Navarro C, Nilsson PM, Overvad K, Palli D, Panico S, Quirós J, Rolandsson
O, Sacerdote C, Sánchez MJ, Slimani N, Tjonneland A, Tumino R, van der A DL, van 
der Schouw YT, Riboli E, Wareham NJ.

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2015;6:6542. Häldin, Jonas [corrected to Hälldin, Jonas].

Variation in body iron is associated with or causes diseases, including anaemia
and iron overload. Here, we analyse genetic association data on biochemical
markers of iron status from 11 European-population studies, with replication in
eight additional cohorts (total up to 48,972 subjects). We find 11
genome-wide-significant (P<5 × 10(-8)) loci, some including known iron-related
genes (HFE, SLC40A1, TF, TFR2, TFRC, TMPRSS6) and others novel (ABO, ARNTL,
FADS2, NAT2, TEX14). SNPs at ARNTL, TF, and TFR2 affect iron markers in HFE C282Y
homozygotes at risk for hemochromatosis. There is substantial overlap between our
iron loci and loci affecting erythrocyte and lipid phenotypes. These results will
facilitate investigation of the roles of iron in disease.

PMCID: PMC4215164
PMID: 25352340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 16;9(10):e110176. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110176.
eCollection 2014.

Shifting the circadian rhythm of feeding in mice induces gastrointestinal,
metabolic and immune alterations which are influenced by ghrelin and the core
clock gene Bmal1.

Laermans J(1), Broers C(1), Beckers K(1), Vancleef L(1), Steensels S(1), Thijs
T(1), Tack J(1), Depoortere I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gut Peptide Research Lab, Translational Research Center for Gastrointestinal
Disorders, KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: In our 24-hour society, an increasing number of people are required
to be awake and active at night. As a result, the circadian rhythm of feeding is 
seriously compromised. To mimic this, we subjected mice to restricted feeding
(RF), a paradigm in which food availability is limited to short and unusual times
of day. RF induces a food-anticipatory increase in the levels of the hunger
hormone ghrelin. We aimed to investigate whether ghrelin triggers the changes in 
body weight and gastric emptying that occur during RF. Moreover, the effect of
genetic deletion of the core clock gene Bmal1 on these physiological adaptations 
was studied.
METHODS: Wild-type, ghrelin receptor knockout and Bmal1 knockout mice were fed ad
libitum or put on RF with a normal or high-fat diet (HFD). Plasma ghrelin levels 
were measured by radioimmunoassay. Gastric contractility was studied in vitro in 
muscle strips and in vivo (13C breath test). Cytokine mRNA expression was
quantified and infiltration of immune cells was assessed histologically.
RESULTS: The food-anticipatory increase in plasma ghrelin levels induced by RF
with normal chow was abolished in HFD-fed mice. During RF, body weight
restoration was facilitated by ghrelin and Bmal1. RF altered cytokine mRNA
expression levels and triggered contractility changes resulting in an accelerated
gastric emptying, independent from ghrelin signaling. During RF with a HFD, Bmal1
enhanced neutrophil recruitment to the stomach, increased gastric IL-1a
expression and promoted gastric contractility changes.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study demonstrating that ghrelin and Bmal1
regulate the extent of body weight restoration during RF, whereas Bmal1 controls 
the type of inflammatory infiltrate and contractility changes in the stomach.
Disrupting the circadian rhythm of feeding induces a variety of diet-dependent
metabolic, immune and gastrointestinal alterations, which may explain the higher 
prevalence of obesity and immune-related gastrointestinal disorders among shift
workers.

PMCID: PMC4199674
PMID: 25329803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Apr;135(4):1053-64. doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.442. Epub 2014 
Oct 13.

The peripheral clock regulates human pigmentation.

Hardman JA(1), Tobin DJ(2), Haslam IS(3), Farjo N(4), Farjo B(4), Al-Nuaimi Y(3),
Grimaldi B(5), Paus R(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] The Centre for Dermatology Research, Institute of Inflammation and Repair, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK [2] Doctoral Training Centre in
Integrative Systems Biology, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK. (2)Centre for Skin Sciences, School of Life Sciences,
University of Bradford, Bradford, UK. (3)The Centre for Dermatology Research,
Institute of Inflammation and Repair, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(4)Farjo Medical Centre, Manchester, UK. (5)Department of Drug Discovery and
Development, Instituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT), Genoa, Italy. (6)1] The
Centre for Dermatology Research, Institute of Inflammation and Repair, University
of Manchester, Manchester, UK [2] Department of Dermatology, University of
Muenster, Muenster, Germany.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Apr;135(4):943-5.

Although the regulation of pigmentation is well characterized, it remains unclear
whether cell-autonomous controls regulate the cyclic on-off switching of
pigmentation in the hair follicle (HF). As human HFs and epidermal melanocytes
express clock genes and proteins, and given that core clock genes (PER1, BMAL1)
modulate human HF cycling, we investigated whether peripheral clock activity
influences human HF pigmentation. We found that silencing BMAL1 or PER1 in human 
HFs increased HF melanin content. Furthermore, tyrosinase expression and
activity, as well as TYRP1 and TYRP2 mRNA levels, gp100 protein expression,
melanocyte dendricity, and the number gp100+ HF melanocytes, were all
significantly increased in BMAL1 and/or PER1-silenced HFs. BMAL1 or PER1
silencing also increased epidermal melanin content, gp100 protein expression, and
tyrosinase activity in human skin. These effects reflect direct modulation of
melanocytes, as BMAL1 and/or PER1 silencing in isolated melanocytes increased
tyrosinase activity and TYRP1/2 expression. Mechanistically, BMAL1 knockdown
reduces PER1 transcription, and PER1 silencing induces phosphorylation of the
master regulator of melanogenesis, microphthalmia-associated transcription
factor, thus stimulating human melanogenesis and melanocyte activity in situ and 
in vitro. Therefore, the molecular clock operates as a cell-autonomous modulator 
of human pigmentation and may be targeted for future therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 25310406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014 Dec;10(12):701. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2014.174. Epub 2014 
Oct 7.

Reproductive endocrinology: circadian clock involved in embryo implantation.

Greenhill C.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 30;111(39):14295-300.

PMID: 25287286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 14;289(46):32064-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.578278. Epub
2014 Sep 30.

The mammalian circadian clock protein period counteracts cryptochrome in
phosphorylation dynamics of circadian locomotor output cycles kaput (CLOCK).

Matsumura R(1), Tsuchiya Y(2), Tokuda I(3), Matsuo T(1), Sato M(1), Node K(4),
Nishida E(2), Akashi M(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Research Institute for Time Studies, Yamaguchi University, 1677-1
Yoshida, Yamaguchi 753-8511, Japan. (2)the Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto
606-8502, Japan. (3)the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Ritsumeikan
University, 1-1-1 Nojihigashi, Kusatsu 525-8577, Japan, and. (4)the Department of
Cardiovascular Medicine, Saga University, 5-1-1 Nabeshima, Saga 849-8501, Japan. 
(5)From the Research Institute for Time Studies, Yamaguchi University, 1677-1
Yoshida, Yamaguchi 753-8511, Japan, akashima@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp.

The circadian transcription factor CLOCK exhibits a circadian oscillation in its 
phosphorylation levels. Although it remains unclear whether this phosphorylation 
contributes to circadian rhythm generation, it has been suggested to be involved 
in transcriptional activity, intracellular localization, and degradative turnover
of CLOCK. Here, we obtained direct evidence that CLOCK phosphorylation may be
essential for autonomous circadian oscillation in clock gene expression.
Importantly, we found that the circadian transcriptional repressors Cryptochrome 
(CRY) and Period (PER) showed an opposite effect on CLOCK phosphorylation; CRY
impaired BMAL1-dependent CLOCK phosphorylation, whereas PER protected the
phosphorylation against CRY. Interestingly, unlike PER1 and PER2, PER3 did not
exert a protective action, which correlates with the phenotypic differences among
mice lacking the Per genes. Further studies on the regulatory mechanism of CLOCK 
phosphorylation would thus lead to elucidation of the mechanism of CRY-mediated
transcriptional repression and an understanding of the true role of PER in the
negative feedback system.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4231683
PMID: 25271155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 5;289(49):34341-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.606392. Epub 2014 
Sep 30.

Class IIa histone deacetylases are conserved regulators of circadian function.

Fogg PC(1), O'Neill JS(2), Dobrzycki T(1), Calvert S(1), Lord EC(1), McIntosh
RL(1), Elliott CJ(1), Sweeney ST(1), Hastings MH(2), Chawla S(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biology, University of York, York YO10 5DD, United
Kingdom and. (2)the Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology,
Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, United Kingdom. (3)From the Department
of Biology, University of York, York YO10 5DD, United Kingdom and
sangeeta.chawla@york.ac.uk.

Class IIa histone deacetylases (HDACs) regulate the activity of many
transcription factors to influence liver gluconeogenesis and the development of
specialized cells, including muscle, neurons, and lymphocytes. Here, we describe 
a conserved role for class IIa HDACs in sustaining robust circadian behavioral
rhythms in Drosophila and cellular rhythms in mammalian cells. In mouse
fibroblasts, overexpression of HDAC5 severely disrupts transcriptional rhythms of
core clock genes. HDAC5 overexpression decreases BMAL1 acetylation on Lys-537 and
pharmacological inhibition of class IIa HDACs increases BMAL1 acetylation.
Furthermore, we observe cyclical nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of HDAC5 in mouse
fibroblasts that is characteristically circadian. Mutation of the Drosophila
homolog HDAC4 impairs locomotor activity rhythms of flies and decreases period
mRNA levels. RNAi-mediated knockdown of HDAC4 in Drosophila clock cells also
dampens circadian function. Given that the localization of class IIa HDACs is
signal-regulated and influenced by Ca(2+) and cAMP signals, our findings offer a 
mechanism by which extracellular stimuli that generate these signals can feed
into the molecular clock machinery.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4256363
PMID: 25271152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Oct 29;42(19):11879-90. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku873. Epub
2014 Sep 26.

The PXDLS linear motif regulates circadian rhythmicity through protein-protein
interactions.

Shalev M(1), Aviram R(1), Adamovich Y(1), Kraut-Cohen J(1), Shamia T(1), Ben-Dor 
S(2), Golik M(1), Asher G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel. (2)Biological Services, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel. (3)Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of
Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel gad.asher@weizmann.ac.il.

The circadian core clock circuitry relies on interlocked
transcription-translation feedback loops that largely count on multiple protein
interactions. The molecular mechanisms implicated in the assembly of these
protein complexes are relatively unknown. Our bioinformatics analysis of short
linear motifs, implicated in protein interactions, reveals an enrichment of the
Pro-X-Asp-Leu-Ser (PXDLS) motif within circadian transcripts. We show that the
PXDLS motif can bind to BMAL1/CLOCK and disrupt circadian oscillations in a
cell-autonomous manner. Remarkably, the motif is evolutionary conserved in the
core clock protein REV-ERBa, and additional proteins implicated in the clock's
function (NRIP1, CBP). In this conjuncture, we uncover a novel cross talk between
the two principal core clock feedback loops and show that BMAL/CLOCK and REV-ERBa
interact and that the PXDLS motif of REV-ERBa participates in their binding.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that the PXDLS motifs of NRIP1 and CBP are involved
in circadian rhythmicity. Our findings suggest that the PXDLS motif plays an
important role in circadian rhythmicity through regulation of protein
interactions within the clock circuitry and that short linear motifs can be
employed to modulate circadian oscillations.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4231743
PMID: 25260595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Jan;42(1):277-88. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3770-9. Epub 2014
Sep 26.

Clock gene variants differentiate mood disorders.

Dmitrzak-Weglarz MP(1), Pawlak JM, Maciukiewicz M, Moczko J, Wilkosc M,
Leszczynska-Rodziewicz A, Zaremba D, Hauser J.

Author information: 
(1)Psychiatric Genetics Unit, Department of Psychiatry, University of Medical
Sciences, Poznan, Poland, mweglarz@ump.edu.pl.

Genetic variations in clock-related genes were hypothesized to be involved to in 
the susceptibility of mood disorders MD (both unipolar (UPD) and bipolar (BPD)
disorders). In our work we investigated role of gene variants form four core
period proteins: CLOCK, ARNTL, TIM and PER3. The total sample comprised from 744 
mood disorders inpatients (UPD = 229, BPD = 515) and 635 healthy voluntary
controls. The 42 SNPs from four genes of interest were genotyped. We used single 
polymorphisms, haplotypes, SNPs interactions and prediction analysis using
classical statistical and machine learning methods. We observed association
between two polymorphisms of CLOCK (rs1801260 and rs11932595) with BPDII and two 
polymorphisms of TIM (rs2291739, rs11171856) with UPD. We also detected ARNTL
haplotype variant (rs1160996C/rs11022779G/rs1122780T) to be associated with
increased risk of MD, BPD (both types). We established significant epistatic
interaction between PER3 (rs2172563) and ARNTL (rs4146388 and rs7107287) in case 
of BPD. Additionally relation between PER3 (rs2172563) and CLOCK (rs1268271 and
rs3805148) appeared in case of UPD. Classification and Regression Trees (C and
RT) showed significant predictive value for 10 polymorphisms in all analyzed
genes. However we failed to obtain model with sufficient predictive power. During
analyses of sleep disturbances sample, we found carriers of homozygote variants
(ARNTL: rs11022778 TT, rs1562438 TT, rs1982350 AA and PER3: rs836755 CC) showing 
more frequent falling asleep difficulties when compare to other genotypes
carriers. Our study suggested a putative role of the CLOCK, TIM, ARNTL and PER3
and polymorphisms in MD susceptibility. In our analyses we showed association of 
specific gene variants with particular types of MD. We also confirmed necessity
of performing separate analyzes for BPD and UPD patients. Comprehensive
statistical approach is required even with individual symptoms analyses.

PMID: 25258123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Jan;398(1-2):195-206. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-2219-8. Epub
2014 Sep 23.

Acute inhibition of casein kinase 1d/e rapidly delays peripheral clock gene
rhythms.

Kennaway DJ(1), Varcoe TJ, Voultsios A, Salkeld MD, Rattanatray L, Boden MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Robinson Research Institute, School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, 5005, Australia,
david.kennaway@adelaide.edu.au.

Circadian rhythms are generated through a transcription-translation feedback loop
involving clock genes and the casein kinases CSNK1D and CSNK1E. In this study, we
investigated the effects of the casein kinase inhibitor PF-670462 (50 mg/kg) on
rhythmic expression of clock genes in the liver, pancreas and suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN) as well as plasma corticosterone, melatonin and running behaviour
in rats and compared them to the responses to a 4 h extension of the light phase.
PF-670462 acutely phase delayed the rhythmic transcription of Bmal1, Per1, Per2
and Nr1d1 in both liver and pancreas by 4.5 ± 1.3 and 4.5 ± 1.2 h, respectively, 
1 day after administration. In the SCN, the rhythm of Nr1d1 and Dbp mRNA
expression was delayed by 4.2 and 4 h, respectively. Despite these changes, the
time of peak plasma melatonin secretion was not delayed, although the plasma
corticosterone rhythm and onset of wheel-running activity were delayed by 2.1 and
1.1 h, respectively. These changes are in contrast to the effects of the 4 h
light extension, which resulted in delays in peak expression of the clock genes
of less than 1 h and no change in the melatonin or corticosterone rhythms. The
ability of the casein kinase inhibitor to bring about large phase shifts in the
rhythms of major metabolic target tissues may lead to new drugs being developed
to rapidly phase adjust circadian rhythms to alleviate the metabolic impact of
shift work.

PMID: 25245819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Rhythms. 2014 Aug;29(4):257-76. doi: 10.1177/0748730414543141.

Cardiomyocyte-specific BMAL1 plays critical roles in metabolism, signaling, and
maintenance of contractile function of the heart.

Young ME(1), Brewer RA(2), Peliciari-Garcia RA(3), Collins HE(4), He L(5), Birky 
TL(2), Peden BW(2), Thompson EG(2), Ammons BJ(2), Bray MS(6), Chatham JC(4),
Wende AR(4), Yang Q(5), Chow CW(7), Martino TA(8), Gamble KL(9).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA meyoung@uab.edu. (2)Division of
Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA. (3)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases,
Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama,
USA Institute of Biomedical Sciences-I, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, 
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. (4)Division of Molecular and Cellular
Pathology, Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama, USA. (5)Department of Nutrition Sciences, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA. (6)Department of Epidemiology,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA. (7)Department of
Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York,
USA. (8)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, 
Canada. (9)Division of Behavioral Neurobiology, Department of Psychiatry,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

Circadian clocks are cell autonomous, transcriptionally based, molecular
mechanisms that confer the selective advantage of anticipation, enabling
cells/organs to respond to environmental factors in a temporally appropriate
manner. Critical to circadian clock function are 2 transcription factors, CLOCK
and BMAL1. The purpose of the present study was to reveal novel physiologic
functions of BMAL1 in the heart, as well as to determine the pathologic
consequences of chronic disruption of this circadian clock component. To address 
this goal, we generated cardiomyocyte-specific Bmal1 knockout (CBK) mice.
Following validation of the CBK model, combined microarray and in silico analyses
were performed, identifying 19 putative direct BMAL1 target genes, which included
a number of metabolic (e.g., ß-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase 1 [Bdh1]) and
signaling (e.g., the p85a regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
[Pik3r1]) genes. Results from subsequent validation studies were consistent with 
regulation of Bdh1 and Pik3r1 by BMAL1, with predicted impairments in ketone body
metabolism and signaling observed in CBK hearts. Furthermore, CBK hearts
exhibited depressed glucose utilization, as well as a differential response to a 
physiologic metabolic stress (i.e., fasting). Consistent with BMAL1 influencing
critical functions in the heart, echocardiographic, gravimetric, histologic, and 
molecular analyses revealed age-onset development of dilated cardiomyopathy in
CBK mice, which was associated with a severe reduction in life span.
Collectively, our studies reveal that BMAL1 influences metabolism, signaling, and
contractile function of the heart.

© 2014 The Author(s).

PMCID: PMC4260630
PMID: 25238855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 19;9(9):e108266. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108266.
eCollection 2014.

Circadian genes, xBmal1 and xNocturnin, modulate the timing and differentiation
of somites in Xenopus laevis.

Curran KL(1), Allen L(1), Porter BB(1), Dodge J(1), Lope C(1), Willadsen G(1),
Fisher R(1), Johnson N(1), Campbell E(1), VonBergen B(1), Winfrey D(1), Hadley
M(1), Kerndt T(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin-Whitewater, Department of Biological Sciences,
Whitewater, Wisconsin, United States of America.

We have been investigating whether xBmal1 and xNocturnin play a role in
somitogenesis, a cyclic developmental process with an ultradian period. Previous 
work from our lab shows that circadian genes (xPeriod1, xPeriod2, xBmal1, and
xNocturnin) are expressed in developing somites. Somites eventually form the
vertebrae, muscles of the back, and dermis. In Xenopus, a pair of somites is
formed about every 50 minutes from anterior to posterior. We were intrigued by
the co-localization of circadian genes in an embryonic tissue known to be
regulated by an ultradian clock. Cyclic expression of genes involved in Notch
signaling has been implicated in the somite clock. Disruption of Notch signaling 
in humans has been linked to skeletal defects in the vertebral column. We found
that both depletion (morpholino) and overexpression (mRNA) of xBMAL1 protein
(bHLH transcription factor) or xNOCTURNIN protein (deadenylase) on one side of
the developing embryo led to a significant decrease in somite number with respect
to the untreated side (p<0.001). These manipulations also significantly affect
expression of a somite clock component (xESR9; p<0.05). We observed opposing
effects on somite size. Depletion of xBMAL1 or xNOCTURNIN caused a statistically 
significant decrease in somite area (quantified using NIH ImageJ; p<0.002), while
overexpression of these proteins caused a significant dose dependent increase in 
somite area (p<0.02; p<0.001, respectively). We speculate that circadian genes
may play two separate roles during somitogenesis. Depletion and overexpression of
xBMAL1 and NOCTURNIN both decrease somite number and influence expression of a
somite clock component, suggesting that these proteins may modulate the timing of
the somite clock in the undifferentiated presomitic mesoderm. The dosage
dependent effects on somite area suggest that xBMAL1 and xNOCTURNIN may also act 
during somite differentiation to promote myogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4169625
PMID: 25238599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Biol Rhythms. 2014 Oct;29(5):384-8. doi: 10.1177/0748730414549239. Epub 2014
Sep 17.

A role for 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin d3 in the expression of circadian genes.

Gutierrez-Monreal MA(1), Cuevas-Diaz Duran R(2), Moreno-Cuevas JE(2), Scott
SP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cátedra de Hematología y Cáncer, Tecnológico de Monterrey, Monterrey, Nuevo
León, México. (2)Cátedra de Terapia Celular, Tecnológico de Monterrey, Monterrey,
Nuevo León, México. (3)Cátedra de Hematología y Cáncer, Tecnológico de Monterrey,
Monterrey, Nuevo León, México sscott04@msn.com.

The active form of vitamin D, 1a,25-(OH)2D3, has been associated with metabolism 
control, cell growth, differentiation, antiproliferation, apoptosis, and
adaptive/innate immune responses, besides its functions in the integrity of bone 
and calcium homeostasis. The circadian rhythm regulates a variety of biological
processes, many of them related to the functions associated with 1a,25-(OH)2D3.
In the present study, we determine whether 1a,25-(OH)2D3 alters the expression of
circadian genes in adipose-derived stem cells (ADSCs). The effect of
1a,25-(OH)2D3 on the expression of circadian genes BMAL1 and PER2 was measured by
qPCR, over a 60-h period every 4 h, in serum shocked ADSCs, serum shocked ADSCs
supplemented with 1a,25-(OH)2D3, and ADSCs under the presence of only
1a,25-(OH)2D3. The results showed that 1a,25-(OH)2D3 was able to synchronize
circadian clock gene expression in ADSCs. The expression of circadian genes BMAL1
and PER2 in ADSCs that contained only 1a,25-(OH)2D3 has a profile similar to that
found in the ADSCs synchronized by a serum shock. The results suggest an
important role of 1a,25-(OH)2D3 in the regulation of the molecular clock.

© 2014 The Author(s).

PMID: 25231949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Chronobiol Int. 2014 Dec;31(10):1115-22. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2014.957301. Epub 
2014 Sep 17.

Polymorphisms in circadian genes, night work and breast cancer: results from the 
GENICA study.

Rabstein S(1), Harth V, Justenhoven C, Pesch B, Plöttner S, Heinze E, Lotz A,
Baisch C, Schiffermann M, Brauch H, Hamann U, Ko Y, Brüning T; GENICA Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Prevention and Occupational Medicine of the German Social
Accident Insurance, Institute of the Ruhr-Universität Bochum (IPA) , Bochum ,
Germany .

OBJECTIVES: The role of genetic variants and environmental factors in breast
cancer etiology has been intensively studied in the last decades.
Gene-environment interactions are now increasingly being investigated to gain
more insights into the development of breast cancer, specific subtypes, and
therapeutics. Recently, night shift work that involves circadian disruption has
gained rising interest as a potential non-genetic breast cancer risk factor.
Here, we analyzed genetic polymorphisms in genes of cellular clocks, melatonin
biosynthesis and signaling and their association with breast cancer as well as
gene-gene and gene-night work interactions in a German case-control study on
breast cancer.
METHODS: GENICA is a population-based case-control study on breast cancer
conducted in the Greater Region of Bonn. Associations between seven polymorphisms
in circadian genes (CLOCK, NPAS2, ARTNL, PER2 and CRY2), genes of melatonin
biosynthesis and signaling (AANAT and MTNR1B) and breast cancer were analyzed
with conditional logistic regression models, adjusted for potential confounders
for 1022 cases and 1014 controls. Detailed shift-work information was documented 
for 857 breast cancer cases and 892 controls. Gene-gene and gene-shiftwork
interactions were analyzed using model-based multifactor dimensionality reduction
(mbMDR).
RESULTS: For combined heterozygotes and rare homozygotes a slightly elevated
breast cancer risk was found for rs8150 in gene AANAT (OR 1.17; 95% CI
1.01-1.36), and a reduced risk for rs3816358 in gene ARNTL (OR 0.82; 95% CI
0.69-0.97) in the complete study population. In the subgroup of shift workers,
rare homozygotes for rs10462028 in the CLOCK gene had an elevated risk of breast 
cancer (OR for AA vs. GG: 3.53; 95% CI 1.09-11.42). Shift work and CLOCK gene
interactions were observed in the two-way interaction analysis. In addition,
gene-shiftwork interactions were detected for MTNR1B with NPAS2 and ARNTL.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, the results of our population-based case-control
study support a putative role of the CLOCK gene in the development of breast
cancer in shift workers. In addition, higher order interaction analyses suggest a
potential relevance of MTNR1B with the key transcriptional factor NPAS2 with
ARNTL. Hence, in the context of circadian disruption, multivariable models should
be preferred that consider a wide range of polymorphisms, e.g. that may influence
chronotype or light sensitivity. The investigation of these interactions in
larger studies is needed.

PMID: 25229211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Genes Dev. 2014 Sep 15;28(18):1989-98. doi: 10.1101/gad.249417.114.

Dual modes of CLOCK:BMAL1 inhibition mediated by Cryptochrome and Period proteins
in the mammalian circadian clock.

Ye R(1), Selby CP(1), Chiou YY(1), Ozkan-Dagliyan I(1), Gaddameedhi S(1), Sancar 
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina School
of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA. (2)Department of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina School of Medicine,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA aziz_sancar@med.unc.edu.

The mammalian circadian clock is based on a transcription-translation feedback
loop (TTFL) in which CLOCK and BMAL1 proteins act as transcriptional activators
of Cryptochrome and Period genes, which encode proteins that repress CLOCK-BMAL1 
with a periodicity of ~ 24 h. In this model, the mechanistic roles of CRY and PER
are unclear. Here, we used a controlled targeting system to introduce CRY1 or
PER2 into the nuclei of mouse cells with defined circadian genotypes to
characterize the functions of CRY and PER. Our data show that CRY is the primary 
repressor in the TTFL: It binds to CLOCK-BMAL1 at the promoter and inhibits
CLOCK-BMAL1-dependent transcription without dissociating the complex
("blocking"-type repression). PER alone has no effect on CLOCK-BMAL1-activated
transcription. However, in the presence of CRY, nuclear entry of PER inhibits
transcription by displacing CLOCK-BMAL1 from the promoter ("displacement"-type
repression). In light of these findings, we propose a new model for the mammalian
circadian clock in which the negative arm of the TTFL proceeds by two different
mechanisms during the circadian cycle.

© 2014 Ye et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4173159
PMID: 25228643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 30;111(39):14295-300. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1209249111. Epub 2014 Sep 15.

Loss of BMAL1 in ovarian steroidogenic cells results in implantation failure in
female mice.

Liu Y(1), Johnson BP(1), Shen AL(1), Wallisser JA(1), Krentz KJ(1), Moran SM(1), 
Sullivan R(2), Glover E(1), Parlow AF(3), Drinkwater NR(1), Schuler LA(4),
Bradfield CA(5).

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, and Carbone Cancer Center, School of
Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison WI 53706;
(2)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, and Carbone Cancer Center, School of
Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison WI 53706;
Research Animal Resources Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706; and. (3)National Hormone and Peptide Program, Harbor-University of
California Los Angeles Medical Center, Torrance, CA 90502. (4)Carbone Cancer
Center, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison WI 53706; Department of Comparative Biosciences, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison WI 53706; (5)McArdle
Laboratory for Cancer Research, and Carbone Cancer Center, School of Medicine and
Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison WI 53706;
bradfield@oncology.wisc.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014 Dec;10(12):701.

The circadian clock plays a significant role in many aspects of female
reproductive biology, including estrous cycling, ovulation, embryonic
implantation, onset of puberty, and parturition. In an effort to link
cell-specific circadian clocks to their specific roles in female reproduction, we
used the promoter that controls expression of Steroidogenic Factor-1 (SF1) to
drive Cre-recombinase-mediated deletion of the brain muscle arnt-like 1 (Bmal1)
gene, known to encode an essential component of the circadian clock
(SF1-Bmal1(-/-)). The resultant SF1-Bmal1(-/-) females display embryonic
implantation failure, which is rescued by progesterone supplementation, or
bilateral or unilateral transplantation of wild-type ovaries into SF1-Bmal1(-/-) 
dams. The observation that the central clock, and many other peripheral clocks,
are fully functional in this model allows the assignment of the implantation
phenotype to the clock in ovarian steroidogenic cells and distinguishes it from
more general circadian related systemic pathology (e.g., early onset arthropathy,
premature aging, ovulation, late onset of puberty, and abnormal estrous cycle).
Our ovarian transcriptome analysis reveals that deletion of ovarian Bmal1
disrupts expression of transcripts associated with the circadian machinery and
also genes critical for regulation of progesterone production, such as
steroidogenic acute regulatory factor (Star). Overall, these data provide a
powerful model to probe the interlocking and synergistic network of the circadian
clock and reproductive systems.

PMCID: PMC4191810
PMID: 25225411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Feb 1;331(1):200-10. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.08.041. Epub
2014 Sep 9.

Brain and muscle Arnt-like 1 promotes skeletal muscle regeneration through
satellite cell expansion.

Chatterjee S(1), Yin H(2), Nam D(1), Li Y(3), Ma K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Medicine, Houston Methodist
Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Center for Diabetes Research,
Department of Medicine, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA; Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Third Affiliated Hospital, Hebei
Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050051, Hebei, China. (3)Department of Pediatric
Surgery, Center for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, University of
Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Center for
Diabetes Research, Department of Medicine, Houston Methodist Research Institute, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: kma@houstonmethodist.org.

Circadian clock is an evolutionarily conserved timing mechanism governing diverse
biological processes and the skeletal muscle possesses intrinsic functional
clocks. Interestingly, although the essential clock transcription activator,
Brain and muscle Arnt-like 1 (Bmal1), participates in maintenance of muscle mass,
little is known regarding its role in muscle growth and repair. In this report,
we investigate the in vivo function of Bmal1 in skeletal muscle regeneration
using two muscle injury models. Bmal1 is highly up-regulated by cardiotoxin
injury, and its genetic ablation significantly impairs regeneration with markedly
suppressed new myofiber formation and attenuated myogenic induction. A similarly 
defective regenerative response is observed in Bmal1-null mice as compared to
wild-type controls upon freeze injury. Lack of satellite cell expansion accounts 
for the regeneration defect, as Bmal1(-/-) mice display significantly lower
satellite cell number with nearly abolished induction of the satellite cell
marker, Pax7. Furthermore, satellite cell-derived primary myoblasts devoid of
Bmal1 display reduced growth and proliferation ex vivo. Collectively, our results
demonstrate, for the first time, that Bmal1 is an integral component of the
pro-myogenic response that is required for muscle repair. This mechanism may
underlie its role in preserving adult muscle mass and could be targeted
therapeutically to prevent muscle-wasting diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25218946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Chronobiol Int. 2015 Feb;32(1):81-91. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2014.956218. Epub
2014 Sep 12.

Chronotype and stability of spontaneous locomotor activity rhythm in
BMAL1-deficient mice.

Pfeffer M(1), Korf HW, von Gall C.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Senckenbergische Anatomie, Institut für Anatomie II, Fachbereich Medizin, 
Goethe-Universität , Frankfurt/Main , Germany .

Behavior, physiological functions and cognitive performance change over the time 
of the day. These daily rhythms are either externally driven by rhythmic
environmental cues such as the light/dark cycle (masking) or controlled by an
internal circadian clock, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), which can be
entrained to the light/dark cycle. Within a given species, there is genetically
determined variability in the temporal preference for the onset of the active
phase, the chronotype. The chronotype is the phase of entrainment between
external and internal time and is largely regulated by the circadian clock.
Genetic variations in clock genes and environmental influences contribute to the 
distribution of chronotypes in a given population. However, little is known about
the determination of the chronotype, the stability of the locomotor rhythm and
the re-synchronization capacity to jet lag in an animal without a functional
endogenous clock. Therefore, we analyzed the chronotype of BMAL1-deficient mice
(BMAL1-/-) as well as the effects of repeated experimental jet lag on locomotor
activity rhythms. Moreover, light-induced period expression in the retina was
analyzed to assess the responsiveness of the circadian light input system. In
contrast to wild-type mice, BMAL1-/- showed a significantly later chronotype,
adapted more rapidly to both phase advance and delay but showed reduced
robustness of rhythmic locomotor activity after repeated phase shifts. However,
photic induction of Period in the retina was not different between the two
genotypes. Our findings suggest that a disturbed clockwork is associated with a
late chronotype, reduced rhythm stability and higher vulnerability to repeated
external desynchronization.

PMID: 25216070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014 Nov 1;307(9):G894-904. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00288.2014. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

Prolonged exposure of cholestatic rats to complete dark inhibits biliary
hyperplasia and liver fibrosis.

Han Y(1), Onori P(2), Meng F(3), DeMorrow S(4), Venter J(1), Francis H(3),
Franchitto A(5), Ray D(1), Kennedy L(6), Greene J(7), Renzi A(2), Mancinelli
R(2), Gaudio E(2), Glaser S(8), Alpini G(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division Gastroenterology, Texas A&M University Health
Science Center, Temple, Texas; (2)Department of Anatomical, Histological,
Forensic Medicine and Orthopedics Sciences, La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.
(3)Research, Central Texas Veterans Health Care System, Temple, Texas; Baylor
Scott & White Digestive Disease Research Center, Scott & White, Temple, Texas;
Operational Funds, Baylor Scott & White, Temple, Texas; Department of Medicine,
Division Gastroenterology, Texas A&M University Health Science Center, Temple,
Texas; (4)Baylor Scott & White Digestive Disease Research Center, Scott & White, 
Temple, Texas; Department of Medicine, Division Gastroenterology, Texas A&M
University Health Science Center, Temple, Texas; (5)Eleonora Lorillard Spencer
Cenci Foundation, Rome, Italy; Department of Anatomical, Histological, Forensic
Medicine and Orthopedics Sciences, La Sapienza, Rome, Italy. (6)Research, Central
Texas Veterans Health Care System, Temple, Texas; (7)Pathology, Baylor Scott &
White, Temple, Texas; and. (8)Research, Central Texas Veterans Health Care
System, Temple, Texas; Baylor Scott & White Digestive Disease Research Center,
Scott & White, Temple, Texas; Department of Medicine, Division Gastroenterology, 
Texas A&M University Health Science Center, Temple, Texas; (9)Research, Central
Texas Veterans Health Care System, Temple, Texas; Baylor Scott & White Digestive 
Disease Research Center, Scott & White, Temple, Texas; Department of Medicine,
Division Gastroenterology, Texas A&M University Health Science Center, Temple,
Texas; galpini@tamu.edu.

Biliary hyperplasia and liver fibrosis are common features in cholestatic liver
disease. Melatonin is synthesized by the pineal gland as well as the liver.
Melatonin inhibits biliary hyperplasia of bile duct-ligated (BDL) rats. Since
melatonin synthesis (by the enzyme serotonin N-acetyltransferase, AANAT) from the
pineal gland increases after dark exposure, we hypothesized that biliary
hyperplasia and liver fibrosis are diminished by continuous darkness via
increased melatonin synthesis from the pineal gland. Normal or BDL rats
(immediately after surgery) were housed with light-dark cycles or complete dark
for 1 wk before evaluation of 1) the expression of AANAT in the pineal gland and 
melatonin levels in pineal gland tissue supernatants and serum; 2) biliary
proliferation and intrahepatic bile duct mass, liver histology, and serum
chemistry; 3) secretin-stimulated ductal secretion (functional index of biliary
growth); 4) collagen deposition, liver fibrosis markers in liver sections, total 
liver, and cholangiocytes; and 5) expression of clock genes in cholangiocytes. In
BDL rats exposed to dark there was 1) enhanced AANAT expression/melatonin
secretion in pineal gland and melatonin serum levels; 2) improved liver
morphology, serum chemistry and decreased biliary proliferation and
secretin-stimulated choleresis; and 4) decreased fibrosis and expression of
fibrosis markers in liver sections, total liver and cholangiocytes and reduced
biliary expression of the clock genes PER1, BMAL1, CLOCK, and Cry1. Thus
prolonged dark exposure may be a beneficial noninvasive therapeutic approach for 
the management of biliary disorders.

PMCID: PMC4216989
PMID: 25214401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Sci Rep. 2014 Sep 9;4:6309. doi: 10.1038/srep06309.

Screening of clock gene polymorphisms demonstrates association of a PER3
polymorphism with morningness-eveningness preference and circadian rhythm sleep
disorder.

Hida A(1), Kitamura S(1), Katayose Y(1), Kato M(1), Ono H(1), Kadotani H(2),
Uchiyama M(3), Ebisawa T(4), Inoue Y(5), Kamei Y(6), Okawa M(7), Takahashi K(7), 
Mishima K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychophysiology, National Institute of Mental Health, National 
Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8553, Japan. (2)Department
of Psychiatry, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga 520-2192, Japan. 
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Nihon University School of Medicine, Itabashi, Tokyo
173-8610, Japan. (4)Department of Psychiatry, Tokyo Metropolitan Police Hospital,
Nakano, Tokyo 164-8541, Japan. (5)1] Department of Somnology, Tokyo Medical
University, Shinjuku, Tokyo 160-8402, Japan [2] Yoyogi Sleep Disorder Center,
Shibuya, Tokyo 151-0053, Japan. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National
Center Hospital, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo
187-8551, Japan. (7)Japan Foundation for Neuroscience and Mental Health, Kodaira,
Tokyo 187-8551, Japan.

A system of self-sustained biological clocks controls the 24-h rhythms of
behavioral and physiological processes such as the sleep-wake cycle. The
circadian clock system is regulated by transcriptional and translational negative
feedback loops of multiple clock genes. Polymorphisms in circadian clock genes
have been associated with morningness-eveningness (diurnal) preference, familial 
advanced sleep phase type (ASPT), and delayed sleep phase type (DSPT). We
genotyped single-nucleotide polymorphisms in circadian clock genes in 182 DSPT
individuals, 67 free-running type (FRT) individuals, and 925 controls. The clock 
gene polymorphisms were tested for associations with diurnal preference and
circadian rhythm sleep disorder (CRSD) phenotypes. The PER3 polymorphism
(rs228697) was significantly associated with diurnal preference and the FRT
phenotype. The minor allele of rs228697 was more prevalent in evening types than 
in morning types (sex-adjusted odds ratio (OR), 2.483, Bonferroni-corrected P =
0.012) and in FRT individuals compared with the controls (age- and sex-adjusted
OR, 2.021, permutated P = 0.017). Our findings support the notion that PER3
polymorphisms could be a potential genetic marker for an individual's circadian
and sleep phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC4158573
PMID: 25201053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Neurosci. 2014 Sep 3;34(36):12029-38. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5158-13.2014.

Bmal1 is an essential regulator for circadian cytosolic Ca²<U+207A> rhythms in
suprachiasmatic nucleus neurons.

Ikeda M(1), Ikeda M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Schools of Science and Engineering, and Innovative Life Science,
University of Toyama, Toyama 930-8555, Japan, and msikeda@sci.u-toyama.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Physiology, Saitama Medical University, Moroyama, Iruma-gun,
Saitama 350-0495, Japan.

The hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) plays a pivotal role in the
mammalian circadian clock system. Bmal1 is a clock gene that drives
transcriptional-translational feedback loops (TTFLs) for itself and other genes, 
and is expressed in nearly all SCN neurons. Despite strong evidence that
Bmal1-null mutant mice display arrhythmic behavior under constant darkness, the
function of Bmal1 in neuronal activity is unknown. Recently, periodic changes in 
the levels of intracellular signaling messengers, such as cytosolic Ca(2+) and
cAMP, were suggested to regulate TTFLs. However, the opposite aspect of how clock
gene TTFLs regulate cytosolic signaling remains unclear. To investigate
intracellular Ca(2+) dynamics under Bmal1 perturbations, we cotransfected some
SCN neurons with yellow cameleon together with wild-type or dominant-negative
Bmal1 using a gene-gun applied for mouse organotypic cultures. Immunofluorescence
staining for a tag protein linked to BMAL1 showed nuclear expression of wild-type
BMAL1 and its degradation within 1 week after transfection in SCN neurons.
However, dominant-negative BMAL1 did not translocate into the nucleus and the
cytosolic signals persisted beyond 1 week. Consistently, circadian Ca(2+) rhythms
in SCN neurons were inhibited for longer periods by dominant-negative Bmal1
overexpression. Furthermore, SCN neurons transfected with a Bmal1 shRNA
lengthened, whereas those overexpressing wild-type Bmal1 shortened, the periods
of Ca(2+) rhythms, with a significant reduction in their amplitude. BMAL1
expression was intact in the majority of neighboring neurons in organotypic
cultures. Therefore, we conclude that proper intrinsic Bmal1 expression, but not 
passive signaling via cell-to-cell interactions, is the determinant of circadian 
Ca(2+) rhythms in SCN neurons.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3412029-10$15.00/0.

PMID: 25186748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Elife. 2014 Sep 2;3:e02981. doi: 10.7554/eLife.02981.

Nuclear envelope protein MAN1 regulates clock through BMAL1.

Lin ST(1), Zhang L(1), Lin X(1), Zhang LC(1), Garcia VE(1), Tsai CW(1), Ptácek
L(2), Fu YH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, United States. (2)Department of Neurology, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, United States Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, United States ying-hui.fu@ucsf.edu.

Circadian clocks serve as internal pacemakers that influence many basic
homeostatic processes; consequently, the expression and function of their
components are tightly regulated by intricate networks of feedback loops that
fine-tune circadian processes. Our knowledge of these components and pathways is 
far from exhaustive. In recent decades, the nuclear envelope has emerged as a
global gene regulatory machine, although its role in circadian regulation has not
been explored. We report that transcription of the core clock component BMAL1 is 
positively modulated by the inner nuclear membrane protein MAN1, which directly
binds the BMAL1 promoter and enhances its transcription. Our results establish a 
novel connection between the nuclear periphery and circadian rhythmicity,
therefore bridging two global regulatory systems that modulate all aspects of
bodily functions.

Copyright © 2014, Lin et al.

PMCID: PMC4150126
PMID: 25182847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Int J Oncol. 2014 Nov;45(5):2101-7. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2627. Epub 2014 Aug 29.

Epigenetic silencing of ARNTL, a circadian gene and potential tumor suppressor in
ovarian cancer.

Yeh CM(1), Shay J(1), Zeng TC(1), Chou JL(1), Huang TH(2), Lai HC(3), Chan MW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and, National Chung Cheng University, Chia-Yi,
Taiwan, R.O.C. (2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Biotechnology,
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. (3)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical
Center, Taipei, R.O.C.

Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer death and the most deadly
gynecological malignancy in women. Epigenetic modifications play an important
role in regulating gene transcription. Specifically, aberrant promoter
hypermethylation has been implicated as a hallmark of cancer. In order to
identify genes that are differentially methylated in ovarian cancer, we performed
meDIP-chip in various ovarian cancer cell lines using Agilent 244K CpG island
microarray. One of the targets, ARNTL which is a core component of the circadian 
clock is methylated in a sub-set of ovarian cancer cell lines. Combined bisulfite
restriction analysis (COBRA) confirmed the results of the microarray. Additional 
analysis using ChIP-PCR revealed that promoter of ARNTL is enriched with the
repressive histone mark H3K27me3 in CP70 and MCP2 ovarian cancer cells. Treatment
with the EZH2 inhibitor (GSK126) significantly restored ARNTL expression in these
cells (CP70 and MCP2). Further functional analysis demonstrated that
overexpression of ARNTL inhibited cell growth and enhanced chemosensitivity of
cisplatin in ovarian cancer cells. Finally, overexpression of ARNTL restored the 
rhythmic activity of c-MYC in ovarian cancer cells. These results suggested that 
ARNTL may be a tumor suppressor and is epigenetically silenced in ovarian cancer.

PMID: 25175925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Theor Biol. 2014 Dec 21;363:318-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2014.08.008. Epub 2014 
Aug 23.

Modeling circadian clock-cell cycle interaction effects on cell population growth
rates.

El Cheikh R(1), Bernard S(1), El Khatib N(2).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 5208, Institut Camille Jordan, Université Lyon 1, 43 blvd. du 11
novembre 1918, F-69622 Villeurbanne cedex, France; DRACULA Inria Grenoble
Rhône-Alpes, Montbonnot F-38322, France. (2)Lebanese American University,
Department of Computer Science and Mathematics, Byblos, P.O.Box 36, Byblos,
Lebanon. Electronic address: nader.elkhatib@lau.edu.lb.

The circadian clock and the cell cycle are two tightly coupled oscillators.
Recent analytical studies have shown counter-intuitive effects of circadian
gating of the cell cycle on growth rates of proliferating cells which cannot be
explained by a molecular model or a population model alone. In this work, we
present a combined molecular-population model that studies how coupling the
circadian clock to the cell cycle, through the protein WEE1, affects a
proliferating cell population. We show that the cell cycle can entrain to the
circadian clock with different rational period ratios and characterize multiple
domains of entrainment. We show that coupling increases the growth rate for
autonomous periods of the cell cycle around 24 h and above 48 h. We study the
effect of mutation of circadian genes on the growth rate of cells and show that
disruption of the circadian clock can lead to abnormal proliferation.
Particularly, we show that Cry 1, Cry 2 mutations decrease the growth rate of
cells, Per 2 mutation enhances it and Bmal 1 knockout increases it for autonomous
periods of the cell cycle less than 21 h and decreases it elsewhere. Combining a 
molecular model to a population model offers new insight on the influence of the 
circadian clock on the growth of a cell population. This can help chronotherapy
which takes benefits of physiological rhythms to improve anti-cancer efficacy and
tolerance to drugs by administering treatments at a specific time of the day.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25152215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2014 Oct 15;307(8):R1049-60. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00100.2014. Epub 2014 Aug 20.

Differential effects of omega-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid and palmitate on 
the circadian transcriptional profile of clock genes in immortalized hypothalamic
neurons.

Greco JA(1), Oosterman JE(2), Belsham DD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
(2)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Academic Medical Center, University
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Physiology, University
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
and Medicine, University of Toronto and Division of Cellular and Molecular
Biology, Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, University Health Network, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; and d.belsham@utoronto.ca.

Diets high in saturated fatty acids (SFAs) are associated with the development of
circadian dysregulation, obesity, and Type 2 diabetes mellitus. Conversely,
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) have recently been identified to improve
insulin sensitivity, reduce weight gain, and relieve obesity-induced
inflammation. While saturated fatty acids, such as the prevalent dietary fatty
acid palmitate, have been implicated in circadian disruption, there is a paucity 
of studies regarding the effects of PUFAs on circadian parameters. Therefore, the
immortalized murine neuronal model, mHypoE-37, was utilized to examine the
effects of the SFA palmitate and omega-3 PUFA docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) on
circadian rhythms. The mHypoE-37 neurons express the core clock genes, Bmal1,
Per2, and Rev-erba, in a circadian manner. 25 µM of palmitate significantly
increased the transcriptional expression of Bmal1, without altering the
expression of inflammatory markers TLR4, I<U+03BA>Ba, and IL-6, nor the orexigenic
neuropeptide AgRP, suggesting that the observed disruption of the molecular clock
is the result of a mechanism distinct from that of hypothalamic cellular
inflammation. Furthermore, treatment with the PUFA DHA resulted in alterations in
the circadian expression profile of Bmal1, although differentially from the
effects of palmitate. In the presence of DHA, the disruptive effects of palmitate
on Bmal1 were less pronounced, suggesting a protective effect of DHA. These
studies are the first to identify the potential for omega-3 PUFAs to protect
against palmitate-mediated dysregulation of circadian parameters and will
ultimately improve the understanding of circadian control mechanisms.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4200380
PMID: 25144192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nat Rev Immunol. 2014 Sep;14(9):582. doi: 10.1038/nri3732. Epub 2014 Aug 18.

Mucosal immunology: killing time in the lungs.

Bordon Y.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2014 Aug;20(8):919-26.

PMID: 25132094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Elife. 2014 Aug 15;3:e03674. doi: 10.7554/eLife.03674.

Molecular assembly of the period-cryptochrome circadian transcriptional repressor
complex.

Nangle SN(1), Rosensweig C(2), Koike N(3), Tei H(4), Takahashi JS(5), Green
CB(6), Zheng N(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington, Seattle, United States. 
(2)Department of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, United States. (3)Department of Physiology and Systems Bioscience, Kyoto 
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (4)Graduate School of Natural
Science and Technology, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan. (5)Department of
Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United
States Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, United States joseph.takahashi@utsouthwestern.edu. (6)Department 
of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United 
States carla.green@utsouthwestern.edu. (7)Department of Pharmacology, University 
of Washington, Seattle, United States Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University
of Washington, Seattle, United States nzheng@u.washington.edu.

The mammalian circadian clock is driven by a transcriptional-translational
feedback loop, which produces robust 24-hr rhythms. Proper oscillation of the
clock depends on the complex formation and periodic turnover of the Period and
Cryptochrome proteins, which together inhibit their own transcriptional activator
complex, CLOCK-BMAL1. We determined the crystal structure of the CRY-binding
domain (CBD) of PER2 in complex with CRY2 at 2.8 Å resolution. PER2-CBD adopts a 
highly extended conformation, embracing CRY2 with a sinuous binding mode. Its
N-terminal end tucks into CRY adjacent to a large pocket critical for CLOCK-BMAL1
binding, while its C-terminal half flanks the CRY2 C-terminal helix and
sterically hinders the recognition of CRY2 by the FBXL3 ubiquitin ligase.
Unexpectedly, a strictly conserved intermolecular zinc finger, whose integrity is
important for clock rhythmicity, further stabilizes the complex. Our
structure-guided analyses show that these interspersed CRY-interacting regions
represent multiple functional modules of PERs at the CRY-binding interface.

Copyright © 2014, Nangle et al.

PMCID: PMC4157330
PMID: 25127877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014;42(16):10278-87. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku701. Epub 2014 Aug
13.

An intensity ratio of interlocking loops determines circadian period length.

Yan J(1), Shi G(2), Zhang Z(2), Wu X(2), Liu Z(2), Xing L(2), Qu Z(2), Dong Z(2),
Yang L(3), Xu Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Systems Biology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China MOE Key
Laboratory of Model Animal for Disease Study, Model Animal Research Center,
Medical School of Nanjing University, Nanjing 210061, China. (2)MOE Key
Laboratory of Model Animal for Disease Study, Model Animal Research Center,
Medical School of Nanjing University, Nanjing 210061, China. (3)Center for
Systems Biology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China School of Mathematical 
Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China yingxu@suda.edu.cn. (4)Center 
for Systems Biology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China MOE Key Laboratory 
of Model Animal for Disease Study, Model Animal Research Center, Medical School
of Nanjing University, Nanjing 210061, China Collaborative Innovation Center for 
Genetics and Development, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
yingxu@suda.edu.cn.

Circadian clocks allow organisms to orchestrate the daily rhythms in physiology
and behaviors, and disruption of circadian rhythmicity can profoundly affect
fitness. The mammalian circadian oscillator consists of a negative primary
feedback loop and is associated with some 'auxiliary' loops. This raises the
questions of how these interlocking loops coordinate to regulate the period and
maintain its robustness. Here, we focused on the REV-ERBa/Cry1 auxiliary loop,
consisting of Rev-Erba/ROR-binding elements (RORE) mediated Cry1 transcription,
coordinates with the negative primary feedback loop to modulate the mammalian
circadian period. The silicon simulation revealed an unexpected rule: the
intensity ratio of the primary loop to the auxiliary loop is inversely related to
the period length, even when post-translational feedback is fixed. Then we
measured the mRNA levels from two loops in 10-mutant mice and observed the
similar monotonic relationship. Additionally, our simulation and the experimental
results in human osteosarcoma cells suggest that a coupling effect between the
numerator and denominator of this intensity ratio ensures the robustness of
circadian period and, therefore, provides an efficient means of correcting
circadian disorders. This ratio rule highlights the contribution of the
transcriptional architecture to the period dynamics and might be helpful in the
construction of synthetic oscillators.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4176327
PMID: 25122753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Aug 29;451(3):408-14. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.07.138. Epub 2014 Aug 7.

The circadian rhythm controls telomeres and telomerase activity.

Chen WD(1), Wen MS(1), Shie SS(2), Lo YL(3), Wo HT(1), Wang CC(1), Hsieh IC(1),
Lee TH(4), Wang CY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung
University College of Medicine, Taiwan. (2)Department of Infectious Diseases,
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine,
Taiwan. (3)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and
Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Taiwan. (4)Stroke Center and
Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University
College of Medicine, Taiwan. (5)Department of Cardiology, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Taiwan. Electronic
address: cwang@ocean.ag.

Circadian clocks are fundamental machinery in organisms ranging from archaea to
humans. Disruption of the circadian system is associated with premature aging in 
mice, but the molecular basis underlying this phenomenon is still unclear. In
this study, we found that telomerase activity exhibits endogenous circadian
rhythmicity in humans and mice. Human and mouse TERT mRNA expression oscillates
with circadian rhythms and are under the control of CLOCK-BMAL1 heterodimers.
CLOCK deficiency in mice causes loss of rhythmic telomerase activities, TERT mRNA
oscillation, and shortened telomere length. Physicians with regular work
schedules have circadian oscillation of telomerase activity while emergency
physicians working in shifts lose the circadian rhythms of telomerase activity.
These findings identify the circadian rhythm as a mechanism underlying telomere
and telomerase activity control that serve as interconnections between circadian 
systems and aging.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25109806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Nat Med. 2014 Aug;20(8):809-11. doi: 10.1038/nm.3649.

A local circadian clock calls time on lung inflammation.

Thompson AA(1), Walmsley SR(1), Whyte MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Infection and Immunity,
The Medical School, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2014 Aug;20(8):919-26.

Inflammatory diseases typically display circadian variation in symptom severity. 
A new study in mice shows how a pulmonary epithelial cell clock controls
neutrophil recruitment to the lungs and provides insight into interactions
between local and systemic circadian clocks.

PMID: 25100521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Biol Pharm Bull. 2014;37(8):1422-7.

Harmine lengthens circadian period of the mammalian molecular clock in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus.

Kondoh D(1), Yamamoto S, Tomita T, Miyazaki K, Itoh N, Yasumoto Y, Oike H, Doi R,
Oishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Clock Research Group, Biomedical Research Institute, National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST).

The circadian clock is a cell-autonomous endogenous system that generates
circadian rhythms in the behavior and physiology of most organisms. We previously
reported that the harmala alkaloid, harmine, lengthens the circadian period of
Bmal1 transcription in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. Clock protein dynamics were examined 
using real-time reporter assays of PER2::LUC to determine the effects of harmine 
on the central clock in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). Harmine significantly 
lengthened the period of PER2::LUC expression in embryonic fibroblasts, in
neuronal cells differentiated from neuronal progenitor cells and in SCN slices
obtained from PER2::LUC mice. Although harmine did not induce the transient mRNA 
expression of clock genes such as Per1, Per2 and Bmal1 in embryonic fibroblasts, 
it significantly extended the half-life of PER2::LUC protein in neuronal cells
and SCN slices. Harmine might lengthen the circadian period of the molecular
clock by increasing PER2 protein stability in the SCN.

PMID: 25087965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Cell. 2014 Jul 31;158(3):659-72. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.06.050.

Partitioning circadian transcription by SIRT6 leads to segregated control of
cellular metabolism.

Masri S(1), Rigor P(2), Cervantes M(1), Ceglia N(2), Sebastian C(3), Xiao C(4),
Roqueta-Rivera M(5), Deng C(4), Osborne TF(5), Mostoslavsky R(3), Baldi P(6),
Sassone-Corsi P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Epigenetics and Metabolism, University of California, Irvine,
Irvine, CA 92697, USA; Department of Biological Chemistry, University of
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. (2)Department of Computer Science,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA; Institute for Genomics
and Bioinformatics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.
(3)The Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA. (4)Genetics of Development and Diseases Branch, NIDDK,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (5)Metabolic Disease
Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, Orlando, FL 32827, USA.
(6)Center for Epigenetics and Metabolism, University of California, Irvine,
Irvine, CA 92697, USA; Department of Biological Chemistry, University of
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA; Department of Computer Science,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA; Institute for Genomics
and Bioinformatics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.
(7)Center for Epigenetics and Metabolism, University of California, Irvine,
Irvine, CA 92697, USA; Department of Biological Chemistry, University of
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA; Institute for Genomics and
Bioinformatics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA; INSERM
U904, Sprague Hall, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.
Electronic address: psc@uci.edu.

Comment in
    Science. 2014 Sep 5;345(6201):1122-3.

Circadian rhythms are intimately linked to cellular metabolism. Specifically, the
NAD(+)-dependent deacetylase SIRT1, the founding member of the sirtuin family,
contributes to clock function. Whereas SIRT1 exhibits diversity in deacetylation 
targets and subcellular localization, SIRT6 is the only constitutively
chromatin-associated sirtuin and is prominently present at transcriptionally
active genomic loci. Comparison of the hepatic circadian transcriptomes reveals
that SIRT6 and SIRT1 separately control transcriptional specificity and therefore
define distinctly partitioned classes of circadian genes. SIRT6 interacts with
CLOCK:BMAL1 and, differently from SIRT1, governs their chromatin recruitment to
circadian gene promoters. Moreover, SIRT6 controls circadian chromatin
recruitment of SREBP-1, resulting in the cyclic regulation of genes implicated in
fatty acid and cholesterol metabolism. This mechanism parallels a phenotypic
disruption in fatty acid metabolism in SIRT6 null mice as revealed by circadian
metabolome analyses. Thus, genomic partitioning by two independent sirtuins
contributes to differential control of circadian metabolism.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25083875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Sleep. 2014 Aug 1;37(8):1327-36. doi: 10.5665/sleep.3924.

A novel BHLHE41 variant is associated with short sleep and resistance to sleep
deprivation in humans.

Pellegrino R(1), Kavakli IH(2), Goel N(3), Cardinale CJ(4), Dinges DF(3), Kuna
ST(5), Maislin G(6), Van Dongen HP(7), Tufik S(8), Hogenesch JB(9), Hakonarson
H(4), Pack AI(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Applied Genomics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA ; Center for Sleep and Circadian Neurobiology, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA ; Departamento de
Psicobiologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Departments of Chemical and Biological Eng. and Molecular Biology and
Genetics, Koc University, Rumelifeneri Yolu, Sariyer-Istanbul, Turkey. (3)Center 
for Sleep and Circadian Neurobiology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School 
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA ; Division of Sleep and Chronobiology, Department
of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA. (4)Center for Applied Genomics, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA. (5)Center for Sleep and Circadian Neurobiology,
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA ;
Division of Sleep Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA ; Department of Medicine, Philadelphia Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA. (6)Center for Sleep and Circadian
Neurobiology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA ; Division of Sleep Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA. (7)Sleep and Performance Research 
Center, Washington State University, Pullman, WA. (8)Departamento de
Psicobiologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil.
(9)Department of Pharmacology, Institute for Translational Medicine and
Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine;
Philadelphia, PA.

Erratum in
    Sleep. 2015 Nov;38(11):1827.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Earlier work described a mutation in DEC2 also known as BHLHE41
(basic helix-loophelix family member e41) as causal in a family of short
sleepers, who needed just 6 h sleep per night. We evaluated whether there were
other variants of this gene in two well-phenotyped cohorts.
DESIGN: Sequencing of the BHLHE41 gene, electroencephalographic data, and delta
power analysis and functional studies using cell-based luciferase.
RESULTS: We identified new variants of the BHLHE41 gene in two cohorts who had
either acute sleep deprivation (n = 200) or chronic partial sleep deprivation (n 
= 217). One variant, Y362H, at another location in the same exon occurred in one 
twin in a dizygotic twin pair and was associated with reduced sleep duration,
less recovery sleep following sleep deprivation, and fewer performance lapses
during sleep deprivation than the homozygous twin. Both twins had almost
identical amounts of non rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep. This variant reduced
the ability of BHLHE41 to suppress CLOCK/BMAL1 and NPAS2/BMAL1 transactivation in
vitro. Another variant in the same exome had no effect on sleep or response to
sleep deprivation and no effect on CLOCK/BMAL1 transactivation. Random
mutagenesis identified a number of other variants of BHLHE41 that affect its
function.
CONCLUSIONS: There are a number of mutations of BHLHE41. Mutations reduce total
sleep while maintaining NREM sleep and provide resistance to the effects of sleep
loss. Mutations that affect sleep also modify the normal inhibition of BHLHE41 of
CLOCK/BMAL1 transactivation. Thus, clock mechanisms are likely involved in
setting sleep length and the magnitude of sleep homeostasis.
CITATION: Pellegrino R, Kavakli IH, Goel N, Cardinale CJ, Dinges DF, Kuna ST,
Maislin G, Van Dongen HP, Tufik S, Hogenesch JB, Hakonarson H, Pack AI. A novel
BHLHE41 variant is associated with short sleep and resistance to sleep
deprivation in humans. SLEEP 2014;37(8):1327-1336.

PMCID: PMC4096202
PMID: 25083013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2014 Jul;157(3):360-3. doi: 10.1007/s10517-014-2566-1. Epub
2014 Jul 30.

Expression of circadian rhythm genes CLOCK, BMAL1, and PER1 in buccal epithelial 
cells of patients with essential arterial hypertension in dependence on
polymorphic variants of CLOCK and BMAL1 genes.

Kurbatova IV(1), Topchieva LV, Korneva VA, Kolomeichuk SN, Nemova NN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, Karelian Scientific Center, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Petrozavodsk, Russia, irina7m@yandex.ru.

The transcript levels of circadian rhythm genes CLOCK, BMAL1, and PER1 in buccal 
epithelial cells of the patients with essential arterial hypertension was
analyzed in relation to polymorphic variants of CLOCK and BMAL1 genes. These
levels were assessed with realtime PCR method at daily hours 9, 13, and 17. The
significant differences were revealed in transcript levels of the examined genes 
in patients with various genotypes at the polymorphic markers 3111TC and 257TG
regulatory regions of CLOCK gene. The study detected no significant differences
among the carriers of various genotypes at polymorphic markers 862TC and 2121GA
of CLOCK gene and 56445TC of BMAL1 gene.

PMID: 25070164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 28;9(7):e103309. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103309.
eCollection 2014.

Phase differences in expression of circadian clock genes in the central nucleus
of the amygdala, dentate gyrus, and suprachiasmatic nucleus in the rat.

Harbour VL(1), Weigl Y(1), Robinson B(1), Amir S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Studies in Behavioral Neurobiology/Groupe de Recherche en
Neurobiologie Comportementale, Department of Psychology, Concordia University,
Montreal, QC, Canada.

We performed a high temporal resolution analysis of the transcript level of two
core clock genes, Period2 (Per2) and Bmal1, and a clock output gene, Dbp, in the 
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the master circadian clock, and in two forebrain
regions, the lateral part of the central nucleus of the amygdala (CEAl), and
dentate gyrus (DG), in rats. These regions, as we have shown previously, exhibit 
opposite rhythms in expression of the core clock protein, PERIOD2 (PER2). We
found that the expression of Per2, Bmal1 and Dbp follow a diurnal rhythm in all
three regions but the phase and amplitude of the rhythms of each gene vary across
regions, revealing important regional differences in temporal dynamics underlying
local daily rhythm generation in the mammalian forebrain. These findings
underscore the complex temporal organization of subordinate circadian oscillators
in the forebrain and raise interesting questions about the functional connection 
of these oscillators with the master SCN clock.

PMCID: PMC4113347
PMID: 25068868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Nat Med. 2014 Aug;20(8):919-26. doi: 10.1038/nm.3599. Epub 2014 Jul 27.

An epithelial circadian clock controls pulmonary inflammation and glucocorticoid 
action.

Gibbs J(1), Ince L(2), Matthews L(1), Mei J(3), Bell T(4), Yang N(1), Saer B(2), 
Begley N(2), Poolman T(1), Pariollaud M(1), Farrow S(5), DeMayo F(6), Hussell
T(4), Worthen GS(3), Ray D(1), Loudon A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester
Academic Health Sciences Centre, Manchester, UK. (2)Faculty of Life Sciences,
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (3)Division of Neonatology, Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA. (4)Manchester Collaborative Centre for Inflammation Research, Core
Technology Facility, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (5)1] Faculty of
Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health 
Sciences Centre, Manchester, UK. [2] Respiratory Therapy Area, GlaxoSmithKline,
Stevenage, UK. (6)Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2014 Aug;20(8):809-11.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2014 Sep;14(9):582.

The circadian system is an important regulator of immune function. Human
inflammatory lung diseases frequently show time-of-day variation in symptom
severity and lung function, but the mechanisms and cell types underlying these
effects remain unclear. We show that pulmonary antibacterial responses are
modulated by a circadian clock within epithelial club (Clara) cells. These drive 
circadian neutrophil recruitment to the lung via the chemokine CXCL5. Genetic
ablation of the clock gene Bmal1 (also called Arntl or MOP3) in bronchiolar cells
disrupts rhythmic Cxcl5 expression, resulting in exaggerated inflammatory
responses to lipopolysaccharide and an impaired host response to Streptococcus
pneumoniae infection. Adrenalectomy blocks rhythmic inflammatory responses and
the circadian regulation of CXCL5, suggesting a key role for the adrenal axis in 
driving CXCL5 expression and pulmonary neutrophil recruitment. Glucocorticoid
receptor occupancy at the Cxcl5 locus shows circadian oscillations, but this is
disrupted in mice with bronchiole-specific ablation of Bmal1, leading to enhanced
CXCL5 expression despite normal corticosteroid secretion. The therapeutic effects
of the synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone depend on intact clock function in 
the airway. We now define a regulatory mechanism that links the circadian clock
and glucocorticoid hormones to control both time-of-day variation and the
magnitude of pulmonary inflammation and responses to bacterial infection.

PMCID: PMC4268501
PMID: 25064128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 12;289(37):25925-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.567628. Epub
2014 Jul 25.

Liver clock protein BMAL1 promotes de novo lipogenesis through insulin-mTORC2-AKT
signaling.

Zhang D(1), Tong X(1), Arthurs B(1), Guha A(1), Rui L(1), Kamath A(1), Inoki
K(1), Yin L(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109. (2)From the Department of
Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48109 Leiyin@umich.edu.

The clock protein BMAL1 (brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1) participates in
circadian regulation of lipid metabolism, but its contribution to insulin
AKT-regulated hepatic lipid synthesis is unclear. Here we used both Bmal1(-/-)
and acute liver-specific Bmal1-depleted mice to study the role of BMAL1 in
refeeding-induced de novo lipogenesis in the liver. Both global deficiency and
acute hepatic depletion of Bmal1 reduced lipogenic gene expression in the liver
upon refeeding. Conversely, Bmal1 overexpression in mouse liver by adenovirus was
sufficient to elevate the levels of mRNA of lipogenic enzymes. Bmal1(-/-) primary
mouse hepatocytes displayed decreased levels of de novo lipogenesis and lipogenic
enzymes, supporting the notion that BMAL1 regulates lipid synthesis in
hepatocytes in a cell-autonomous manner. Both refed mouse liver and
insulin-treated primary mouse hepatocytes showed impaired AKT activation in the
case of either Bmal1 deficiency or Bmal1 depletion by adenoviral shRNA. Restoring
AKT activity by a constitutively active mutant of AKT nearly normalized de novo
lipogenesis in Bmal1(-/-) hepatocytes. Finally, Bmal1 deficiency or knockdown
decreased the protein abundance of RICTOR, the key component of the mTORC2
complex, without affecting the gene expression of key factors of insulin
signaling. Thus, our study uncovered a novel metabolic function of hepatic BMAL1 
that promotes de novo lipogenesis via the insulin-mTORC2-AKT signaling during
refeeding.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4162191
PMID: 25063808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Physiol Biochem. 2014 Sep;70(3):801-8. doi: 10.1007/s13105-014-0349-9. Epub
2014 Jul 26.

Effects of dietary sea cucumber saponin on the gene expression rhythm involved in
circadian clock and lipid metabolism in mice during nighttime-feeding.

Wen M(1), Cui J, Xu J, Xue Y, Wang J, Xue C, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Food Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao,
266003, Shandong Province, China.

In mammals, clock rhythms exist not only in the suprachiasmatic nucleus, which is
entrained by light/dark (LD) cycles, but also in most peripheral tissues. Recent 
studies have revealed that most physiology and behavior are subject to
well-controlled daily oscillations; similarly, metabolic state influences the
diurnal rhythm too. Previous studies have indicated that dietary sea cucumber
saponin (SCS) could improve glucose and lipid metabolism of rodent. However,
whether SCS could affect the expression of clock genes, which is involved in
lipid metabolism, is unknown at present. The aim of this study is to investigate 
the effects of SCS on the clock and clock-controlled genes involved in lipid
metabolism. ICR male mice were divided into a control and SCS group mice (add
0.03% sea cucumber saponin to regular chow) and were fed at night (2030-0830
hours). After 2 weeks, clock genes expression in brain and liver, blood glucose, 
hormones, and lipid metabolic markers were analyzed. The results showed that
dietary SCS caused alteration in rhythms and/or amplitudes of clock genes was
more significant in brain than in liver. In addition, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPARa), sterol regulatory element binding
protein-1c (SREBP-1c), together with their target genes carnitine palmitoyl
transferase (CPT), and fatty acid synthase (FAS) showed marked changes in rhythm 
and/or amplitude in SCS group mice. These results suggested that SCS could affect
the daily expression patterns of clock genes in brain and liver tissues, and
alter the clock-controlled genes involved in lipid metabolism.

PMID: 25059722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2014 Dec 1;307(11):C989-98. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00401.2013. Epub 2014 Jul 23.

Rhythmic expression of cytochrome P450 epoxygenases CYP4x1 and CYP2c11 in the rat
brain and vasculature.

Carver KA(1), Lourim D(1), Tryba AK(2), Harder DR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin; Department of Physiology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin; and. (2)Department of Physiology, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin; and Clement J. Zablocki VA Medical Center, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin. (3)Cardiovascular Research Center, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Department of Physiology, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin; and Clement J. Zablocki VA Medical Center, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin dharder@mcw.edu.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2014 Dec 1;307(11):C986-8.

Mammals have circadian variation in blood pressure, heart rate, vascular tone,
thrombotic tendency, and cerebral blood flow (CBF). These changes may be in part 
orchestrated by circadian variation in clock gene expression within cells
comprising the vasculature that modulate blood flow (e.g., fibroblasts, cerebral 
vascular smooth muscle cells, astrocytes, and endothelial cells). However, the
downstream mechanisms that underlie circadian changes in blood flow are unknown. 
Cytochrome P450 epoxygenases (Cyp4x1 and Cyp2c11) are expressed in the brain and 
vasculature and metabolize arachidonic acid (AA) to form epoxyeicosatrienoic
acids (EETs). EETs are released from astrocytes, neurons, and vascular
endothelial cells and act as potent vasodilators, increasing blood flow. EETs
released in response to increases in neural activity evoke a corresponding
increase in blood flow known as the functional hyperemic response. We examine the
hypothesis that Cyp2c11 and Cyp4x1 expression and EETs production vary in a
circadian manner in the rat brain and cerebral vasculature. RT-PCR revealed
circadian/diurnal expression of clock and clock-controlled genes as well as
Cyp4x1 and Cyp2c11, within the rat hippocampus, middle cerebral artery, inferior 
vena cava, hippocampal astrocytes and rat brain microvascular endothelial cells. 
Astrocyte and endothelial cell culture experiments revealed rhythmic variation in
Cyp4x1 and Cyp2c11 gene and protein expression with a 12-h period and parallel
rhythmic production of EETs. Our data suggest there is circadian regulation of
Cyp4x1 and Cyp2c11 gene expression. Such rhythmic EETs production may contribute 
to circadian changes in blood flow and alter risk of adverse cardiovascular
events throughout the day.

PMCID: PMC4254955
PMID: 25055826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Feb;75(2):131-44. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22213. Epub 2014 Jul 23.

Melatonin administered during the fetal stage affects circadian clock in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus but not in the liver.

Houdek P(1), Polidarová L, Nováková M, Mateju K, Kubík , Sumová A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurohumoral Regulations, Institute of Physiology, v.v.i.,
Academy of Science of the Czech Republic, Videnska 1083, 14220, Prague, Czech
Republic.

The mammalian circadian system develops gradually during ontogenesis, and after
birth, the system is already set to a phase of the mothers. The role of maternal 
melatonin in the entrainment of fetal circadian clocks has been suggested, but
direct evidence is lacking. In our study, intact or pinealectomized pregnant rats
were exposed to constant light (LL) throughout pregnancy to suppress the
endogenous melatonin and behavioral rhythms. During the last 5 days of gestation,
the rats were injected with melatonin or vehicle or were left untreated. After
delivery, daily expression profiles of c-fos and Avp in the suprachiasmatic
nuclei (SCN), and Per1, Per2, Rev-erba, and Bmal1 in the liver were measured in
1-day-old pups. Due to the LL exposure, no gene expression rhythms were detected 
in the SCN of untreated pregnant rats or in the SCN and liver of the pups. The
administration of melatonin to pregnant rats entrained the pups' gene expression 
profiles in the SCN, but not in the liver. Melatonin did not affect the maternal 
behavior during pregnancy. Vehicle injections also synchronized the gene
expression in the SCN but not in the liver. Melatonin and vehicle entrained the
gene expression profiles to different phases, demonstrating that the effect of
melatonin was apparently not due to the treatment procedure per se. The data
demonstrate that in pregnant rats with suppressed endogenous melatonin levels,
pharmacological doses of melatonin affect the fetal clock in the SCN but not in
the liver.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25045046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Learn Mem. 2014 Jul 17;21(8):417-23. doi: 10.1101/lm.035451.114. Print 2014 Aug.

Genetic disruption of the core circadian clock impairs hippocampus-dependent
memory.

Wardlaw SM(1), Phan TX(1), Saraf A(1), Chen X(1), Storm DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington 98195-7750, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, School of
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-7750, USA
dstorm@u.washington.edu.

Erratum in
    Learn Mem. 2014 Sep;21(9):498.

Perturbing the circadian system by electrolytically lesioning the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN) or varying the environmental light:dark schedule impairs memory,
suggesting that memory depends on the circadian system. We used a genetic
approach to evaluate the role of the molecular clock in memory. Bmal1-/- mice,
which are arrhythmic under constant conditions, were examined for
hippocampus-dependent memory, LTP at the Schaffer-collateral synapse, and signal 
transduction activity in the hippocampus. Bmal1-/- mice exhibit impaired
contextual fear and spatial memory. Furthermore, LTP in hippocampal slices from
Bmal1-/- mice is also significantly decreased relative to that from wild-type
mice. Activation of Erk1,2 MAP kinase (MAPK) during training for contextual fear 
memory and diurnal oscillation of MAPK activity and cAMP in the hippocampus is
also lost in Bmal1-/- mice, suggesting that the memory defects are due to
reduction of the memory consolidation pathway in the hippocampus. We conclude
that critical signaling events in the hippocampus required for memory depend on
BMAL1.

© 2014 Wardlaw et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4105720
PMID: 25034823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Blood Press Monit. 2014 Oct;19(5):249-54. doi: 10.1097/MBP.0000000000000060.

Clock genes in hypertension: novel insights from rodent models.

Richards J(1), Diaz AN, Gumz ML.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of aMedicine bBiochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

The circadian clock plays an integral role in the regulation of physiological
processes, including the regulation of blood pressure. However, deregulation of
the clock can lead to pathophysiological states including hypertension. Recent
work has implicated the circadian clock genes in the regulation of processes in
the heart, kidney, vasculature, and the metabolic organs, which are all critical 
in the regulation of the blood pressure. The goal of this review is to provide an
introduction and general overview into the role of circadian clock genes in the
regulation of blood pressure with a focus on their deregulation in the etiology
of hypertension. This review will focus on the core circadian clock genes CLOCK, 
BMAL1, Per, and Cry.

PMCID: PMC4159427
PMID: 25025868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Front Syst Neurosci. 2014 Jun 26;8:121. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2014.00121.
eCollection 2014.

BMAL1 controls the diurnal rhythm and set point for electrical seizure threshold 
in mice.

Gerstner JR(1), Smith GG(2), Lenz O(3), Perron IJ(1), Buono RJ(4), Ferraro TN(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia, PA, USA ;
Center for Sleep and Circadian Neurobiology, University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA ; Research Service, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center Coatesville, PA, USA. (3)Center for Sleep and Circadian Neurobiology,
University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia, PA, USA. (4)Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Cooper Medical School of Rowan University Camden, NJ, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia, PA, USA ;
Research Service, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center Coatesville, PA, 
USA ; Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cooper Medical School of Rowan
University Camden, NJ, USA.

The epilepsies are a heterogeneous group of neurological diseases defined by the 
occurrence of unprovoked seizures which, in many cases, are correlated with
diurnal rhythms. In order to gain insight into the biological mechanisms
controlling this phenomenon, we characterized time-of-day effects on electrical
seizure threshold in mice. Male C57BL/6J wild-type mice were maintained on a
14/10 h light/dark cycle, from birth until 6 weeks of age for seizure testing.
Seizure thresholds were measured using a step-wise paradigm involving a single
daily electrical stimulus. Results showed that the current required to elicit
both generalized and maximal seizures was significantly higher in mice tested
during the dark phase of the diurnal cycle compared to mice tested during the
light phase. This rhythm was absent in BMAL1 knockout (KO) mice. BMAL1 KO also
exhibited significantly reduced seizure thresholds at all times tested, compared 
to C57BL/6J mice. Results document a significant influence of time-of-day on
electrical seizure threshold in mice and suggest that this effect is under the
control of genes that are known to regulate circadian behaviors. Furthermore, low
seizure thresholds in BMAL1 KO mice suggest that BMAL1 itself is directly
involved in controlling neuronal excitability.

PMCID: PMC4071977
PMID: 25018707  [PubMed]


130. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 11;9(7):e102073. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102073.
eCollection 2014.

The melatonin agonist ramelteon induces duration-dependent clock gene expression 
through cAMP signaling in pancreatic INS-1 ß-cells.

Nishiyama K(1), Hirai K(1).

Author information: 
(1)CNS Drug Discovery Unit, Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda
Pharmaceutical Company Ltd., Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan.

Prolonged exposure to melatonin improves glycemic control in animals. Although
glucose metabolism is controlled by circadian clock genes, little is known about 
the role of melatonin signaling and its duration in the regulation of clock gene 
expression in pancreatic ß-cells. Activation of MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptors
inhibits cAMP signaling, which mediates clock gene expression. Therefore, this
study investigated exposure duration-dependent alterations in cAMP
element-binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation and clock gene expression that
occur during and after exposure to ramelteon, a selective melatonin agonist used 
to treat insomnia. In rat INS-1 cells, a pancreatic ß-cell line endogenously
expressing melatonin receptors, ramelteon persistently decreased CREB
phosphorylation during the treatment period (2-14 h), whereas the subsequent
washout induced an enhancement of forskolin-stimulated CREB phosphorylation in a 
duration- and concentration-dependent manner. This augmentation was blocked by
forskolin or the melatonin receptor antagonist luzindole. Similarly, gene
expression analyses of 7 clock genes revealed the duration dependency of the
effects of ramelteon on Rev-erba and Bmal1 expression through melatonin
receptor-mediated cAMP signaling; longer exposure times (14 h) resulted in
greater increases in the expression and signaling of Rev-erba, which is related
to ß-cell functions. Interestingly, this led to amplified oscillatory Rev-erba
and Bmal1 expression after agonist washout and forskolin stimulation. These
results provide new insights into the duration-dependent effects of ramelteon on 
clock gene expression in INS-1 cells and may improve the understanding of its
effect in vivo. The applicability of these results to pancreatic islets awaits
further investigation.

PMCID: PMC4094524
PMID: 25013953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 9;9(7):e102238. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102238. eCollection
2014.

Non-circadian expression masking clock-driven weak transcription rhythms in U2OS 
cells.

Hoffmann J(1), Symul L(2), Shostak A(1), Fischer T(1), Naef F(2), Brunner M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Center, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Bioengineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland.

U2OS cells harbor a circadian clock but express only a few rhythmic genes in
constant conditions. We identified 3040 binding sites of the circadian regulators
BMAL1, CLOCK and CRY1 in the U2OS genome. Most binding sites even in promoters do
not correlate with detectable rhythmic transcript levels. Luciferase fusions
reveal that the circadian clock supports robust but low amplitude transcription
rhythms of representative promoters. However, rhythmic transcription of these
potentially clock-controlled genes is masked by non-circadian transcription that 
overwrites the weaker contribution of the clock in constant conditions. Our data 
suggest that U2OS cells harbor an intrinsically rather weak circadian oscillator.
The oscillator has the potential to regulate a large number of genes. The
contribution of circadian versus non-circadian transcription is dependent on the 
metabolic state of the cell and may determine the apparent complexity of the
circadian transcriptome.

PMCID: PMC4090172
PMID: 25007071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Pharmacol Sci. 2014;125(3):329-32. Epub 2014 Jun 25.

Effect of quetiapine on Per1, Per2, and Bmal1 clock gene expression in the mouse 
amygdala and hippocampus.

Moriya S(1), Tahara Y, Sasaki H, Hamaguchi Y, Kuriki D, Ishikawa R, Ishigooka J, 
Shibata S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Physiology and Pharmacology, School of Advanced Science and
Engineering, Waseda University, Japan.

Circadian rhythms are related to various psychiatric disorders. Recently,
antipsychotics, including quetiapine (QTP), have been accepted as potential
therapeutic agents for the treatment of depression, but its mechanism remains
poorly understood. In this study, we examined clock gene fluctuation patterns in 
QTP-treated mice. QTP significantly increased Per2 mRNA at ZT12 and Per1 and Per2
expression at ZT18 in the amygdala. There were significant differences between
the control and QTP groups in the cross-time effects of Per2 mRNA expression in
the amygdala. Our findings suggest that QTP possibly acts on the circadian
system, which then induces changes in mood symptoms.

PMID: 24965164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 18;9(6):e99527. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099527. eCollection
2014.

Survival of adult generated hippocampal neurons is altered in circadian
arrhythmic mice.

Rakai BD(1), Chrusch MJ(2), Spanswick SC(1), Dyck RH(3), Antle MC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada;
Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada;
Department of Neuroscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada;
Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada;
Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada. (4)Department of Psychology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada; Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada; Pharmacology & Therapeutics, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada.

The subgranular zone of the hippocampal formation gives rise to new neurons that 
populate the dentate gyrus throughout life. Cells in the hippocampus exhibit
rhythmic clock gene expression and the circadian clock is known to regulate the
cycle of cell division in other areas of the body. These facts suggest that the
circadian clock may regulate adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus as well. In
the present study, neurogenesis in the hippocampal subgranular zone was examined 
in arrhythmic Bmal1 knockout (-KO) mice and their rhythmic heterozygous and
wildtype littermates. Proliferation and survival of newly generated subgranular
zone cells were examined using bromodeoxyuridine labelling, while pyknosis (a
measure of cell death) and hippocampal volume were examined in cresyl violet
stained sections. There was no significant difference in cellular proliferation
between any of the groups, yet survival of proliferating cells, 6 weeks after the
bromodeoxyuridine injection, was significantly greater in the BMAL1-KO animals.
The number of pyknotic cells was significantly decreased in Bmal1-KO animals, yet
hippocampal volume remained the same across genotypes. These findings suggest
that while a functional circadian clock is not necessary for normal proliferation
of neuronal precursor cells, the normal pruning of newly generated neurons in the
hippocampus may require a functional circadian clock.

PMCID: PMC4062413
PMID: 24941219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Chronobiol Int. 2014 Oct;31(8):901-10. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2014.925469. Epub
2014 Jun 16.

Daily rhythms are retained both in spontaneously developed sarcomas and in
xenografts grown in immunocompromised SCID mice.

Comas M(1), Kuropatwinski KK, Wrobel M, Toshkov I, Antoch MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute , 
Buffalo, NY , USA .

The circadian clock generates and regulates many daily physiological, metabolic
and behavioral rhythms as well as acute responses to various types of stresses
including those induced by anticancer treatment. It has been proposed that
modulatory function of the clock may be used for improving the therapeutic
efficacy of established anti-cancer treatments. In order to rationally exploit
this mechanism, more information is needed to fully characterize the functional
status of the molecular clock in tumors of different cellular origin; however,
the data describing tumor clocks are still inconsistent. Here we tested the
status of clock in two models of tumors derived from connective tissue: sarcomas 
spontaneously developed in p53-deficient mice and human fibrosarcoma cells grown 
as xenografts in immunocompromised severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice.
We show that both types of tumors retain a functional clock, which is
synchronized in phase with normal tissues. We also show that spontaneously
developed tumors are not only oscillating in the context of an organism where
they receive hormonal and metabolic signals but continue oscillating ex vivo in
tissue explants demonstrating that tumors have functional clocks capable of
timing all their functions. We also provide evidence that similar to liver,
tumors can be synchronized by food availability independent of the central
pacemaker in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN). These data provide the basis for
the design of anticancer therapies that take into account the circadian metabolic
and physiological patterns of both the tumor and normal tissues.

PMCID: PMC4358746
PMID: 24933324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Neuroscience. 2014 Sep 5;275:170-83. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.06.007.
Epub 2014 Jun 12.

Temporal modulation of the canonical clockwork in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and
olfactory bulb by the mammary pheromone 2MB2 in pre-visual rabbits.

Trejo-Muñoz L(1), Navarrete E(1), Montúfar-Chaveznava R(2), Caldelas I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Ciudad Universitaria, 04510, Distrito Federal, Mexico. (2)Instituto de
Fisiología Celular, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad
Universitaria, 04510, Distrito Federal, Mexico. (3)Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad Universitaria, 04510,
Distrito Federal, Mexico. Electronic address: caldelas@biomedicas.unam.mx.

During the early stages of development, the olfactory system plays a vital role
in the survival of altricial mammals. One remarkable example is the Oryctolagus
cuniculus, whose mother-young interaction greatly depends on the
2-methylbut-2-enal (2MB2) pheromone that triggers nipple search and grasping
behaviors. Olfactory stimulation with 2MB2 regulates the expression of the core
body temperature and locomotor activity rhythms in rabbit pups, indicating the
modulation of the circadian system by this volatile cue. To address this issue,
in the present study, we determined the effect of stimulation with pulses of 2MB2
on the molecular circadian clockwork in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) and in 
the main olfactory bulb (MOB). For this purpose, 7-day-old rabbits were
stimulated with distilled water (CON), with ethyl isobutyrate (ETHYL) or with the
pheromone (2MB2) at different times of the cycle, and 1h later, the expression of
the activity marker C-FOS and of the clock proteins PER1, CRY1 and BMAL1 was
evaluated in the SCN and in the three layers of the MOB. The clock proteins were 
abundantly expressed in both structures; nevertheless these showed diurnal
rhythmicity only in the MOB, confirming that central pacemakers exhibit a
heterochronical development of the molecular clockwork. C-FOS expression in the
SCN and in the MOB was modulated by exposure to ETHYL and to 2MB2 only when these
stimulants were presented at ZT00 and at ZT18. In contrast, the clock proteins
were essentially modulated by 2MB2 at ZT00 and at ZT06 in both structures. In
addition, the PER1 and CRY1 proteins exhibited differential responses to
stimulation in the three layers of the MOB. For the first time, we report a
modulatory and time-dependent effect of the mammary pheromone 2MB2 on the
expression of the core clock proteins in the SCN and in the MOB in rabbits during
pre-visual stages of development.

Copyright © 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24931761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. FEBS Lett. 2014 Aug 25;588(17):3015-22. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.05.058. Epub 
2014 Jun 10.

MicroRNAs function as cis- and trans-acting modulators of peripheral circadian
clocks.

Shende VR(1), Kim SM(1), Neuendorff N(2), Earnest DJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA; Center 
for Biological Clocks Research, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Experimental Therapeutics, Texas A&M Health
Science Center, College of Medicine, Bryan, TX, USA. (3)Department of Biology,
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA; Center for Biological Clocks
Research, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA; Department of
Neuroscience and Experimental Therapeutics, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
College of Medicine, Bryan, TX, USA. Electronic address:
dearnest@medicine.tamhsc.edu.

Based on their extracellular expression and targeting of the clock gene Bmal1,
miR-142-3p and miR-494 were analyzed for evidence of vesicle-mediated
communication between cells and intracellular functional activity. Our studies
demonstrate that: miR-142-3p+miR-494 overexpression decreases endogenous BMAL1
levels, increases the period of Per2 oscillations, and increases extracellular
miR-142-3p/miR-494 abundance in conditioned medium; miRNA-enriched medium
increases intracellular expression of miR-142-3p and represses Bmal1 3'-UTR
activity in naïve cells; and inhibitors of vesicular trafficking modulate
intercellular communication of these miRNAs and ensemble Per2 rhythms. Thus,
miR-142-3p and miR-494 may function as cis- and trans-acting signals contributing
to local temporal coordination of cell-autonomous circadian clocks.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24928439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 12;9(6):e99172. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099172. eCollection
2014.

Daily rhythmicity of clock gene transcripts in atlantic cod fast skeletal muscle.

Lazado CC(1), Kumaratunga HP(1), Nagasawa K(1), Babiak I(1), Giannetto A(2),
Fernandes JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biosciences and Aquaculture, University of Nordland, Bodø, Norway. 
(2)Faculty of Biosciences and Aquaculture, University of Nordland, Bodø, Norway; 
Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Messina,
Messina, Italy.

The classical notion of a centralized clock that governs circadian rhythmicity
has been challenged with the discovery of peripheral oscillators that enable
organisms to cope with daily changes in their environment. The present study
aimed to identify the molecular clock components in Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua)
and to investigate their daily gene expression in fast skeletal muscle. Atlantic 
cod clock genes were closely related to their orthologs in teleosts and
tetrapods. Synteny was conserved to varying degrees in the majority of the 18
clock genes examined. In particular, aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator-like 2 (arntl2), RAR-related orphan receptor A (rora) and timeless
(tim) displayed high degrees of conservation. Expression profiling during the
early ontogenesis revealed that some transcripts were maternally transferred,
namely arntl2, cryptochrome 1b and 2 (cry1b and cry2), and period 2a and 2b
(per2a and per2b). Most clock genes were ubiquitously expressed in various
tissues, suggesting the possible existence of multiple peripheral clock systems
in Atlantic cod. In particular, they were all detected in fast skeletal muscle,
with the exception of neuronal PAS (Per-Arnt-Single-minded) domain-containing
protein (npas1) and rora. Rhythmicity analysis revealed 8 clock genes with daily 
rhythmic expression, namely arntl2, circadian locomotor output cycles kaput
(clock), npas2, cry2, cry3 per2a, nuclear receptor subfamily 1, group D, member 1
(nr1d1), and nr1d2a. Transcript levels of the myogenic genes myogenic factor 5
(myf5) and muscleblind-like 1 (mbnl1) strongly correlated with clock gene
expression. This is the first study to unravel the molecular components of
peripheral clocks in Atlantic cod. Taken together, our data suggest that the
putative clock system in fast skeletal muscle of Atlantic cod has regulatory
implications on muscle physiology, particularly in the expression of genes
related to myogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4062345
PMID: 24921252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Mol Recognit. 2014 Jul;27(7):458-69. doi: 10.1002/jmr.2367.

Quantification of interactions among circadian clock proteins via surface plasmon
resonance.

Kepsutlu B(1), Kizilel R, Kizilel S.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical and Biological Engineering, Koc University, Sariyer, Istanbul, 34450,
Turkey.

Circadian clock is an internal time keeping system recurring 24 h daily rhythm in
physiology and behavior of organisms. Circadian clock contains transcription and 
translation feedback loop involving CLOCK/NPAS2, BMAL1, Cry1/2, and Per1/2. In
common, heterodimer of CLOCK/NPAS2 and BMAL1 binds to EBOX element in the
promoter of Per and Cry genes in order to activate their transcription. CRY and
PER making heterodimeric complexes enter the nucleus in order to inhibit their
own BMAL1-CLOCK-activated transcription. The aim of this study was to investigate
and quantify real-time binding affinities of clock proteins among each other on
and off DNA modes using surface plasmon resonance. The pairwise interaction
coefficients among clock proteins, as well as interaction of PER2, CRY2, and
PER2<U+2009>:<U+2009>CRY2 proteins with BMAL1 : CLOCK complex in the presence and absence of
EBOX motif have been investigated via analysis of surface plasmon resonance data 
with pseudo first-order reaction kinetics approximation and via nonlinear
regression curve fitting. The results indicated that CRY2 and PER2, BMAL1, and
CLOCK proteins form complexes in vitro and that PER2, CRY2 and PER2<U+2009>:<U+2009>CRY2
complex have similar affinities toward BMAL1 : CLOCK complex. CRY2 protein had
the highest affinity toward EBOX complex, whereas PER2 and CRY2<U+2009>:<U+2009>PER2 complexes 
displayed low affinity toward EBOX complex. The quantification of the interaction
between clock proteins is critical to understand the operation mechanism of the
biological clock and to address the behavioral and physiological disorders, and
it will be useful for the design of new drugs toward clock-related diseases.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24895278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2014 May;1318:71-80. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12464.

Circadian endocrine rhythms: the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and its
actions.

Nicolaides NC(1), Charmandari E, Chrousos GP, Kino T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Diabetes, First Department of
Pediatrics, University of Athens Medical School, "Aghia Sophia" Children's
Hospital, Athens, Greece; Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Clinical
Research Center, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens,
Greece.

The stress system effectively restores the internal balance--or homeostasis--of
living organisms in the face of random external or internal changes, the
stressors. This highly complex system helps organisms to provide a series of
neuroendocrine responses to stressors--the stress response--through coordinated
activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the locus
coeruleus/norepinephrine autonomic nervous systems. In addition to stressors,
life is influenced by daily light/dark changes due to the 24-h rotation of Earth.
To adjust to these recurrent day/night cycles, the biological clock system
employs the heterodimer of transcription factors circadian locomotor output cycle
kaput/brain-muscle-arnt-like protein 1 (CLOCK/BMAL1), along with a set of other
transcription factors, to regulate the circadian pattern of gene expression.
Interestingly, the stress system, through the HPA axis, communicates with the
clock system; therefore, any uncoupling or dysregulation could potentially cause 
several disorders, such as metabolic, autoimmune, and mood disorders. In this
review, we discuss the biological function of the two systems, their
interactions, and the clinical implications of their dysregulation or uncoupling.

© 2014 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMCID: PMC4104011
PMID: 24890877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Vet J. 2014 Jul;201(1):39-45. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2014.03.028. Epub 2014 Mar 31.

Exercise influences circadian gene expression in equine skeletal muscle.

Murphy BA(1), Wagner AL(2), McGlynn OF(3), Kharazyan F(3), Browne JA(3), Elliott 
JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture and Food Science, University College Dublin, Belfield,
Dublin 4, Ireland. Electronic address: Barbara.murphy@ucd.ie. (2)Center of Muscle
Biology, Department of Physiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536,
USA. (3)School of Agriculture and Food Science, University College Dublin,
Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland. (4)Center for Chronobiology, Departments of
Psychiatry and Psychology, University of California, La Jolla, San Diego, CA
92093-0109, USA.

Circadian rhythms are endogenously generated 24-h oscillations that coordinate
numerous aspects of mammalian physiology, metabolism and behaviour. The existence
of a molecular circadian clock in equine skeletal muscle has previously been
demonstrated. This study investigates how the circadian 24-h expression of
exercise-relevant genes in skeletal muscle is influenced by a regular exercise
regime. Mid-gluteal, percutaneous muscle biopsies were obtained over a 24-h
period from six Thoroughbred mares before and after an 8-week exercise programme.
Real-time qPCR assays were used to assess the expression patterns of core clock
genes ARNTL, PER2, NR1D1, clock-controlled gene DBP, and muscle genes MYF6, UCP3,
VEGFA, FOXO1, MYOD1, PPARGC1A, PPARGC1B, FBXO32 and PDK4. Two-way repeated
measures ANOVA revealed a significant interaction between circadian time and
exercise for muscle genes MYF6, UCP3, MYOD1 and PDK4. A significant effect of
time was observed for all genes with the exception of VEGFA, where a main effect 
of exercise was observed. By cosinor analysis, the core clock genes, ARNTL
(P<U+2009><0.01) and NR1D1 (P<U+2009><0.05), showed 24-h rhythmicity both pre- and
post-exercise, while PER2 expression was rhythmic post-exercise (P<U+2009><0.05) but not
pre-exercise. The expression profiles of muscle genes MYOD1 and MYF6 showed
significant fits to a 24-h cosine waveform indicative of circadian rhythmicity
post-exercise only (P<U+2009><0.01). This study suggests that the metabolic capacity of 
muscle is influenced by scheduled exercise and that optimal athletic performance 
may be achieved when exercise times and competition times coincide.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 24888677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 11;289(28):19681-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.568493. Epub
2014 May 28.

Phosphorylation of the transcription activator CLOCK regulates progression
through a ~ 24-h feedback loop to influence the circadian period in Drosophila.

Mahesh G(1), Jeong E(2), Ng FS(1), Liu Y(1), Gunawardhana K(1), Houl JH(1),
Yildirim E(3), Amunugama R(4), Jones R(4), Allen DL(4), Edery I(3), Kim EY(2),
Hardin PE(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biology and Center for Biological Clocks Research,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843. (2)the Department of Brain
Science, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon 443-380, Korea. (3)the
Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Rutgers University, Center for 
Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Piscataway New Jersey 08854. (4)MS Bioworks,
LLC, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48108, and. (5)From the Department of Biology and Center
for Biological Clocks Research, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas
77843, phardin@bio.tamu.edu.

Circadian (<U+2245> 24 h) clocks control daily rhythms in metabolism, physiology, and
behavior in animals, plants, and microbes. In Drosophila, these clocks keep
circadian time via transcriptional feedback loops in which clock-cycle (CLK-CYC) 
initiates transcription of period (per) and timeless (tim), accumulating levels
of PER and TIM proteins feed back to inhibit CLK-CYC, and degradation of PER and 
TIM allows CLK-CYC to initiate the next cycle of transcription. The timing of key
events in this feedback loop are controlled by, or coincide with, rhythms in PER 
and CLK phosphorylation, where PER and CLK phosphorylation is high during
transcriptional repression. PER phosphorylation at specific sites controls its
subcellular localization, activity, and stability, but comparatively little is
known about the identity and function of CLK phosphorylation sites. Here we
identify eight CLK phosphorylation sites via mass spectrometry and determine how 
phosphorylation at these sites impacts behavioral and molecular rhythms by
transgenic rescue of a new Clk null mutant. Eliminating phosphorylation at four
of these sites accelerates the feedback loop to shorten the circadian period,
whereas loss of CLK phosphorylation at serine 859 increases CLK activity, thereby
increasing PER levels and accelerating transcriptional repression. These results 
demonstrate that CLK phosphorylation influences the circadian period by
regulating CLK activity and progression through the feedback loop.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4094078
PMID: 24872414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Neurol Sci. 2014 Nov;35(11):1743-7. doi: 10.1007/s10072-014-1824-3. Epub 2014 May
22.

The polymorphism of ARNTL2 (BMAL2) gene rs2306074 C>T is associated with
susceptibility of Alzheimer disease in Chinese population.

Qing-Xiu L(1), Chang-Quan H, Qian C, Xue-Mei Z, Xiu-Ying H, Song-Bing L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, The Third Hospital of Mianyang, Jiannanlu 190,
Mianyang, 621000, Sichuang Province, China.

In the present study, we investigated whether polymorphism of ARNTL2 (BMAL2) gene
rs2306074 T/C was associated with susceptibility of Alzheimer disease (AD) in
Chinese population. A case-control method was employed in this study. 296
unrelated AD patients and 423 control subjects were recruited in current study.
The prevalence of C carriers in BMAL2 gene rs2306074 T/C in AD patients was
significantly higher than that of control subjects in both the whole sample and
APOE e 4 non-carriers (in the whole sample: <U+03C7> (2) = 5.938, P = 0.012; in APOE e 4
non-carriers: <U+03C7> (2) = 9.048, P < 0.0001). In addition, both in the whole sample
and APOE e 4 non-carriers, prevalence of CC genotypes in BMAL2 gene rs2306074 of 
AD patients was also significantly higher than that in controls (in the whole
sample: <U+03C7> (2) = 5.126, P = 0.018; in APOE e 4 non-carriers: <U+03C7> (2) = 7.389, P =
0.023). However, there was no significant difference of prevalence of C carriers 
and CC genotypes in BMAL2 gene rs2306074 T/C between AD patients and control
subjects among APOE e 4 carriers (C carriers: <U+03C7> (2) = 0.020, P = 0.900; CC
genotypes: <U+03C7> (2) = 0.017, P = 0.946). C carriers in BMAL2 gene rs2306074 T/C are 
associated with a high susceptibility of AD among APOE e 4 non-carriers but not
among APOE e 4 carriers in Chinese population.

PMID: 24847962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. PLoS One. 2014 May 20;9(5):e98016. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098016. eCollection
2014.

Expressions of tight junction proteins Occludin and Claudin-1 are under the
circadian control in the mouse large intestine: implications in intestinal
permeability and susceptibility to colitis.

Kyoko OO(1), Kono H(2), Ishimaru K(1), Miyake K(3), Kubota T(3), Ogawa H(4),
Okumura K(4), Shibata S(5), Nakao A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Yamanashi Faculty of Medicine,
Yamanashi, Japan. (2)The First Department of Surgery, University of Yamanashi
Faculty of Medicine, Yamanashi, Japan. (3)Department of Epigenetic Medicine,
University of Yamanashi Faculty of Medicine, Yamanashi, Japan. (4)Atopy Research 
Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of
Physiology and Pharmacology, School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Waseda
University, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of Immunology, University of Yamanashi
Faculty of Medicine, Yamanashi, Japan; Atopy Research Center, Juntendo University
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The circadian clock drives daily rhythms in behavior and
physiology. A recent study suggests that intestinal permeability is also under
control of the circadian clock. However, the precise mechanisms remain largely
unknown. Because intestinal permeability depends on tight junction (TJ) that
regulates the epithelial paracellular pathway, this study investigated whether
the circadian clock regulates the expression levels of TJ proteins in the
intestine.
METHODS: The expression levels of TJ proteins in the large intestinal epithelium 
and colonic permeability were analyzed every 4, 6, or 12 hours between wild-type 
mice and mice with a mutation of a key clock gene Period2 (Per2; mPer2(m/m). In
addition, the susceptibility to dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced colitis was 
compared between wild-type mice and mPer2(m/m) mice.
RESULTS: The mRNA and protein expression levels of Occludin and Claudin-1
exhibited daily variations in the colonic epithelium in wild-type mice, whereas
they were constitutively high in mPer2(m/m) mice. Colonic permeability in
wild-type mice exhibited daily variations, which was inversely associated with
the expression levels of Occludin and Claudin-1 proteins, whereas it was
constitutively low in mPer2(m/m) mice. mPer2(m/m) mice were more resistant to the
colonic injury induced by DSS than wild-type mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Occludin and Claudin-1 expressions in the large intestine are under 
the circadian control, which is associated with temporal regulation of colonic
permeability and also susceptibility to colitis.

PMCID: PMC4028230
PMID: 24845399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cell Tissue Res. 2014 Sep;357(3):743-55. doi: 10.1007/s00441-014-1878-9. Epub
2014 May 20.

Circadian oscillators in the mouse brain: molecular clock components in the
neocortex and cerebellar cortex.

Rath MF(1), Rovsing L, Møller M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet 6102, Blegdamsvej 9,
Copenhagen, DK-2100, Denmark, mrath@sund.ku.dk.

The circadian timekeeper of the mammalian brain resides in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus of the hypothalamus (SCN), and is characterized by rhythmic expression of
a set of clock genes with specific 24-h daily profiles. An increasing amount of
data suggests that additional circadian oscillators residing outside the SCN have
the capacity to generate peripheral circadian rhythms. We have recently shown the
presence of SCN-controlled oscillators in the neocortex and cerebellum of the
rat. The function of these peripheral brain clocks is unknown, and elucidating
this could involve mice with conditional cell-specific clock gene deletions. This
prompted us to analyze the molecular clockwork of the mouse neocortex and
cerebellum in detail. Here, by use of in situ hybridization and quantitative
RT-PCR, we show that clock genes are expressed in all six layers of the neocortex
and the Purkinje and granular cell layers of the cerebellar cortex of the mouse
brain. Among these, Per1, Per2, Cry1, Arntl, and Nr1d1 exhibit circadian rhythms 
suggesting that local running circadian oscillators reside within neurons of the 
mouse neocortex and cerebellar cortex. The temporal expression profiles of clock 
genes are similar in the neocortex and cerebellum, but they are delayed by 5 h as
compared to the SCN, suggestively reflecting a master-slave relationship between 
the SCN and extra-hypothalamic oscillators. Furthermore, ARNTL protein products
are detectable in neurons of the mouse neocortex and cerebellum, as revealed by
immunohistochemistry. These findings give reason to further pursue the
physiological significance of circadian oscillators in the mouse neocortex and
cerebellum.

PMID: 24842045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Genes Dev. 2014 May 15;28(10):1101-10. doi: 10.1101/gad.237511.114.

CaMKII is essential for the cellular clock and coupling between morning and
evening behavioral rhythms.

Kon N(1), Yoshikawa T(2), Honma S(2), Yamagata Y(3), Yoshitane H(1), Shimizu
K(1), Sugiyama Y(1), Hara C(1), Kameshita I(4), Honma K(2), Fukada Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Graduate School of Science, The University of
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan; (2)Department of Chronomedicine, Center 
for Cooperative Projects, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo 060-8638, Japan; (3)Department of Information Physiology, National
Institute for Physiological Sciences, The Graduate University for Advanced
Studies (SOKENDAI), Okazaki 444-8787, Japan; (4)Department of Life Sciences,
Faculty of Agriculture, Kagawa University, Miki-cho, Kagawa 761-0795, Japan.

Daily behavioral rhythms in mammals are governed by the central circadian clock, 
located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). The behavioral rhythms persist even
in constant darkness, with a stable activity time due to coupling between two
oscillators that determine the morning and evening activities. Accumulating
evidence supports a prerequisite role for Ca(2+) in the robust oscillation of the
SCN, yet the underlying molecular mechanism remains elusive. Here, we show that
Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) activity is essential for 
not only the cellular oscillation but also synchronization among oscillators in
the SCN. A kinase-dead mutation in mouse CaMKIIa weakened the behavioral
rhythmicity and elicited decoupling between the morning and evening activity
rhythms, sometimes causing arrhythmicity. In the mutant SCN, the right and left
nuclei showed uncoupled oscillations. Cellular and biochemical analyses revealed 
that Ca(2+)-calmodulin-CaMKII signaling contributes to activation of
E-box-dependent gene expression through promoting dimerization of circadian
locomotor output cycles kaput (CLOCK) and brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1
(BMAL1). These results demonstrate a dual role of CaMKII as a component of
cell-autonomous clockwork and as a synchronizer integrating circadian behavioral 
activities.

© 2014 Kon et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4035538
PMID: 24831701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cell Rep. 2014 May 22;7(4):1056-64. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.03.072. Epub 2014 
May 1.

A positive role for PERIOD in mammalian circadian gene expression.

Akashi M(1), Okamoto A(2), Tsuchiya Y(3), Todo T(4), Nishida E(3), Node K(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Research Institute for Time Studies, Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi
753-8511, Japan. Electronic address: akashima@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp. (2)The Research 
Institute for Time Studies, Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi 753-8511, Japan.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Biostudies,
Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan. (4)Department of Radiation Biology and
Medical Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, 
Japan. (5)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Saga University, Saga 849-8501, 
Japan.

In the current model of the mammalian circadian clock, PERIOD (PER) represses the
activity of the circadian transcription factors BMAL1 and CLOCK, either
independently or together with CRYPTOCHROME (CRY). Here, we provide evidence that
PER has an entirely different function from that reported previously, namely,
that PER inhibits CRY-mediated transcriptional repression through interference
with CRY recruitment into the BMAL1-CLOCK complex. This indirect positive
function of PER is consistent with previous data from genetic analyses using
Per-deficient or mutant mice. Overall, our results support the hypothesis that
PER plays different roles in different circadian phases: an early phase in which 
it suppresses CRY activity, and a later phase in which it acts as a
transcriptional repressor with CRY. This buffering effect of PER on CRY might
help to prolong the period of rhythmic gene expression. Additional studies are
required to carefully examine the promoter- and phase-specific roles of PER.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24794436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Biol Reprod. 2014 Jun;90(6):127. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.116137. Epub 2014
Apr 23.

Tissue-specific changes in molecular clocks during the transition from pregnancy 
to lactation in mice.

Casey TM(1), Crodian J(2), Erickson E(2), Kuropatwinski KK(3), Gleiberman AS(4), 
Antoch MP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana
theresa-casey@purdue.edu. (2)Department of Animal Science, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, Indiana. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell
Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York. (4)Cleveland BioLabs, Buffalo, New
York.

Circadian clocks regulate homeostasis and mediate responses to stressors.
Lactation is one of the most energetically demanding periods of an adult female's
life. Peripartum changes occur in almost every organ so the dam can support
neonatal growth through milk production while homeostasis is maintained. How
circadian clocks are involved in adaptation to lactation is currently unknown.
The abundance and temporal pattern of core clock genes' expression were measured 
in suprachiasmatic nucleus, liver, and mammary from late pregnant and early
lactation mice. Tissue-specific changes in molecular clocks occurred between
physiological states. Amplitude and robustness of rhythms increased in
suprachiasmatic nucleus and liver. Mammary rhythms of core molecular clock genes 
were suppressed. Attenuated rhythms appeared to be a physiological adaptation of 
mammary to lactation, because manipulation of timing of suckling resulting in
significant differences in plasma prolactin and corticosterone had no effect on
amplitude. Analysis of core clock proteins revealed that the stoichiometric
relationship between positive (CLOCK) and negative (PER2) components remained 1:1
in liver but was increased to 4:1 in mammary during physiological transition.
Induction of differentiation of mammary epithelial cell line HC11 with
dexamethasone, insulin, and prolactin resulted in similar stoichiometric changes 
among positive and negative clock regulators, and prolactin induced phase shifts 
in HC11 Arntl expression rhythm. Data support that distinct mechanisms drive
periparturient changes in mammary clock. Stoichiometric change in clock
regulators occurs with gland differentiation. Suppression of mammary clock gene
expression rhythms represents a physiological adaptation to suckling cues.
Adaptations in mammary clock are likely needed in part to support suckling
demands of neonates.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4094001
PMID: 24759789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Thromb Haemost. 2014 Aug;112(2):271-5. doi: 10.1160/TH13-11-0910. Epub 2014 Apr
17.

Whole blood thrombin generation in Bmal1-deficient mice.

Ninivaggi M, Kelchtermans H, Kuijpers MJ, Hemmeryckx B, Heemskerk JW, Lindhout T,
Hoylaerts MF, de Laat B(1).

Author information: 
(1)B. de Laat, PhD, Synapse bv, Oxfordlaan 70, 6229 EV Maastricht, The
Netherlands, Tel.: +31 43 3885895, Fax: +31 43 3884159, E-mail:
b.delaat@thrombin.com.

The Calibrated Automated Thrombogram (CAT) assay that measures thrombin
generation (TG) in platelet-poor and -rich plasma, is increasingly being
recognised as a more sensitive tool to determine the overall function of the
haemostatic system. We developed a method enabling the measurement of TG in a
small aliquot of blood. The objective was to validate this assay in mouse blood
and to examine the rate and extent of TG in a mouse model of premature aging. TG 
was assayed in blood from 20- to 28-week-old brain and muscle ARNT-like protein-1
(Bmal1)-deficient (knockout, KO) mice and wild-type (WT) littermates. Bmal1-KO
mice are known to display symptoms of premature aging. TG was initiated by adding
calcium, tissue factor and a thrombin specific substrate. After TG, the samples
were prepared for scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The intra-assay variations 
(%) in mouse blood of the endogenous thrombin potential (ETP), peak height, lag
time, time-to-peak and velocity index were 10% or less (n=24). We found that
Bmal1-KO mice have a significantly (p<0.001) higher ETP (437 ± 7 nM.min; mean ±
SD, n=7) when compared with WT mice (ETP=220 ± 45 nM.min; mean ± SD, n=5). The
peak heights also differed significantly (p=0.027). By applying SEM we found that
Bmal1 deficient mice display a denser fibrin network with smaller pores compared 
to WT mice. In conclusion, the whole blood TG assay in mice revealed to be
reproducible. As a proof-of-principle we have shown that the whole blood TG assay
is capable of detecting a prothrombotic phenotype in Bmal1-KO mice.

PMID: 24740693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. EMBO Rep. 2014 May;15(5):518-28. doi: 10.1002/embr.201338271. Epub 2014 Apr 15.

Nuclear receptors rock around the clock.

Zhao X(1), Cho H, Yu RT, Atkins AR, Downes M, Evans RM.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
CA, USA.

Circadian rhythms characterize almost every aspect of human physiology,
endocrinology, xenobiotic detoxification, cell growth, and behavior. Modern
lifestyles that disrupt our normal circadian rhythms are increasingly thought to 
contribute to various disease conditions ranging from depression and metabolic
disorders to cancer. This self-sustained time-keeping system is generated and
maintained by an endogenous molecular machine, the circadian clock, which is a
transcriptional mechanism composed of the transcription factors CLOCK and BMAL
and their co-repressors, PER and CRY. Nuclear receptors (NRs) represent a large
family of hormone-sensitive transcriptional regulators involved in a myriad of
biological processes such as development, energy metabolism, reproduction,
inflammation, and tissue homeostasis. Recent studies point not only to NR
regulation by the clock, but also to NR regulation of the clock itself. Here, we 
discuss recent studies that functionally and mechanistically implicate NRs as key
components of both the universal and adaptive circadian clock mechanisms. As
proven pharmacological targets, nuclear receptors are promising targets for
therapeutic control of many pathological conditions associated with the
disruption of circadian rhythm.

PMCID: PMC4210094
PMID: 24737872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. PLoS Biol. 2014 Apr 15;12(4):e1001840. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001840.
eCollection 2014.

Machine learning helps identify CHRONO as a circadian clock component.

Anafi RC(1), Lee Y(2), Sato TK(2), Venkataraman A(2), Ramanathan C(3), Kavakli
IH(4), Hughes ME(5), Baggs JE(6), Growe J(1), Liu AC(3), Kim J(7), Hogenesch
JB(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Sleep Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Center for Sleep and
Circadian Neurobiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (2)Department of
Pharmacology and the Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Memphis,
Memphis, Tennessee, United States of America. (4)Department of Chemical and
Biological Engineering, Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey. (5)Department of
Biology, University of Missouri-St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of 
America. (6)Department of Pharmacology, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, United States of America. (7)Department of Biology, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (8)Center for
Sleep and Circadian Neurobiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of Pharmacology 
and the Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of
America.

Over the last decades, researchers have characterized a set of "clock genes" that
drive daily rhythms in physiology and behavior. This arduous work has yielded
results with far-reaching consequences in metabolic, psychiatric, and neoplastic 
disorders. Recent attempts to expand our understanding of circadian regulation
have moved beyond the mutagenesis screens that identified the first clock
components, employing higher throughput genomic and proteomic techniques. In
order to further accelerate clock gene discovery, we utilized a computer-assisted
approach to identify and prioritize candidate clock components. We used a simple 
form of probabilistic machine learning to integrate biologically relevant,
genome-scale data and ranked genes on their similarity to known clock components.
We then used a secondary experimental screen to characterize the top candidates. 
We found that several physically interact with known clock components in a
mammalian two-hybrid screen and modulate in vitro cellular rhythms in an
immortalized mouse fibroblast line (NIH 3T3). One candidate, Gene Model 129,
interacts with BMAL1 and functionally represses the key driver of molecular
rhythms, the BMAL1/CLOCK transcriptional complex. Given these results, we have
renamed the gene CHRONO (computationally highlighted repressor of the network
oscillator). Bi-molecular fluorescence complementation and co-immunoprecipitation
demonstrate that CHRONO represses by abrogating the binding of BMAL1 to its
transcriptional co-activator CBP. Most importantly, CHRONO knockout mice display 
a prolonged free-running circadian period similar to, or more drastic than, six
other clock components. We conclude that CHRONO is a functional clock component
providing a new layer of control on circadian molecular dynamics.

PMCID: PMC3988006
PMID: 24737000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. PLoS Biol. 2014 Apr 15;12(4):e1001839. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001839.
eCollection 2014.

A novel protein, CHRONO, functions as a core component of the mammalian circadian
clock.

Goriki A(1), Hatanaka F(1), Myung J(1), Kim JK(2), Yoritaka T(3), Tanoue S(3),
Abe T(4), Kiyonari H(4), Fujimoto K(3), Kato Y(3), Todo T(5), Matsubara A(3),
Forger D(2), Takumi T(6).

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako, Saitama, Japan; Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima University, Minami, Hiroshima, Japan.
(2)Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United
States of America. (3)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima
University, Minami, Hiroshima, Japan. (4)Laboratory for Animal Resources and
Genetic Engineering, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, Chuo, Kobe, Japan.
(5)Department of Radiation Biology and Medical Genetics, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan. (6)RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako, Saitama, Japan; Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Hiroshima University, Minami, Hiroshima, Japan; Core Research for Evolutional
Science and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Chiyoda, Tokyo,
Japan.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2014 Apr;12(4):e1001838.

Circadian rhythms are controlled by a system of negative and positive genetic
feedback loops composed of clock genes. Although many genes have been implicated 
in these feedback loops, it is unclear whether our current list of clock genes is
exhaustive. We have recently identified Chrono as a robustly cycling transcript
through genome-wide profiling of BMAL1 binding on the E-box. Here, we explore the
role of Chrono in cellular timekeeping. Remarkably, endogenous CHRONO occupancy
around E-boxes shows a circadian oscillation antiphasic to BMAL1. Overexpression 
of Chrono leads to suppression of BMAL1-CLOCK activity in a histone deacetylase
(HDAC) -dependent manner. In vivo loss-of-function studies of Chrono including
Avp neuron-specific knockout (KO) mice display a longer circadian period of
locomotor activity. Chrono KO also alters the expression of core clock genes and 
impairs the response of the circadian clock to stress. CHRONO forms a complex
with the glucocorticoid receptor and mediates glucocorticoid response. Our
comprehensive study spotlights a previously unrecognized clock component of an
unsuspected negative circadian feedback loop that is independent of another
negative regulator, Cry2, and that integrates behavioral stress and epigenetic
control for efficient metabolic integration of the clock.

PMCID: PMC3988004
PMID: 24736997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. PLoS Biol. 2014 Apr 15;12(4):e1001838. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001838.
eCollection 2014.

Chronos: stress makes the clock tick.

Robinson R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Freelance Science Writer, Sherborn, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Comment on
    PLoS Biol. 2014 Apr;12(4):e1001839.

PMCID: PMC3987995
PMID: 24736971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 May;42(9):5765-75. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku225. Epub 2014 Apr
11.

The E3 ubiquitin ligase UBE3A is an integral component of the molecular circadian
clock through regulating the BMAL1 transcription factor.

Gossan NC(1), Zhang F(1), Guo B(1), Jin D(1), Yoshitane H(2), Yao A(3), Glossop
N(1), Zhang YQ(3), Fukada Y(2), Meng QJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester,
M13 9PT, UK. (2)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of
Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. (3)Institute of Genetics and
Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(4)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester,
M13 9PT, UK Qing-Jun.Meng@manchester.ac.uk.

Post-translational modifications (such as ubiquitination) of clock proteins are
critical in maintaining the precision and robustness of the evolutionarily
conserved circadian clock. Ubiquitination of the core clock transcription factor 
BMAL1 (brain and muscle Arnt-like 1) has recently been reported. However, it
remains unknown whether BMAL1 ubiquitination affects circadian pacemaking and
what ubiquitin ligase(s) is involved. Here, we show that activating UBE3A (by
expressing viral oncogenes E6/E7) disrupts circadian oscillations in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts, measured using PER2::Luc dynamics, and rhythms in
endogenous messenger ribonucleic acid and protein levels of BMAL1.
Over-expression of E6/E7 reduced the level of BMAL1, increasing its
ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. UBE3A could bind to and degrade BMAL1
in a ubiquitin ligase-dependent manner. This occurred both in the presence and
absence of E6/E7. We provide in vitro (knockdown/over-expression in mammalian
cells) and in vivo (genetic manipulation in Drosophila) evidence for an
endogenous role of UBE3A in regulating circadian dynamics and rhythmic locomotor 
behaviour. Together, our data reveal an essential and conserved role of UBE3A in 
the regulation of the circadian system in mammals and flies and identify a novel 
mechanistic link between oncogene E6/E7-mediated cell transformation and
circadian (BMAL1) disruption.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4027211
PMID: 24728990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. BMC Gastroenterol. 2014 Apr 6;14:67. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-14-67.

Deregulated expression of circadian clock genes in gastric cancer.

Hu ML, Yeh KT, Lin PM, Hsu CM, Hsiao HH, Liu YC, Lin HY, Lin SF(1), Yang MY.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang
Gung University, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st Road,Kwei-Shan 333 Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.
shlin@cc.kmu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer (GC), an aggressive malignant tumor of the alimentary 
tract, is a leading cause of cancer-related death. Circadian rhythm exhibits a
24-hour variation in physiological processes and behavior, such as hormone
levels, metabolism, gene expression, sleep and wakefulness, and appetite.
Disruption of circadian rhythm has been associated with various cancers,
including chronic myeloid leukemia, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma,
hepatocellular carcinoma, endometrial carcinoma, and breast cancer. However, the 
expression of circadian clock genes in GC remains unexplored.
METHODS: In this study, the expression profiles of eight circadian clock genes
(PER1, PER2, PER3, CRY1, CRY2, CKI<U+03F5>, CLOCK, and BMAL1) of cancerous and
noncancerous tissues from 29 GC patients were investigated using real-time
quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and validated
through immunohistochemical analysis.
RESULTS: We found that PER2 was significantly up-regulated in cancer tissues (p <
0.005). Up-regulated CRY1 expression was significantly correlated with more
advanced stages (stage III and IV) (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest deregulated expressions of circadian clock genes
exist in GC and circadian rhythm disturbance may be associated with the
development of GC.

PMCID: PMC3992139
PMID: 24708606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Biol Rhythms. 2014 Apr;29(2):87-96. doi: 10.1177/0748730414523559.

HSP90 affects the stability of BMAL1 and circadian gene expression.

Schneider R(1), Linka RM, Reinke H.

Author information: 
(1)University of Düsseldorf, Medical Faculty, Institute of Clinical Chemistry and
Laboratory Diagnostics, Düsseldorf, Germany.

The mammalian circadian clock comprises a system of interconnected
transcriptional and translational feedback loops. Proper oscillator function
requires the precisely timed synthesis and degradation of core clock proteins.
Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90), an adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-dependent
molecular chaperone, has important functions in many cellular regulatory pathways
by controlling the activity and stability of its various client proteins. Despite
accumulating evidence for interplay between the heat shock response and the
circadian system, the role of HSP90 in the mammalian core clock is not known. The
results of this study suggest that inhibition of the ATP-dependent chaperone
activity of HSP90 impairs circadian rhythmicity of cultured mouse fibroblasts
whereby amplitude and phase of the oscillations are predominantly affected.
Inhibition of HSP90 shortened the half-life of BMAL1, which resulted in reduced
cellular protein levels and blunted expression of rhythmic BMAL1-CLOCK target
genes. Furthermore, the HSP90 isoforms HSP90AA1 and HSP90AB1, and not
HSP90B1-GRP94 or TRAP1, are responsible for maintaining proper cellular levels of
BMAL1 protein. In summary, these findings provide evidence for a model in which
cytoplasmic HSP90 is required for transcriptional activation processes by the
positive arm of the mammalian circadian clock.

PMID: 24682203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Neurosci Res. 2014 Apr-May;81-82:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2014.03.005. Epub
2014 Mar 27.

The in vitro maintenance of clock genes expression within the rat pineal gland
under standard and norepinephrine-synchronized stimulation.

Andrade-Silva J(1), Cipolla-Neto J(1), Peliciari-Garcia RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of São Paulo, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Department of
Physiology and Biophysics, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 1524, Room 118, São Paulo, SP
05508-900, Brazil. (2)University of São Paulo, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 1524, Room 118,
São Paulo, SP 05508-900, Brazil. Electronic address: rodrigousp@gmail.com.

Although the norepinephrine (NE) synchronization protocol was proved to be an
important procedure for further modulating in vitro pineal melatonin synthesis,
the maintenance of clock genes under the same conditions remained to be
investigated. The aim of this study was to investigate the maintenance of the
clock genes expression in pineal gland cultures under standard and
NE-synchronized stimulation. The glands were separated into three experimental
groups: Control, Standard (acute NE-stimulation), and NE-synchronized. The
expression of Bmal1, Per2, Cry2, Rev-erba, the clock controlled gene Dbp and
Arylalkylamine-N-acetyltransferase were investigated, as well as melatonin
content. No oscillations were observed in the expression of the investigated
genes from the control group. Under Standard NE stimulation, the clock genes did 
not exhibit a rhythmic pattern of expression. However, in the NE-synchronized
condition, a rhythmic expression pattern was observed in all cases. An
enhancement in pineal gland responsiveness to NE stimulation, reflected in an
advanced synthesis of melatonin was also observed. Our results reinforce our
previous hypothesis that NE synchronization of pineal gland culture mimics the
natural rhythmic release of NE in the gland, increasing melatonin synthesis and
keeping the pineal circadian clock synchronized, ensuring the fine adjustments
that are relied in the clockwork machinery.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and the Japan Neuroscience Society. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 24681283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Affect Disord. 2014 Apr;159:80-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2014.02.024. Epub 2014 Feb
22.

Polymorphism of circadian clock genes and temperamental dimensions of the TEMPS-A
in bipolar disorder.

Rybakowski JK(1), Dmitrzak-Weglarz M(2), Dembinska-Krajewska D(3), Hauser J(2),
Akiskal KK(4), Akiskal HH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Psychiatry, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan,
Poland. Electronic address: janusz.rybakowski@gmail.com. (2)Laboratory of
Psychiatric Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(3)Department of Adult Psychiatry, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan,
Poland. (4)International Mood Center, Paris, France and La Jolla, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Previously, we found correlations between lithium efficacy in bipolar
disorder and temperamental dimensions of the TEMPS-A and also genes involved in
the regulation of biological rhythms ("clock" genes). Here, were attempted to
investigate an association between multiple, single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) of four clock genes (CLOCK, ARNTL, TIM, PER3) and temperamental dimensions
of the TEMPS-A, in bipolar patients.
METHODS: The study included 70 patients with bipolar disorder (20 males, 50
females), with a mean age of 59±12 years. The TEMPS-A questionnaire, 110
questions version, was used assessing five temperament domains: depressive,
cyclothymic, hyperthymic, irritable and anxious. Genotyping was done for 9 SNPs
of the CLOCK gene, 18 SNPs of the ARNTL gene, 6 SNPs of the TIM gene and 5 SNPs
of the PER3 gene.
RESULTS: An association with hyperthymic temperament was found for three, and
with anxious temperament for four SNPs of the ARTL gene. An association of
cyclothymic temperament was found with two SNPs of the TIM gene and of depressive
temperament with one SNP of the PER3 gene. No association was observed with SNPs 
of the CLOCK gene.
LIMITATIONS: Relatively small number of patients studied and insufficient
correction for multiple testing.
CONCLUSIONS: These results may suggest that the ARNTL, TIM and PER3 genes may be 
associated with temperamental dimensions measured by the TEMPS-A, each of this
gene being specific to given temperamental dimension. Of special interest may be 
the polymorphisms of ARNTL gene also connected with predisposition to bipolar
mood disorder and/or lithium response.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24679394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Chronobiol Int. 2014 Jul;31(6):770-8. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2014.899244. Epub
2014 Mar 27.

Analysis of genetic association and epistasis interactions between circadian
clock genes and symptom dimensions of bipolar affective disorder.

Maciukiewicz M(1), Dmitrzak-Weglarz M, Pawlak J, Leszczynska-Rodziewicz A,
Zaremba D, Skibinska M, Hauser J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Psychiatric Genetics, Department of Psychiatry, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences , Poznan , Poland.

Bipolar affective disorder (BD) is a severe psychiatric disorder characterized by
periodic changes in mood from depression to mania. Disruptions of biological
rhythms increase risk of mood disorders. Because clinical representation of
disease is heterogeneous, homogenous sets of patients are suggested to use in the
association analyses. In our study, we aimed to apply previously computed
structure of bipolar disorder symptom dimension for analyses of genetic
association. We based quantitative trait on: main depression, sleep disturbances,
appetite disturbances, excitement and psychotic dimensions consisted of OPCRIT
checklist items. We genotyped 42 polymorphisms from circadian clock genes: PER3, 
ARNTL, CLOCK and TIMELSSS from 511 patients BD (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>292 women and n<U+2009>=<U+2009>219 men).
As quantitative trait we used clinical dimensions, described above. Genetic
associations between alleles and quantitative trait were performed using applied 
regression models applied in PLINK. In addition, we used the Kruskal-Wallis test 
to look for associations between genotypes and quantitative trait. During second 
stage of our analyses, we used multidimensional scaling (multifactor
dimensionality reduction) for quantitative trait to compute pairwise epistatic
interactions between circadian gene variants. We found association between ARNTL 
variant rs11022778 main depression (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.00047) and appetite disturbances
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004). In epistatic interaction analyses, we observed two locus
interactions between sleep disturbances (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007; rs11824092 of ARNTL and
rs11932595 of CLOCK) as well as interactions of subdimension in main depression
and ARNTL variants (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0011; rs3789327, rs10766075) and appetite disturbances 
in depression and ARNTL polymorphism (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>7<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-4); rs11022778, rs156243).

PMID: 24673294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. FASEB J. 2014 Jul;28(7):2775-89. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-242040. Epub 2014 Mar 25.

RORa and ROR <U+03B3> are expressed in human skin and serve as receptors for
endogenously produced noncalcemic 20-hydroxy- and 20,23-dihydroxyvitamin D.

Slominski AT(1), Kim TK(2), Takeda Y(3), Janjetovic Z(2), Brozyna AA(4),
Skobowiat C(2), Wang J(5), Postlethwaite A(6), Li W(5), Tuckey RC(7), Jetten
AM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Department of Medicine, and
aslominski@uthsc.edu jetten@niehs.nih.gov. (2)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine. (3)Cell Biology Section, Division of Intramural Research,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA; (4)Department of Tumor
Pathology and Pathomorphology, Oncology Center, Professor Franciszek Lukaszczyk
Memorial Hospital, Ludwik Rydygier Collegium Medicum, Nicolaus Copernicus
University, Bydgoszcz, Poland; (5)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee, USA;
(6)Department of Medicine, and Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA; and. (7)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University
of Western Australia, Crawley, Western Australia, Australia. (8)Cell Biology
Section, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina, USA; aslominski@uthsc.edu jetten@niehs.nih.gov.

RORa and ROR<U+03B3> are expressed in human skin cells that produce the noncalcemic
20-hydroxyvitamin D3 [20(OH)D3] and 20,23-dihydroxyvitamin D3 [20,23(OH)2D3].
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells stably expressing a Tet-on RORa or ROR<U+03B3>
expression vector and a ROR-responsive element (RORE)-LUC reporter, and a
mammalian 2-hybrid model examining the interaction between the ligand binding
domain (LBD) of RORa or ROR<U+03B3> with an LBD-interacting LXXLL-peptide, were used to 
study ROR-antagonist activities. These assays revealed that 20(OH)D3 and
20,23(OH)2D3 function as antagonists of RORa and ROR<U+03B3>. Moreover, 20(OH)D3
inhibited the activation of the promoter of the Bmal1 and G6pase genes, targets
of RORa, and 20(OH)D3 and 20,23(OH)2D3 inhibited Il17 promoter activity in Jurkat
cells overexpressing RORa or ROR<U+03B3>. Molecular modeling using crystal structures of
the LBDs of RORa and ROR<U+03B3> revealed docking scores for 20(OH)D3, 20,23(OH)2D3 and 
1,25(OH)2D3 similar to those of the natural ligands, predicting good binding to
the receptor. Notably, 20(OH)D3, 20,23(OH)2D3, and 1,25(OH)2D3 inhibited
RORE-mediated activation of a reporter in keratinocytes and melanoma cells and
inhibited IL-17 production by immune cells. Our study identifies a novel
signaling pathway, in which 20(OH)D3 and 20,23(OH)2D3 act as antagonists or
inverse agonists of RORa and ROR<U+03B3>, that opens new possibilities for local (skin) 
or systemic regulation.-Slominski, A. T., Kim, T.-K., Takeda, Y., Janjetovic, Z.,
Broz<U+02D9>yna, A. A., Skobowiat, C., Wang, J., Postlethwaite, A., Li, W., Tuckey, R.
C., Jetten, A. M. RORa and ROR <U+03B3> are expressed in human skin and serve as
receptors for endogenously produced noncalcemic 20-hydroxy- and
20,23-dihydroxyvitamin D.

© FASEB.

PMCID: PMC4062828
PMID: 24668754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014 Jul;25(7):1430-9. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013060641. Epub 2014
Mar 20.

Local renal circadian clocks control fluid-electrolyte homeostasis and BP.

Tokonami N(1), Mordasini D(1), Pradervand S(2), Centeno G(1), Jouffe C(3),
Maillard M(4), Bonny O(5), Gachon F(3), Gomez RA(6), Sequeira-Lopez ML(6), Firsov
D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology and. (2)Genomic Technologies
Facility, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland; (3)Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology and Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne,
Switzerland; (4)Service of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland; and. (5)Department of Pharmacology 
and Toxicology and Service of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland; and. (6)Department of
Pediatrics, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia.
(7)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology and dmitri.firsov@unil.ch.

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014 Jul;25(7):1369-71.

The circadian timing system is critically involved in the maintenance of fluid
and electrolyte balance and BP control. However, the role of peripheral circadian
clocks in these homeostatic mechanisms remains unknown. We addressed this
question in a mouse model carrying a conditional allele of the circadian clock
gene Bmal1 and expressing Cre recombinase under the endogenous Renin promoter
(Bmal1(lox/lox)/Ren1(d)Cre mice). Analysis of Bmal1(lox/lox)/Ren1(d)Cre mice
showed that the floxed Bmal1 allele was excised in the kidney. In the kidney,
BMAL1 protein expression was absent in the renin-secreting granular cells of the 
juxtaglomerular apparatus and the collecting duct. A partial reduction of BMAL1
expression was observed in the medullary thick ascending limb. Functional
analyses showed that Bmal1(lox/lox)/Ren1(d)Cre mice exhibited multiple
abnormalities, including increased urine volume, changes in the circadian rhythm 
of urinary sodium excretion, increased GFR, and significantly reduced plasma
aldosterone levels. These changes were accompanied by a reduction in BP. These
results show that local renal circadian clocks control body fluid and BP
homeostasis.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4073428
PMID: 24652800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Hum Genet. 2014 Aug;133(8):985-95. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1439-z. Epub 2014 Mar 
19.

Large multiethnic Candidate Gene Study for C-reactive protein levels:
identification of a novel association at CD36 in African Americans.

Ellis J(1), Lange EM, Li J, Dupuis J, Baumert J, Walston JD, Keating BJ, Durda P,
Fox ER, Palmer CD, Meng YA, Young T, Farlow DN, Schnabel RB, Marzi CS, Larkin E, 
Martin LW, Bis JC, Auer P, Ramachandran VS, Gabriel SB, Willis MS, Pankow JS,
Papanicolaou GJ, Rotter JI, Ballantyne CM, Gross MD, Lettre G, Wilson JG, Peters 
U, Koenig W, Tracy RP, Redline S, Reiner AP, Benjamin EJ, Lange LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, 5112 Genetic Medicine
Bldg., Chapel Hill, NC, 27599-7264, USA.

C-reactive protein (CRP) is a heritable biomarker of systemic inflammation and a 
predictor of cardiovascular disease (CVD). Large-scale genetic association
studies for CRP have largely focused on individuals of European descent. We
sought to uncover novel genetic variants for CRP in a multiethnic sample using
the ITMAT Broad-CARe (IBC) array, a custom 50,000 SNP gene-centric array having
dense coverage of over 2,000 candidate CVD genes. We performed analyses on 7,570 
African Americans (AA) from the Candidate gene Association Resource (CARe) study 
and race-combined meta-analyses that included 29,939 additional individuals of
European descent from CARe, the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) and KORA studies.
We observed array-wide significance (p < 2.2 × 10(-6)) for four loci in AA, three
of which have been reported previously in individuals of European descent (IL6R, 
p = 2.0 × 10(-6); CRP, p = 4.2 × 10(-71); APOE, p = 1.6 × 10(-6)). The fourth
significant locus, CD36 (p = 1.6 × 10(-6)), was observed at a functional variant 
(rs3211938) that is extremely rare in individuals of European descent. We
replicated the CD36 finding (p = 1.8 × 10(-5)) in an independent sample of 8,041 
AA women from WHI; a meta-analysis combining the CARe and WHI AA results at
rs3211938 reached genome-wide significance (p = 1.5 × 10(-10)). In the
race-combined meta-analyses, 13 loci reached significance, including ten (CRP,
TOMM40/APOE/APOC1, HNF1A, LEPR, GCKR, IL6R, IL1RN, NLRP3, HNF4A and BAZ1B/BCL7B) 
previously associated with CRP, and one (ARNTL) previously reported to be
nominally associated with CRP. Two novel loci were also detected (RPS6KB1, p =
2.0 × 10(-6); CD36, p = 1.4 × 10(-6)). These results highlight both shared and
unique genetic risk factors for CRP in AA compared to populations of European
descent.

PMCID: PMC4104766
PMID: 24643644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Bipolar Disord. 2014 Mar;16(2):151-8.

Polymorphism of circadian clock genes and prophylactic lithium response.

Rybakowski JK, Dmitrzak-Weglar M, Kliwicki S, Hauser J.

OBJECTIVES: The therapeutic action of lithium in bipolar mood disorder may be
connected with its effect on biological rhythms. In the present study, an attempt
was made to investigate an association between multiple single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) and their haplotypes pertaining to four genes involved in
regulation of biological rhythms [circadian locomotor output cycle kaput (CLOCK),
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like (ARNTL), timeless circadian
clock (TIMELESS), period circadian clock 3 (PER 3)], and the efficacy of lithium 
prophylaxis.
METHODS: The study was performed on 115 patients with bipolar mood disorder (45
males, 70 females) with a mean age of 52 ± 12 years, with lithium prophylaxis for
22 ± 8 years, recruited from the outpatients in the Department of Psychiatry,
Poznan University of Medical Sciences. The assessment of the lithium prophylactic
response was made retrospectively using the Alda scale. Genotyping was done for
nine SNPs of the CLOCK gene, 18 SNPs of the ARNTL gene, six SNPs of the timeless 
circadian clock (TIM) gene, and nine SNPs of the PER3 gene.
RESULTS: An association with the degree of lithium prophylaxis was found for six 
SNPs and three haplotype blocks of the ARNTL gene, and two SNPs and one haplotype
block of the TIM gene. No association with SNPs or haplotypes of the CLOCK and
PER3 genes was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that the ARNTL and TIM genes may be associated
with the lithium prophylactic response in bipolar illness. This association may
be related to the role of these genes in the predisposition to bipolar mood
disorder. Of special interest may be polymorphisms of these genes involved both
in the predisposition to bipolar mood disorder and the lithium response.

PMID: 24636202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Sleep Res. 2014 Oct;23(5):595-604. doi: 10.1111/jsr.12144. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

Polymorphisms in the circadian expressed genes PER3 and ARNTL2 are associated
with diurnal preference and GNß3 with sleep measures.

Parsons MJ(1), Lester KJ, Barclay NL, Archer SN, Nolan PM, Eley TC, Gregory AM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Harwell, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Oxfordshire, UK.

Sleep and circadian rhythms are intrinsically linked, with several sleep traits, 
including sleep timing and duration, influenced by both sleep homeostasis and the
circadian phase. Genetic variation in several circadian genes has been associated
with diurnal preference (preference in timing of sleep), although there has been 
limited research on whether they are associated with other sleep measurements. We
investigated whether these genetic variations were associated with diurnal
preference (Morningness-Eveningness Questionnaire) and various sleep measures,
including: the global Pittsburgh Sleep Quality index score; sleep duration; and
sleep latency and sleep quality. We genotyped 10 polymorphisms in genes with
circadian expression in participants from the G1219 sample (n = 966), a British
longitudinal population sample of young adults. We conducted linear regressions
using dominant, additive and recessive models of inheritance to test for
associations between these polymorphisms and the sleep measures. We found a
significant association between diurnal preference and a polymorphism in period
homologue 3 (PER3) (P < 0.005, recessive model) and a novel nominally significant
association between diurnal preference and a polymorphism in aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator-like 2 (ARNTL2) (P < 0.05, additive model). We
found that a polymorphism in guanine nucleotide binding protein beta 3 (GNß3) was
associated significantly with global sleep quality (P < 0.005, recessive model), 
and that a rare polymorphism in period homologue 2 (PER2) was associated
significantly with both sleep duration and quality (P < 0.0005, recessive model).
These findings suggest that genes with circadian expression may play a role in
regulating both the circadian clock and sleep homeostasis, and highlight the
importance of further studies aimed at dissecting the specific roles that
circadian genes play in these two interrelated but unique behaviours.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Sleep Research published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
on behalf of the European Sleep Research Society.

PMCID: PMC4320759
PMID: 24635757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Neuron. 2014 Apr 2;82(1):151-66. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.01.040. Epub 2014 Mar
13.

WIDE AWAKE mediates the circadian timing of sleep onset.

Liu S(1), Lamaze A(2), Liu Q(1), Tabuchi M(1), Yang Y(2), Fowler M(3), Bharadwaj 
R(1), Zhang J(1), Bedont J(4), Blackshaw S(4), Lloyd TE(5), Montell C(6), Sehgal 
A(7), Koh K(8), Wu MN(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and the Farber Institute for Neurosciences, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. (3)Department of Biological
Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. (4)Department of
Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. (5)Department
of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA; Department of
Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. (6)Neuroscience
Research Institute and Department of Molecular, Cellular, & Developmental
Biology, University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA.
(7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Neuroscience, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (8)Department of Neuroscience and the 
Farber Institute for Neurosciences, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA
19107, USA. Electronic address: kyunghee.koh@jefferson.edu. (9)Department of
Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA; Department of
Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. Electronic
address: marknwu@jhmi.edu.

How the circadian clock regulates the timing of sleep is poorly understood. Here,
we identify a Drosophila mutant, wide awake (wake), that exhibits a marked delay 
in sleep onset at dusk. Loss of WAKE in a set of arousal-promoting clock neurons,
the large ventrolateral neurons (l-LNvs), impairs sleep onset. WAKE levels cycle,
peaking near dusk, and the expression of WAKE in l-LNvs is Clock dependent.
Strikingly, Clock and cycle mutants also exhibit a profound delay in sleep onset,
which can be rescued by restoring WAKE expression in LNvs. WAKE interacts with
the GABAA receptor Resistant to Dieldrin (RDL), upregulating its levels and
promoting its localization to the plasma membrane. In wake mutant l-LNvs, GABA
sensitivity is decreased and excitability is increased at dusk. We propose that
WAKE acts as a clock output molecule specifically for sleep, inhibiting LNvs at
dusk to promote the transition from wake to sleep.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3982794
PMID: 24631345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Biogerontology. 2014 Jun;15(3):257-68. doi: 10.1007/s10522-014-9495-2. Epub 2014 
Mar 12.

Differential role of melatonin in restoration of age-induced alterations in daily
rhythms of expression of various clock genes in suprachiasmatic nucleus of male
Wistar rats.

Mattam U(1), Jagota A.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology and Molecular Chronobiology Laboratory, Department of Animal
Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, 500046,
Andhra Pradesh, India.

Aging is associated with changes in several basic parameters of circadian rhythms
in mammals leading to circadian dysfunction. The hypothalamic Suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN) regulates neuronal, endocrine and behavioral rhythms through the
expression of various clock genes and release of melatonin from pineal gland. In 
the present study, we investigated the effect of aging on daily rhythms of
various clock genes such as rPer1, rPer2, rCry1, rCry2 and rBmal1 in the SCN of
male Wistar rats. The m-RNA expression levels of these genes were studied by
using quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction (qPCR) in 3 age groups [3 (adult),
12 and 24 month (m)] at variable time points (Zeitgeber time (ZT)-0, 6, 12 and
18). The m-RNA expression for all genes studied was rhythmic in SCN of adult rats
with maximum for rPer1 at ZT-6, rPer2, rCry1 and rCry2 at ZT-12 and rBmal1 at
ZT-18. However in 12 and 24 m, the phases of expression of these genes were
significantly altered with abolition of daily rhythms of rCry1, rCry2 and rBmal1 
in 24 m. Melatonin, messenger of darkness, an endogenous synchronizer of rhythm, 
an antioxidant and an antiaging drug, declines with aging. We therefore studied
the effects of melatonin administered subcutaneously at 1 h before the onset of
darkness (ZT-11) for 11 days on age induced desynchronization in expression of
these genes. We report here differential restoration of daily rhythm, phase,
levels and stoichiometric interaction of m-RNA expression of these genes in
various age groups in rat SCN with melatonin treatment.

PMID: 24619734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Neuroendocrinol. 2014 May;26(5):282-95. doi: 10.1111/jne.12145.

Daily patterns and adaptation of the ghrelin, growth hormone and insulin-like
growth factor-1 system under daytime food synchronisation in rats.

Arellanes-Licea Edel C(1), Báez-Ruiz A, Carranza ME, Arámburo C, Luna M,
Díaz-Muñoz M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Neurobiología Celular y Molecular, Instituto de Neurobiología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Querétaro, México.

Daytime restricted feeding promotes the re-alignment of the food entrained
oscillator (FEO). Endocrine cues which secretion is regulated by the transition
of fasting and feeding cycles converge in the FEO. The present study aimed to
investigate the ghrelin, growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor
(IGF)-1 system because their release depends on rhythmic and nutritional factors,
and the output from the system influences feeding and biochemical status. In a
daily sampling approach, rats that were fed ad lib. were compared with rats on a 
reversed (daytime) and restricted feeding schedule by 3 weeks (dRF; food access
for 2 h), also assessing the effect of acute fasting and refeeding. We undertook 
measurements of clock protein BMAL1 and performed somatometry of peripheral
organs and determined the concentration of total, acylated and unacylated
ghrelin, GH and IGF-1 in both serum and in its main synthesising organs. During
dRF, BMAL1 expression was synchronised to mealtime in hypophysis and liver; rats 
exhibited acute hyperphagia, stomach distension with a slow emptying, a phase
shift in liver mass towards the dark period and decrease in mass perigonadal
white adipose tissue. Total ghrelin secretion during the 24-h period increased in
the dRF group as a result of elevation of the unacylated form. By contrast, GH
and IGF-1 serum concentration fell, with a modification of GH daily pattern after
mealtime. In the dRF group, ghrelin content in the stomach and pituitary GH
content decreased, whereas hepatic IGF-1 remained equal. The daily patterns and
synthesis of these hormones had a rheostatic adaptation. The endocrine adaptive
response elicited suggests that it may be associated with the regulation of
metabolic, behavioural and physiological processes during the paradigm of daytime
restricted feeding and associated FEO activity.

© 2014 British Society for Neuroendocrinology.

PMID: 24617825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Pathol. 2014 Jun;233(2):159-69. doi: 10.1002/path.4338. Epub 2014 Mar 28.

Hyperlipidaemia impairs the circadian clock and physiological homeostasis of
vascular smooth muscle cells via the suppression of Smarcd1.

Chen S(1), Ding Y, Zhang Z, Wang H, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Molecular and Medical Biotechnology and College of 
Life Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, People's Republic of 
China.

Many mammalian physiological processes show diurnal oscillation and are
controlled by a circadian clock. Disruption of the circadian clock has been
implicated in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disorders, but the mechanism
through which clock and vessel function are integrated is unclear. Here we show
that the rhythmicity of key clock genes and Smarcd1, a member of the SWI/SNF
chromatin remodelling complex family, is suppressed in the layer of vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) of the thoracic aorta of hyperlipidaemic rats fed a
high-fat diet (HFD). Smarcd1 stimulates the transcription of clock genes, notably
bmal1, through co-activation of the nuclear orphan receptor RORa in VSMCs. The
co-activation of Smarcd1 and RORa is dependent on the mediation of PGC-1a, a
transcriptional co-activator. Pathophysiologically, Smarcd1 inhibits VSMC
proliferation and migration by blocking cell cycle re-entry and via the
activation of kinase signalling pathways. Our results demonstrate that Smarcd1 is
a critical node integrating the circadian clock and VSMC physiological
homeostasis.

Copyright © 2014 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24615205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Negat Results Biomed. 2014 Mar 8;13:4. doi: 10.1186/1477-5751-13-4.

Clock gene Bmal1 is dispensable for intrinsic properties of murine hematopoietic 
stem cells.

Ieyasu A, Tajima Y, Shimba S, Nakauchi H(1), Yamazaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Therapy, Center for Experimental Medicine, the
Institute of Medical Science, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.
nakauchi@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Circadian rhythms are known to influence a variety of biological
phenomena such as cell cycle, sleep-wake rhythm, hormone release and other
important physiological functions. Given that cell cycle entry of hibernating
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) plays a critical role in controlling
hematopoiesis, we asked functional significance of the clock gene Bmal1, which
plays a central role in regulating circadian rhythms as a transcription factor.
Here we investigated the necessity of Bmal1 for HSC functions using Bmal1
deficient (Bmal1<U+207B>/<U+207B>) mice.
FINDINGS: Using colony-forming assays in vitro, we found that the frequency of
mixed colony formation between Bmal1<U+207A>/<U+207A> and Bmal1<U+207B>/<U+207B> CD34-KSL cells does not
differ significantly. Competitive bone marrow assays also revealed that Bmal1<U+207B>/<U+207B> 
bone marrow cells competed normally with wild-type cells and displayed long-term 
multi-hematopoietic lineage reconstitution. In addition, there were no
significant differences in the frequencies and hibernation state of bone marrow
HSCs between Bmal1<U+207A>/<U+207A> and Bmal1<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice, suggesting that they are independent of 
circadian rhythms.
CONCLUSIONS: This paper discusses the necessity of circadian rhythms for HSC
functions. Our data clearly shows that a key circadian clock gene Bmal1 is
dispensable for intrinsic functions of HSCs, such as differentiation,
proliferation and repopulating ability.

PMCID: PMC4016489
PMID: 24606809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2014 Mar;70(Pt 3):863-76. doi:
10.1107/S1399004713033634. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

Multi-PAS domain-mediated protein oligomerization of PpsR from Rhodobacter
sphaeroides.

Heintz U(1), Meinhart A(1), Winkler A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Mechanisms, Max Planck Institute for Medical
Research, Heidelberg, Germany.

Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domains are essential modules of many multi-domain signalling 
proteins that mediate protein interaction and/or sense environmental stimuli.
Frequently, multiple PAS domains are present within single polypeptide chains,
where their interplay is required for protein function. Although many isolated
PAS domain structures have been reported over the last decades, only a few
structures of multi-PAS proteins are known. Therefore, the molecular mechanism of
multi-PAS domain-mediated protein oligomerization and function is poorly
understood. The transcription factor PpsR from Rhodobacter sphaeroides is such a 
multi-PAS domain protein that, in addition to its three PAS domains, contains a
glutamine-rich linker and a C-terminal helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif. Here, 
crystal structures of two N-terminally and C-terminally truncated PpsR variants
that comprise a single (PpsRQ-PAS1) and two (PpsRN-Q-PAS1) PAS domains,
respectively, are presented and the multi-step strategy required for the phasing 
of a triple PAS domain construct (PpsR<U+0394>HTH) is illustrated. While parts of the
biologically relevant dimerization interface can already be observed in the two
shorter constructs, the PpsR<U+0394>HTH structure reveals how three PAS domains enable
the formation of multiple oligomeric states (dimer, tetramer and octamer),
highlighting that not only the PAS cores but also their a-helical extensions are 
essential for protein oligomerization. The results demonstrate that the long
helical glutamine-rich linker of PpsR results from a direct fusion of the N-cap
of the PAS1 domain with the C-terminal extension of the N-domain that plays an
important role in signal transduction.

PMCID: PMC3949515
PMID: 24598755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Cell. 2014 Mar 6;53(5):791-805. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.01.028. Epub 2014 
Feb 27.

Phosphorylation of LSD1 by PKCa is crucial for circadian rhythmicity and phase
resetting.

Nam HJ(1), Boo K(1), Kim D(1), Han DH(2), Choe HK(3), Kim CR(1), Sun W(4), Kim
H(4), Kim K(3), Lee H(5), Metzger E(6), Schuele R(6), Yoo SH(7), Takahashi JS(7),
Cho S(2), Son GH(8), Baek SH(9).

Author information: 
(1)Creative Research Initiatives Center for Chromatin Dynamics, School of
Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, South Korea.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration Control Research Center, Kyung
Hee University School of Medicine, Seoul 130-701, South Korea. (3)Brain Research 
Center for the 21st Frontier Program in Neuroscience, School of Biological
Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, South Korea. (4)Department of
Anatomy, Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul 136-705, South Korea.
(5)Division of Basic and Applied Sciences, National Cancer Center, Gyeonggi-do
410-769, South Korea. (6)Urologische Klinik und Zentrale Klinische Forschung,
Klinikum der Universität Freiburg, DKTK Standort Freiburg, BIOSS Centre of
Biological Signaling Studies, Albert-Ludwigs-University, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.
(7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Neuroscience, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (8)Department of Legal 
Medicine, Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul 136-705, South Korea.
(9)Creative Research Initiatives Center for Chromatin Dynamics, School of
Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, South Korea.
Electronic address: sbaek@snu.ac.kr.

The circadian clock is a self-sustaining oscillator that controls daily rhythms. 
For the proper circadian gene expression, dynamic changes in chromatin structure 
are important. Although chromatin modifiers have been shown to play a role in
circadian gene expression, the in vivo role of circadian signal-modulated
chromatin modifiers at an organism level remains to be elucidated. Here, we
provide evidence that the lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) is phosphorylated 
by protein kinase Ca (PKCa) in a circadian manner and the phosphorylated LSD1
forms a complex with CLOCK:BMAL1 to facilitate E-box-mediated transcriptional
activation. Knockin mice bearing phosphorylation-defective Lsd1(SA/SA) alleles
exhibited altered circadian rhythms in locomotor behavior with attenuation of
rhythmic expression of core clock genes and impaired phase resetting of circadian
clock. These data demonstrate that LSD1 is a key component of the molecular
circadian oscillator, which plays a pivotal role in rhythmicity and phase
resetting of the circadian clock.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24582500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Brain Struct Funct. 2015;220(3):1251-62. doi: 10.1007/s00429-014-0720-1. Epub
2014 Feb 19.

Gender associated circadian oscillations of the clock genes in rat choroid
plexus.

Quintela T(1), Sousa C, Patriarca FM, Gonçalves I, Santos CR.

Author information: 
(1)CICS-UBI-Health Sciences Research Centre, University of Beira Interior,
Covilhã, Portugal, tquintela@fcsaude.ubi.pt.

It is well-documented that circadian rhythms are controlled by the circadian
master clock of the mammalian brain, located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN)
of the hypothalamus. The SCN clockwork is a cell autonomous mechanism consisting 
of a series of interlocked transcriptional/post-translational feedback loops. In 
turn, the SCN controls the seasonal rhythmicity of various biological processes, 
in particular the secretion pattern of hormones. Although the effects of gonadal 
hormones on circadian rhythmicity are clearly established, how the SCN integrates
and regulates these hormonal stimuli remains unknown. We have previously found
that clock genes are expressed in the choroid plexus (CP). Therefore, we compared
the circadian expression of these genes in female and male rat CP. We show that
there is a 24-h rhythm in the expression of Per2 and Cry2 in males and females.
Bmal1 and Per1 expression also varied along the day, but only in females. Bmal1, 
Clock and Per1 mRNA did not show any significant differences in the CP of males. 
Moreover, data from cultured CP cells collected at different timepoints revealed 
significant circadian rhythms in mRNA abundance of Bmal1, Clock and Per2. In
conclusion, our data show that the rat CP expresses all canonical clock genes and
that their circadian expression differs between genders suggesting that hormones 
can regulate circadian rhythmicity in CP.

PMID: 24549704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cell Rep. 2014 Feb 27;6(4):633-45. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.01.027. Epub 2014
Feb 13.

SRC-2 is an essential coactivator for orchestrating metabolism and circadian
rhythm.

Stashi E(1), Lanz RB(1), Mao J(1), Michailidis G(2), Zhu B(1), Kettner NM(1),
Putluri N(1), Reineke EL(1), Reineke LC(3), Dasgupta S(1), Dean A(1), Stevenson
CR(4), Sivasubramanian N(1), Sreekumar A(1), Demayo F(1), York B(1), Fu L(1),
O'Malley BW(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA;
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, 500 South State Street, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology,
Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Trinity University, One
Trinity Place, San Antonio, TX 78212-7200, USA. (5)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX
77030, USA. Electronic address: berto@bcm.edu.

Synchrony of the mammalian circadian clock is achieved by complex transcriptional
and translational feedback loops centered on the BMAL1:CLOCK heterodimer.
Modulation of circadian feedback loops is essential for maintaining rhythmicity, 
yet the role of transcriptional coactivators in driving BMAL1:CLOCK
transcriptional networks is largely unexplored. Here, we show diurnal hepatic
steroid receptor coactivator 2 (SRC-2) recruitment to the genome that extensively
overlaps with the BMAL1 cistrome during the light phase, targeting genes that
enrich for circadian and metabolic processes. Notably, SRC-2 ablation impairs
wheel-running behavior, alters circadian gene expression in several peripheral
tissues, alters the rhythmicity of the hepatic metabolome, and deregulates the
synchronization of cell-autonomous metabolites. We identify SRC-2 as a potent
coregulator of BMAL1:CLOCK and find that SRC-2 targets itself with BMAL1:CLOCK in
a feedforward loop. Collectively, our data suggest that SRC-2 is a
transcriptional coactivator of the BMAL1:CLOCK oscillators and establish SRC-2 as
a critical positive regulator of the mammalian circadian clock.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4096300
PMID: 24529706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014 Apr 1;276(1):63-72. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2014.01.019.
Epub 2014 Feb 11.

Chronic exposure to low doses of pharmaceuticals disturbs the hepatic expression 
of circadian genes in lean and obese mice.

Anthérieu S(1), Le Guillou D(1), Coulouarn C(1), Begriche K(1), Trak-Smayra V(2),
Martinais S(1), Porceddu M(3), Robin MA(1), Fromenty B(4).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U991, Université de Rennes 1, 35000 Rennes, France. (2)Pathology
Department, Saint-Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon. (3)Mitologics SAS, Hôpital 
Robert Debré, 48 Boulevard Sérurier, 75019 Paris, France. (4)INSERM, U991,
Université de Rennes 1, 35000 Rennes, France. Electronic address:
bernard.fromenty@inserm.fr.

Drinking water can be contaminated with pharmaceuticals. However, it is uncertain
whether this contamination can be harmful for the liver, especially during
obesity. Hence, the goal of our study was to determine whether chronic exposure
to low doses of pharmaceuticals could have deleterious effects on livers of lean 
and obese mice. To this end, lean and ob/ob male mice were treated for 4 months
with a mixture of 11 drugs provided in drinking water at concentrations ranging
from 10 to 106 ng/l. At the end of the treatment, some liver and plasma
abnormalities were observed in ob/ob mice treated with the cocktail containing
106 ng/l of each drug. For this dosage, a gene expression analysis by microarray 
showed altered expression of circadian genes (e.g. Bmal1, Dbp, Cry1) in lean and 
obese mice. RT-qPCR analyses carried out in all groups of animals confirmed that 
expression of 8 different circadian genes was modified in a dose-dependent
manner. For some genes, a significant modification was observed for dosages as
low as 10²-10³ ng/l. Drug mixture and obesity presented an additive effect on
circadian gene expression. These data were validated in an independent study
performed in female mice. Thus, our study showed that chronic exposure to trace
pharmaceuticals disturbed hepatic expression of circadian genes, particularly in 
obese mice. Because some of the 11 drugs can be found in drinking water at such
concentrations (e.g. acetaminophen, carbamazepine, ibuprofen) our data could be
relevant in environmental toxicology, especially for obese individuals exposed to
these contaminants.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24525044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Diabetes. 2014 Jun;63(6):2148-57. doi: 10.2337/db13-1702. Epub 2014 Feb 11.

Linking the circadian rhythm gene Arntl2 to interleukin 21 expression in type 1
diabetes.

Lebailly B(1), He C(2), Rogner UC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental & Stem Cells Biology, Institut Pasteur, CNRS URA
2578, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Murine, Paris, FranceUniversité Pierre
et Marie Curie, Cellule Pasteur UPMC, Paris, France. (2)Department of
Developmental & Stem Cells Biology, Institut Pasteur, CNRS URA 2578, Laboratoire 
de Génétique Moléculaire Murine, Paris, France. (3)Department of Developmental & 
Stem Cells Biology, Institut Pasteur, CNRS URA 2578, Laboratoire de Génétique
Moléculaire Murine, Paris, France ute-christine.rogner@pasteur.fr.

The circadian rhythm-related aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like 
2 (Arntl2) gene has been identified as a candidate gene for the murine type 1
diabetes locus Idd6.3. Previous studies suggested a role in expansion of
CD4(+)CD25(-) T cells, and this then creates an imbalance in the ratio between
T-effector and CD4(+)CD25(+) T-regulator cells. Our transcriptome analyses
identify the interleukin 21 (IL21) gene (Il21) as a direct target of ARNTL2.
ARNTL2 binds in an allele-specific manner to the RNA polymerase binding site of
the Il21 promoter and inhibits its expression in NOD.C3H congenic mice carrying
C3H alleles at Idd6.3. IL21 is known to promote T-cell expansion, and in
agreement with these findings, mice with C3H alleles at Idd6.3 produce lower
numbers of CD4(+)IL21(+) and CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells compared with mice with
NOD alleles at Idd6.3. Our results describe a novel and rather unexpected role
for Arntl2 in the immune system that lies outside of its predicted function in
circadian rhythm regulation.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association.

PMID: 24520124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Sci Rep. 2014 Feb 7;4:4032. doi: 10.1038/srep04032.

Compensation for intracellular environment in expression levels of mammalian
circadian clock genes.

Matsumura R(1), Okamoto A(1), Node K(2), Akashi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Research Institute for Time Studies, Yamaguchi University, 1677-1 Yoshida,
Yamaguchi 753-8511, Japan. (2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Saga
University, 5-1-1 Nabeshima, Saga 849-8501, Japan.

The circadian clock is driven by transcriptional oscillation of clock genes in
almost all body cells. To investigate the effect of cell type-specific
intracellular environment on the circadian machinery, we examined gene expression
profiles in five peripheral tissues. As expected, the phase relationship between 
expression rhythms of nine clock genes was similar in all tissues examined. We
also compared relative expression levels of clock genes among tissues, and
unexpectedly found that quantitative variation remained within an approximately
three-fold range, which was substantially smaller than that of metabolic
housekeeping genes. Interestingly, circadian gene expression was little affected 
even when fibroblasts were cultured with different concentrations of serum.
Together, these findings support a hypothesis that expression levels of clock
genes are quantitatively compensated for the intracellular environment, such as
redox potential and metabolite composition. However, more comprehensive studies
are required to reach definitive conclusions.

PMCID: PMC3916895
PMID: 24504324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 31;9(1):e87319. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087319. eCollection
2014.

Epigenetic suppression of mouse Per2 expression in the suprachiasmatic nucleus by
the inhalational anesthetic, sevoflurane.

Mori K(1), Iijima N(2), Higo S(2), Aikawa S(2), Matsuo I(1), Takumi K(2),
Sakamoto A(3), Ozawa H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine, Nippon
Medical School, Tokyo, Japan ; Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine,
Graduate School of Medicine, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department
of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine, Nippon Medical School, 
Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Graduate School 
of Medicine, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: We previously reported that sevoflurane anesthesia reversibly
suppresses the expression of the clock gene, Period2 (Per2), in the mouse
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). However, the molecular mechanisms underlying this 
suppression remain unclear. In this study, we examined the possibility that
sevoflurane suppresses Per2 expression via epigenetic modification of the Per2
promoter.
METHODS: Mice were anesthetized with a gas mixture of 2.5% sevoflurane/40% oxygen
at a 6 L/min flow for 1 or 4 h. After termination, brains were removed and
samples of SCN tissue were derived from frozen brain sections. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays using anti-acetylated-histone antibodies were
performed to investigate the effects of sevoflurane on histone acetylation of the
Per2 promoter. Interaction between the E'-box (a cis-element in the Per2
promoter) and CLOCK (the Clock gene product) was also assessed by a ChIP assay
using an anti-CLOCK antibody. The SCN concentration of nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NAD(+)), a CLOCK regulator, was assessed by liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: Acetylation of histone H4 in the proximal region of the Per2 promoter
was significantly reduced by sevoflurane. This change in the epigenetic profile
of the Per2 gene was observed prior to suppression of Per2 expression.
Simultaneously, a reduction in the CLOCK-E'-box interaction in the Per2 promoter 
was observed. Sevoflurane treatment did not affect the concentration of NAD(+) in
the SCN.
CONCLUSIONS: Independent of NAD(+) concentration in the SCN, sevoflurane
decreases CLOCK binding to the Per2 promoter E'-box motif, reducing histone
acetylation and leading to suppression of Per2 expression.

PMCID: PMC3909093
PMID: 24498074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Pharmacol Sci. 2014;124(2):267-75. Epub 2014 Feb 4.

Involvement of 5-HT3 and 5-HT4 receptors in the regulation of circadian clock
gene expression in mouse small intestine.

Aoki N(1), Watanabe H, Okada K, Aoki K, Imanishi T, Yoshida D, Ishikawa R,
Shibata S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Physiology and Pharmacology, School of Advanced Science and
Engineering, Waseda University, Japan.

Several lines of evidence suggest that 5-HT receptors play a critical role in the
expression of clock genes in the suprachiasmatic nucleus, the main circadian
oscillator in hamsters. The contributions of 5-HT-receptor subtypes in the
intestine, where they are expressed at high concentrations, are however not yet
clarified. The 5-HT synthesis inhibitor, p-chlorophenylalanine, attenuated the
daily rhythm of Per1 and Per2 gene expression in the intestine. Injection of 5-HT
and agonists of the 5-HT3 and 5-HT4 receptors increased Per1/Per2 expression and 
decreased Bmal1 expression in a dose-dependent manner. Although treatment with
antagonists of 5-HT3 and 5-HT4 alone did not affect clock gene expression,
co-injection of these antagonists with 5-HT blocked the 5-HT-induced changes in
clock gene expression. Increased tissue levels of 5-HT due to treatment with the 
antidepressants clomipramine and fluvoxamine did not affect clock gene
expression. The present results suggest that the 5-HT system in the small
intestine may play a critical role in regulating circadian rhythms through
5-HT3/5-HT4-receptor activation.

PMID: 24492464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Aging (Albany NY). 2014 Jan;6(1):48-57.

BMAL1-dependent regulation of the mTOR signaling pathway delays aging.

Khapre RV(1), Kondratova AA, Patel S, Dubrovsky Y, Wrobel M, Antoch MP, Kondratov
RV.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Regulation in Health and Diseases, BGES, Cleveland State
University, Cleveland, OH.

The circadian clock, an internal time-keeping system, has been linked with
control of aging, but molecular mechanisms of regulation are not known. BMAL1 is 
a transcriptional factor and core component of the circadian clock; BMAL1
deficiency is associated with premature aging and reduced lifespan. Here we
report that activity of mammalian Target of Rapamycin Complex 1 (mTORC1) is
increased upon BMAL1 deficiency both in vivo and in cell culture. Increased mTOR 
signaling is associated with accelerated aging; in accordance with that,
treatment with the mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin increased lifespan of Bmal1-/- mice
by 50%. Our data suggest that BMAL1 is a negative regulator of mTORC1 signaling. 
We propose that the circadian clock controls the activity of the mTOR pathway
through BMAL1-dependent mechanisms and this regulation is important for control
of aging and metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3927809
PMID: 24481314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cell Prolif. 2013 Dec;46(6):644-53. doi: 10.1111/cpr.12075.

Roles of brain and muscle ARNT-like 1 and Wnt antagonist Dkk1 during osteogenesis
of bone marrow stromal cells.

He Y(1), Chen Y, Zhao Q, Tan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Orthodontic Centre, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, 610041, China; State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, 610041, China.

OBJECTIVES: Many studies have demonstrated that the clock gene, brain and muscle 
ARNT-like 1 (Bmal1), is directly related to bone ageing by affecting age-related 
changes to mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). As a main developmental signal, Wnt may
play an important role in this process. Here, we have aimed to elucidate whether 
Bmal1 positively regulates osteogenesi via Wnt pathways.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Bone marrow stromal cells were cultured in basic and in
osteo-induction medium with Wnt signalling inhibitor Dkk1 and Bmal1 transfection.
Proliferation and osteogenesis of MSCs, expression of Bmal1 and activation of Wnt
signalling were investigated by flow cytometry, senescence-associated
ß-galactosidase (SA-ß-gal) staining, real-time quantitative PCR and western blot 
analysis.
RESULTS: Expression of Bmal1 (specially after 7 days osteo-induction), activation
of Wnt signalling and osteo-related factors fell significantly during
osteo-induction after Dkk1 addition. When cellular Bmal1 was increased by
transfection, osteogenesis inhibition by Dkk1 was rescued to a certain extent
with activation of Wnt signalling. However, Dkk1 did not significantly affect
proliferation or senescence of MSCs during early periods of culture.
CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrated that Bmal1 and Wnt signalling may have a 
synergistic effect at a particular stage of osteogenesis. Inhibition of Wnt
signalling did not greatly affect ageing of MSCs through early passages.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24460718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Chronobiol Int. 2014 May;31(4):468-78. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2013.856316. Epub
2014 Jan 23.

Differential maturation of rhythmic clock gene expression during early
development in medaka (Oryzias latipes).

Cuesta IH(1), Lahiri K, Lopez-Olmeda JF, Loosli F, Foulkes NS, Vallone D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Genetics and.

One key challenge for the field of chronobiology is to identify how circadian
clock function emerges during early embryonic development. Teleosts such as the
zebrafish are ideal models for studying circadian clock ontogeny since the entire
process of development occurs ex utero in an optically transparent chorion.
Medaka (Oryzias latipes) represents another powerful fish model for exploring
early clock function with, like the zebrafish, many tools available for detailed 
genetic analysis. However, to date there have been no reports documenting
circadian clock gene expression during medaka development. Here we have
characterized the expression of key clock genes in various developmental stages
and in adult tissues of medaka. As previously reported for other fish, light dark
cycles are required for the emergence of clock gene expression rhythms in this
species. While rhythmic expression of per and cry genes is detected very early
during development and seems to be light driven, rhythmic clock and bmal
expression appears much later around hatching time. Furthermore, the maturation
of clock function seems to correlate with the appearance of rhythmic expression
of these positive elements of the clock feedback loop. By accelerating
development through elevated temperatures or by artificially removing the
chorion, we show an earlier onset of rhythmicity in clock and bmal expression.
Thus, differential maturation of key elements of the medaka clock mechanism
depends on the developmental stage and the presence of the chorion.

PMID: 24456338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Lab Anim (NY). 2014 Feb;43(2):44. doi: 10.1038/laban.473.

Excess fat reprograms circadian rhythms.

Rosania K.

PMID: 24451349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Feb 11;111(6):E682-91. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1316335111. Epub 2014 Jan 21.

Mistimed sleep disrupts circadian regulation of the human transcriptome.

Archer SN(1), Laing EE, Möller-Levet CS, van der Veen DR, Bucca G, Lazar AS,
Santhi N, Slak A, Kabiljo R, von Schantz M, Smith CP, Dijk DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford GU2
7XH, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Bioessays. 2014 Jul;36(7):644-8.

Circadian organization of the mammalian transcriptome is achieved by rhythmic
recruitment of key modifiers of chromatin structure and transcriptional and
translational processes. These rhythmic processes, together with
posttranslational modification, constitute circadian oscillators in the brain and
peripheral tissues, which drive rhythms in physiology and behavior, including the
sleep-wake cycle. In humans, sleep is normally timed to occur during the
biological night, when body temperature is low and melatonin is synthesized.
Desynchrony of sleep-wake timing and other circadian rhythms, such as occurs in
shift work and jet lag, is associated with disruption of rhythmicity in
physiology and endocrinology. However, to what extent mistimed sleep affects the 
molecular regulators of circadian rhythmicity remains to be established. Here, we
show that mistimed sleep leads to a reduction of rhythmic transcripts in the
human blood transcriptome from 6.4% at baseline to 1.0% during forced desynchrony
of sleep and centrally driven circadian rhythms. Transcripts affected are key
regulators of gene expression, including those associated with chromatin
modification (methylases and acetylases), transcription (RNA polymerase II),
translation (ribosomal proteins, initiation, and elongation factors),
temperature-regulated transcription (cold inducible RNA-binding proteins), and
core clock genes including CLOCK and ARNTL (BMAL1). We also estimated the
separate contribution of sleep and circadian rhythmicity and found that the
sleep-wake cycle coordinates the timing of transcription and translation in
particular. The data show that mistimed sleep affects molecular processes at the 
core of circadian rhythm generation and imply that appropriate timing of sleep
contributes significantly to the overall temporal organization of the human
transcriptome.

PMCID: PMC3926083
PMID: 24449876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Hepatology. 2014 Jun;59(6):2196-206. doi: 10.1002/hep.26992. Epub 2014 Apr 25.

CLOCK/BMAL1 regulates circadian change of mouse hepatic insulin sensitivity by
SIRT1.

Zhou B(1), Zhang Y, Zhang F, Xia Y, Liu J, Huang R, Wang Y, Hu Y, Wu J, Dai C,
Wang H, Tu Y, Peng X, Wang Y, Zhai Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

The protein deacetylase, sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), involved in regulating hepatic
insulin sensitivity, shows circadian oscillation and regulates the circadian
clock. Recent studies show that circadian misalignment leads to insulin
resistance (IR); however, the underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. Here, we
show that CLOCK and brain and muscle ARNT-like protein 1 (BMAL1), two core
circadian transcription factors, are correlated with hepatic insulin sensitivity.
Knockdown of CLOCK or BMAL1 induces hepatic IR, whereas their ectopic expression 
attenuates hepatic IR. Moreover, circadian change of insulin sensitivity is
impaired in Clock mutant, liver-specific Bmal1 knockout (KO) or Sirt1 KO mice,
and CLOCK and BMAL1 are required for hepatic circadian expression of SIRT1.
Further studies show that CLOCK/BMAL1 binds to the SIRT1 promoter to enhance its 
expression and regulates hepatic insulin sensitivity by SIRT1. In addition,
constant darkness-induced circadian misalignment in mice decreases hepatic BMAL1 
and SIRT1 levels and induces IR, which can be dramatically reversed by
resveratrol.CONCLUSION: These findings offer new insights for coordination of the
circadian clock and metabolism in hepatocytes by circadian regulation of hepatic 
insulin sensitivity via CLOCK/BMAL1-dependent SIRT1 expression and provide a
potential application of resveratrol for combating circadian misalignment-induced
metabolic disorders.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 24442997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Semin Immunopathol. 2014 Mar;36(2):149-62. doi: 10.1007/s00281-013-0414-4. Epub
2014 Jan 17.

Circadian rhythms in leukocyte trafficking.

Druzd D(1), de Juan A, Scheiermann C.

Author information: 
(1)Walter-Brendel-Center of Experimental Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
München, Marchioninistraße 27, 81377, Munich, Germany.

A broad range of immunological processes oscillates over the course of a day.
Recent findings have identified a molecular basis for the circadian clock in the 
regulation of the immune system. These rhythms manifest themselves in oscillatory
behavior of immune cells and proinflammatory mediators, which causes a
time-dependent sensitivity in the reaction to pathogens. This rhythmicity impacts
disease manifestations and severity and provides an option for therapy that
incorporates chronopharmacological considerations. This review will focus on the 
current knowledge and relevance of rhythmic immune cell trafficking. It will
provide an overview of the molecular clock machinery and its interrelations with 
leukocyte migration and the immune response.

PMID: 24435096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Lipids Health Dis. 2014 Jan 13;13:14. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-13-14.

The rhythmic expression of clock genes attenuated in human plaque-derived
vascular smooth muscle cells.

Lin C, Tang X, Zhu Z, Liao X, Zhao R, Fu W, Chen B, Jiang J, Qian R(1), Guo D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Vascular Surgery, Department of Vascular Surgery, Zhongshan
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. rzqian@shmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Acute myocardial infarction and stroke are more likely to occur in
the early morning. Circadian pacemakers are considered to be involved in the
process. Many peripheral tissues and cells also contain clock systems. In this
study, we examined whether the primary cultured human plaque-derived vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) process circadian rhythmicity; furthermore, we
investigated the expression difference of clock genes between normal human
carotid VSMCs and human plaque-derived VSMCs.
METHODS: Fifty-six human carotid plaques provided the atherosclerotic tissue, and
21 samples yielded viable cultured primary VSMCs. The normal carotid VSMCs were
cultured from donors' normal carotids. The mRNA levels of the target genes were
measured by Quantitative Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction (qRT-PCR).
RESULTS: After serum shock, both types of cells showed clear circadian
expressions of Bmal1, Cry1, Cry2, Per1, Per2, Per3 and Rev-erba mRNA; meanwhile
the Clock mRNA show a rhythmic expression in plaque-derived SMCs but not in
normal carotid VSMCs. The expression levels of these main clock genes were
significantly attenuated in human plaque-derived VSMCs compared with normal human
carotid VSMCs. The rhythm of Bmal1 mRNA in plaque-derived VSMCs was changed.
CONCLUSION: The present results demonstrate that the human plaque-derived VSMCs
possess different circadian rhythmicity from that of normal carotid VSMCs. The
rhythm changes of clock genes in plaque-derived VSMCs may be involved in the
process of atherosclerosis and finally promote the rupture of plaque.

PMCID: PMC4077102
PMID: 24418196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Curr Biol. 2014 Jan 6;24(1):R25-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.11.016.

Circadian clocks: the tissue is the issue.

Menet JS(1), Hardin PE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Biological Clocks Research, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX 77843-3258, USA. (2)Department of Biology and
Center for Biological Clocks Research, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 
77843-3258, USA. Electronic address: phardin@bio.tamu.edu.

Comment on
    Curr Biol. 2014 Jan 6;24(1):1-10.

The circadian clock uses a widely expressed pair of clock activators to drive
tissue-specific rhythms in target gene expression. A new study sheds light on
this tissue specificity by showing that binding of clock activators and
tissue-specific transcription factors to closely associated target sites enables 
cooperative activation of target genes in different tissues.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4157344
PMID: 24405673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Genes Dev. 2014 Jan 1;28(1):8-13. doi: 10.1101/gad.228536.113.

CLOCK:BMAL1 is a pioneer-like transcription factor.

Menet JS(1), Pescatore S, Rosbash M.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, National Center for Behavioral Genomics,
Department of Biology, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts 02454, USA.

The mammalian circadian clock relies on the master genes CLOCK and BMAL1 to drive
rhythmic gene expression and regulate biological functions under circadian
control. Here we show that rhythmic CLOCK:BMAL1 DNA binding promotes rhythmic
chromatin opening. Mechanisms include CLOCK:BMAL1 binding to nucleosomes and
rhythmic chromatin modification; e.g., incorporation of the histone variant
H2A.Z. This rhythmic chromatin remodeling mediates the rhythmic binding of other 
transcription factors adjacent to CLOCK:BMAL1, suggesting that the activity of
these other transcription factors contributes to the genome-wide CLOCK:BMAL1
heterogeneous transcriptional output. These data therefore indicate that the
clock regulation of transcription relies on the rhythmic regulation of chromatin 
accessibility and suggest that the concept of pioneer function extends to acute
gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC3894415
PMID: 24395244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 26;8(12):e83602. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083602.
eCollection 2013.

Altered phase-relationship between peripheral oscillators and environmental time 
in Cry1 or Cry2 deficient mouse models for early and late chronotypes.

Destici E(1), Jacobs EH(1), Tamanini F(1), Loos M(2), van der Horst GT(1),
Oklejewicz M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Center for Biomedical Genetics, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Vrije
Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The mammalian circadian system is composed of a light-entrainable central clock
in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the brain and peripheral clocks in
virtually any other tissue. It allows the organism to optimally adjust metabolic,
physiological and behavioral functions to the physiological needs it will have at
specific time of the day. According to the resonance theory, such rhythms are
only advantageous to an organism when in tune with the environment, which is
illustrated by the adverse health effects originating from chronic circadian
disruption by jetlag and shift work. Using short-period Cry1 and long-period Cry2
deficient mice as models for morningness and eveningness, respectively, we
explored the effect of chronotype on the phase relationship between the central
SCN clock and peripheral clocks in other organs. Whereas the behavioral activity 
patterns and circadian gene expression in the SCN of light-entrained Cry1(-/-)
and Cry2(-/-) mice largely overlapped with that of wild type mice, expression of 
clock and clock controlled genes in liver, kidney, small intestine, and skin was 
shown to be markedly phase-advanced or phase-delayed, respectively. Likewise,
circadian rhythms in urinary corticosterone were shown to display a significantly
altered phase relationship similar to that of gene expression in peripheral
tissues. We show that the daily dissonance between peripheral clocks and the
environment did not affect the lifespan of Cry1(-/-) or Cry2(-/-) mice.
Nonetheless, the phase-shifted peripheral clocks in light-entrained mice with
morningness and eveningness-like phenotypes may have implications for
personalized preventive and therapeutic (i.e. chronomodulation-based) health care
for people with early and late chronotypes.

PMCID: PMC3873389
PMID: 24386234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Mar 5;383(1-2):170-80. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.12.013. 
Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Modulation of glucocorticoid receptor induction properties by core circadian
clock proteins.

Han DH(1), Lee YJ(1), Kim K(2), Kim CJ(3), Cho S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience & Neurodegeneration Control Research Center, Kyung 
Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Biological Sciences,
Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Physiology,
Kyung Hee University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (4)Department 
of Neuroscience & Neurodegeneration Control Research Center, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Department of Physiology, Kyung Hee
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
sehyung@khu.ac.kr.

Glucocorticoid (GC) plays important roles in diverse physiological processes
including metabolism and immune functions. While circadian control of GC
synthesis and secretion is relatively well appreciated, circadian control of GC
action within target tissues remains poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that
CLOCK/BMAL1, the core circadian clock components, reduces maximal GR
transactivation (A(max)) as well as efficacy (EC50) by a novel mechanism that
requires binding to DNA and transactivation of target genes. Accordingly, we
observe that PER1 and CRY1, the primary targets of CLOCK/BMAL1 action, reduce
maximal GR transactivation while not affecting the efficacy. Moreover, we observe
hyper-activations of GRE-dependent transcription in BMAL1- or PERs-deficient
MEFs. In addition, endogenous GC target genes expression negatively correlates
with the CLOCK/BMAL1 activity. Considering that GC sensitivity is widely
implicated in human health and diseases, these results provide valuable insights 
into plethora of GC-related physiology and pathology.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24378737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014 Jan;76(1):241-4. doi: 10.1097/TA.0b013e3182a90014.

Early sex-specific modulation of the molecular clock in trauma.

Mehraj V(1), Wiramus S, Capo C, Leone M, Mege JL, Textoris J.

Author information: 
(1)From the Equipe Infection (V.M., C.C., M.L., J.-L.M., J.T.), Genre et
Grossesse, URMITE CNRS UMR7278, INSERM U1095, Aix- Marseille Université; Service 
d'anesthésie et de reanimation (S.W., M.L., J.T.), Hôpital Nord, Assistance
Publique - Hôpitaux de Marseille, Aix Marseille Université; and Service
d'anesthésie et de reanimation (S.W.), Réanimation du centre des brûlés
inter-régional de Méditerranée, Hôpital de la Conception, Assistance Publique -
Hôpitaux de Marseille, Marseille, France.

BACKGROUND: Immune system biology and most physiologic functions are tightly
linked to circadian rhythms. Time of day-dependent variations in many biologic
parameters also play a fundamental role in the disease process. We previously
showed that the genes encoding the peripheral molecular clock were modulated in a
sex-dependent manner in Q fever.
METHODS: Here, we examined severe trauma patients at admission to the intensive
care unit. Using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, the
whole-blood expression of the molecular clock components ARNTL, CLOCK, and PER2
was assessed in male and female trauma patients. Healthy volunteers of both sexes
were used as controls.
RESULTS: We observed a significant overexpression of both ARNTL and CLOCK in male
trauma patients.
CONCLUSION: We report, for the first time, the sex-related modulation of the
molecular clock genes in the blood following severe trauma. These results
emphasize the role of circadian rhythms in the immune response in trauma
patients.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Epidemiologic study, level IV.

PMID: 24368387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Cell. 2013 Dec 19;155(7):1464-78. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.11.034.

Reprogramming of the circadian clock by nutritional challenge.

Eckel-Mahan KL(1), Patel VR(2), de Mateo S(1), Orozco-Solis R(1), Ceglia NJ(2),
Sahar S(1), Dilag-Penilla SA(1), Dyar KA(3), Baldi P(2), Sassone-Corsi P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Epigenetics and Metabolism, Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. (2)Institute for
Genomics and Bioinformatics, School of Information and Computer Sciences,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. (3)Venetian Institute of
Molecular Medicine, Padova 35129, Italy. (4)Center for Epigenetics and
Metabolism, Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine,
Irvine, CA 92697, USA. Electronic address: psc@uci.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014 Apr;10(4):191-2.

Circadian rhythms and cellular metabolism are intimately linked. Here, we reveal 
that a high-fat diet (HFD) generates a profound reorganization of specific
metabolic pathways, leading to widespread remodeling of the liver clock.
Strikingly, in addition to disrupting the normal circadian cycle, HFD causes an
unexpectedly large-scale genesis of de novo oscillating transcripts, resulting in
reorganization of the coordinated oscillations between coherent transcripts and
metabolites. The mechanisms underlying this reprogramming involve both the
impairment of CLOCK:BMAL1 chromatin recruitment and a pronounced cyclic
activation of surrogate pathways through the transcriptional regulator PPAR<U+03B3>.
Finally, we demonstrate that it is specifically the nutritional challenge, and
not the development of obesity, that causes the reprogramming of the clock and
that the effects of the diet on the clock are reversible.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4573395
PMID: 24360271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Retrovirology. 2013 Dec 21;10:160. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-10-160.

Transcriptional profiling reveals molecular signatures associated with HIV
permissiveness in Th1Th17 cells and identifies peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor gamma as an intrinsic negative regulator of viral replication.

Bernier A, Cleret-Buhot A, Zhang Y, Goulet JP, Monteiro P, Gosselin A, DaFonseca 
S, Wacleche VS, Jenabian MA, Routy JP, Tremblay C, Ancuta P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Infectiology, and Immunology, Université de
Montréal, Faculty of Medicine, Montreal Quebec, Canada.
petronela.ancuta@umontreal.ca.

BACKGROUND: We previously demonstrated that primary Th1Th17 cells are highly
permissive to HIV-1, whereas Th1 cells are relatively resistant. Molecular
mechanisms underlying these differences remain unknown.
RESULTS: Exposure to replication competent and single-round VSV-G pseudotyped HIV
strains provide evidence that superior HIV replication in Th1Th17 vs. Th1 cells
was regulated by mechanisms located at entry and post-entry levels. Genome-wide
transcriptional profiling identified transcripts upregulated (n = 264) and
downregulated (n = 235) in Th1Th17 vs. Th1 cells (p-value < 0.05; fold change
cut-off 1.3). Gene Set Enrichment Analysis revealed pathways enriched in Th1Th17 
(nuclear receptors, trafficking, p38/MAPK, NF-<U+03BA>B, p53/Ras, IL-23) vs. Th1 cells
(proteasome, interferon a/ß). Differentially expressed genes were classified into
biological categories using Gene Ontology. Th1Th17 cells expressed typical Th17
markers (IL-17A/F, IL-22, CCL20, RORC, IL-26, IL-23R, CCR6) and transcripts
functionally linked to regulating cell trafficking (CEACAM1, MCAM), activation
(CD28, CD40LG, TNFSF13B, TNFSF25, PTPN13, MAP3K4, LTB, CTSH), transcription
(PPAR<U+03B3>, RUNX1, ATF5, ARNTL), apoptosis (FASLG), and HIV infection (CXCR6, FURIN).
Differential expression of CXCR6, PPAR<U+03B3>, ARNTL, PTPN13, MAP3K4, CTSH, SERPINB6,
PTK2, and ISG20 was validated by RT-PCR, flow cytometry and/or confocal
microscopy. The nuclear receptor PPAR<U+03B3> was preferentially expressed by Th1Th17
cells. PPAR<U+03B3> RNA interference significantly increased HIV replication at levels
post-entry and prior HIV-DNA integration. Finally, the activation of PPAR<U+03B3>
pathway via the agonist Rosiglitazone induced the nuclear translocation of PPAR<U+03B3> 
and a robust inhibition of viral replication.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, transcriptional profiling in Th1Th17 vs. Th1 cells
demonstrated that HIV permissiveness is associated with a superior state of
cellular activation and limited antiviral properties and identified PPAR<U+03B3> as an
intrinsic negative regulator of viral replication. Therefore, triggering PPAR<U+03B3>
pathway via non-toxic agonists may contribute to limiting covert HIV replication 
and disease progression during antiretroviral treatment.

PMCID: PMC3898812
PMID: 24359430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Feb 24;52(2):133-43. doi: 10.1530/JME-13-0042. Print 2014 
Apr.

LGR4 acts as a link between the peripheral circadian clock and lipid metabolism
in liver.

Wang F(1), Zhang X, Wang J, Chen M, Fan N, Ma Q, Liu R, Wang R, Li X, Liu M, Ning
G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Institute of Health Sciences,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences (SIBS), Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CAS) and Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (SJTUSM), Shanghai,
China Shanghai Clinical Center for Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Shanghai
Institute of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Key Laboratory for Endocrine 
Tumors and E-Institute of Shanghai Universities, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, 197 Ruijin 2nd Road, Shanghai 200025,
China Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health
Science Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The circadian clock plays an important role in the liver by regulating the major 
aspects of energy metabolism. Currently, it is assumed that the circadian clock
regulates metabolism mostly by regulating the expression of liver enzymes at the 
transcriptional level, but the underlying mechanism is not well understood. In
this study, we showed that Lgr4 homozygous mutant (Lgr4(m/m)) mice showed
alteration in the rhythms of the respiratory exchange ratio. We further detected 
impaired plasma triglyceride rhythms in Lgr4(m/m) mice. Although no significant
changes in plasma cholesterol rhythms were observed in the Lgr4(m/m) mice, their 
cholesterol levels were obviously lower. This phenotype was further confirmed in 
the context of ob/ob mice, in which lack of LGR4 dampened circadian rhythms of
triglyceride. We next demonstrated that Lgr4 expression exhibited circadian
rhythms in the liver tissue and primary hepatocytes in mice, but we did not
detect changes in the expression levels or circadian rhythms of classic clock
genes, such as Clock, Bmal1 (Arntl), Pers, Rev-erbs, and Crys, in Lgr4(m/m) mice 
compared with their littermates. Among the genes related to the lipid metabolism,
we found that the diurnal expression pattern of the Mttp gene, which plays an
important role in the regulation of plasma lipid levels, was impaired in
Lgr4(m/m) mice and primary Lgr4(m/m) hepatocytes. Taken together, our results
demonstrate that LGR4 plays an important role in the regulation of plasma lipid
rhythms, partially through regulating the expression of microsomal triglyceride
transfer protein. These data provide a possible link between the peripheral
circadian clock and lipid metabolism.

PMID: 24353284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Curr Biol. 2014 Jan 6;24(1):1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.11.017. Epub 2013 Dec
12.

cis-regulatory requirements for tissue-specific programs of the circadian clock.

Meireles-Filho AC(1), Bardet AF(1), Yáñez-Cuna JO(1), Stampfel G(1), Stark A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), 1030 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), 1030 Vienna, Austria.
Electronic address: stark@starklab.org.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2014 Jan 6;24(1):R25-7.

BACKGROUND: Broadly expressed transcriptions factors (TFs) control
tissue-specific programs of gene expression through interactions with local TF
networks. A prime example is the circadian clock: although the conserved TFs
CLOCK (CLK) and CYCLE (CYC) control a transcriptional circuit throughout animal
bodies, rhythms in behavior and physiology are generated tissue specifically.
Yet, how CLK and CYC determine tissue-specific clock programs has remained
unclear.
RESULTS: Here, we use a functional genomics approach to determine the
cis-regulatory requirements for clock specificity. We first determine CLK and CYC
genome-wide binding targets in heads and bodies by ChIP-seq and show that they
have distinct DNA targets in the two tissue contexts. Computational dissection of
CLK/CYC context-specific binding sites reveals sequence motifs for putative
partner factors, which are predictive for individual binding sites. Among them,
we show that the opa and GATA motifs, differentially enriched in head and body
binding sites respectively, can be bound by OPA and SERPENT (SRP). They act
synergistically with CLK/CYC in the Drosophila feedback loop, suggesting that
they help to determine their direct targets and therefore orchestrate
tissue-specific clock outputs. In addition, using in vivo transgenic assays, we
validate that GATA motifs are required for proper tissue-specific gene expression
in the adult fat body, midgut, and Malpighian tubules, revealing a cis-regulatory
signature for enhancers of the peripheral circadian clock.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results reveal how universal clock circuits can regulate
tissue-specific rhythms and, more generally, provide insights into the mechanism 
by which universal TFs can be modulated to drive tissue-specific programs of gene
expression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24332542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Andrology. 2014 Mar;2(2):225-33. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2013.00161.x. Epub 2013
Dec 10.

Contribution of testosterone to the clock system in rat prostate mesenchyme
cells.

Kawamura M(1), Tasaki H, Misawa I, Chu G, Yamauchi N, Hattori MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Marine Bioresource Sciences, Graduate School of
Agriculture, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Circadian rhythms are modulated in a variety of peripheral tissues including the 
prostate, in which the mesenchyme and epithelium cells are controlled under
androgens. Here, we investigated the testosterone regulation of core clock genes 
such as Bmal1, Clock, Per2 and Nr1d1 under a deficient state of testosterone. In 
vivo studies showed that the Bmal1 mRNA expression in the prostates displayed a
peak at ZT 20 and a trough at ZT 12. Both Bmal1 and Clock transcripts decreased
after castration. Conversely, the expression of Per2 that is promoted by binding 
of Bmal1 and Clock heterodimers to the E-box, enhanced or did not decease at
least within 1 week after castration. The clock gene transcripts were recovered
to the intact levels, when 1 mg testosterone was administered daily for 5 days.
Fluorescent immunohistochemical studies revealed the increased staining of
caspase 3 in the epithelium and Per2 in both the mesenchyme and epithelium after 
1-week castration. In the mesenchyme cells prepared from castrated rats, the Per2
oscillation was generated in response to dexamethasone. The circadian rhythms of 
Bmal1 and Nr1d1 transcripts were obviously antiphase in the cells. However, the
mesenchyme cells displayed the different profiles in the presence or absence of
testosterone; the amplitude of the first phase was significantly decreased by
testosterone. Addition of testosterone significantly increased the transcripts of
Bmal1, Clock and Casp3 in cultured cells, whereas the Per2 and Nr1d1 transcripts 
were significantly inhibited. Collectively, the present results demonstrated that
Bmal1 and Clock, but not Per2 and Nr1d1, are down-regulated in mesenchyme cells
by testosterone deficiency. In addition to the conservative interlocked
transcriptional-translational feedback loop, it is strongly suggested that the
prostate clock system is controlled under androgen.

© 2013 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMID: 24327317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jan 3;443(1):339-43. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.11.116. Epub 2013 Dec 7.

Shikonin shortens the circadian period: possible involvement of Top2 inhibition.

Ogawa Y(1), Kawano Y(1), Yamazaki Y(1), Onishi Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (AIST), Higashi 1-1-1, Tsukuba 305-8566, Japan.
(2)Biomedical Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (AIST), Higashi 1-1-1, Tsukuba 305-8566, Japan. Electronic
address: y-onishi@aist.go.jp.

The naphthoquinone pigment, shikonin, is a natural product derived from
Lithospermum erythrorhizon and an active component of a Chinese traditional
herbal therapeutic. We identified shikonin as a candidate for shortening the
circadian period using real-time reporter gene assays based on NIH3T3-derived
stable reporter cells. Period length that became shortened in cells incubated
with shikonin or etoposide reverted to that of control cells after continued
incubation without these compounds. These findings indicated that shikonin and
etoposide shorten the circadian period reversibly and through similar mechanisms.
Topoisomerase II (Top2)-specific decatenation assays confirmed that shikonin,
liker etoposide, is a Top2 inhibitor. Shikonin was incorporated into the nucleus 
and Top2 was located in the Bmal1 promoter, suggesting the relationship between
Bmal1 transcription and Top2 inhibition. Top2a siRNA also shortened period
length, suggesting that Top2 is involved in this process. Promoter assays showed 
that Top2a siRNA, etoposide and shikonin reduce Bmal1 promoter activity. These
findings indicated that Top2 is involved in Bmal1 transcription and influences
the circadian period, and that shikonin is a novel contributor to the control of 
period length in mammalian cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24321095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Zoolog Sci. 2013 Dec;30(12):1011-8. doi: 10.2108/zsj.30.1011.

Helix-loop-helix protein Id2 stabilizes mammalian circadian oscillation under
constant light conditions.

Adachi AA(1), Fujioka A, Nagano M, Masumoto KH, Takumi T, Yoshimura T, Ebihara S,
Mori K, Yokota Y, Shigeyoshi Y.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Kinki University School of Medicine,
377-2 Ohno-Higashi, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka 589-8511, Japan.

The mammalian circadian oscillator is composed of interacting positive and
negative transcription events. The clock proteins PER1 and PER2 play essential
roles in a negative limb of the feedback loop that generates the circadian rhythm
in mammals. In addition, the proteins CLOCK and BMAL1 (also known as ARNTL) form 
a heterodimer that drives the Per genes via the E-box consensus sequences within 
their promoter regions. In the present study, we demonstrate that Id2 is involved
in stabilization of the amplitudes of the circadian oscillations by suppressing
transcriptional activation of clock genes Clock and Bmal1. Id2 shows dynamic
oscillation in the SCN, with a peak in the late subjective night. Under constant 
dark conditions (DD), Id2(-/-) mice showed no apparent difference in locomotor
activity, however, under constant light conditions (LL), Id2(-/-) mice exhibit
aberrant locomotor activity, with lower circadian oscillation amplitudes,
although the free running periods in Id2(-/-) mice show no differences from those
in either wild type or heterozygous mice. Id2(-/-) animals also exhibit
upregulation of Per1 in constant light, during both the subjective night and day.
In wild type mice, Id2 is upregulated by constant light exposure during the
subjective night. We propose that Id2 expression in the SCN contributes to
maintenance of dynamic circadian oscillations.

PMID: 24320178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 17;289(3):1457-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.500850. Epub 2013 
Dec 3.

Sympathetic activation induces skeletal Fgf23 expression in a circadian
rhythm-dependent manner.

Kawai M(1), Kinoshita S, Shimba S, Ozono K, Michigami T.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Bone and Mineral Research, Osaka Medical Center and
Research Institute for Maternal and Child Health, 840 Murodo-cho, Izumi, Osaka
594-1101, Japan.

The circadian clock network is well known to link food intake and metabolic
outputs. Phosphorus is a pivotal nutritional factor involved in energy and
skeletal metabolisms and possesses a circadian profile in the circulation;
however, the precise mechanisms whereby phosphate metabolism is regulated by the 
circadian clock network remain largely unknown. Because sympathetic tone, which
displays a circadian profile, is activated by food intake, we tested the
hypothesis that phosphate metabolism was regulated by the circadian clock network
through the modification of food intake-associated sympathetic activation.
Skeletal Fgf23 expression showed higher expression during the dark phase (DP)
associated with elevated circulating FGF23 levels and enhanced phosphate
excretion in the urine. The peaks in skeletal Fgf23 expression and urine
epinephrine levels, a marker for sympathetic tone, shifted from DP to the light
phase (LP) when mice were fed during LP. Interestingly, ß-adrenergic agonist,
isoproterenol (ISO), induced skeletal Fgf23 expression when administered at ZT12,
but this was not observed in Bmal1-deficient mice. In vitro reporter assays
revealed that ISO trans-activated Fgf23 promoter through a cAMP responsive
element in osteoblastic UMR-106 cells. The mechanism of circadian regulation of
Fgf23 induction by ISO in vivo was partly explained by the suppressive effect of 
Cryptochrome1 (Cry1) on ISO signaling. These results indicate that the regulation
of skeletal Fgf23 expression by sympathetic activity is dependent on the
circadian clock system and may shed light on new regulatory networks of FGF23
that could be important for understanding the physiology of phosphate metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3894328
PMID: 24302726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Jan;28(1):99-115. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1270. Epub 2013 Jan
1.

Dynamic postnatal developmental and sex-specific neuroendocrine effects of
prenatal polychlorinated biphenyls in rats.

Walker DM(1), Goetz BM, Gore AC.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute for Neuroscience (D.M.W., A.C.G.), Center for Computational
Biology and Bioinformatics (B.M.G.), Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology
(A.C.G.), College of Pharmacy, and Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology
(A.C.G.), The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712.

Gestational exposures to estrogenic compounds, both endogenous hormones and
exogenous endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs), have long-term effects on
reproductive physiology and behavior. We tested the hypothesis that prenatal
treatment of rats with low doses of Aroclor 1221 (A1221), a weakly estrogenic
polychlorinated biphenyl mix previously used in industry, or estradiol benzoate
(EB), alters development of the hypothalamus in a sexually dimorphic manner and
subsequently perturbs reproductive function. Pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were
injected on embryonic days 16 and 18 with vehicle (dimethylsulfoxide), A1221 (1
mg/kg), or EB (50 µg/kg). Developmental milestones were monitored, and on
postnatal days 15, 30, 45, and 90, 1 male and 1 female per litter were
euthanized. Because of their key roles in the mediation of steroid actions on
reproductive function, the anteroventral periventricular nucleus (AVPV) and the
arcuate nucleus (ARC) were punched for a low-density quantitative PCR array of 48
neuroendocrine genes and analysis of DNA methylation of a subset of genes.
Gestational exposure to A1221 or EB delayed the timing of puberty in males and
disrupted estrous cyclicity in females. In the AVPV, 28 genes were affected by
treatment in a developmental stage-specific manner, mostly in females, which
exhibited a masculinized expression profile. This included 2 clock genes, Per2
and Arntl, implicating circadian circuits as being vulnerable to endocrine
disruption. DNA methylation analysis of 2 genes, Per2 and Ar, showed no effect of
EDCs and suggested alternative mechanisms for the altered mRNA levels. In the
ARC, 12 genes were affected by treatment, mostly in males, again with dynamic
developmental changes. Bionetwork analysis of relationships among genes,
hormones, and physiological markers showed sexually dimorphic effects of
estrogenic EDC exposures, with the female AVPV and the male ARC being most
vulnerable, and provided novel relationships among hypothalamic genes and
postnatal reproductive maturation.

PMCID: PMC3874456
PMID: 24284824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Feb 15;20(4):1042-52. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-0171.
Epub 2013 Nov 25.

Overexpression of the circadian clock gene Bmal1 increases sensitivity to
oxaliplatin in colorectal cancer.

Zeng ZL(1), Luo HY, Yang J, Wu WJ, Chen DL, Huang P, Xu RH.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: State Key Laboratory of Oncology in Southern China and 
Departments of Experimental Research and Medical Oncology, Cancer Center, Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China; and School of Engineering, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: The circadian clock gene Bmal1 is involved in cancer cell proliferation 
and DNA damage sensitivity. The aim of this study was to explore the effect of
Bmal1 on oxaliplatin sensitivity and to determine its clinical significance in
colorectal cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Three colorectal cancer cell lines, HCT116, THC8307 and
HT29, were used. The Bmal1-mediated control of colorectal cancer cell
proliferation was tested in vitro and in vivo. MTT and colony formation assays
were performed to determine the sensitivity of colorectal cancer cells to
oxaliplatin. Flow cytometry was used to examine changes in the cell-cycle
distribution and apoptosis rate. Proteins expressed downstream of Bmal1 upon its 
overexpression were determined by Western blotting. Immunohistochemistry was used
to analyze Bmal1 expression in 82 archived colorectal cancer tumors from patients
treated with oxaliplatin-based regimens.
RESULTS: Bmal1 overexpression inhibited colorectal cancer cell proliferation and 
increased colorectal cancer sensitivity to oxaliplatin in three colorectal cancer
cell lines and HCT116 cells model in vivo. Furthermore, the overall survival of
patients with colorectal cancer with high Bmal1 levels in their primary tumors
was significantly longer than that of patients with low Bmal1 levels (27 vs. 19
months; P = 0.043). The progression-free survival of patients with high Bmal1
expression was also significantly longer than that of patients with low Bmal1
expression (11 vs. 5 months; P = 0.015). Mechanistically, the effect of Bmal1 was
associated with its ability to regulate G2-M arrest by activating the ATM
pathway.
CONCLUSION: Bmal1 shows the potential as a novel prognostic biomarker and may
represent a new therapeutic target in colorectal cancer.

©2013 AACR

PMID: 24277452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Clin Invest. 2013 Dec;123(12):5389-400. doi: 10.1172/JCI70317. Epub 2013 Nov
25.

Circadian clock proteins regulate neuronal redox homeostasis and
neurodegeneration.

Musiek ES, Lim MM, Yang G, Bauer AQ, Qi L, Lee Y, Roh JH, Ortiz-Gonzalez X,
Dearborn JT, Culver JP, Herzog ED, Hogenesch JB, Wozniak DF, Dikranian K, Giasson
BI, Weaver DR, Holtzman DM, Fitzgerald GA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2013 Dec;123(12):4994-6.

Brain aging is associated with diminished circadian clock output and decreased
expression of the core clock proteins, which regulate many aspects of cellular
biochemistry and metabolism. The genes encoding clock proteins are expressed
throughout the brain, though it is unknown whether these proteins modulate brain 
homeostasis. We observed that deletion of circadian clock transcriptional
activators aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like (Bmal1) alone, or 
circadian locomotor output cycles kaput (Clock) in combination with neuronal PAS 
domain protein 2 (Npas2), induced severe age-dependent astrogliosis in the cortex
and hippocampus. Mice lacking the clock gene repressors period circadian clock 1 
(Per1) and period circadian clock 2 (Per2) had no observed astrogliosis. Bmal1
deletion caused the degeneration of synaptic terminals and impaired cortical
functional connectivity, as well as neuronal oxidative damage and impaired
expression of several redox defense genes. Targeted deletion of Bmal1 in neurons 
and glia caused similar neuropathology, despite the retention of intact circadian
behavioral and sleep-wake rhythms. Reduction of Bmal1 expression promoted
neuronal death in primary cultures and in mice treated with a chemical inducer of
oxidative injury and striatal neurodegeneration. Our findings indicate that BMAL1
in a complex with CLOCK or NPAS2 regulates cerebral redox homeostasis and
connects impaired clock gene function to neurodegeneration.

PMCID: PMC3859381
PMID: 24270424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Clin Invest. 2013 Dec;123(12):4994-6. doi: 10.1172/JCI73059. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

Mind your rhythms: an important role for circadian genes in neuroprotection.

McClung CA.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2013 Dec;123(12):5389-400.

Circadian rhythms govern nearly every physiological process in our brains and
bodies. At the most basic level, the molecular clockwork in each cell interacts
with metabolic cycles to influence the redox state, allowing for increased
cellular activity at specific times of day. In this issue of the JCI, Musiek et
al. show that genetic disruptions in the positive arm of the molecular clock can 
lead to severe astrogliosis, which likely occurs through disruptions in output
genes that keep oxidative stress in check. This study demonstrates the importance
of proper circadian protein function in the maintenance of neuronal integrity.

PMCID: PMC3859426
PMID: 24270412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Cell Rep. 2013 Nov 27;5(4):961-73. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.10.037. Epub 2013
Nov 21.

The circadian molecular clock regulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis by
controlling the timing of cell-cycle entry and exit.

Bouchard-Cannon P(1), Mendoza-Viveros L(1), Yuen A(1), Kærn M(2), Cheng HY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Toronto Mississauga, 3359 Mississauga
Road, Mississauga, ON L5L 1C6, Canada. (2)Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology,
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, and Department of Physics,
University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada. Electronic
address: mkaern@uottawa.ca. (3)Department of Biology, University of Toronto
Mississauga, 3359 Mississauga Road, Mississauga, ON L5L 1C6, Canada. Electronic
address: haiying.cheng@utoronto.ca.

The subgranular zone (SGZ) of the adult hippocampus contains a pool of quiescent 
neural progenitor cells (QNPs) that are capable of entering the cell cycle and
producing newborn neurons. The mechanisms that control the timing and extent of
adult neurogenesis are not well understood. Here, we show that QNPs of the adult 
SGZ express molecular-clock components and proliferate in a rhythmic fashion. The
clock proteins PERIOD2 and BMAL1 are critical for proper control of neurogenesis.
The absence of PERIOD2 abolishes the gating of cell-cycle entrance of QNPs,
whereas genetic ablation of bmal1 results in constitutively high levels of
proliferation and delayed cell-cycle exit. We use mathematical model simulations 
to show that these observations may arise from clock-driven expression of a
cell-cycle inhibitor that targets the cyclin D/Cdk4-6 complex. Our findings may
have broad implications for the circadian clock in timing cell-cycle events of
other stem cell populations throughout the body.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24268780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Feb 15;382(2):888-98. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.11.004.
Epub 2013 Nov 14.

Evidence for an internal and functional circadian clock in rat pituitary cells.

Becquet D(1), Boyer B(1), Rasolonjanahary R(1), Brue T(1), Guillen S(1), Moreno
M(1), Franc JL(1), François-Bellan AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)CRN2M, CNRS UMR 7286, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France. (2)CRN2M,
CNRS UMR 7286, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France. Electronic address:
anne-marie.francois@univ-amu.fr.

In primary cultures of rat pituitary cells and in a pituitary sommatolactotroph
cell line (GH4C1), endogenous core-clock- as well as hormone-genes such as
prolactin displayed a rhythmic expression pattern, fitted by a sinusoidal
equation in which the period value was close to the circadian one. This is
consistent with the presence of a functional circadian oscillator in pituitary
cells whose importance was ascertained in GH4C1 cell lines stably expressing a
dominant negative mutant of BMAL1. In these cells, both endogenous core-clock-
and prolactin-genes no more displayed a circadian pattern. Some genes we recently
identified as mouse pituitary BMAL1-regulated genes in a DNA-microarray study,
lost their circadian pattern in these cells, suggesting that BMAL1 controlled
these genes locally in the pituitary. The intra-pituitary circadian oscillator
could then play a role in the physiology of the gland that would not be seen
anymore as a structure only driven by hypothalamic rhythmic control.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24239982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Nutr Biochem. 2013 Dec;24(12):2100-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2013.07.010.

Dietary oleanolic acid mediates circadian clock gene expression in liver
independently of diet and animal model but requires apolipoprotein A1.

Gabás-Rivera C(1), Martínez-Beamonte R, Ríos JL, Navarro MA, Surra JC, Arnal C,
Rodríguez-Yoldi MJ, Osada J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento Bioquímica y Biología Molecular y Celular, Facultad de
Veterinaria, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Aragón (IIS), Universidad de
Zaragoza, Spain; CIBER de Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición, Instituto de
Salud Carlos III, Spain.

Oleanolic acid is a triterpene widely distributed throughout the plant kingdom
and present in virgin olive oil at a concentration of 57 mg/kg. To test the
hypotheses that its long-term administration could modify hepatic gene expression
in several animal models and that this could be influenced by the presence of
APOA1-containing high-density lipoproteins (HDLs), diets including 0.01%
oleanolic acid were provided to Apoe- and Apoa1-deficient mice and F344 rats.
Hepatic transcriptome was analyzed in Apoe-deficient mice fed long-term
semipurified Western diets differing in the oleanolic acid content. Gene
expression changes, confirmed by reverse transcriptase quantitative polymerase
chain reaction, were sought for their implication in hepatic steatosis. To
establish the effect of oleanolic acid independently of diet and animal model,
male rats were fed chow diet with or without oleanolic acid, and to test the
influence of HDL, Apoa1-deficient mice consuming the latter diet were used. In
Apoe-deficient mice, oleanolic acid intake increased hepatic area occupied by
lipid droplets with no change in oxidative stress. Bmal1 and the other core
component of the circadian clock, Clock, together with Elovl3, Tubb2a and Cldn1
expressions, were significantly increased, while Amy2a5, Usp2, Per3 and Thrsp
were significantly decreased in mice receiving the compound. Bmal1 and Cldn1
expressions were positively associated with lipid droplets. Increased Clock and
Bmal1 expressions were also observed in rats, but not in Apoa1-deficient mice.
The core liver clock components Clock-Bmal1 are a target of oleanolic acid in two
animal models independently of the diets provided, and this compound requires
APOA1-HDL for its hepatic action.

© 2013.

PMID: 24231102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Cell. 2013 Nov 7;155(4):793-806. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.026.

RNA-methylation-dependent RNA processing controls the speed of the circadian
clock.

Fustin JM(1), Doi M, Yamaguchi Y, Hida H, Nishimura S, Yoshida M, Isagawa T,
Morioka MS, Kakeya H, Manabe I, Okamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Department of System Biology,
Kyoto University, 46-29 Yoshida-Shimo-Adachi-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501,
Japan.

Comment in
    Cell. 2013 Nov 7;155(4):740-1.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2014 Jan;15(1):3.

The eukaryotic biological clock involves a negative transcription-translation
feedback loop in which clock genes regulate their own transcription and that of
output genes of metabolic significance. While around 10% of the liver
transcriptome is rhythmic, only about a fifth is driven by de novo transcription,
indicating mRNA processing is a major circadian component. Here, we report that
inhibition of transmethylation reactions elongates the circadian period. RNA
sequencing then reveals methylation inhibition causes widespread changes in the
transcription of the RNA processing machinery, associated with m(6)A-RNA
methylation. We identify m(6)A sites on many clock gene transcripts and show that
specific inhibition of m(6)A methylation by silencing of the m(6)A methylase
Mettl3 is sufficient to elicit circadian period elongation and RNA processing
delay. Analysis of the circadian nucleocytoplasmic distribution of clock genes
Per2 and Arntl then revealed an uncoupling between steady-state pre-mRNA and
cytoplasmic mRNA rhythms when m(6)A methylation is inhibited.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24209618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 25;8(10):e78626. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078626.
eCollection 2013.

Circadian clock control of Nox4 and reactive oxygen species in the vasculature.

Anea CB(1), Zhang M, Chen F, Ali MI, Hart CM, Stepp DW, Kovalenkov YO, Merloiu
AM, Pati P, Fulton D, Rudic RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, 
Georgia, United States of America.

Recent studies have shown that circadian clock disruption is associated with
pathological remodeling in the arterial structure and vascular stiffness.
Moreover, chronic circadian disruption is associated with dysfunction in
endothelial responses and signaling. Reactive oxygen species have emerged as key 
regulators in vascular pathology. Previously, we have demonstrated that circadian
clock dysfunction exacerbates superoxide production through eNOS uncoupling. To
date, the impact of circadian clock mutation on vascular NADPH oxidase expression
and function is not known. The goal in the current study was to determine if the 
circadian clock controls vascular Nox4 expression and hydrogen peroxide formation
in arteries, particularly in endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells. In
aorta, there was an increase in hydrogen peroxide and Nox4 expression in mice
with a dysfunctional circadian rhythm (Bmal1-KO mice). In addition, the Nox4 gene
promoter is activated by the core circadian transcription factors. Lastly, in
synchronized cultured human endothelial cells, Nox4 gene expression exhibited
rhythmic oscillations. These data reveal that the circadian clock plays an
important role in the control of Nox4 and disruption of the clock leads to
subsequent production of reaction oxygen species.

PMCID: PMC3808297
PMID: 24205282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Biol Chem. 2013 Dec 20;288(51):36548-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.517235. Epub
2013 Nov 6.

Nuclear receptor-mediated cell-autonomous oscillatory expression of the circadian
transcription factor, neuronal PAS domain protein 2 (NPAS2).

Matsumura R(1), Matsubara C, Node K, Takumi T, Akashi M.

Author information: 
(1)From the The Research Institute for Time Studies, Yamaguchi University, 1677-1
Yoshida, Yamaguchi 753-8511, Japan.

NPAS2 (MOP4) is a heme-containing sensor transcription factor responsive to a
wide range of intra- and extracellular stimuli, which also functions as a
circadian transcription factor. This molecule forms a heterodimer with another
circadian transcription factor, BMAL1, and activates transcription via E-box
elements, indicating that circadian phase synchronization between NPAS2 and BMAL1
expression is important for the efficient transcriptional activation of target
genes. However, details of the mechanism of cell-autonomous circadian
transcription of Npas2 remain unclear. Here, we show that one of the ROREs
(retinoid-related orphan receptor response elements) in the upstream region of
the transcription start site is essential for circadian transcription of the
Npas2 gene. Furthermore, we also show that endogenous RORa indeed plays an
essential role in cell-autonomous circadian transcription of Npas2, because a
damped transcriptional oscillation was observed not only by introduction of a
dominant negative form or small interfering RNA but also in embryonic fibroblasts
obtained from RORa-mutant (sg/sg) mice. These results indicate that circadian
transcription of Npas2 is synchronized with that of Bmal1 in a cell-autonomous
nuclear receptor-mediated fashion.

PMCID: PMC3868767
PMID: 24196956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Endocrinology. 2014 Jan;155(1):133-42. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1531. Epub 2013 Dec
20.

Impaired glucocorticoid production and response to stress in Arntl-deficient male
mice.

Leliavski A(1), Shostak A, Husse J, Oster H.

Author information: 
(1)Chronophysiology Group (A.L., H.O.), Medical Department I, University of
Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany; and Circadian Rhythms Group (A.L., A.S., J.H., H.O.),
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Nuclear
Translocator-Like (ARNTL, also known as BMAL1 or MOP3) is a core component of the
circadian timing system in mammals, which orchestrates 24-hour rhythms of
physiology and behavior. Genetic ablation of Arntl in mice leads to behavioral
and physiological arrhythmicity, including loss of circadian baseline regulation 
of glucocorticoids (GCs). GCs are important downstream regulators of circadian
tissue clocks and have essential functions in the physiological adaptation to
stress. The role of the clock machinery in the regulation of stress-induced GC
release, however, is not well understood. Here we show that already under
unstressed conditions Arntl-deficient mice suffer from hypocortisolism with
impaired adrenal responsiveness to ACTH and down-regulated transcription of genes
involved in cholesterol transport in adrenocortical cells. Under stress they show
diminished GC and behavioral responses and develop behavioral resistance to acute
and subchronic stressors, as shown using forced swim, tail suspension, and
sucrose preference tests. These data suggest that the clock gene Arntl regulates 
circadian and acute secretion of GCs by the adrenal gland. Arntl disruption,
probably via its effect on adrenal clock function, modulates stress axis activity
and, thus, may promote resistance to both acute and repeated stress.

PMID: 24189141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Cancer Res. 2013 Dec 15;73(24):7176-88. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1528. Epub 
2013 Oct 23.

A circadian clock transcription model for the personalization of cancer
chronotherapy.

Li XM(1), Mohammad-Djafari A, Dumitru M, Dulong S, Filipski E, Siffroi-Fernandez 
S, Mteyrek A, Scaglione F, Guettier C, Delaunay F, Lévi F.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: INSERM UMRS 776 «Rythmes biologiques et cancers»,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Laboratoire d'Anatomie et Cytologie
Pathologiques, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Unité de Chronothérapie,
Département d'Oncologie Médicale, Hôpital Paul Brousse, Villejuif; Université
Paris-Sud, Orsay; Laboratoire des Signaux et Systèmes, UMR8506 CNRS-SUPELEC-UNIV 
PARIS-SUD, Gif-sur-Yvette; University de Nice-Sophia-Antipolis, Institute de
Biologie Valrose, CNRS UMR 7277, INSERM 1091, Nice, France; and Department of
Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.

Circadian timing of anticancer medications has improved treatment tolerability
and efficacy several fold, yet with intersubject variability. Using three
C57BL/6-based mouse strains of both sexes, we identified three chronotoxicity
classes with distinct circadian toxicity patterns of irinotecan, a topoisomerase 
I inhibitor active against colorectal cancer. Liver and colon circadian 24-hour
expression patterns of clock genes Rev-erba and Bmal1 best discriminated these
chronotoxicity classes, among 27 transcriptional 24-hour time series, according
to sparse linear discriminant analysis. An 8-hour phase advance was found both
for Rev-erba and Bmal1 mRNA expressions and for irinotecan chronotoxicity in
clock-altered Per2(m/m) mice. The application of a maximum-a-posteriori Bayesian 
inference method identified a linear model based on Rev-erba and Bmal1 circadian 
expressions that accurately predicted for optimal irinotecan timing. The
assessment of the Rev-erba and Bmal1 regulatory transcription loop in the
molecular clock could critically improve the tolerability of chemotherapy through
a mathematical model-based determination of host-specific optimal timing.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 24154875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Cancer Causes Control. 2014 Jan;25(1):25-32. doi: 10.1007/s10552-013-0305-y. Epub
2013 Oct 18.

Circadian pathway genes in relation to glioma risk and outcome.

Madden MH(1), Anic GM, Thompson RC, Nabors LB, Olson JJ, Browning JE, Monteiro
AN, Egan KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL, 33612, USA.

PURPOSE: There is growing evidence that circadian disruption may alter risk and
aggressiveness of cancer. We evaluated common genetic variants in the circadian
gene pathway for associations with glioma risk and patient outcome in a US
clinic-based case-control study.
METHODS: Subjects were genotyped for 17 candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms
in ARNTL, CRY1, CRY2, CSNK1E, KLHL30, NPAS2, PER1, PER3, CLOCK, and MYRIP.
Unconditional logistic regression was used to estimate age and gender-adjusted
odds ratios (OR) and 95 % confidence intervals (CI) for glioma risk under three
inheritance models (additive, dominant, and recessive). Proportional hazards
regression was used to estimate hazard ratios for glioma-related death among 441 
patients with high-grade tumors. Survival associations were validated using The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset.
RESULTS: A variant in PER1 (rs2289591) was significantly associated with overall 
glioma risk (per variant allele OR 0.80; 95 % CI 0.66-0.97; p trend = 0.027). The
variant allele for CLOCK rs11133391 under a recessive model increased risk of
oligodendroglioma (OR 2.41; 95 % CI 1.31-4.42; p = 0.005), though not other
glioma subtypes (p for heterogeneity = 0.0033). The association remained
significant after false discovery rate adjustment (p = 0.008). Differential
associations by gender were observed for MYRIP rs6599077 and CSNK1E rs1534891
though differences were not significant after adjustment for multiple testing. No
consistent mortality associations were identified. Several of the examined genes 
exhibited differential expression in glioblastoma multiforme versus normal brain 
in TCGA data (MYRIP, ARNTL, CRY1, KLHL30, PER1, CLOCK, and PER3), and expression 
of NPAS2 was significantly associated with a poor patient outcome in TCGA
patients.
CONCLUSION: This exploratory analysis provides some evidence supporting a role
for circadian genes in the onset of glioma and possibly the outcome of glioma.

PMCID: PMC3947318
PMID: 24135790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Oct 25;440(3):449-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.09.124. Epub 2013 Oct 5.

DNA methylation of the BMAL1 promoter.

Satou R(1), Sugihara N, Ishizuka Y, Matsukubo T, Onishi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Tokyo Dental College, Japan.

We previously analyzed transcriptional regulation of the BMAL1 gene, a critical
component of the mammalian clock system and found that the BMAL1 gene is
expressed with circadian oscillation and that its regulatory region is located in
hypomethylated CpG islands with an open chromatin structure. Here, we found that 
the BMAL1 gene is not expressed with circadian oscillation in CPT-K cells because
the CpG islands located in the BMAL1 promoter are hypermethylated and that
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (aza-dC) recovered BMAL1 expression. In contrast, CpG
islands in the PER2 promoter were hypomethylated, the PER2 gene was expressed and
aza-dC enhanced PER2 gene expression in CPT-K cells. Reporter gene assays showed 
that intracellular transcriptional machinery for the BMAL1 gene is active,
suggesting that BMAL1 inactivation is caused by DNA methylation and not by
malfunctional promoter activity. Incubating CPT-K cells with aza-dC also
increased CRY1 expression, whereas CLOCK expression was not altered and the CRY1 
promoter was unmethylated. These results suggest that aza-dC induces BMAL1
expression via DNA demethylation in the BMAL1 promoter and enhances PER2 and CRY1
transcription. Finally, aza-dC recovered the circadian oscillation of BMAL1
transcription. These results suggest that DNA methylation of the BMAL1 gene is
critical for interfering with circadian rhythms.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24103761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2545. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3545.

Metastasis-associated protein 1 is an integral component of the circadian
molecular machinery.

Li DQ(1), Pakala SB, Reddy SD, Peng S, Balasenthil S, Deng CX, Lee CC, Rea MA,
Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine and
Health Sciences, The George Washington University, Washington, District of
Columbia 20037, USA [2].

The mammalian circadian clock regulates the daily cycles of many important
physiological processes, but its mechanism is not well understood. Here we
provide genetic and biochemical evidence that metastasis-associated protein 1
(MTA1), a widely upregulated gene product in human cancers, is an integral
component of the circadian molecular machinery. Knockout of MTA1 in mice disrupts
the free-running period of circadian rhythms under constant light and normal
entrainment of behaviour to 12-h-light/12-h-dark cycles. The CLOCK-BMAL1
heterodimer activates MTA1 transcription through a conserved E-box element at its
promoter. MTA1, in turn, interacts with and recruits CLOCK-BMAL1 at its own and
CRY1 promoters and promotes their transcription. Moreover, MTA1 deacetylates
BMAL1 at lysine 538 through regulating deacetylase SIRT1 expression, thus
disturbing the CRY1-mediated negative feedback loop. These findings uncover a
previously unappreciated role for MTA1 in maintenance of circadian rhythmicity
through acting on the positive limb of the clock machinery.

PMID: 24089055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 25;8(9):e75690. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075690. eCollection
2013.

Increased sensitivity of the circadian system to temporal changes in the feeding 
regime of spontaneously hypertensive rats - a potential role for Bmal2 in the
liver.

Polidarová L(1), Sládek M, Nováková M, Parkanová D, Sumová A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurohumoral Regulations, Institute of Physiology, v.v.i.,
Academy of Science of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.

The mammalian timekeeping system generates circadian oscillations that
rhythmically drive various functions in the body, including metabolic processes. 
In the liver, circadian clocks may respond both to actual feeding conditions and 
to the metabolic state. The temporal restriction of food availability to improper
times of day (restricted feeding, RF) leads to the development of food
anticipatory activity (FAA) and resets the hepatic clock accordingly. The aim of 
this study was to assess this response in a rat strain exhibiting complex
pathophysiological symptoms involving spontaneous hypertension, an abnormal
metabolic state and changes in the circadian system, i.e., in spontaneously
hypertensive rats (SHR). The results revealed that SHR were more sensitive to RF 
compared with control rats, developing earlier and more pronounced FAA. Whereas
in control rats, the RF only redistributed the activity profiles into two bouts
(one corresponding to FAA and the other corresponding to the dark phase), in SHR 
the RF completely phase-advanced the locomotor activity according to the time of 
food presentation. The higher behavioral sensitivity to RF was correlated with
larger phase advances of the hepatic clock in response to RF in SHR. Moreover, in
contrast to the controls, RF did not suppress the amplitude of the hepatic clock 
oscillation in SHR. In the colon, no significant differences in response to RF
between the two rat strains were detected. The results suggested the possible
involvement of the Bmal2 gene in the higher sensitivity of the hepatic clock to
RF in SHR because, in contrast to the Wistar rats, the rhythm of Bmal2 expression
was advanced similarly to that of Bmal1 under RF. Altogether, the data
demonstrate a higher behavioral and circadian responsiveness to RF in the rat
strain with a cardiovascular and metabolic pathology and suggest a likely
functional role for the Bmal2 gene within the circadian clock.

PMCID: PMC3783415
PMID: 24086613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Curr Biol. 2013 Oct 7;23(19):1863-73. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.08.038. Epub 2013
Sep 26.

Dissociation of circadian and circatidal timekeeping in the marine crustacean
Eurydice pulchra.

Zhang L(1), Hastings MH, Green EW, Tauber E, Sladek M, Webster SG, Kyriacou CP,
Wilcockson DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 7RH, UK.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2013 Oct 21;23(20):R921-3.

BACKGROUND: Tidal (12.4 hr) cycles of behavior and physiology adapt intertidal
organisms to temporally complex coastal environments, yet their underlying
mechanism is unknown. However, the very existence of an independent "circatidal" 
clock has been disputed, and it has been argued that tidal rhythms arise as a
submultiple of a circadian clock, operating in dual oscillators whose outputs are
held in antiphase i.e., ~12.4 hr apart.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that the intertidal crustacean Eurydice pulchra (Leach)
exhibits robust tidal cycles of swimming in parallel to circadian (24 hr) rhythms
in behavioral, physiological and molecular phenotypes. Importantly, ~12.4 hr
cycles of swimming are sustained in constant conditions, they can be entrained by
suitable stimuli, and they are temperature compensated, thereby meeting the three
criteria that define a biological clock. Unexpectedly, tidal rhythms (like
circadian rhythms) are sensitive to pharmacological inhibition of Casein kinase
1, suggesting the possibility of shared clock substrates. However, cloning the
canonical circadian genes of E. pulchra to provide molecular markers of circadian
timing and also reagents to disrupt it by RNAi revealed that environmental and
molecular manipulations that confound circadian timing do not affect tidal
timing. Thus, competent circadian timing is neither an inevitable nor necessary
element of tidal timekeeping.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that tidal rhythms are driven by a dedicated
circatidal pacemaker that is distinct from the circadian system of E. pulchra,
thereby resolving a long-standing debate regarding the nature of the circatidal
mechanism.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3793863
PMID: 24076244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Science. 2013 Sep 27;341(6153):1462-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1244445.

Immunology. Some monocytes got rhythm.

Druzd D(1), Scheiermann C.

Author information: 
(1)Walter-Brendel-Center of Experimental Medicine,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, 81377 Munich, Germany.

Comment on
    Science. 2013 Sep 27;341(6153):1483-8.

PMID: 24072913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2013 Oct;20(10):1206-13. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2667. Epub 2013
Sep 22.

Cycles in spatial and temporal chromosomal organization driven by the circadian
clock.

Aguilar-Arnal L(1), Hakim O, Patel VR, Baldi P, Hager GL, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Center for Epigenetics and Metabolism,
University of California Irvine, Irvine, California, USA.

Dynamic transitions in the epigenome have been associated with regulated patterns
of nuclear organization. The accumulating evidence that chromatin remodeling is
implicated in circadian function prompted us to explore whether the clock may
control nuclear architecture. We applied the chromosome conformation capture on
chip technology in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) to demonstrate the presence
of circadian long-range interactions using the clock-controlled Dbp gene as bait.
The circadian genomic interactions with Dbp were highly specific and were absent 
in MEFs whose clock was disrupted by ablation of the Bmal1 gene (also called
Arntl). We establish that the Dbp circadian interactome contains a wide variety
of genes and clock-related DNA elements. These findings reveal a previously
unappreciated circadian and clock-dependent shaping of the nuclear landscape.

PMCID: PMC3885543
PMID: 24056944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2444. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3444.

p53 regulates Period2 expression and the circadian clock.

Miki T(1), Matsumoto T, Zhao Z, Lee CC.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical School,
University of Texas Health Science Center-Houston, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2].

The mechanistic interconnectivity between circadian regulation and the genotoxic 
stress response remains poorly understood. Here we show that the expression of
Period 2 (Per2), a circadian regulator, is directly regulated by p53 binding to a
response element in the Per2 promoter. This p53 response element is
evolutionarily conserved and overlaps with the E-Box element critical for
BMAL1/CLOCK binding and its transcriptional activation of Per2 expression. Our
studies reveal that p53 blocks BMAL1/CLOCK binding to the Per2 promoter, leading 
to repression of Per2 expression. In the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), p53
expression and its binding to the Per2 promoter are under circadian control. Per2
expression in the SCN is altered by p53 deficiency or stabilization of p53 by
Nutlin-3. Behaviourally, p53<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice have a shorter period length that lacks
stability, and they exhibit impaired photo-entrainment to a light pulse under a
free-running state. Our studies demonstrate that p53 modulates mouse circadian
behaviour.

PMCID: PMC3798035
PMID: 24051492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Science. 2013 Nov 1;342(6158):1243417. doi: 10.1126/science.1243417. Epub 2013
Sep 19.

Circadian clock NAD+ cycle drives mitochondrial oxidative metabolism in mice.

Peek CB(1), Affinati AH, Ramsey KM, Kuo HY, Yu W, Sena LA, Ilkayeva O, Marcheva
B, Kobayashi Y, Omura C, Levine DC, Bacsik DJ, Gius D, Newgard CB, Goetzman E,
Chandel NS, Denu JM, Mrksich M, Bass J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular
Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2013 Nov 1;342(6158):570-1.

Circadian clocks are self-sustained cellular oscillators that synchronize
oxidative and reductive cycles in anticipation of the solar cycle. We found that 
the clock transcription feedback loop produces cycles of nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NAD(+)) biosynthesis, adenosine triphosphate production, and
mitochondrial respiration through modulation of mitochondrial protein acetylation
to synchronize oxidative metabolic pathways with the 24-hour fasting and feeding 
cycle. Circadian control of the activity of the NAD(+)-dependent deacetylase
sirtuin 3 (SIRT3) generated rhythms in the acetylation and activity of oxidative 
enzymes and respiration in isolated mitochondria, and NAD(+) supplementation
restored protein deacetylation and enhanced oxygen consumption in circadian
mutant mice. Thus, circadian control of NAD(+) bioavailability modulates
mitochondrial oxidative function and organismal metabolism across the daily
cycles of fasting and feeding.

PMCID: PMC3963134
PMID: 24051248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Neurosci. 2013 Sep 18;33(38):14989-97. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2039-13.2013.

Circadian rhythm of contrast sensitivity is regulated by a dopamine-neuronal
PAS-domain protein 2-adenylyl cyclase 1 signaling pathway in retinal ganglion
cells.

Hwang CK(1), Chaurasia SS, Jackson CR, Chan GC, Storm DR, Iuvone PM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology and Pharmacology, and Graduate Program in
Biochemistry, Cell and Developmental Biology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, Translational Clinical Research Laboratory,
Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore, Signature Research Program in
Neuroscience and Behavioral Disorder, and Department of Ophthalmology, Yong Loo
Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore 169712,
Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee
37235, and Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195.

Spatial variation in light intensity, called spatial contrast, comprises much of 
the visual information perceived by mammals, and the relative ability to detect
contrast is referred to as contrast sensitivity (Purves et al., 2012). Recently, 
retinal dopamine D4 receptors (D4Rs) have been implicated in modulating contrast 
sensitivity (Jackson et al., 2012); however, the cellular and molecular
mechanisms have not been elucidated. Our study demonstrates a circadian rhythm of
contrast sensitivity that peaks during the daytime, and that its regulation
involves interactions of D4Rs, the clock gene Npas2, and the clock-controlled
gene adenylyl cyclase 1 (Adcy1) in a subset of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs).
Targeted disruption of the gene encoding D4Rs reduces the amplitude of the
contrast sensitivity rhythm by reducing daytime sensitivity and abolishes the
rhythmic expression of Npas2 and Adcy1 mRNA in the ganglion cell layer (GCL) of
the retina. Npas2(-/-) and Adcy1(-/-) mice show strikingly similar reductions in 
the contrast sensitivity rhythm to that in mice lacking D4Rs. Moreover, Adcy1
transcript rhythms were abolished in the GCL of Npas2(-/-) mice. Luciferase
reporter assays demonstrated that the Adcy1 promoter is selectively activated by 
neuronal PAS-domain protein 2 (NPAS2)/BMAL1. Our results indicate that the
contrast sensitivity rhythm is modulated by D4Rs via a signaling pathway that
involves NPAS2-mediated circadian regulation of Adcy1. Hence, we have identified 
a circadian clock mechanism in a subset of RGCs that modulates an important
aspect of retinal physiology and visual processing.

PMCID: PMC3776053
PMID: 24048828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Oct 1;110(40):16021-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1305980110. Epub 2013 Sep 16.

A positive feedback loop links circadian clock factor CLOCK-BMAL1 to the basic
transcriptional machinery.

Lande-Diner L(1), Boyault C, Kim JY, Weitz CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

Circadian clocks in mammals are built on a negative feedback loop in which the
heterodimeric transcription factor circadian locomotor output cycles kaput
(CLOCK)-brain, muscle Arnt-like 1 (BMAL1) drives the expression of its own
inhibitors, the PERIOD and CRYPTOCHROME proteins. Reactivation of CLOCK-BMAL1
occurs at a specific time several hours after PERIOD and CRYPTOCHROME protein
turnover, but the mechanism underlying this process is unknown. We found that
mouse BMAL1 complexes include TRAP150 (thyroid hormone receptor-associated
protein-150; also known as THRAP3). TRAP150 is a selective coactivator for
CLOCK-BMAL1, which oscillates under CLOCK-BMAL1 transcriptional control. TRAP150 
promotes CLOCK-BMAL1 binding to target genes and links CLOCK-BMAL1 to the
transcriptional machinery at target-gene promoters. Depletion of TRAP150 caused
low-amplitude, long-period rhythms, identifying it as a positive clock element.
The activity of TRAP150 defines a positive feedback loop within the clock and
provides a potential mechanism for timing the reactivation of circadian
transcription.

PMCID: PMC3791755
PMID: 24043798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 1;288(44):31930-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.507038. Epub 2013 
Sep 12.

Transcription factor NF-Y is a functional regulator of the transcription of core 
clock gene Bmal1.

Xiao J(1), Zhou Y, Lai H, Lei S, Chi LH, Mo X.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Tumour Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China.

The circadian clock enables organisms to adjust to daily environmental changes
and synchronize multiple molecular, biochemical, physiological, and behavioral
processes accordingly. In mammalian clock work, Bmal1 is the most important core 
clock gene, which works with another core clock gene Clock to drive the
expression of other clock genes and clock-controlled genes. However, the
regulation of Bmal1 has not been fully understood. This work was aimed at
identifying the positive regulator(s) of Bmal1 transcription. A series of 5'
deletion reporter constructs was generated, and binding site mutations of mouse
Bmal1 promoter fragments were cloned into pGL3-basic and pGL3(R2.1)-basic
plasmids and transfected into NIH 3T3 cells. Luciferase activity was either
measured 48 h after transfection or recorded for 4 days after serum shock. DNA
affinity precipitation assay was used to detect the transcription factors binding
to Bmal1 promoter. Small interfering RNA against nuclear factor Y, subunit A
(NF-YA) and dominant negative NF-YA were employed to study the role of NF-Y in
Bmal1 transcription regulation. Deletion and mutation analyses identified two
clusters of CCAAT/GC-boxes at the proximal region of Bmal1 promoter as the
activating cis-elements. Bmal1 promoter activity was up-regulated by NF-Y and/or 
Sp1 and repressed by dominant negative NF-YA or siRNA against NF-YA. The
activation of Bmal1 promoter activity by NF-Y and Sp1 was inhibited by Rev-Erba. 
DNA affinity precipitation assay showed that NF-Y and Sp1 bound to the two
CCAAT/GC clusters of Bmal1 promoter. These results indicate that NF-Y is a
functional activator of Bmal1 transcription and it cooperates with Sp1 and
Rev-Erba to generate the daily cycle of Bmal1 expression.

PMCID: PMC3814788
PMID: 24030830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. FASEB J. 2014 Jan;28(1):176-94. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-232629. Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Circadian clock function is disrupted by environmental tobacco/cigarette smoke,
leading to lung inflammation and injury via a SIRT1-BMAL1 pathway.

Hwang JW(1), Sundar IK, Yao H, Sellix MT, Rahman I.

Author information: 
(1)2Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Box 850, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester 14642, NY, USA.
irfan_rahman@urmc.rochester.edu.

Patients with obstructive lung diseases display abnormal circadian rhythms in
lung function. We determined the mechanism whereby environmental
tobacco/cigarette smoke (CS) modulates expression of the core clock gene BMAL1,
through Sirtuin1 (SIRT1) deacetylase during lung inflammatory and injurious
responses. Adult C57BL6/J and various mice mutant for SIRT1 and BMAL1 were
exposed to both chronic (6 mo) and acute (3 and 10 d) CS, and we measured the
rhythmic expression of clock genes, circadian rhythms of locomotor activity, lung
function, and inflammatory and emphysematous responses in the lungs. CS exposure 
(100-300 mg/m(3) particulates) altered clock gene expression and reduced
locomotor activity by disrupting the central and peripheral clocks and increased 
lung inflammation, causing emphysema in mice. BMAL1 was acetylated and degraded
in the lungs of mice exposed to CS and in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), compared with lungs of the nonsmoking controls, linking
it mechanistically to CS-induced reduction of SIRT1. Targeted deletion of Bmal1
in lung epithelium augmented inflammation in response to CS, which was not
attenuated by the selective SIRT1 activator SRT1720 (EC50=0.16 µM) in these mice.
Thus, the circadian clock, specifically the enhancer BMAL1 in epithelium, plays a
pivotal role, mediated by SIRT1-dependent BMAL1, in the regulation of CS-induced 
lung inflammatory and injurious responses.

PMCID: PMC3868829
PMID: 24025728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Invest Dermatol. 2014 Mar;134(3):610-9. doi: 10.1038/jid.2013.366. Epub 2013
Sep 4.

A meeting of two chronobiological systems: circadian proteins Period1 and BMAL1
modulate the human hair cycle clock.

Al-Nuaimi Y(1), Hardman JA(2), Bíró T(3), Haslam IS(1), Philpott MP(4), Tóth
BI(3), Farjo N(5), Farjo B(5), Baier G(6), Watson RE(1), Grimaldi B(7), Kloepper 
JE(8), Paus R(9).

Author information: 
(1)The Dermatology Centre, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust and the Institute
of Inflammation and Repair, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University
of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (2)1] The Dermatology Centre, Salford Royal NHS
Foundation Trust and the Institute of Inflammation and Repair, Manchester
Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK [2]
Doctoral Training Centre in Integrative Systems Biology, Manchester Institute of 
Biotechnology, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (3)DE-MTA ''Lendulet''
Cell Physiology Group, Department of Physiology, University of Debrecen,
Debrecen, Hungary. (4)Centre for Cutaneous Research, Barts and the London School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK. (5)Farjo 
Medical Centre, Manchester, UK. (6)Faculty of Life Sciences, Division of
Biosciences, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College
London, London, UK. (7)Italian Institute of Technology, Genova, Italy.
(8)Department of Dermatology, University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany. (9)1] The 
Dermatology Centre, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust and the Institute of
Inflammation and Repair, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK [2] Department of Dermatology, University of Luebeck, 
Luebeck, Germany.

The hair follicle (HF) is a continuously remodeled mini organ that cycles between
growth (anagen), regression (catagen), and relative quiescence (telogen). As the 
anagen-to-catagen transformation of microdissected human scalp HFs can be
observed in organ culture, it permits the study of the unknown controls of
autonomous, rhythmic tissue remodeling of the HF, which intersects developmental,
chronobiological, and growth-regulatory mechanisms. The hypothesis that the
peripheral clock system is involved in hair cycle control, i.e., the
anagen-to-catagen transformation, was tested. Here we show that in the absence of
central clock influences, isolated, organ-cultured human HFs show circadian
changes in the gene and protein expression of core clock genes (CLOCK, BMAL1, and
Period1) and clock-controlled genes (c-Myc, NR1D1, and CDKN1A), with Period1
expression being hair cycle dependent. Knockdown of either BMAL1 or Period1 in
human anagen HFs significantly prolonged anagen. This provides evidence that
peripheral core clock genes modulate human HF cycling and are an integral
component of the human hair cycle clock. Specifically, our study identifies BMAL1
and Period1 as potential therapeutic targets for modulating human hair growth.

PMID: 24005054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 26;8(8):e70109. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070109. eCollection
2013.

The biological clock is regulated by adrenergic signaling in brown fat but is
dispensable for cold-induced thermogenesis.

Li S(1), Yu Q, Wang GX, Lin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Institute and Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

The biological clock plays an important role in integrating nutrient and energy
metabolism with other cellular processes. Previous studies have demonstrated that
core clock genes are rhythmically expressed in peripheral tissues, including the 
liver, skeletal muscle, pancreatic islets, and white and brown adipose tissues.
These peripheral clocks are entrained by physiological cues, thereby aligning the
circadian pacemaker to tissue functions. The mechanisms that regulate brown
adipose tissue clock in response to physiological signals remain poorly
understood. Here we found that the expression of core clock genes is highly
responsive to cold exposure in brown fat, but not in white fat. This
cold-inducible regulation of the clock network is mediated by adrenergic receptor
activation and the transcriptional coactivator PGC-1a. Brown adipocytes in mice
lacking a functional clock contain large lipid droplets accompanied by
dysregulation of genes involved in lipid metabolism and adaptive thermogenesis.
Paradoxically, the "clockless" mice were competent in maintaining core body
temperature during cold exposure. These studies elucidated the presence of
adrenergic receptor/clock crosstalk that appears to be required for normal
thermogenic gene expression in brown fat.

PMCID: PMC3753278
PMID: 23990898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Science. 2013 Sep 27;341(6153):1483-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1240636. Epub 2013
Aug 22.

Circadian gene Bmal1 regulates diurnal oscillations of Ly6C(hi) inflammatory
monocytes.

Nguyen KD(1), Fentress SJ, Qiu Y, Yun K, Cox JS, Chawla A.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94158-9001, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2013 Sep 27;341(6153):1462-4.

Circadian clocks have evolved to regulate physiologic and behavioral rhythms in
anticipation of changes in the environment. Although the molecular clock is
present in innate immune cells, its role in monocyte homeostasis remains unknown.
Here, we report that Ly6C(hi) inflammatory monocytes exhibit diurnal variation,
which controls their trafficking to sites of inflammation. This cyclic pattern of
trafficking confers protection against Listeria monocytogenes and is regulated by
the repressive activity of the circadian gene Bmal1. Accordingly, myeloid
cell-specific deletion of Bmal1 induces expression of monocyte-attracting
chemokines and disrupts rhythmic cycling of Ly6C(hi) monocytes, predisposing mice
to development of pathologies associated with acute and chronic inflammation.
These findings have unveiled a critical role for BMAL1 in controlling the diurnal
rhythms in Ly6C(hi) monocyte numbers.

PMCID: PMC3836670
PMID: 23970558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Arch Dermatol Res. 2013 Oct;305(8):755-61. doi: 10.1007/s00403-013-1403-0. Epub
2013 Aug 18.

The clock gene brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1) is involved in hair
growth.

Watabe Y(1), Tomioka M, Watabe A, Aihara M, Shimba S, Inoue H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stem Cell Therapy (Endowed Chair by ANGFA Co.), St. Marianna
University School of Medicine, 2-16-1 Sugao, Miyamae, Kawasaki, 216-8511, Japan, 
y.watabe@marianna-u.ac.jp.

It is known that baldness caused by androgenetic alopecia is involved with
androgen and the androgen receptor. Furthermore, it has been reported that
testosterone secretion follows a circadian rhythm. Therefore, we hypothesized
that a relationship exists between androgen-induced alopecia and biological
rhythm. The mammalian circadian rhythm is controlled by several clock genes.
Brain and muscle aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like protein-1
(BMAL1), one of the clock genes, is a transcription factor that plays central
roles in the regulation of circadian rhythms. In this study, we investigated the 
influence of BMAL1 on hair follicle functions and hair growth. Mice deficient in 
BMAL1 expression exhibited a delay in hair regrowth after shaving. In hair
follicles of mouse vibrissa, expression of Bmal1 and other clock genes was found 
to be rhythmic. Knockdown of BMAL1 in human follicle dermal papilla cells
resulted in modulation of expression of several hair growth-related genes.
Therefore, we concluded that expression of clock genes in hair follicles is
linked to the circadian rhythm and that BMAL1 can regulate hair growth.

PMID: 23955654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 26;8(7):e69622. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069622. Print 2013.

Genetic variation in the NOC gene is associated with body mass index in Chinese
subjects.

Chang YC(1), Chiu YF, Liu PH, Hee SW, Chang TJ, Jiang YD, Lee WJ, Lee PC, Kao HY,
Hwang JJ, Chuang LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

Circadian clock genes are critical regulators of energy homeostasis and
metabolism. However, whether variation in the circadian genes is associated with 
metabolic phenotypes in humans remains to be explored. In this study, we
systemically genotyped 20 tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 8
candidate genes involved in circadian clock, including CLOCK, BMAL1(ARNTL), PER1,
PER2, CRY1, CRY2, CSNK1E,, and NOC(CCRN4L) in 1,510 non-diabetic Chinese subjects
in Taipei and Yunlin populations in Taiwan. Their associations with metabolic
phenotypes were analyzed. We found that genetic variation in the NOC gene,
rs9684900 was associated with body mass index (BMI) (P = 0.0016, Bonferroni
corrected P = 0.032). Another variant, rs135764 in the CSNK1E gene was associated
with fasting glucose (P = 0.0023, Bonferroni corrected P = 0.046). These
associations were consistent in both Taipei and Yunlin populations. Significant
epistatic and joint effects between SNPs on BMI and related phenotypes were
observed. Furthermore, NOC mRNA levels in human abdominal adipose tissue were
significantly increased in obese subjects compared to non-obese
controls.CONCLUSION: Genetic variation in the NOC gene is associated with BMI in 
Chinese subjects.

PMCID: PMC3724939
PMID: 23922759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Chronobiol Int. 2013 Nov;30(9):1089-100. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2013.800090. Epub 
2013 Jul 23.

Photoperiod affects the diurnal rhythm of hippocampal neuronal morphology of
Siberian hamsters.

Ikeno T(1), Weil ZM, Nelson RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center,
Columbus , Ohio , USA.

Individuals of many species can regulate their physiology, morphology, and
behavior in response to annual changes of day length (photoperiod). In mammals,
the photoperiodic signal is mediated by a change in the duration of melatonin,
leading to alterations in gene expressions, neuronal circuits, and hormonal
secretion. The hippocampus is one of the most plastic structures in the adult
brain and hippocampal neuronal morphology displays photoperiod-induced
differences. Because the hippocampus is important for emotional and cognitive
behaviors, photoperiod-driven remodeling of hippocampal neurons is implicated in 
seasonal differences of affect, including seasonal affective disorder (SAD) in
humans. Because neuronal architecture is also affected by the day-night cycle in 
several brain areas, we hypothesized that hippocampal neuronal morphology would
display a diurnal rhythm and that day length would influence that rhythm. In the 
present study, we examined diurnal and seasonal differences in hippocampal
neuronal morphology, as well as mRNA expression of the neurotrophic factors
(i.e., brain-derived neurotrophic factor [Bdnf], tropomyosin receptor kinase B
[trkB; a receptor for BDNF], and vascular endothelial growth factor [Vegf]) and a
circadian clock gene, Bmal1, in the hippocampus of Siberian hamsters. Diurnal
rhythms in total length of dendrites, the number of primary dendrites, dendritic 
complexity, and distance of the furthest intersection from the cell body were
observed only in long-day animals; however, diurnal rhythms in the number of
branch points and mean length of segments were observed only in short-day
animals. Spine density of dendrites displayed diurnal rhythmicity with different 
peak times between the CA1 and DG subregions and between long and short days.
These results indicate that photoperiod affects daily morphological changes of
hippocampal neurons and the daily rhythm of spine density, suggesting the
possibility that photoperiod-induced adjustments of hippocampal neuronal dynamics
might underlie seasonal difference of affective responses. Bmal1 mRNA showed a
diurnal rhythm and different expression levels between long and short days were
observed. However, there were no strong effects of day length on Bdnf. trkb, and 
Vegf gene expression, suggesting that these genes are not involved in the
photoperiodic effects on hippocampal neurons.

PMID: 23879697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cell Biochem Funct. 2013 Oct;31(7):626-7. doi: 10.1002/cbf.2990. Epub 2013 Jul
16.

Comments on 'over-expression of circadian clock gene Bmal1 affects proliferation 
and the canonical Wnt pathway in NIH-3T3 cells'.

Xiang L(1), Ma L, Wei N, Gong P.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China; Dental Implant Center, West China Hospital of
Stomatology Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Comment on
    Cell Biochem Funct. 2013 Mar;31(2):166-72.

PMID: 23857118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Regul Pept. 2013 Sep 10;186:49-56. doi: 10.1016/j.regpep.2013.06.016. Epub 2013
Jul 12.

Effect of angiotensin II on rhythmic per2 expression in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus and heart and daily rhythm of activity in Wistar rats.

Herichová I(1), oltésová D, Szántóová K, Mravec B, Neupauerová D, Veselá A,
Zeman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Physiology and Ethology, Faculty of Natural Sciences,
Comenius University, Mlynská dolina B-2, 842 15 Bratislava, Slovak Republic.
Electronic address: herichova@fns.uniba.sk.

Endogenous daily rhythms are generated by the hierarchically organized circadian 
system predominantly synchronized by the external light (L): dark (D) cycle.
During recent years several humoral signals have been found to influence the
generation and manifestation of daily rhythm. Since most studies have been
performed under in vitro conditions, the mechanisms employed under in vivo
conditions need to be investigated. Our study focused on angiotensin II
(angII)-mediated regulation of Per2 expression in the suprachiasmatic nuclei
(SCN) and heart and spontaneous locomotor activity in Wistar rats under
synchronized conditions. Angiotensin II was infused (100ng/kg/min) via
subcutaneously implanted osmotic minipumps for 7 or 28days. Samples were taken in
4-h intervals during a 24hcycle and after a light pulse applied in the first and 
second part of the dark phase. Gene expression was measured using real time PCR. 
Locomotor activity was monitored using an infrared camera with a remote control
installed in the animal facility. Seven days of angII infusion caused an increase
in blood pressure and heart/body weight index and 28days of angII infusion also
increased water intake in comparison with controls. We observed a distinct daily 
rhythm in Per2 expression in the SCN and heart of control rats and infused rats. 
Seven days of angII infusion did not influence Per2 expression in the heart.
28days of angII treatment caused significant phase advance and a decrease in
nighttime expression of Per2 and influenced expression of clock controlled genes 
Rev-erb alpha and Dbp in the heart compared to the control. Four weeks of angII
infusion decreased the responsiveness of Per2 expression in the SCN to a light
pulse at the end of the dark phase of the 24hcycle. Expression of mRNA coding
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) and angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2)
showed a daily rhythm in the heart of control rats. Four weeks of angII infusion 
caused a decrease in amplitude of rhythmic expression of Ace, the disappearance
of rhythm and an increase in Ace2 expression. The Ace/Ace2 ratio showed a
rhythmic pattern in the heart of control rats with peak levels during the dark
phase. Angiotensin II infusion decreased the mean Ace/Ace2 mRNA ratio in the
heart. We observed a significant daily rhythm in expression of brain natriuretic 
peptide (BNP) in the heart of control rats. In hypertensive rats mean value of
Bnp expression increased. Locomotor activity showed a distinct daily rhythm in
both groups. Angiotensin II time dependently decreased ratio of locomotor
activity in active versus passive phase of 24hcycle. To conclude, 28days of
subcutaneous infusion of angII modulates the functioning of the central and
peripheral circadian system measured at the level of Per2 expression and
locomotor activity.

© 2013.

PMID: 23850797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Aug 2;437(3):386-91. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.06.086. Epub 2013 Jul 2.

Effects of NAD(P)H and its derivatives on the DNA-binding activity of NPAS2, a
mammalian circadian transcription factor.

Yoshii K(1), Ishijima S, Sagami I.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Science, Kyoto Prefectural
University, Shimogamo, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8522, Japan.

NPAS2 is a transcription factor that regulates mammalian circadian rhythms. It
has been suggested that NPAS2 DNA-binding activity is regulated by the
intracellular redox state of NAD(P)H, although the mechanism remains unclear. To 
investigate the NAD(P)H interaction site of murine NPAS2, we performed
electrophoretic mobility shift assays using several truncation mutants of the
NPAS2 bHLH domain. Among the mutants, NPAS2 containing the N-terminal 61 residues
formed a heterodimer with BMAL1 to bind DNA, and NAD(P)H enhanced the binding
activity, while NAD(P)H inhibited the DNA-binding activity of the BMAL1 homodimer
in a dose-dependent manner. NAD(P)H derivatives such as 2',5'-ADP, nicotinamide, 
nicotinic acid and nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide (NAAD) did not affect the 
DNA-binding activity. Interestingly, NAD(P)(+), previously reported as an
inhibitor, did not affect NPAS2 binding activity in the presence or absence of
NAD(P)H in our system. These results suggest that NPAS2 DNA-binding activity is
specifically enhanced by NAD(P)H independently of NAD(P)(+) and that the
N-terminal 1-61 amino acids of NPAS2 are sufficient to sense NAD(P)H.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23831463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Genes Dev. 2013 Jul 1;27(13):1526-36. doi: 10.1101/gad.221374.113.

Real-time recording of circadian liver gene expression in freely moving mice
reveals the phase-setting behavior of hepatocyte clocks.

Saini C(1), Liani A, Curie T, Gos P, Kreppel F, Emmenegger Y, Bonacina L, Wolf
JP, Poget YA, Franken P, Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Sciences III, University of Geneva,
Switzerland.

The mammalian circadian timing system consists of a master pacemaker in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) in the hypothalamus, which is thought to set the
phase of slave oscillators in virtually all body cells. However, due to the lack 
of appropriate in vivo recording technologies, it has been difficult to study how
the SCN synchronizes oscillators in peripheral tissues. Here we describe the
real-time recording of bioluminescence emitted by hepatocytes expressing
circadian luciferase reporter genes in freely moving mice. The technology employs
a device dubbed RT-Biolumicorder, which consists of a cylindrical cage with
reflecting conical walls that channel photons toward a photomultiplier tube. The 
monitoring of circadian liver gene expression revealed that hepatocyte
oscillators of SCN-lesioned mice synchronized more rapidly to feeding cycles than
hepatocyte clocks of intact mice. Hence, the SCN uses signaling pathways that
counteract those of feeding rhythms when their phase is in conflict with its own 
phase.

PMCID: PMC3713432
PMID: 23824542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Cell. 2013 Jun 20;153(7):1448-60. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.027.

SIRT1 mediates central circadian control in the SCN by a mechanism that decays
with aging.

Chang HC(1), Guarente L.

Author information: 
(1)Glenn Laboratory for the Science of Aging, Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2013 Jun 20;153(7):1421-2.

SIRT1 is a NAD(+)-dependent protein deacetylase that governs many physiological
pathways, including circadian rhythm in peripheral tissues. Here, we show that
SIRT1 in the brain governs central circadian control by activating the
transcription of the two major circadian regulators, BMAL1 and CLOCK. This
activation comprises an amplifying circadian loop involving SIRT1, PGC-1a, and
Nampt. In aged wild-type mice, SIRT1 levels in the suprachiasmatic nucleus are
decreased, as are those of BMAL1 and PER2, giving rise to a longer intrinsic
period, a more disrupted activity pattern, and an inability to adapt to changes
in the light entrainment schedule. Young mice lacking brain SIRT1 phenocopy these
aging-dependent circadian changes, whereas mice that overexpress SIRT1 in the
brain are protected from the effects of aging. Our findings indicate that SIRT1
activates the central pacemaker to maintain robust circadian control in young
animals, and a decay in this activity may play an important role in aging.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3748806
PMID: 23791176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Neurosci. 2013 Jun 19;33(25):10221-34. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2757-12.2013.

p75 neurotrophin receptor is a clock gene that regulates oscillatory components
of circadian and metabolic networks.

Baeza-Raja B(1), Eckel-Mahan K, Zhang L, Vagena E, Tsigelny IF, Sassone-Corsi P, 
Ptácek LJ, Akassoglou K.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94158, USA.

The p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75(NTR)) is a member of the tumor necrosis factor
receptor superfamily with a widespread pattern of expression in tissues such as
the brain, liver, lung, and muscle. The mechanisms that regulate p75(NTR)
transcription in the nervous system and its expression in other tissues remain
largely unknown. Here we show that p75(NTR) is an oscillating gene regulated by
the helix-loop-helix transcription factors CLOCK and BMAL1. The p75(NTR) promoter
contains evolutionarily conserved noncanonical E-box enhancers. Deletion
mutagenesis of the p75(NTR)-luciferase reporter identified the -1039 conserved
E-box necessary for the regulation of p75(NTR) by CLOCK and BMAL1. Accordingly,
gel-shift assays confirmed the binding of CLOCK and BMAL1 to the p75(NTR-)1039
E-box. Studies in mice revealed that p75(NTR) transcription oscillates during
dark and light cycles not only in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), but also in 
peripheral tissues including the liver. Oscillation of p75(NTR) is disrupted in
Clock-deficient and mutant mice, is E-box dependent, and is in phase with clock
genes, such as Per1 and Per2. Intriguingly, p75(NTR) is required for circadian
clock oscillation, since loss of p75(NTR) alters the circadian oscillation of
clock genes in the SCN, liver, and fibroblasts. Consistent with this,
Per2::Luc/p75(NTR-/-) liver explants showed reduced circadian oscillation
amplitude compared with those of Per2::Luc/p75(NTR+/+). Moreover, deletion of
p75(NTR) also alters the circadian oscillation of glucose and lipid homeostasis
genes. Overall, our findings reveal that the transcriptional activation of
p75(NTR) is under circadian regulation in the nervous system and peripheral
tissues, and plays an important role in the maintenance of clock and metabolic
gene oscillation.

PMCID: PMC3685830
PMID: 23785138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Bipolar Disord. 2013 Sep;15(6):694-700. doi: 10.1111/bdi.12095. Epub 2013 Jun 20.

Application of an ex vivo cellular model of circadian variation for bipolar
disorder research: a proof of concept study.

Bamne MN(1), Ponder CA, Wood JA, Mansour H, Frank E, Kupfer DJ, Young MW,
Nimgaonkar VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, University
of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Disruption of circadian function has been observed in several human
disorders, including bipolar disorder (BD). Research into these disorders can be 
facilitated by human cellular models that evaluate external factors (zeitgebers) 
that impact circadian pacemaker activity. Incorporating a firefly luciferase
reporter system into human fibroblasts provides a facile, bioluminescent readout 
that estimates circadian phase, while leaving the cells intact. We evaluated
whether this system can be adapted to clinical BD research and whether it can
incorporate zeitgeber challenge paradigms.
METHODS: Fibroblasts from patients with bipolar I disorder (BD-I) (n = 13) and
controls (n = 12) were infected ex vivo with a lentiviral reporter incorporating 
the promoter sequences for Bmal1, a circadian gene to drive expression of the
firefly luciferase gene. Following synchronization, the bioluminescence was used 
to estimate period length. Phase response curves (PRCs) were also generated
following forskolin challenge and the phase response patterns were characterized.
RESULTS: Period length and PRCs could be estimated reliably from the constructs. 
There were no significant case-control differences in period length, with a
nonsignificant trend for differences in PRCs following the phase-setting
experiments.
CONCLUSIONS: An ex vivo cellular fibroblast-based model can be used to
investigate circadian function in BD-I. It can be generated from specific
individuals and this could usefully complement ongoing circadian clinical
research.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3762935
PMID: 23782472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 5;8(6):e65300. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065300. Print 2013.

Role of miR-142-3p in the post-transcriptional regulation of the clock gene Bmal1
in the mouse SCN.

Shende VR(1), Neuendorff N, Earnest DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, United
States of America.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that function as
post-transcriptional modulators by regulating stability or translation of target 
mRNAs. Recent studies have implicated miRNAs in the regulation of mammalian
circadian rhythms. To explore the role of miRNAs in the post-transcriptional
modulation of core clock genes in the master circadian pacemaker, we examined
miR-142-3p for evidence of circadian expression in the suprachiasmatic nuclei
(SCN), regulation of its putative clock gene target Bmal1 via specific binding
sites in the 3' UTR and overexpression-induced changes in the circadian rhythm of
BMAL1 protein levels in SCN cells. In mice exposed to constant darkness (DD),
miR-142-3p levels in the SCN were characterized by circadian rhythmicity with
peak expression during early subjective day at CT 3. Mutagenesis studies indicate
that two independent miRNA recognition elements located at nucleotides 1-7 and
335-357 contribute equally to miR-142-3p-induced repression of
luciferase-reported Bmal1 3' UTR activity. Importantly, overexpression of
miR-142-3p in immortalized SCN cells abolished circadian variation in endogenous 
BMAL1 protein levels in vitro. Collectively, our results suggest that miR-142-3p 
may play a role in the post-transcriptional modulation of Bmal1 and its
oscillatory regulation in molecular feedback loops mediating SCN circadian
function.

PMCID: PMC3673942
PMID: 23755214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 4;8(6):e65255. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065255. Print 2013.

Global loss of bmal1 expression alters adipose tissue hormones, gene expression
and glucose metabolism.

Kennaway DJ(1), Varcoe TJ, Voultsios A, Boden MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Robinson Institute, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia.

The close relationship between circadian rhythm disruption and poor metabolic
status is becoming increasingly evident, but role of adipokines is poorly
understood. Here we investigated adipocyte function and the metabolic status of
mice with a global loss of the core clock gene Bmal1 fed either a normal or a
high fat diet (22% by weight). Bmal1 null mice aged 2 months were killed across
24 hours and plasma adiponectin and leptin, and adipose tissue expression of
Adipoq, Lep, Retn and Nampt mRNA measured. Glucose, insulin and pyruvate
tolerance tests were conducted and the expression of liver glycolytic and
gluconeogenic enzyme mRNA determined. Bmal1 null mice displayed a pattern of
increased plasma adiponectin and plasma leptin concentrations on both control and
high fat diets. Bmal1 null male and female mice displayed increased adiposity
(1.8 fold and 2.3 fold respectively) on the normal diet, but the high fat diet
did not exaggerate these differences. Despite normal glucose and insulin
tolerance, Bmal1 null mice had increased production of glucose from pyruvate,
implying increased liver gluconeogenesis. The Bmal1 null mice had arrhythmic
clock gene expression in epigonadal fat and liver, and loss of rhythmic
transcription of a range of metabolic genes. Furthermore, the expression of
epigonadal fat Adipoq, Retn, Nampt, AdipoR1 and AdipoR2 and liver Pfkfb3 mRNA
were down-regulated. These results show for the first time that global loss of
Bmal1, and the consequent arrhythmicity, results in compensatory changes in
adipokines involved in the cellular control of glucose metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3672145
PMID: 23750248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2013;77(6):1296-8. Epub 2013 Jun 7.

Styrene altered clock gene expression in serum-shocked cultured human
fibroblasts.

Manzella N(1), Bracci M, Staffolani S, Strafella E, Rapisarda V, Valentino M,
Amati M, Copertaro A, Santarelli L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Sciences, Polytechnic University of
Marche, Ancona, Italy.

The circadian clock can regulate the metabolic process of xenobiotics, but little
is known as to circadian rhythms can be perturbed by xenobiotics. Styrene is a
organic chemical widely used in occupational settings. The effects of styrene on 
the circadian genes of HuDE cells were evaluated after serum-shocking
synchronization. A subtoxic dose of 100 µM of styrene altered the expression of
clock genes BMAL1, PER2, PER3, CRY1, CRY2, and REV-ERB-a.

PMID: 23748757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Chronobiol Int. 2013 Aug;30(7):901-9. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2013.784773. Epub
2013 Jun 5.

Effect of sleep deprivation on rhythms of clock gene expression and melatonin in 
humans.

Ackermann K(1), Plomp R, Lao O, Middleton B, Revell VL, Skene DJ, Kayser M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Molecular Biology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. ka44@st-andrews.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Chronobiol Int. 2013 Aug;30(7):909.

This study investigated the impact of sleep deprivation on the human circadian
system. Plasma melatonin and cortisol levels and leukocyte expression levels of
12 genes were examined over 48<U+2009>h (sleep vs. no-sleep nights) in 12 young males
(mean±SD: 23±5 yrs). During one night of total sleep deprivation, BMAL1
expression was suppressed, the heat shock gene HSPA1B expression was induced, and
the amplitude of the melatonin rhythm increased, whereas other high-amplitude
clock gene rhythms (e.g., PER1-3, REV-ERBa) remained unaffected. These data
suggest that the core clock mechanism in peripheral oscillators is compromised
during acute sleep deprivation.

PMID: 23738906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Nephrology (Carlton). 2013 Aug;18(8):555-62. doi: 10.1111/nep.12111.

Altered diurnal variation and localization of clock proteins in the remnant
kidney of 5/6 nephrectomy rats.

Huang XM(1), Chen WL, Yuan JP, Yang YH, Mei QH, Huang LX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Wuhan Central Hospital, Wuhan Hubei 430014,
China.huang19713052@sina.com

AIM: To investigate the localization and diurnal variation of clock proteins
(BMAL1, PER2) and clock output protein (DBP) in the remnant kidney of 5/6
nephrectomy rats (STNx).
METHODS: Male wistar rats were randomly divided into sham STNx group (Control)
and STNx group. Rats were synchronized 12 weeks to the light: dark cycle 12:12
with light on from 07.00 hours (Zeitgeber time ZT 0). Kidneys were collected to
detect the localization and expression rhythm of clock proteins (BMAL1, PER2 and 
DBP) every 4 h throughout the day by immunohistochemistry and Western blotting.
RESULTS: Clock proteins showed diurnal rhythm in the kidney of the control. But
diurnal rhythm of clock proteins changed in the STNx rats. Acrophase of BMAL1,
DBP and PER2 advanced 4 h, respectively; mesor of clock proteins increased in the
STNx rats. BMAL1 was located in endothelial cells of glomerulus and tubular
interstitial vasculars, and it was also expressed in nucleus of tubular cells in 
cortex and medulla. PER2 was mainly expressed in proximal tubular cells at the
juncture of cortex and medulla. DBP was widely expressed in the kidney. The
localization of BMAL1 and PER2 were changed in remnant kidneys of the STNx group.
CONCLUSION: The localization and diurnal variation of BMAL1, DBP and PER2 are
changed in remnant kidney of 5/6 nephrectomy rats and are involved in diurnal
rhythm of renal function.

© 2013 The Authors. Nephrology © 2013 Asian Pacific Society of Nephrology.

PMID: 23738784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Endocrinology. 2013 Aug;154(8):2924-35. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1080. Epub 2013 Jun 
4.

Global but not gonadotrope-specific disruption of Bmal1 abolishes the luteinizing
hormone surge without affecting ovulation.

Chu A(1), Zhu L, Blum ID, Mai O, Leliavski A, Fahrenkrug J, Oster H, Boehm U,
Storch KF.

Author information: 
(1)Douglas Mental Health University Institute and Department of Psychiatry,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H4H 1R3, Canada.

Although there is evidence for a circadian regulation of the preovulatory LH
surge, the contributions of individual tissue clocks to this process remain
unclear. We studied female mice deficient in the Bmal1 gene (Bmal1(-/-)), which
is essential for circadian clock function, and found that they lack the
proestrous LH surge. However, spontaneous ovulation on the day of estrus was
unaffected in these animals. Bmal1(-/-) females were also deficient in the
proestrous FSH surge, which, like the LH surge, is GnRH-dependent. In the absence
of circadian or external timing cues, Bmal1(-/-) females continued to cycle in
constant darkness albeit with increased cycle length and time spent in estrus.
Because pituitary gonadotropes are the source of circulating LH and FSH, we
assessed hypophyseal circadian clock function and found that female pituitaries
rhythmically express clock components throughout all cycle stages. To determine
the role of the gonadotrope clock in the preovulatory LH and FSH surge process,
we generated mice that specifically lack BMAL1 in gonadotropes (GBmal1KO).
GBmal1KO females exhibited a modest elevation in both proestrous and baseline LH 
levels across all estrous stages. BMAL1 elimination from gonadotropes also led to
increased variability in estrous cycle length, yet GBmal1KO animals were
otherwise reproductively normal. Together our data suggest that the intrinsic
clock in gonadotropes is dispensable for LH surge regulation but contributes to
estrous cycle robustness. Thus, clocks in the suprachiasmatic nucleus or
elsewhere must be involved in the generation of the LH surge, which,
surprisingly, is not required for spontaneous ovulation.

PMID: 23736292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Biol Rhythms. 2013 Jun;28(3):183-92. doi: 10.1177/0748730413487494.

Fibroblast PER2 circadian rhythmicity depends on cell density.

Noguchi T(1), Wang LL, Welsh DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Center for Chronobiology, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0603, USA.

Like neurons in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the master circadian pacemaker
in the brain, single fibroblasts can function as independent oscillators. In the 
SCN, synaptic and paracrine signaling among cells creates a robust, synchronized 
circadian oscillation, whereas there is no evidence for such integration in
fibroblast cultures. However, interactions among single-cell fibroblast
oscillators cannot be completely excluded, because fibroblasts were not isolated 
in previous work. In this study, we tested the autonomy of fibroblasts as
single-cell circadian oscillators in high- and low-density culture, by
single-cell imaging of cells from PER2::LUC circadian reporter mice. We found
greatly reduced PER2::LUC rhythmicity in low-density cultures, which could result
from lack of either constitutive or rhythmic paracrine signals from neighboring
fibroblasts. To discriminate between these 2 possibilities, we mixed PER2::LUC
wild-type (WT) cells with nonluminescent, nonrhythmic Bmal1-/- cells, so that
density of rhythmic cells was low but overall cell density remained high. In this
condition, WT cells showed clear rhythmicity similar to high-density cultures. We
also mixed PER2::LUC WT cells with nonluminescent, long period Cry2-/- cells. In 
this condition, WT cells showed a period no different from cells cultured with
rhythmic WT cells or nonrhythmic Bmal1-/- cells. In previous work, we found that 
low K<U+207A> suppresses fibroblast rhythmicity, and we and others have found that
either low K<U+207A> or low Ca²<U+207A> suppresses SCN rhythmicity. Therefore, we attempted to 
rescue rhythmicity of low-density fibroblasts with high K<U+207A> (21 mM), high Ca²<U+207A>
(3.6 mM), or conditioned medium. Conditioned medium from high-density fibroblast 
cultures rescued rhythmicity of low-density cultures, whereas high K<U+207A> or Ca²<U+207A>
medium did not consistently rescue rhythmicity. These data suggest that
fibroblasts require paracrine signals from adjacent cells for normal expression
of rhythmicity, but that these signals do not have to be rhythmic, and that
rhythmic signals from other cells do not affect the intrinsic periods of
fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC3760388
PMID: 23735497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Cancer Epidemiol. 2013 Oct;37(5):606-12. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2013.04.006. Epub
2013 May 28.

Shift work, circadian gene variants and risk of breast cancer.

Grundy A(1), Schuetz JM, Lai AS, Janoo-Gilani R, Leach S, Burstyn I, Richardson
H, Brooks-Wilson A, Spinelli JJ, Aronson KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Health and Epidemiology and Queen's Cancer Research
Institute, Queen's University, 10 Stuart Street, Kingston, Ontario, Canada K7L
3N6.

Circadian (clock) genes have been linked with several functions relevant to
cancer, and epidemiologic research has suggested relationships with breast cancer
risk for variants in NPAS2, CLOCK, CRY2 and TIMELESS. Increased breast cancer
risk has also been observed among shift workers, suggesting potential
interactions in relationships of circadian genes with breast cancer.
Relationships with breast cancer of 100 SNPs in 14 clock-related genes, as well
as potential interactions with shift work history, were investigated in a
case-control study (1042 cases, 1051 controls). Odds ratios in an additive
genetic model for European-ancestry participants (645 cases, 806 controls) were
calculated, using a two-step correction for multiple testing: within each gene
through permutation testing (10,000 permutations), and correcting for the false
discovery rate across genes. Interactions of genotypes with ethnicity and shift
work (<2 years vs =2 years) were evaluated individually. Following permutation
analysis, two SNPs (rs3816360 in ARNTL and rs11113179 in CRY1) displayed
significant associations with breast cancer and one SNP (rs3027188 in PER1) was
marginally significant; however, none were significant following adjustment for
the false discovery rate. No significant interaction with shift work history was 
detected. If shift work causes circadian disruption, this was not reflected in
associations between clock gene variants and breast cancer risk in this study.
Larger studies are needed to assess interactions with longer durations (>30
years) of shift work that have been associated with breast cancer.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 23725643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Lipids Health Dis. 2013 May 24;12:76. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-12-76.

Cyclic restricted feeding enhances lipid storage in 3 T3-L1 adipocytes.

Hashimoto T, Endo Y.

BACKGROUND: People who skip breakfast have more visceral fat than those who eat
breakfast; however, the mechanism underlying this difference is unclear. In this 
study, we examined 3 T3-L1 adipocytes and assessed 1) whether restricted feeding 
(i.e., "breakfast skipping") alters the cyclic expression of brain and muscle
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)-like protein 1 (BMAL1) and 
lipogenic proteins and 2) whether repeated exposure to growth media at the
time-points with enhanced lipogenic regulatory signals increases de novo
lipogenesis and lipid storage.
METHODS: Differentiated adipocytes were divided into two groups: a control group 
and a restricted feeding group, for which incubation with growth medium from ZT 9
to ZT 12 was withheld.
RESULTS: A bout of restricted feeding disrupted the cyclic expression of BMAL1
protein and increased the expression of lipogenic proteins, such as fatty acid
synthase and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma in adipocytes.
Furthermore, the repeated exposure to growth media at the time-points with
enhanced lipogenic regulatory signals increased de novo lipogenesis and lipid
storage.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that direct disruption of intracellular
molecular clock systems by breakfast skipping and the concurrent changes in the
daily cycle of lipogenic proteins in adipocytes, as a consequence of repeated
nutrition at the time-points with enhanced lipogenic regulatory signals, would
result in increased lipogenesis and lipid storage. These alterations are
important molecular mechanisms underlying augmented adiposity induced by
breakfast skipping.

PMCID: PMC3679985
PMID: 23705949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Thorax. 2014 Jan;69(1):90-2. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2013-203482. Epub 2013 May
23.

The circadian clock and asthma.

Durrington HJ(1), Farrow SN, Loudon AS, Ray DW.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, Institute of Human Development, ,
Manchester, UK.

It is characteristic of asthma that symptoms worsen overnight, particularly in
the early hours of the morning. Nocturnal symptoms in asthma are common and are
an important indicator for escalation of treatment. An extensive body of research
has demonstrated that nocturnal symptoms of cough and dyspnea are accompanied by 
circadian variations in airway inflammation and physiologic variables, including 
airflow limitation and airways hyper-responsiveness. The molecular apparatus that
underpins circadian variations, controlled by so called 'clock' genes, has
recently been characterised. Clock genes control circadian rhythms both
centrally, in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the brain and peripherally, within
every organ of the body. Here, we will discuss how clock genes regulate circadian
rhythms. We will focus particularly on the peripheral lung clock and the
peripheral immune clock and discuss how these might relate to both the
pathogenesis and treatment of asthma.

PMID: 23704227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2013 Aug 1;115(3):373-82. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01139.2012. Epub 2013 May 23.

Chronic phase advance alters circadian physiological rhythms and peripheral
molecular clocks.

Wolff G(1), Duncan MJ, Esser KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Center for Muscle Biology, University of Kentucky
Medical School, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Shifting the onset of light, acutely or chronically, can profoundly affect
responses to infection, tumor progression, development of metabolic disease, and 
mortality in mammals. To date, the majority of phase-shifting studies have
focused on acute exposure to a shift in the timing of the light cycle, whereas
the consequences of chronic phase shifts alone on molecular rhythms in peripheral
tissues such as skeletal muscle have not been studied. In this study, we tested
the effect of chronic phase advance on the molecular clock mechanism in two
phenotypically different skeletal muscles. The phase advance protocol (CPA)
involved 6-h phase advances (earlier light onset) every 4 days for 8 wk. Analysis
of the molecular clock, via bioluminescence recording, in the soleus and flexor
digitorum brevis (FDB) muscles and lung demonstrated that CPA advanced the phase 
of the rhythm when studied immediately after CPA. However, if the mice were
placed into free-running conditions (DD) for 2 wk after CPA, the molecular clock 
was not phase shifted in the two muscles but was still shifted in the lung. Wheel
running behavior remained rhythmic in CPA mice; however, the endogenous period
length of the free-running rhythm was significantly shorter than that of control 
mice. Core body temperature, cage activity, and heart rate remained rhythmic
throughout the experiment, although the onset of the rhythms was significantly
delayed with CPA. These results provide clues that lifestyles associated with
chronic environmental desynchrony, such as shift work, can have disruptive
effects on the molecular clock mechanism in peripheral tissues, including both
types of skeletal muscle. Whether this can contribute, long term, to increased
incidence of insulin resistance/metabolic disease requires further study.

PMCID: PMC3743007
PMID: 23703115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 11;110(24):9950-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1305814110. Epub 2013 May 13.

Circadian patterns of gene expression in the human brain and disruption in major 
depressive disorder.

Li JZ(1), Bunney BG, Meng F, Hagenauer MH, Walsh DM, Vawter MP, Evans SJ,
Choudary PV, Cartagena P, Barchas JD, Schatzberg AF, Jones EG, Myers RM, Watson
SJ Jr, Akil H, Bunney WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109,
USA. junzli@med.umich.edu

A cardinal symptom of major depressive disorder (MDD) is the disruption of
circadian patterns. However, to date, there is no direct evidence of circadian
clock dysregulation in the brains of patients who have MDD. Circadian rhythmicity
of gene expression has been observed in animals and peripheral human tissues, but
its presence and variability in the human brain were difficult to characterize.
Here, we applied time-of-death analysis to gene expression data from high-quality
postmortem brains, examining 24-h cyclic patterns in six cortical and limbic
regions of 55 subjects with no history of psychiatric or neurological illnesses
("controls") and 34 patients with MDD. Our dataset covered ~12,000 transcripts in
the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, hippocampus,
amygdala, nucleus accumbens, and cerebellum. Several hundred transcripts in each 
region showed 24-h cyclic patterns in controls, and >100 transcripts exhibited
consistent rhythmicity and phase synchrony across regions. Among the top-ranked
rhythmic genes were the canonical clock genes BMAL1(ARNTL), PER1-2-3,
NR1D1(REV-ERBa), DBP, BHLHE40 (DEC1), and BHLHE41(DEC2). The phasing of known
circadian genes was consistent with data derived from other diurnal mammals.
Cyclic patterns were much weaker in the brains of patients with MDD due to
shifted peak timing and potentially disrupted phase relationships between
individual circadian genes. This transcriptome-wide analysis of the human brain
demonstrates a rhythmic rise and fall of gene expression in regions outside of
the suprachiasmatic nucleus in control subjects. The description of its breakdown
in MDD suggests potentially important molecular targets for treatment of mood
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3683716
PMID: 23671070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. PLoS One. 2013 May 7;8(5):e63821. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063821. Print 2013.

Genome wide association study of age at menarche in the Japanese population.

Tanikawa C(1), Okada Y, Takahashi A, Oda K, Kamatani N, Kubo M, Nakamura Y,
Matsuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Age at menarche (AAM) is a complex trait involving both genetic and environmental
factors. To identify the genetic factors associated with AAM, we conducted a
large-scale meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies using more than
15,000 Japanese female samples. Here, we identified an association between SNP
(single nucleotide polymorphism) rs364663 at the LIN28B locus and AAM, with a
P-value of 5.49×10(-7) and an effect size of 0.089 (year). We also evaluated 33
SNPs that were previously reported to be associated with AAM in women of European
ancestry. Among them, two SNPs rs4452860 and rs7028916 in TMEM38B indicated
significant association with AAM in the same directions as reported in previous
studies (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0013 with an effect size of 0.051) even after Bonferroni
correction for the 33 SNPs. In addition, six loci in or near CCDC85A,
LOC100421670, CA10, ZNF483, ARNTL, and RXRG exhibited suggestive association with
AAM (P<0.05). Our findings elucidated the impact of genetic variations on AAM in 
the Japanese population.

PMCID: PMC3646805
PMID: 23667675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 30;8(4):e63113. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063113. Print 2013.

C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) activates the expression of E-box clock genes
with CLOCK/CYCLE in Drosophila.

Itoh TQ(1), Matsumoto A, Tanimura T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Systems Life Sciences, Kyushu University, Hakozaki,
Fukuoka, Japan.

In Drosophila, CLOCK/CYCLE heterodimer (CLK/CYC) is the primary activator of
circadian clock genes that contain the E-box sequence in their promoter regions
(hereafter referred to as "E-box clock genes"). Although extensive studies have
investigated the feedback regulation of clock genes, little is known regarding
other factors acting with CLK/CYC. Here we show that Drosophila C-terminal
binding protein (dCtBP), a transcriptional co-factor, is involved in the
regulation of the E-box clock genes. In vivo overexpression of dCtBP in clock
cells lengthened or abolished circadian locomotor rhythm with up-regulation of a 
subset of the E-box clock genes, period (per), vrille (vri), and PAR domain
protein 1e (Pdp1e). Co-expression of dCtBP with CLK in vitro also increased the
promoter activity of per, vri, Pdp1e and cwo depending on the amount of dCtBP
expression, whereas no effect was observed without CLK. The activation of these
clock genes in vitro was not observed when we used mutated dCtBP which carries
amino acid substitutions in NAD+ domain. These results suggest that dCtBP
generally acts as a putative co-activator of CLK/CYC through the E-box sequence.

PMCID: PMC3640014
PMID: 23646183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Nihon Rinsho. 2013 Feb;71(2):244-8.

[The roles of clock genes in obesity].

[Article in Japanese]

Shimba S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Science, School of Pharmacy, Nihon University.

Several epidemiological studies have suggested that the perturbation of circadian
rhythm has adverse metabolic consequences (e.g., obesity) in humans. At the
molecular level, circadian rhythms are encoded by an autoregulatory loop composed
of a set of transcription activators (BMAL1/CLOCK) that induce expression of
repressors (PER/CRY). The mammalian molecular clock is not only expressed within 
the master suprachiasmatic nucleus pacemaker neurons, but also within nearly all 
cells. In addition to this core loop, BMAL1/CLOCK also induce expression of the
orphan nuclear hormone receptor, which modulates Bmal1 transcription. Disruption 
of clock genes results in metabolic dysregulation in mice. In this article, the
roles of clock genes in the regulation of metabolism were summarized based on the
phenotypes of the knockout mice.

PMID: 23631200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jul;41(12):6161-74. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt307. Epub 2013
Apr 24.

Glucocorticoid-mediated Period2 induction delays the phase of circadian rhythm.

Cheon S(1), Park N, Cho S, Kim K.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Korea.

Glucocorticoid (GC) signaling synchronizes the circadian rhythm of individual
peripheral cells and induces the expression of circadian genes, including Period1
(Per1) and Period2 (Per2). However, no GC response element (GRE) has been
reported in the Per2 promoter region. Here we report the molecular mechanisms of 
Per2 induction by GC signaling and its relevance to the regulation of circadian
timing. We found that GC prominently induced Per2 expression and delayed the
circadian phase. The overlapping GRE and E-box (GE2) region in the proximal Per2 
promoter was responsible for GC-mediated Per2 induction. The GRE in the Per2
promoter was unique in that brain and muscle ARNT-like protein-1 (BMAL1) was
essential for GC-induced Per2 expression, whereas other GRE-containing promoters,
such as Per1 and mouse mammary tumor virus, responded to dexamethasone in the
absence of BMAL1. This specialized regulatory mechanism was mediated by
BMAL1-dependent binding of the GC receptor to GRE in Per2 promoter. When Per2
induction was abrogated by the mutation of the GRE or E-box, the circadian
oscillation phase failed to be delayed compared with that of the wild-type.
Therefore, the current study demonstrates that the rapid Per2 induction mediated 
by GC is crucial for delaying the circadian rhythm.

PMCID: PMC3695510
PMID: 23620290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Rhythms. 2013 Apr;28(2):117-29. doi: 10.1177/0748730413478552.

Sex difference in daily rhythms of clock gene expression in the aged human
cerebral cortex.

Lim AS(1), Myers AJ, Yu L, Buchman AS, Duffy JF, De Jager PL, Bennett DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Sunnybrook Health Sciences
Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. andrew.lim@utoronto.ca

Studies using self-report and physiological markers of circadian rhythmicity have
demonstrated sex differences in a number of circadian attributes including
morningness-eveningness, entrained phase, and intrinsic period. However, these
sex differences have not been examined at the level of the molecular clock and
not in human cerebral cortex. The authors tested the hypothesis that there are
detectable daily rhythms of clock gene expression in human cerebral cortex and
that there are significant sex differences in the timing of these rhythms. The
expression levels of 3 clock genes-PER2, PER3, and ARNTL1-were quantified in
samples of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex from 490 deceased individuals in 2
cohort studies of older individuals, the Religious Orders Study and the Rush
Memory and Aging Project, using mRNA microarray data. Clock gene expression at
death was parameterized as a function of time of death using cosine curves and
was examined for sex differences in the phase of these curves. Significant daily 
variation was seen in the expression of PER2 (p = 0.004), PER3 (p = 0.003), and
ARNTL1 (p = 0.0005). PER2/3 expression peaked at 10:38 (95% confidence interval
[CI], 09:20-11:56) and 10:44 (95% CI, 09:29-11:59), respectively, and ARNTL1
expression peaked in antiphase to this at 21:23 (95% CI, 20:16-22:30). The timing
of the expression of all 3 genes was significantly earlier in women than in men
(PER2 6.8 h, p = 0.002; PER3 5.5 h, p = 0.001; ARNTL1 4.7 h, p = 0.007). Daily
rhythms of clock gene expression are present in human cerebral cortex and can be 
inferred from postmortem samples. Moreover, these rhythms are relatively delayed 
in men compared with women.

PMCID: PMC3774838
PMID: 23606611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2013;(217):289-309. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-25950-0_12.

Pharmacological modulators of the circadian clock as potential therapeutic drugs:
focus on genotoxic/anticancer therapy.

Antoch MP(1), Kondratov RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY, USA. marina.antoch@roswellpark.org

The circadian clock is an evolutionary conserved intrinsic timekeeping mechanism 
that controls daily variations in multiple biological processes. One important
process that is modulated by the circadian clock is an organism's response to
genotoxic stress, such as that induced by anticancer drug and radiation
treatments. Numerous observations made in animal models have convincingly
demonstrated that drug-induced toxicity displays prominent daily variations;
therefore, undesirable side effects could be significantly reduced by
administration of drugs at specific times when they are better tolerated. In some
cases, these critical times of the day coincide with increased sensitivity of
tumor cells allowing for a greater therapeutic index. Despite encouraging results
of chronomodulated therapies, our knowledge of molecular mechanisms underlying
these observations remains sketchy. Here we review recent progress in deciphering
mechanistic links between circadian and stress response pathways with a focus on 
how these findings could be applied to anticancer clinical practice. We discuss
the potential for using high-throughput screens to identify small molecules that 
can modulate basic parameters of the entire circadian machinery as well as
functional activity of its individual components. We also describe the discovery 
of several small molecules that can pharmacologically modulate clock and that
have a potential to be developed into therapeutic drugs. We believe that
translational applications of clock-targeting pharmaceuticals are twofold: they
may be developed into drugs to treat circadian-related disorders or used in
combination with existing therapeutic strategies to improve therapeutic index of 
a given genotoxic treatment via the intrinsic clock mechanism.

PMCID: PMC4073629
PMID: 23604484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2013;(217):157-83. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-25950-0_7.

The circadian control of sleep.

Fisher SP(1), Foster RG, Peirson SN.

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences Division, SRI International, Centre for Neuroscience, 333
Ravenswood Avenue, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA.

The sleep/wake cycle is arguably the most familiar output of the circadian
system, however, sleep is a complex biological process that arises from multiple 
brain regions and neurotransmitters, which is regulated by numerous physiological
and environmental factors. These include a circadian drive for wakefulness as
well as an increase in the requirement for sleep with prolonged waking (the sleep
homeostat). In this chapter, we describe the regulation of sleep, with a
particular emphasis on the contribution of the circadian system. Since their
identification, the role of clock genes in the regulation of sleep has attracted 
considerable interest, and here, we provide an overview of the interplay between 
specific elements of the molecular clock with the sleep regulatory system.
Finally, we summarise the role of the light environment, melatonin and social
cues in the modulation of sleep, with a focus on the role of melanopsin ganglion 
cells.

PMID: 23604479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2013;(217):29-44. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-25950-0_2.

The epigenetic language of circadian clocks.

Sahar S(1), Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Epigenetics and Metabolism, School of Medicine, University of
California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Epigenetic control, which includes DNA methylation and histone modifications,
leads to chromatin remodeling and regulated gene expression. Remodeling of
chromatin constitutes a critical interface of transducing signals, such as light 
or nutrient availability, and how these are interpreted by the cell to generate
permissive or silenced states for transcription. CLOCK-BMAL1-mediated activation 
of clock-controlled genes (CCGs) is coupled to circadian changes in histone
modification at their promoters. Several chromatin modifiers, such as the
deacetylases SIRT1 and HDAC3 or methyltransferase MLL1, have been shown to be
recruited to the promoters of the CCGs in a circadian manner. Interestingly, the 
central element of the core clock machinery, the transcription factor CLOCK, also
possesses histone acetyltransferase activity. Rhythmic expression of the CCGs is 
abolished in the absence of these chromatin modifiers. Here we will discuss the
evidence demonstrating that chromatin remodeling is at the crossroads of
circadian rhythms and regulation of metabolism and cellular proliferation.

PMID: 23604474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2013;(217):3-27. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-25950-0_1.

Molecular components of the Mammalian circadian clock.

Buhr ED(1), Takahashi JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Washington, 1959 NE Pacific St,
356485 BB-857 HSB, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Mammals synchronize their circadian activity primarily to the cycles of light and
darkness in the environment. This is achieved by ocular photoreception relaying
signals to the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) in the hypothalamus. Signals from
the SCN cause the synchronization of independent circadian clocks throughout the 
body to appropriate phases. Signals that can entrain these peripheral clocks
include humoral signals, metabolic factors, and body temperature. At the level of
individual tissues, thousands of genes are brought to unique phases through the
actions of a local transcription/translation-based feedback oscillator and
systemic cues. In this molecular clock, the proteins CLOCK and BMAL1 cause the
transcription of genes which ultimately feedback and inhibit CLOCK and BMAL1
transcriptional activity. Finally, there are also other molecular circadian
oscillators which can act independently of the transcription-based clock in all
species which have been tested.

PMCID: PMC3762864
PMID: 23604473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Jun;27(6):979-89. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1366. Epub 2013 Apr
18.

Npas4 is activated by melatonin, and drives the clock gene Cry1 in the ovine pars
tuberalis.

West A(1), Dupré SM, Yu L, Paton IR, Miedzinska K, McNeilly AS, Davis JR, Burt
DW, Loudon AS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

Seasonal mammals integrate changes in the duration of nocturnal melatonin
secretion to drive annual physiologic cycles. Melatonin receptors within the
proximal pituitary region, the pars tuberalis (PT), are essential in regulating
seasonal neuroendocrine responses. In the ovine PT, melatonin is known to
influence acute changes in transcriptional dynamics coupled to the onset (dusk)
and offset (dawn) of melatonin secretion, leading to a potential interval-timing 
mechanism capable of decoding changes in day length (photoperiod). Melatonin
offset at dawn is linked to cAMP accumulation, which directly induces
transcription of the clock gene Per1. The rise of melatonin at dusk induces a
separate and distinct cohort, including the clock-regulated genes Cry1 and Nampt,
but little is known of the up-stream mechanisms involved. Here, we used
next-generation sequencing of the ovine PT transcriptome at melatonin onset and
identified Npas4 as a rapidly induced basic helix-loop-helix Per-Arnt-Sim domain 
transcription factor. In vivo we show nuclear localization of NPAS4 protein in
presumptive melatonin target cells of the PT (a-glycoprotein hormone-expressing
cells), whereas in situ hybridization studies identified acute and transient
expression in the PT of Npas4 in response to melatonin. In vitro, NPAS4 forms
functional dimers with basic helix loop helix-PAS domain cofactors aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), ARNT2, and ARNTL,
transactivating both Cry1 and Nampt ovine promoter reporters. Using a combination
of 5'-deletions and site-directed mutagenesis, we show NPAS4-ARNT transactivation
to be codependent upon two conserved central midline elements within the Cry1
promoter. Our data thus reveal NPAS4 as a candidate immediate early-response gene
in the ovine PT, driving molecular responses to melatonin.

PMCID: PMC3689899
PMID: 23598442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Jun 15;304(12):C1131-40. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00008.2013. Epub 2013 Apr 17.

Downregulation of core clock gene Bmal1 attenuates expression of progesterone and
prostaglandin biosynthesis-related genes in rat luteinizing granulosa cells.

Chen H(1), Zhao L, Kumazawa M, Yamauchi N, Shigeyoshi Y, Hashimoto S, Hattori MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Marine Bioresource Sciences, Graduate School of
Agriculture, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Ovarian circadian oscillators have been implicated in the reproductive processes 
of mammals. However, there are few reports regarding the detection of ovarian
clock-controlled genes (CCGs). The present study was designed to unravel the
mechanisms through which CCG ovarian circadian oscillators regulate fertility,
primarily using quantitative RT-PCR and RNA interference against Bmal1 in rat
granulosa cells. Mature granulosa cells were prepared from mouse
Per2-destabilized luciferase (dLuc) reporter gene transgenic rats. A real-time
monitoring system of Per2 promoter activity was employed to detect Per2-dLuc
oscillations. The cells exposed to luteinizing hormone (LH) displayed clear
Per2-dLuc oscillations and a rhythmic expression of clock genes (Bmal1, Per1,
Per2, Rev-erba, and Dbp). Meanwhile, the examined ovarian genes (Star, Cyp19a1,
Cyp11a1, Ptgs2, Lhcgr, and p53) showed rhythmic transcript profiles except for
Hsd3b2, indicating that these rhythmic expression genes may be CCGs. Notably,
Bmal1 small interfering (si)RNA treatment significantly decreased both the
amplitude of Per2-dLuc oscillations and Bmal1 mRNA levels compared with
nonsilencing RNA treatment in luteinizing granulosa cells. Depletion of Bmal1 by 
siRNA decreased the transcript levels of clock genes (Per1, Per2, Rev-erba, and
Dbp) and examined ovarian genes (Star, Cyp19a1, Cyp11a1, Ptgs2, Hsd3b2, and
Lhcgr). Accordingly, knockdown of Bmal1 also inhibited the synthesis of
progesterone and prostaglandin E2, which are associated with crucial reproductive
processes. Collectively, these data suggest that ovarian circadian oscillators
regulate the synthesis of steroid hormones and prostaglandins through
ovarian-specific CCGs in response to LH stimuli. The present study provides new
insights into the physiologic significance of Bmal1 related to fertility in
ovarian circadian oscillators.

PMID: 23596172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 8;8(4):e60527. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060527. Print 2013.

Mutual antagonism between circadian protein period 2 and hepatitis C virus
replication in hepatocytes.

Benegiamo G(1), Mazzoccoli G, Cappello F, Rappa F, Scibetta N, Oben J, Greco A,
Williams R, Andriulli A, Vinciguerra M, Pazienza V.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, Hospital San
Giovanni Rotondo, FG, San Giovanni, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infects approximately 3% of the world
population and is the leading cause of liver disease, impacting hepatocyte
metabolism, depending on virus genotype. Hepatic metabolic functions show
rhythmic fluctuations with 24-h periodicity (circadian), driven by molecular
clockworks ticking through translational-transcriptional feedback loops, operated
by a set of genes, called clock genes, encoding circadian proteins. Disruption of
biologic clocks is implicated in a variety of disorders including fatty liver
disease, obesity and diabetes. The relation between HCV replication and the
circadian clock is unknown.
METHODS: We investigated the relationship between HCV core infection and viral
replication and the expression of clock genes (Rev-Erba, Rora, ARNTL, ARNTL2,
CLOCK, PER1, PER2, PER3, CRY1 and CRY2) in two cellular models, the Huh-7 cells
transiently expressing the HCV core protein genotypes 1b or 3a, and the OR6 cells
stably harboring the full-length hepatitis C genotype 1b replicon, and in human
liver biopsies, using qRT-PCR, immunoblotting, luciferase assays and
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In Huh-7 cells expressing the HCV core protein genotype 1b, but not 3a, 
and in OR6 cells, transcript and protein levels of PER2 and CRY2 were
downregulated. Overexpression of PER2 led to a consistent decrease in HCV RNA
replicating levels and restoration of altered expression pattern of a subset of
interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) in OR6 cells. Furthermore, in liver biopsies
from HCV genotype 1b infected patients, PER2 was markedly localized to the
nucleus, consistent with an auto-inhibitory transcriptional feedback loop.
CONCLUSIONS: HCV can modulate hepatic clock gene machinery, and the circadian
protein PER2 counteracts viral replication. Further understanding of circadian
regulation of HCV replication and rhythmic patterns of host-hosted relationship
may improve the effectiveness of HCV antiviral therapy. This would extend to
hepatic viral infections the current spectrum of chronotherapies, implemented to 
treat metabolic, immune related and neoplastic disease.

PMCID: PMC3620463
PMID: 23593233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Endocrinology. 2013 Jun;154(6):2046-57. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-2274. Epub 2013 Apr 
12.

Clock gene expression in the human pituitary gland.

Wunderer F(1), Kühne S, Jilg A, Ackermann K, Sebesteny T, Maronde E, Stehle JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy III, Goethe-University Frankfurt am Main,
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, D-60590 Frankfurt, Germany.

Pituitary function relies on strictly timed, yet plastic mechanisms, particularly
with respect to the daytime-dependent coordination of hormone synthesis and
release. In other systems, clock genes and their protein products are
well-described candidates to anticipate the daily demands in neuroendocrine
coupling and to manage cellular adaptation on changing internal or external
circumstances. To elucidate possible mechanisms of time management, a total of 52
human autoptic pituitary glands were allocated to the 4 time-of-day groups,
night, dawn, day, and dusk, according to reported time of death. The observed
daytime-dependent dynamics in ACTH content supports a postmortem conservation of 
the premortem condition, and thus, principally validates the investigation of
autoptic pituitary glands. Pituitary extracts were investigated for expression of
clock genes Per1, Cry1, Clock, and Bmal1 and corresponding protein products. Only
the clock gene Per1 showed daytime-dependent differences in quantitative
real-time PCR analyses, with decreased levels observed during dusk. Although the 
overall amount in clock gene protein products PER1, CRY1, and CLOCK did not
fluctuate with time of day in human pituitary, an indication for a temporally
parallel intracellular translocation of PER1 and CRY1 was detected by
immunofluorescence. Presented data suggest that the observed clock gene
expression in human pituitary cells does not provide evidence for a functional
intrinsic clockwork. It is suggested that clock genes and their protein products 
may be directly involved in the daytime-dependent regulation and adaptation of
hormone synthesis and release and within homeostatic adaptive plasticity.

PMID: 23584858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Elife. 2013 Apr 9;2:e00659. doi: 10.7554/eLife.00659.

Shedding new light on circadian clocks.

Demarque M(1), Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)is at the Department of Molecular Biology , University of Geneva , Geneva ,
Switzerland maud.demarque@unige.ch.

Comment on
    Elife. 2013;2:e00426.

Using a clever combination of genetic and biochemical tools researchers have
shown that a transcription factor called USF1 has a central role in determining
how mutations of the Clock gene manifest themselves in the behaviour of different
mouse strains.

PMCID: PMC3622228
PMID: 23580350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Oncol Rep. 2013 Jun;29(6):2109-13. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2381. Epub 2013 Apr 3.

Bmal1 suppresses cancer cell invasion by blocking the phosphoinositide
3-kinase-Akt-MMP-2 signaling pathway.

Jung CH(1), Kim EM, Park JK, Hwang SG, Moon SK, Kim WJ, Um HD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Cancer Biology, Korea Institute of Radiological and
Medical Sciences, Seoul 139-706, Republic of Korea.

Bmal1 is a core factor in the regulation of circadian rhythms. Previous studies
have shown that Bmal1 suppresses tumor growth in cell culture and animal models
and is downregulated in certain types of cancer. The aim of the present study was
to investigated whether Bmal1 influences the invasiveness of cancer cells. We
demonstrated that knockdown of Bmal1 by RNA interference promoted cancer cell
invasion, whereas its overexpression reduced cellular invasiveness. These effects
were observed in lung cancer and glioma cells, and occurred regardless of p53
status. Therefore, it appears that Bmal1 suppresses the invasion of multiple
cancer types in a p53-independent manner. Bmal1 knockdown-induced cancer cell
invasion was accompanied by activation of the PI3K-Akt-MMP-2 pathway, and was
prevented by inhibitors of PI3K, Akt or MMP-2. This suggests that Bmal1
suppresses cell invasion by blocking the PI3K-Akt-MMP-2 pathway. Since this
invasion pathway is activated by the oncogene Bcl-w, we investigated whether
Bmal1 affects the activity of Bcl-w. As expected, Bmal1 attenuated the ability of
Bcl-w to promote MMP-2 accumulation and cell invasion, supporting the idea that
Bmal1 antagonizes Bcl-w activity. Collectively, our data suggest that Bmal1 is a 
tumor suppressor, capable of suppressing cancer cell growth and invasiveness, and
support the recent proposal that there is a tight molecular link between
circadian rhythms and tumor formation/progression.

PMCID: PMC3694561
PMID: 23563360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. PLoS Genet. 2013 Mar;9(3):e1003398. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003398. Epub 2013 
Mar 28.

Dynamic circadian protein-protein interaction networks predict temporal
organization of cellular functions.

Wallach T(1), Schellenberg K, Maier B, Kalathur RK, Porras P, Wanker EE, Futschik
ME, Kramer A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chronobiology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.

Essentially all biological processes depend on protein-protein interactions
(PPIs). Timing of such interactions is crucial for regulatory function. Although 
circadian (~24-hour) clocks constitute fundamental cellular timing mechanisms
regulating important physiological processes, PPI dynamics on this timescale are 
largely unknown. Here, we identified 109 novel PPIs among circadian clock
proteins via a yeast-two-hybrid approach. Among them, the interaction of protein 
phosphatase 1 and CLOCK/BMAL1 was found to result in BMAL1 destabilization. We
constructed a dynamic circadian PPI network predicting the PPI timing using
circadian expression data. Systematic circadian phenotyping (RNAi and
overexpression) suggests a crucial role for components involved in dynamic
interactions. Systems analysis of a global dynamic network in liver revealed that
interacting proteins are expressed at similar times likely to restrict regulatory
interactions to specific phases. Moreover, we predict that circadian PPIs
dynamically connect many important cellular processes (signal transduction, cell 
cycle, etc.) contributing to temporal organization of cellular physiology in an
unprecedented manner.

PMCID: PMC3610820
PMID: 23555304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. PLoS Genet. 2013 Mar;9(3):e1003361. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003361. Epub 2013 
Mar 21.

Astakine 2--the dark knight linking melatonin to circadian regulation in
crustaceans.

Watthanasurorot A(1), Saelee N, Phongdara A, Roytrakul S, Jiravanichpaisal P,
Söderhäll K, Söderhäll I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Physiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Retraction in
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr;11(4):e1005222.

Daily, circadian rhythms influence essentially all living organisms and affect
many physiological processes from sleep and nutrition to immunity. This ability
to respond to environmental daily rhythms has been conserved along evolution, and
it is found among species from bacteria to mammals. The hematopoietic process of 
the crayfish Pacifastacus leniusculus is under circadian control and is tightly
regulated by astakines, a new family of cytokines sharing a prokineticin (PROK)
domain. The expression of AST1 and AST2 are light-dependent, and this suggests an
evolutionarily conserved function for PROK domain proteins in mediating circadian
rhythms. Vertebrate PROKs are transmitters of circadian rhythms of the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) in the brain of mammals, but the mechanism by which
they function is unknown. Here we demonstrate that high AST2 expression is
induced by melatonin in the brain. We identify RACK1 as a binding protein of AST2
and further provide evidence that a complex between AST2 and RACK1 functions as a
negative-feedback regulator of the circadian clock. By DNA mobility shift assay, 
we showed that the AST2-RACK1 complex will interfere with the binding between
BMAL1 and CLK and inhibit the E-box binding activity of the complex BMAL1-CLK.
Finally, we demonstrate by gene knockdown that AST2 is necessary for
melatonin-induced inhibition of the complex formation between BMAL1 and CLK
during the dark period. In summary, we provide evidence that melatonin regulates 
AST2 expression and thereby affects the core clock of the crustacean brain. This 
process may be very important in all animals that have AST2 molecules, i.e.
spiders, ticks, crustaceans, scorpions, several insect groups such as
Hymenoptera, Hemiptera, and Blattodea, but not Diptera and Coleoptera. Our
findings further reveal an ancient evolutionary role for the prokineticin
superfamily protein that links melatonin to direct regulation of the core clock
gene feedback loops.

PMCID: PMC3605217
PMID: 23555281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;33(11):2327-38. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01421-12. Epub 2013 Apr 
1.

Bmal1 and ß-cell clock are required for adaptation to circadian disruption, and
their loss of function leads to oxidative stress-induced ß-cell failure in mice.

Lee J(1), Moulik M, Fang Z, Saha P, Zou F, Xu Y, Nelson DL, Ma K, Moore DD,
Yechoor VK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Circadian disruption has deleterious effects on metabolism. Global deletion of
Bmal1, a core clock gene, results in ß-cell dysfunction and diabetes. However, it
is unknown if this is due to loss of cell-autonomous function of Bmal1 in ß
cells. To address this, we generated mice with ß-cell clock disruption by
deleting Bmal1 in ß cells (ß-Bmal1(-/-)). ß-Bmal1(-/-) mice develop diabetes due 
to loss of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS). This loss of GSIS is due 
to the accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and consequent mitochondrial
uncoupling, as it is fully rescued by scavenging of the ROS or by inhibition of
uncoupling protein 2. The expression of the master antioxidant regulatory factor 
Nrf2 (nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2) and its targets, Sesn2, Prdx3,
Gclc, and Gclm, was decreased in ß-Bmal1(-/-) islets, which may contribute to the
observed increase in ROS accumulation. In addition, by chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments, we show that Nrf2 is a direct transcriptional
target of Bmal1. Interestingly, simulation of shift work-induced circadian
misalignment in mice recapitulates many of the defects seen in Bmal1-deficient
islets. Thus, the cell-autonomous function of Bmal1 is required for normal ß-cell
function by mitigating oxidative stress and serves to preserve ß-cell function in
the face of circadian misalignment.

PMCID: PMC3648066
PMID: 23547261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Mol Genet Genomics. 2013 Apr;288(3-4):185-93. doi: 10.1007/s00438-013-0745-9.
Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Analysis of the molecular pathophysiology of sleep disorders relevant to a
disturbed biological clock.

Ebisawa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Tokyo Metropolitan Police Hospital, 4-22-1, Nakano, 
Nakano-ku, Tokyo, 164-8541, Japan. tebisawa-tky@umin.net

Genetic studies have revealed several clock gene variations/mutations involved in
the manifestation of sleep disorders or interindividual differences in sleep-wake
patterns, but only part of the genetic risk can be explained by the gene
variations/mutations identified to date. Recent progress in research into
circadian rhythm generation has provided efficient tools for eliciting the
molecular basis of clock-relevant sleep disorders, complementing traditional
genetic analysis. While the human master clock resides in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus of the hypothalamus (central clock), peripheral tissue cells also
generate self-sustained circadian oscillations of clock gene expression
(peripheral clock), enabling estimation of individual human clock properties
through a single collection of skin fibroblasts or venous blood cells. Some of
the established cell lines exhibit autonomous circadian oscillations of clock
gene expression, and introduction of clock gene variations into these cell lines 
by gene targeting makes it possible to investigate changes in the circadian
phenotype induced by these variations/mutations without the need for generating
transgenic animals. Estimation of human clock properties using peripheral tissue 
cells, in addition to genetic analysis, will facilitate comprehensive explication
of the genetic risk of a variety of disorders relevant to biological clock
disturbances, including sleep disorders, mood disorders, and metabolic diseases.

PMID: 23546644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59220. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059220. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Genetic variation in circadian rhythm genes CLOCK and ARNTL as risk factor for
male infertility.

Hodic A(1), Ristanovic M, Zorn B, Tulic C, Maver A, Novakovic I, Peterlin B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics and Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Slovenia.

BACKGROUND: The circadian system has a major role in maintaining homeostasis and 
proper body functions including reproductive capacity. The aim of this study was 
to examine whether there is an association between genetic variability in the
primary clock genes CLOCK and ARNTL and male infertility in humans.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed a case-control study, where we
searched for an association between polymorphisms of CLOCK and ARNTL genes and
male infertility in 961 Slovenian and Serbian Caucasian men. The study group
consisted of 517 patients with idiopathic infertility and a control group of 444 
fertile men. A statistically significant difference was found in genotype
distribution between the two groups in the CLOCK gene: rs11932595 (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>6·10(-5), 
q<U+200A>=<U+200A>4·10(-4), OR equaled 1.9 with 95% CI 1.4-2.7), rs6811520 (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2·10(-3),
q<U+200A>=<U+200A>8·10(-3), OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.7 with 95% CI 1.2-2.2) and rs6850524 (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01, q<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.02,
OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.4 with 95% CI 1.1-1.9). Further analyses of haplotypes were consistent
with genotyping results.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We provide evidence that genetic variability in the
CLOCK gene might be associated with male infertility warranting further
confirmation and mechanistic investigations.

PMCID: PMC3601062
PMID: 23527142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Cell Sci. 2013 May 15;126(Pt 10):2213-24. doi: 10.1242/jcs.120519. Epub 2013
Mar 22.

Brain and muscle Arnt-like 1 is a key regulator of myogenesis.

Chatterjee S(1), Nam D, Guo B, Kim JM, Winnier GE, Lee J, Berdeaux R, Yechoor VK,
Ma K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Medicine, The Methodist Hospital
Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The circadian clock network is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism that imparts
temporal regulation to diverse biological processes. Brain and muscle Arnt-like 1
(Bmal1), an essential transcriptional activator of the clock, is highly expressed
in skeletal muscle. However, whether this key clock component impacts myogenesis,
a temporally regulated event that requires the sequential activation of myogenic 
regulatory factors, is not known. Here we report a novel function of Bmal1 in
controlling myogenic differentiation through direct transcriptional activation of
components of the canonical Wnt signaling cascade, a major inductive signal for
embryonic and postnatal muscle growth. Genetic loss of Bmal1 in mice leads to
reduced total muscle mass and Bmal1-deficient primary myoblasts exhibit
significantly impaired myogenic differentiation accompanied by markedly blunted
expression of key myogenic regulatory factors. Conversely, forced expression of
Bmal1 enhances differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts. This cell-autonomous effect of
Bmal1 is mediated by Wnt signaling as both expression and activity of Wnt
components are markedly attenuated by inhibition of Bmal1, and activation of the 
Wnt pathway partially rescues the myogenic defect in Bmal1-deficient myoblasts.
We further reveal direct association of Bmal1 with promoters of canonical Wnt
pathway genes, and as a result of this transcriptional regulation, Wnt signaling 
components exhibit intrinsic circadian oscillation. Collectively, our study
demonstrates that the core clock gene, Bmal1, is a positive regulator of
myogenesis, which may represent a temporal regulatory mechanism to fine-tune
myocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3672937
PMID: 23525013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Neurosci Lett. 2013 May 10;542:126-30. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.03.009. Epub
2013 Mar 18.

Effect of amphetamine on the clock gene expression in rat striatum.

Wongchitrat P(1), Mukda S, Phansuwan-Pujito P, Govitrapong P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Innovation Development and Technology Transfer, Faculty of Medical 
Technology, Mahidol University, Salaya, Nakornpathom, Thailand.

Drug addicts have severe disruptions in many physiological and behavioral
rhythms, such as the sleep/wake cycle. Interestingly, amphetamine, a
psychostimulant, is able to alter many circadian patterns, which are independent 
of the master biological clock located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. To
increase our understanding of the circadian regulation of amphetamine on clock
gene expression, rats received subcutaneous injections of d-amphetamine and the
clock gene mRNA levels were analyzed using real-time PCR to obtain a daily
profile. In the striatum, acute injection of d-amphetamine did not alter Period
(Per)1, Per2 and Reverse erythroblastosis virus a (Rev-erba) expressions. Chronic
administration shifted the phase of Per1 and Per2 expressions from a nocturnal to
diurnal pattern and advance shifted the peak of Rev-erba in d-amphetamine-treated
animals. In contrast, the rhythm of Brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (Bmal1) 
was shifted from a diurnal to a nocturnal pattern by both acute and chronic
treatments. These results demonstrated that chronic d-amphetamine treatment
altered the expression of clock genes in the striatum. This might further
influence the expression of related gene within the striatum and lead to
behavioral and physiological changes which are associated to drug addiction.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23518151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 2;110(14):5677-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1213594110. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Synchronous activation of gonadotropin-releasing hormone gene transcription and
secretion by pulsatile kisspeptin stimulation.

Choe HK(1), Kim HD, Park SH, Lee HW, Park JY, Seong JY, Lightman SL, Son GH, Kim 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742,
Korea.

Pulsatile release of hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is
essential for pituitary gonadotrope function. Although the importance of
pulsatile GnRH secretion has been recognized for several decades, the mechanisms 
underlying GnRH pulse generation in hypothalamic neural networks remain elusive. 
Here, we demonstrate the ultradian rhythm of GnRH gene transcription in single
GnRH neurons using cultured hypothalamic slices prepared from transgenic mice
expressing a GnRH promoter-driven destabilized luciferase reporter. Although GnRH
promoter activity in each GnRH neuron exhibited an ultradian pattern of
oscillations with a period of ~10 h, GnRH neuronal cultures exhibited partially
synchronized bursts of GnRH transcriptional activity at ~2-h intervals.
Surprisingly, pulsatile administration of kisspeptin, a potent GnRH secretagogue,
evoked dramatic synchronous activation of GnRH gene transcription with robust
stimulation of pulsatile GnRH secretion. We also addressed the issue of
hierarchical interaction between the circadian and ultradian rhythms by using
Bmal1-deficient mice with defective circadian clocks. The circadian molecular
oscillator barely affected basal ultradian oscillation of GnRH transcription but 
was heavily involved in kisspeptin-evoked responses of GnRH neurons. In
conclusion, we have clearly shown synchronous bursts of GnRH gene transcription
in the hypothalamic GnRH neuronal population in association with episodic
neurohormone secretion, thereby providing insight into GnRH pulse generation.

PMCID: PMC3619287
PMID: 23509283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Bone. 2013 Jul;55(1):158-65. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.02.011. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Circadian rhythms regulate amelogenesis.

Zheng L(1), Seon YJ, Mourão MA, Schnell S, Kim D, Harada H, Papagerakis S,
Papagerakis P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics and Pediatric Dentistry, School of Dentistry,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Ameloblasts, the cells responsible for making enamel, modify their morphological 
features in response to specialized functions necessary for synchronized
ameloblast differentiation and enamel formation. Secretory and maturation
ameloblasts are characterized by the expression of stage-specific genes which
follows strictly controlled repetitive patterns. Circadian rhythms are recognized
as key regulators of the development and diseases of many tissues including bone.
Our aim was to gain novel insights on the role of clock genes in enamel formation
and to explore the potential links between circadian rhythms and amelogenesis.
Our data shows definitive evidence that the main clock genes (Bmal1, Clock, Per1 
and Per2) oscillate in ameloblasts at regular circadian (24 h) intervals both at 
RNA and protein levels. This study also reveals that the two markers of
ameloblast differentiation i.e. amelogenin (Amelx; a marker of secretory stage
ameloblasts) and kallikrein-related peptidase 4 (Klk4, a marker of maturation
stage ameloblasts) are downstream targets of clock genes. Both, Amelx and Klk4
show 24h oscillatory expression patterns and their expression levels are
up-regulated after Bmal1 over-expression in HAT-7 ameloblast cells. Taken
together, these data suggest that both the secretory and the maturation stages of
amelogenesis might be under circadian control. Changes in clock gene expression
patterns might result in significant alterations of enamel apposition and
mineralization.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3650122
PMID: 23486183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 May 15;304(10):C941-4. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00072.2013. Epub 2013 Mar 13.

Minding the gaps that link intrinsic circadian clock within the heart to its
intrinsic ultradian pacemaker clocks. Focus on "The cardiomyocyte molecular
clock, regulation of Scn5a, and arrhythmia susceptibility".

Lakatta EG, Yaniv Y, Maltsev VA.

Comment on
    Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 May 15;304(10):C954-65.

PMCID: PMC3651642
PMID: 23485714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57921. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057921. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

A molecular clock regulates angiopoietin-like protein 2 expression.

Kadomatsu T(1), Uragami S, Akashi M, Tsuchiya Y, Nakajima H, Nakashima Y, Endo M,
Miyata K, Terada K, Todo T, Node K, Oike Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. tkado@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp

Various physiological and behavioral processes exhibit circadian rhythmicity.
These rhythms are usually maintained by negative feedback loops of core clock
genes, namely, CLOCK, BMAL, PER, and CRY. Recently, dysfunction in the circadian 
clock has been recognized as an important foundation for the pathophysiology of
lifestyle-related diseases, such as obesity, cardiovascular disease, and some
cancers. We have reported that angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2) contributes 
to the pathogenesis of these lifestyle-related diseases by inducing chronic
inflammation. However, molecular mechanisms underlying regulation of ANGPTL2
expression are poorly understood. Here, we assess circadian rhythmicity of
ANGPTL2 expression in various mouse tissues. We observed that ANGPTL2 rhythmicity
was similar to that of the PER2 gene, which is regulated by the CLOCK/BMAL1
complex. Promoter activity of the human ANGPTL2 gene was significantly induced by
CLOCK and BMAL1, an induction markedly attenuated by CRY co-expression. We also
identified functional E-boxes in the ANGPTL2 promoter and observed occupancy of
these sites by endogenous CLOCK in human osteosarcoma cells. Furthermore,
Cry-deficient mice exhibited arrhythmic Angptl2 expression. Taken together, these
data suggest that periodic expression of ANGPTL2 is regulated by a molecular
clock.

PMCID: PMC3585275
PMID: 23469106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Sleep. 2013 Mar 1;36(3):309-10. doi: 10.5665/sleep.2438.

Sleep needs a MOP, or two MOPs!

Partonen T.

Comment on
    Sleep. 2013 Mar;36(3):431-46.

PMCID: PMC3571745
PMID: 23450902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Sleep. 2013 Mar 1;36(3):431-46. doi: 10.5665/sleep.2466.

Common genetic variants in ARNTL and NPAS2 and at chromosome 12p13 are associated
with objectively measured sleep traits in the elderly.

Evans DS(1), Parimi N, Nievergelt CM, Blackwell T, Redline S, Ancoli-Israel S,
Orwoll ES, Cummings SR, Stone KL, Tranah GJ; Study of Osteoporotic Fractures
(SOF); Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco, CA
94107-1728, USA.

Comment in
    Sleep. 2013 Mar;36(3):309-10.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: To determine the association between common genetic variation
in the clock gene pathway and objectively measured acti-graphic sleep and
activity rhythm traits.
DESIGN: Genetic association study in two population-based cohorts of elderly
participants: the Study of Osteoporotic Fractures (SOF) and the Osteoporotic
Fractures in Men (MrOS) study.
SETTING: Population-based.
PARTICIPANTS: SOF participants (n = 1,407, 100% female, mean age 84 years) and
MrOS participants (n = 2,527, 100% male, mean age 77 years) with actigraphy and
genotype data.
INTERVENTIONS: N/A.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Common genetic variation in 30 candidate genes was
captured using 529 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Sleep and activity
rhythm traits were objectively measured using wrist actigraphy. In a region of
high linkage disequilibrium on chromosome 12p13 containing the candidate gene
GNB3, the rs1047776 A allele and the rs2238114 C allele were significantly
associated with higher wake after sleep onset (meta-analysis: rs1047776 PADD = 2 
× 10(-5), rs2238114 PADD = 5 × 10(-5)) and lower LRRC23 gene expression
(rs1047776: <U+03C1> = -0.22, P = 0.02; rs2238114: <U+03C1> = -0.50, P = 5 × 10(-8)). In MrOS
participants, SNPs in ARNTL and NPAS2, genes coding for binding partners, were
associated with later sleep and wake onset time (sleep onset time: ARNTL
rs3816358 P2DF = 1 × 10(-4), NPAS2 rs3768984 P2DF = 5 × 10(-5); wake onset time: 
rs3816358 P2DF = 3 × 10(-3), rs3768984 P2DF = 2 × 10(-4)) and the SNP interaction
was significant (sleep onset time PINT = 0.003, wake onset time PINT = 0.001). A 
SNP association in the CLOCK gene replicated in the MrOS cohort, and rs3768984
was associated with sleep duration in a previously reported study. Cluster
analysis identified four clusters of genetic associations.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings support a role for common genetic variation in clock 
genes in the regulation of inter-related sleep traits in the elderly.
CITATION: Evans DS; Parimi N; Nievergelt CM; Blackwell T; Redline S;
Ancoli-Israel S; Orwoll ES; Cummings SR; Stone KL; Tranah GJ. Common genetic
variants in ARNTL and NPAS2 and at chromosome 12p13 are associated with
objectively measured sleep traits in the elderly. SLEEP 2013;36(3):431-446.

PMCID: PMC3571755
PMID: 23449886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Curr Biol. 2013 Mar 4;23(5):372-81. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.01.048. Epub 2013 Feb
21.

Circadian disruption leads to insulin resistance and obesity.

Shi SQ(1), Ansari TS, McGuinness OP, Wasserman DH, Johnson CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Disruption of circadian (daily) timekeeping enhances the risk of
metabolic syndrome, obesity, and type 2 diabetes. While clinical observations
have suggested that insulin action is not constant throughout the 24 hr cycle,
its magnitude and periodicity have not been assessed. Moreover, when circadian
rhythmicity is absent or severely disrupted, it is not known whether insulin
action will lock to the peak, nadir, or mean of the normal periodicity of insulin
action.
RESULTS: We used hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamps to show a bona fide circadian
rhythm of insulin action; mice are most resistant to insulin during their daily
phase of relative inactivity. Moreover, clock-disrupted Bmal1-knockout mice are
locked into the trough of insulin action and lack rhythmicity in insulin action
and activity patterns. When rhythmicity is rescued in the Bmal1-knockout mice by 
expression of the paralogous gene Bmal2, insulin action and activity patterns are
restored. When challenged with a high-fat diet, arhythmic mice (either
Bmal1-knockout mice or wild-type mice made arhythmic by exposure to constant
light) were obese prone. Adipose tissue explants obtained from high-fat-fed mice 
have their own periodicity that was longer than animals on a chow diet.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides rigorous documentation for a circadian rhythm of
insulin action and demonstrates that disturbing the natural rhythmicity of
insulin action will disrupt the rhythmic internal environment of insulin
sensitive tissue, thereby predisposing the animals to insulin resistance and
obesity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3595381
PMID: 23434278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2013 Mar;33(3):108-14. doi: 10.1089/jir.2012.0092.
Epub 2013 Feb 12.

Altered circadian expression of cytokines and cytolytic factors in splenic
natural killer cells of Per1(-/-) mutant mice.

Logan RW(1), Wynne O, Levitt D, Price D, Sarkar DK.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Program, Department of Animal Sciences, Rutgers University, New
Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.

Circadian systems regulate the immune system by various molecular and
physiological pathways. Disruption to the circadian temporality of these pathways
is associated with disease formation and progression. Circadian clock genes have 
been shown to regulate pathways involved in cellular proliferation, apoptosis,
and DNA damage response, as aberrant rhythms in these genes are associated with
various diseases. However, there is growing evidence that specific circadian
genes differentially regulate functional pathways of immunocompetent cells. To
extend our previous findings of the role of Period 2 in regulating splenocyte
rhythms, we report that mice carrying a mutation in the Period 1 gene (Per1(-/-) 
mice), involved in the negative limb of the molecular clock, display
significantly altered rhythms of cytokine (eg, interferon-<U+03B3>) and cytolytic
factors (eg, perforin and granzyme B) in splenic natural killer (NK) cells.
Altered rhythms of NK cell immune factors were accompanied by changes in
circadian expression of circadian clock genes, Bmal1 and Per2. In addition,
Per1(-/-) circadian running-wheel activity rhythms remained rhythmic during
constant darkness, although with a shortened free-running circadian period,
suggesting primary involvement of peripheral molecular clocks. These findings
indicate that the Per1 gene through NK cellular clocks modulates immune pathways.

PMCID: PMC3595954
PMID: 23402528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Biochem J. 2013 May 1;451(3):453-61. doi: 10.1042/BJ20121085.

DBC1 (Deleted in Breast Cancer 1) modulates the stability and function of the
nuclear receptor Rev-erba.

Chini CC(1), Escande C, Nin V, Chini EN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Signal Transduction, Department of Anesthesiology, Mayo Clinic
College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The nuclear receptor Rev-erba has been implicated as a major regulator of the
circadian clock and integrates circadian rhythm and metabolism. Rev-erba controls
circadian oscillations of several clock genes and Rev-erba protein degradation is
important for maintenance of the circadian oscillations and also for adipocyte
differentiation. Elucidating the mechanisms that regulate Rev-erba stability is
essential for our understanding of these processes. In the present paper, we
report that the protein DBC1 (Deleted in Breast Cancer 1) is a novel regulator of
Rev-erba. Rev-erba and DBC1 interact in cells and in vivo, and DBC1 modulates the
Rev-erba repressor function. Depletion of DBC1 by siRNA (small interfering RNA)
in cells or in DBC1-KO (knockout) mice produced a marked decrease in Rev-erba
protein levels, but not in mRNA levels. In contrast, DBC1 overexpression
significantly enhanced Rev-erba protein stability by preventing its
ubiquitination and degradation. The regulation of Rev-erba protein levels and
function by DBC1 depends on both the N-terminal and C-terminal domains of DBC1.
More importantly, in cells depleted of DBC1, there was a dramatic decrease in
circadian oscillations of both Rev-erba and BMAL1. In summary, our data identify 
DBC1 as an important regulator of the circadian receptor Rev-erba and proposes
that Rev-erba could be involved in mediating some of the physiological effects of
DBC1.

PMCID: PMC3630992
PMID: 23398316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Cell Metab. 2013 Feb 5;17(2):303-10. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2012.12.015.

O-GlcNAc signaling entrains the circadian clock by inhibiting BMAL1/CLOCK
ubiquitination.

Li MD(1), Ruan HB, Hughes ME, Lee JS, Singh JP, Jones SP, Nitabach MN, Yang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2013 Feb 5;17(2):155-6.

Circadian clocks are coupled to metabolic oscillations through nutrient-sensing
pathways. Nutrient flux into the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway triggers
covalent protein modification by O-linked ß-D-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc).
Here we show that the hexosamine/O-GlcNAc pathway modulates peripheral clock
oscillation. O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) promotes expression of BMAL1/CLOCK
target genes and affects circadian oscillation of clock genes in vitro and
in vivo. Both BMAL1 and CLOCK are rhythmically O-GlcNAcylated, and this protein
modification stabilizes BMAL1 and CLOCK by inhibiting their ubiquitination.
In vivo analysis of genetically modified mice with perturbed hepatic OGT
expression shows aberrant circadian rhythms of glucose homeostasis. These results
establish the counteraction between O-GlcNAcylation and ubiquitination as a key
mechanism that regulates the circadian clock and suggest a crucial role for
O-GlcNAc signaling in transducing nutritional signals to the core circadian
timing machinery.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3647362
PMID: 23395176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Am Soc Hypertens. 2013 Mar-Apr;7(2):107-17. doi: 10.1016/j.jash.2012.12.007.
Epub 2013 Feb 6.

Influence of beta-blockers on the myocardial mRNA expressions of circadian clock-
and metabolism-related genes.

Ushijima K(1), Maekawa T, Ishikawa-Kobayashi E, Ando H, Shiga T, Fujimura A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology, Jichi Medical
University, Tochigi, Japan.

Daily rhythms are regulated by a master clock-system in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus and by a peripheral clock-system in each organ. Because norepinephrine is
one of the timekeepers for the myocardial circadian clock that influences cardiac
metabolism, it is speculated that a beta-blocker may affect the circadian clock
and metabolism in heart tissue. In this study, thirty mg/kg/day of propranolol (a
lipophilic beta-blocker) or atenolol (a hydrophilic beta-blocker) was given
orally to Wistar rats for 4 weeks. The mRNA expressions of Bmal1 and E4BP4 in
heart tissue were suppressed by the beta-blockers. However, the mRNA expressions 
of these clock genes in the suprachiasmatic nucleus were unchanged. Myocardial
mRNA expressions of lactate dehydrogenase a and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4
were also suppressed by the beta-blockers. In addition, ATP content in heart
tissue was significantly elevated by the beta-blockers throughout 24 hours. The
effects of propranolol and atenolol did not differ significantly. This study
showed for the first time that a beta-blocker affects myocardial clock gene
expression. Propranolol and atenolol increased ATP content in heart tissue
throughout 24 hours. The influences of beta-blockers may be negligible on the
SCN, and may be independent of lipid solubility on heart tissue. It is well known
that these drugs exert a protective effect against myocardial ischemia, which may
be mediated by an increase in the preservation of myocardial ATP.

Copyright © 2013 American Society of Hypertension. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 23394803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55452. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055452. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

Continuous exposure to a novel stressor based on water aversion induces abnormal 
circadian locomotor rhythms and sleep-wake cycles in mice.

Miyazaki K(1), Itoh N, Ohyama S, Kadota K, Oishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Clock Research Group, Biomedical Research Institute, National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology-AIST, Tsukuba, Japan.
k-miyazaki@aist.go.jp

Psychological stressors prominently affect diurnal rhythms, including locomotor
activity, sleep, blood pressure, and body temperature, in humans. Here, we found 
that a novel continuous stress imposed by the perpetual avoidance of water on a
wheel (PAWW) affected several physiological diurnal rhythms in mice. One week of 
PAWW stress decayed robust circadian locomotor rhythmicity, while locomotor
activity was evident even during the light period when the mice are normally
asleep. Daytime activity was significantly upregulated, whereas nighttime
activity was downregulated, resulting in a low amplitude of activity. Total daily
activity gradually decreased with increasing exposure to PAWW stress. The mice
could be exposed to PAWW stress for over 3 weeks without adaptation. Furthermore,
continuous PAWW stress enhanced food intake, but decreased body weight and plasma
leptin levels, indicating that sleep loss and PAWW stress altered the energy
balance in these mice. The diurnal rhythm of corticosterone levels was not
severely affected. The body temperature rhythm was diurnal in the stressed mice, 
but significantly dysregulated during the dark period. Plasma catecholamines were
elevated in the stressed mice. Continuous PAWW stress reduced the duration of
daytime sleep, especially during the first half of the light period, and
increased nighttime sleepiness. Continuous PAWW stress also simultaneously
obscured sleep/wake and locomotor activity rhythms compared with control mice.
These sleep architecture phenotypes under stress are similar to those of patients
with insomnia. The stressed mice could be entrained to the light/dark cycle, and 
when they were transferred to constant darkness, they exhibited a free-running
circadian rhythm with a timing of activity onset predicted by the phase of their 
entrained rhythms. Circadian gene expression in the liver and muscle was
unaltered, indicating that the peripheral clocks in these tissues remained
intact.

PMCID: PMC3559439
PMID: 23383193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54317. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054317. Epub 2013 Jan 25.

The transcription factor Runx2 is under circadian control in the suprachiasmatic 
nucleus and functions in the control of rhythmic behavior.

Reale ME(1), Webb IC, Wang X, Baltazar RM, Coolen LM, Lehman MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Western Ontario, London,
Ontario, Canada.

Runx2, a member of the family of runt-related transcription factors, is
rhythmically expressed in bone and may be involved in circadian rhythms in bone
homeostasis and osteogenesis. Runx2 is also expressed in the brain, but its
function is unknown. We tested the hypothesis that in the brain, Runx2 may
interact with clock-controlled genes to regulate circadian rhythms in behavior.
First, we demonstrated diurnal and circadian rhythms in the expression of Runx2
in the mouse brain. Expression of Runx2 mRNA and protein mirrored that of the
core clock genes, Period1 and Period2, in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the 
paraventricular nucleus and the olfactory bulb. The rhythm of Runx2 expression
was eliminated in the SCN of Bmal1(-/-) mice. Moreover, by crossbreeding
mPer2(Luc) mice with Runx2(+/-) mice and recording bioluminescence rhythms, a
significant lengthening of the period of rhythms was detected in cultured SCN of 
Runx2(-/-) animals compared to either Runx2(+/-) or Runx2(+/+) mice. Behavioral
analyses of Runx2 mutant mice revealed that Runx2(+/-) animals displayed a
significantly lengthened free-running period of running wheel activity compared
to Runx2(+/+) littermates. Taken together, these findings provide evidence for
clock gene-mediated rhythmic expression of Runx2, and its functional role in
regulating circadian period at the level of the SCN and behavior.

PMCID: PMC3555987
PMID: 23372705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 May 15;304(10):C954-65. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00383.2012. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

The cardiomyocyte molecular clock, regulation of Scn5a, and arrhythmia
susceptibility.

Schroder EA(1), Lefta M, Zhang X, Bartos DC, Feng HZ, Zhao Y, Patwardhan A, Jin
JP, Esser KA, Delisle BP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Muscle Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.
eschr0@uky.edu

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 May 15;304(10):C941-4.

The molecular clock mechanism underlies circadian rhythms and is defined by a
transcription-translation feedback loop. Bmal1 encodes a core molecular clock
transcription factor. Germline Bmal1 knockout mice show a loss of circadian
variation in heart rate and blood pressure, and they develop dilated
cardiomyopathy. We tested the role of the molecular clock in adult cardiomyocytes
by generating mice that allow for the inducible cardiomyocyte-specific deletion
of Bmal1 (iCS<U+0394>Bmal1). ECG telemetry showed that cardiomyocyte-specific deletion
of Bmal1 (iCS<U+0394>Bmal1(-/-)) in adult mice slowed heart rate, prolonged RR and QRS
intervals, and increased episodes of arrhythmia. Moreover, isolated
iCS<U+0394>Bmal1(-/-) hearts were more susceptible to arrhythmia during
electromechanical stimulation. Examination of candidate cardiac ion channel genes
showed that Scn5a, which encodes the principle cardiac voltage-gated Na(+)
channel (Na(V)1.5), was circadianly expressed in control mouse and rat hearts but
not in iCS<U+0394>Bmal1(-/-) hearts. In vitro studies confirmed circadian expression of 
a human Scn5a promoter-luciferase reporter construct and determined that
overexpression of clock factors transactivated the Scn5a promoter. Loss of Scn5a 
circadian expression in iCS<U+0394>Bmal1(-/-) hearts was associated with decreased
levels of Na(V)1.5 and Na(+) current in ventricular myocytes. We conclude that
disruption of the molecular clock in the adult heart slows heart rate, increases 
arrhythmias, and decreases the functional expression of Scn5a. These findings
suggest a potential link between environmental factors that alter the
cardiomyocyte molecular clock and factors that influence arrhythmia
susceptibility in humans.

PMCID: PMC3651636
PMID: 23364267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Mar;19(3):325-33. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.2. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

Genome-wide study of association and interaction with maternal cytomegalovirus
infection suggests new schizophrenia loci.

Børglum AD, Demontis D, Grove J, Pallesen J, Hollegaard MV, Pedersen CB, Hedemand
A, Mattheisen M; GROUP investigators10, Uitterlinden A, Nyegaard M, Ørntoft T,
Wiuf C, Didriksen M, Nordentoft M, Nöthen MM, Rietschel M, Ophoff RA, Cichon S,
Yolken RH, Hougaard DM, Mortensen PB, Mors O.

Collaborators: Kahn RS, Linszen DH, van Os J, DurkbWiersma, Bruggeman R, Cahn W, 
de Haan L, Krabbendam L, Myin-Germeys I.

Genetic and environmental components as well as their interaction contribute to
the risk of schizophrenia, making it highly relevant to include environmental
factors in genetic studies of schizophrenia. This study comprises genome-wide
association (GWA) and follow-up analyses of all individuals born in Denmark since
1981 and diagnosed with schizophrenia as well as controls from the same birth
cohort. Furthermore, we present the first genome-wide interaction survey of
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and maternal cytomegalovirus (CMV)
infection. The GWA analysis included 888 cases and 882 controls, and the
follow-up investigation of the top GWA results was performed in independent
Danish (1396 cases and 1803 controls) and German-Dutch (1169 cases, 3714
controls) samples. The SNPs most strongly associated in the single-marker
analysis of the combined Danish samples were rs4757144 in ARNTL (P=3.78 × 10(-6))
and rs8057927 in CDH13 (P=1.39 × 10(-5)). Both genes have previously been linked 
to schizophrenia or other psychiatric disorders. The strongest associated SNP in 
the combined analysis, including Danish and German-Dutch samples, was rs12922317 
in RUNDC2A (P=9.04 × 10(-7)). A region-based analysis summarizing independent
signals in segments of 100<U+2009>kb identified a new region-based genome-wide
significant locus overlapping the gene ZEB1 (P=7.0 × 10(-7)). This signal was
replicated in the follow-up analysis (P=2.3 × 10(-2)). Significant interaction
with maternal CMV infection was found for rs7902091 (P(SNP × CMV)=7.3 × 10(-7))
in CTNNA3, a gene not previously implicated in schizophrenia, stressing the
importance of including environmental factors in genetic studies.

PMCID: PMC3932405
PMID: 23358160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 26;110(9):3333-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1214266110. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

Pharmacological modulation of circadian rhythms by synthetic activators of the
deacetylase SIRT1.

Bellet MM(1), Nakahata Y, Boudjelal M, Watts E, Mossakowska DE, Edwards KA,
Cervantes M, Astarita G, Loh C, Ellis JL, Vlasuk GP, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Epigenetics and Metabolism, Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Circadian rhythms govern a wide variety of physiological and metabolic functions 
in many organisms, from prokaryotes to humans. We previously reported that silent
information regulator 1 (SIRT1), a NAD(+)-dependent deacetylase, contributes to
circadian control. In addition, SIRT1 activity is regulated in a cyclic manner in
virtue of the circadian oscillation of the coenzyme NAD(+). Here we used specific
SIRT1 activator compounds both in vitro and in vivo. We tested a variety of
compounds to show that the activation of SIRT1 alters CLOCK:BMAL1-driven
transcription in different systems. Activation of SIRT1 induces repression of
circadian gene expression and decreases H3 K9/K14 acetylation at corresponding
promoters in a time-specific manner. Specific activation of SIRT1 was
demonstrated in vivo using liver-specific SIRT1-deficient mice, where the effect 
of SIRT1 activator compounds was shown to be dependent on SIRT1. Our findings
demonstrate that SIRT1 can fine-tune circadian rhythm and pave the way to the
development of pharmacological strategies to address a broad range of therapeutic
indications.

PMCID: PMC3587185
PMID: 23341587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 15;431(3):382-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.01.043. Epub 2013 Jan 18.

O-GlcNAcylation of BMAL1 regulates circadian rhythms in NIH3T3 fibroblasts.

Ma YT(1), Luo H, Guan WJ, Zhang H, Chen C, Wang Z, Li JD.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Central South University, Changsha, 
Hunan 410078, China.

Various physiological processes and behaviors show a circadian rhythm of
approximately 24 h, which is crucial in coordinating internal metabolic processes
and environmental signals. Post-translational modifications play an important
role in regulating circadian core proteins. In this study, we demonstrated that
BMAL1 was modified with an O-linked ß-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc), which
stabilized BMAL1 and enhanced its transcriptional activity. Conversely,
inhibition of O-GlcNAcylation resulted in inhibition of circadian rhythms of
clock gene expression. Because O-GlcNAcylation is sensitive to the glucose level,
such a modification may provide a new mechanism connecting metabolism with
circadian rhythms.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23337503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Jan;15(1):62-6.

[Changes of biological clock protein in neonatal rats with hypoxic-ischemic brain
damage].

[Article in Chinese]

Li YF(1), Jin MF, Sun B, Feng X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, 
Jiangsu, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of biological clock protein on circadian
disorders in hypoxic-ischemic brain damage (HIBD) by examining levels of CLOCK
and BMAL1 proteins in the pineal gland of neonatal rats.
METHODS: Seventy-two 7-day-old Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats were randomly divided
into sham-operated and HIBD groups. HIBD model was prepared according to the
modified Levine method. Western blot analysis was used to measure the levels of
CLOCK and BMAL1 in the pineal gland at 0, 2, 12, 24, 36 and 48 hours after
operation.
RESULTS: Both CLOCK and BMAL levels in the pineal gland increased significantly
48 hours after HIBD compared with the sham-operated group (P<0.05). There were no
significant differences in levels of CLOCK and BMAL proteins between the two
groups at 0, 2, 12, 24 and 36 hours after operation (P>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Levels of CLOCK and BMAL1 proteins in the pineal gland of rats
increase significantly 48 hours after HIBD, suggesting that both CLOCK and BMAL1 
may be involved the regulatory mechanism of circadian disorders in rats with
HIBD.

PMID: 23336172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54049. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054049. Epub 2013 Jan 15.

Circadian timekeeping is disturbed in rheumatoid arthritis at molecular level.

Kouri VP(1), Olkkonen J, Kaivosoja E, Ainola M, Juhila J, Hovatta I, Konttinen
YT, Mandelin J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

INTRODUCTION: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have disturbances in the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. These are reflected in altered
circadian rhythm of circulating serum cortisol, melatonin and IL-6 levels and in 
chronic fatigue. We hypothesized that the molecular machinery responsible for the
circadian timekeeping is perturbed in RA. The aim of this study was to
investigate the expression of circadian clock in RA.
METHODS: Gene expression of thirteen clock genes was analyzed in the synovial
membrane of RA and control osteoarthritis (OA) patients. BMAL1 protein was
detected using immunohistochemistry. Cell autonomous clock oscillation was
started in RA and OA synovial fibroblasts using serum shock. The effect of
pro-inflammatory stimulus on clock gene expression in synovial fibroblasts was
studied using IL-6 and TNF-a.
RESULTS: Gene expression analysis disclosed disconcerted circadian timekeeping
and immunohistochemistry revealed strong cytoplasmic localization of BMAL1 in RA 
patients. Perturbed circadian timekeeping is at least in part inflammation
independent and cell autonomous, because RA synovial fibroblasts display altered 
circadian expression of several clock components, and perturbed circadian
production of IL-6 and IL-1ß after clock resetting. However, inflammatory
stimulus disturbs the rhythm in cultured fibroblasts. Throughout the experiments 
ARNTL2 and NPAS2 appeared to be the most affected clock genes in human
immune-inflammatory conditions.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the molecular machinery controlling the circadian
rhythm is disturbed in RA patients.

PMCID: PMC3546002
PMID: 23335987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Cell Cycle. 2013 Feb 1;12(3):405-8. doi: 10.4161/cc.23596. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

Clock controls angiogenesis.

Jensen LD(1), Cao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden. lasse.jensen@ki.se

Circadian rhythms control multiple physiological and pathological processes,
including embryonic development in mammals and development of various human
diseases. We have recently, in a developing zebrafish embryonic model, discovered
that the circadian oscillation controls developmental angiogenesis. Disruption of
crucial circadian regulatory genes, including Bmal1 and Period2, results in
marked impairment or enhancement of vascular development in zebrafish. At the
molecular level, we show that the circadian regulator Bmal1 directly targets the 
promoter region of the vegf gene in zebrafish, leading to an elevated expression 
of VEGF. These findings can reasonably be extended to developmental angiogenesis 
in mammals and even pathological angiogenesis in humans. Thus, our findings, for 
the first time, shed new light on mechanisms that underlie circadian
clock-regulated angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3587440
PMID: 23324349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2013 Apr;29(4):331-5. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2012.743018. Epub
2013 Jan 17.

Circadian clock gene expression is impaired in gestational diabetes mellitus.

Pappa KI(1), Gazouli M, Anastasiou E, Iliodromiti Z, Antsaklis A, Anagnou NP.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Athens School of 
Medicine, Athens, Greece. kpappa@med.uoa.gr

Dysfunction of the circadian clock genes is involved in the development of
obesity and type 2 diabetes (T2D). Since gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and 
T2D share common genetic and phenotypic features, in the present study, we
investigated the status of the circadian clock in a cohort of 40 Greek pregnant
women with GDM, four with T2D and 20 normal controls. Peripheral blood mRNA
transcript levels of 10 clock genes (CLOCK1, BMAL1, PER1, PER2, PER3, PPAR<U+0391>,
PPARD, PPARG, CRY1 and CRY2) were determined by real-time quantitative PCR. GDM
patients expressed significantly lower transcript levels of BMAL1, PER3, PPARD
and CRY2 compared to control women (p < 0.05). No significant difference was
documented between GDM women maintained either under insulin treatment or diet. A
positive correlation was found between the expression of BMAL1 versus CRY2 (r =
0.45, p = 0.003) and BMAL1 versus PPARD (r = 0.43, p = 0.004). Further
investigation on the functional relevance of these clock genes, disclosed that
expression of PER3 correlated negatively with HbA1C levels (r = -0.36, p =
0.022). These data document for the first time that the expression of BMAL1,
PER3, PPARD and CRY2 genes is altered in GDM compared to normal pregnant women
and support the notion that deranged expression of clock genes may play a
pathogenic role in GDM.

PMID: 23323702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e52559. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052559. Epub 2013 Jan 2.

Analysis of cycle gene expression in Aedes aegypti brains by in situ
hybridization.

Chahad-Ehlers S(1), Gentile C, Lima JB, Peixoto AA, Bruno RV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular de Insetos, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, FIOCRUZ,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Even though the blood-sucking mosquito Aedes aegypti is one of the most important
disease vectors, relatively little is known about the molecular mechanisms
underlying processes involved in the temporal pattern of its activity and host
seeking behavior. In this study, we analyzed the expression of the cycle (cyc)
gene, one of the core components of the circadian clock, in Ae. aegypti brains by
in situ hybridization at two different time points in light-dark conditions and
compared the results with those obtained using a quantitative PCR assay (qPCR).
Within the brain, differential labeling was detected according to distinct areas 
empirically pre-defined. Six out of seven of these areas showed significantly
higher staining at ZT3 (three hours after light-on) compared to ZT11 (one before 
light-off), which is consistent with the qPCR data. Predominant staining was
observed in three of those areas which correspond to positions of the optical and
antennal lobes, as well as the region where the neurons controlling activity
rhythms are presumably localized.

PMCID: PMC3534671
PMID: 23300979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. PLoS Biol. 2013;11(1):e1001455. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001455. Epub 2013 Jan 
3.

The circadian clock coordinates ribosome biogenesis.

Jouffe C(1), Cretenet G, Symul L, Martin E, Atger F, Naef F, Gachon F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2013 Mar;14(3):153.

Biological rhythms play a fundamental role in the physiology and behavior of most
living organisms. Rhythmic circadian expression of clock-controlled genes is
orchestrated by a molecular clock that relies on interconnected negative feedback
loops of transcription regulators. Here we show that the circadian clock exerts
its function also through the regulation of mRNA translation. Namely, the
circadian clock influences the temporal translation of a subset of mRNAs involved
in ribosome biogenesis by controlling the transcription of translation initiation
factors as well as the clock-dependent rhythmic activation of signaling pathways 
involved in their regulation. Moreover, the circadian oscillator directly
regulates the transcription of ribosomal protein mRNAs and ribosomal RNAs. Thus
the circadian clock exerts a major role in coordinating transcription and
translation steps underlying ribosome biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3536797
PMID: 23300384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jan 22;110(4):1554-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1214168110. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

Histone methyltransferase MLL3 contributes to genome-scale circadian
transcription.

Valekunja UK(1), Edgar RS, Oklejewicz M, van der Horst GT, O'Neill JS, Tamanini
F, Turner DJ, Reddy AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge Metabolic
Research Laboratories, Institute of Metabolic Science, National Institute for
Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, United Kingdom.

Daily cyclical expression of thousands of genes in tissues such as the liver is
orchestrated by the molecular circadian clock, the disruption of which is
implicated in metabolic disorders and cancer. Although we understand much about
the circadian transcription factors that can switch gene expression on and off,
it is still unclear how global changes in rhythmic transcription are controlled
at the genomic level. Here, we demonstrate circadian modification of an
activating histone mark at a significant proportion of gene loci that undergo
daily transcription, implicating widespread epigenetic modification as a key node
regulated by the clockwork. Furthermore, we identify the histone-remodelling
enzyme mixed lineage leukemia (MLL)3 as a clock-controlled factor that is able to
directly and indirectly modulate over a hundred epigenetically targeted circadian
"output" genes in the liver. Importantly, catalytic inactivation of the histone
methyltransferase activity of MLL3 also severely compromises the oscillation of
"core" clock gene promoters, including Bmal1, mCry1, mPer2, and Rev-erba,
suggesting that rhythmic histone methylation is vital for robust transcriptional 
oscillator function. This highlights a pathway by which the clockwork exerts
genome-wide control over transcription, which is critical for sustaining temporal
programming of tissue physiology.

PMCID: PMC3557088
PMID: 23297224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Neuromolecular Med. 2013 Jun;15(2):238-51. doi: 10.1007/s12017-012-8214-x. Epub
2013 Jan 5.

A disruption mechanism of the molecular clock in a MPTP mouse model of
Parkinson's disease.

Hayashi A(1), Matsunaga N, Okazaki H, Kakimoto K, Kimura Y, Azuma H, Ikeda E,
Shiba T, Yamato M, Yamada K, Koyanagi S, Ohdo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kyushu University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Fukuoka, Higashi-ku, 812-8582, Japan.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder that is
characterized by the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra
and dopamine depletion in the striatum. Although the motor symptoms are still
regarded as the main problem, non-motor symptoms in PD also markedly impair the
quality of life. Several non-motor symptoms, such as sleep disturbances and
depression, are suggested to be implicated in the alteration in circadian clock
function. In this study, we investigated circadian disruption and the mechanism
in a 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) mouse model of PD.
MPTP-treated mice exhibited altered 24-h rhythms in body temperature and
locomotor activity. In addition, MPTP treatment also affected the circadian clock
system at the genetic level. The exposure of human neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y) 
to 1-metyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+)) increased or decreased the mRNA levels of 
several clock genes in a dose-dependent manner. MPP(+)-induced changes in clock
genes expression were reversed by Compound C, an inhibitor of AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK). Most importantly, addition of ATP to the drinking water of
MPTP-treated mice attenuated neurodegeneration in dopaminergic neurons,
suppressed AMPK activation and prevented circadian disruption. The present
findings suggest that the activation of AMPK caused circadian dysfunction, and
ATP may be a novel therapeutic strategy based on the molecular clock in PD.

PMID: 23292542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Endocr J. 2013;60(4):483-92. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Modulation by adiponectin of circadian clock rhythmicity in model mice for
metabolic syndrome.

Hashinaga T(1), Wada N, Otabe S, Yuan X, Kurita Y, Kakino S, Tanaka K, Sato T,
Kojima M, Ohki T, Nakayama H, Egashira T, Tajiri Y, Yamada K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Kurume
University School of Medicine, Kurume 830-0011, Japan.

To assess the effect of adiponectin on the circadian rhythm disturbances
associated with metabolic syndrome, we generated a KK/Ta mouse line expressing
the human adiponectin transgene in the liver. Locomotor activity of control
C57BL/6 mice was highest during the beginning of the dark period and low during
the light period. Under constant darkness, the length of locomotor activity
rhythm of control mice was slightly shorter than 24 h. In KK/Ta mice the peak of 
locomotor activity was blunted and significant activity was observed during the
light period. Furthermore, KK/Ta mice showed shorter average period length of
free-running locomotor activity rhythm when compared with control mice. However, 
the transgenic expression of adiponectin in the liver significantly altered the
circadian rhythm of locomotor activity and the length of free-running rhythm of
KK/Ta mice towards those of C57BL/6 mice. In the liver and skeletal muscles from 
control mice, mRNA levels of Arntl and Cry1 were increased during the dark
period, whereas those of Dbp, Cry2, Per1 and Per2 were elevated during the light 
period. KK/Ta mice exhibited phase advances in circadian rhythms of Arntl, Dbp,
Cry2 and Per2 in both tissues. The phase shifts of the circadian clock gene
expression in the liver were attenuated in adiponectin-transgenic mice. These
results suggest that adiponectin is a peripheral regulator of the circadian
clocks in the brain and peripheral organs, and may be a novel target for the
treatment of obesity-associated disorders of circadian rhythms.

PMID: 23292171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2013 May;227(1):79-92. doi: 10.1007/s00213-012-2941-4.
Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Hippocampal CLOCK protein participates in the persistence of depressive-like
behavior induced by chronic unpredictable stress.

Jiang WG(1), Li SX, Liu JF, Sun Y, Zhou SJ, Zhu WL, Shi J, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Drug Dependence, Peking University, 38, Xue Yuan Road,
Beijing, 100191, China.

RATIONALE: Circadian disturbances are strongly linked with major depression. The 
circadian proteins CLOCK and BMAL1 are abundantly expressed but function
differently in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) and hippocampus. However, their 
roles in depressive-like behavior are still poorly understood.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the alterations of CLOCK and BMAL1 in the SCN and
hippocampus in rats subjected to chronic unpredictable stress (CUS) and to
explore the relationship of circadian protein and the depressive-like behavior.
RESULTS: Together with depressive-like behavior induced by CUS, CLOCK and BMAL1
in the SC were inhibited during the light period, and the peak expression of
CLOCK in the hippocampus was shifted from the dark to light period. BMAL1
expression in the hippocampus was not significantly changed. Two weeks after the 
termination of CUS, abnormalities of CLOCK in the CA1 and CA3 endured, with
unchanged depressive-like behavior, but the expression of CLOCK and BMAL1 in the 
SCN recovered to control levels. Knockdown of the Clock gene in CA1 induced
depressive-like behavior in normal rats. CLOCK in the SCN and hippocampus may
participate in the development of depressive-like behavior. However, CLOCK in the
hippocampus but not SCN was involved in the long-lasting effects of CUS on
depressive-like behavior. BMAL1 in the hippocampus appeared to be unrelated to
the effects of CUS on depressive-like behavior.
CONCLUSION: CLOCK protein in the hippocampus but not SCN play an important role
in the long-lasting depressive-like behavior induced by CUS. These findings
suggest a novel therapeutic target in the development of new antidepressants
focusing on the regulation of circadian rhythm.

PMID: 23263459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Gastrointest Surg. 2013 Mar;17(3):443-50. doi: 10.1007/s11605-012-2112-2. Epub 
2012 Dec 20.

Circadian gene expression and clinicopathologic correlates in pancreatic cancer.

Relles D(1), Sendecki J, Chipitsyna G, Hyslop T, Yeo CJ, Arafat HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107,
USA.

INTRODUCTION: The circadian rhythm is responsible for physiologic homeostasis,
behavior, and components of multiple metabolic processes. Disruption of the
circadian rhythm is associated with cancer development, and several circadian
clock genes have been implicated in loss of cell cycle control, impaired DNA
damage repair, and subsequent tumor formation. Here, we investigated the
expression profiles of several circadian clock genes in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA).
METHODS: Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to examine the
circadian clock genes (brain-muscle-like (Bmal)-ARNTL, circadian locomotor output
cycles kaput (Clock), cryptochrome 1 (Cry1), cryptochrome 2 (Cry2), casein kinase
1e (CK1e), period 1 (Per1), period 2 (Per2), period 3 (Per3), timeless (Tim), and
timeless-interacting protein (Tipin)) in PDA, as well as matching adjacent and
benign tissue. Logistic regression models with robust variance were used to
analyze the gene expression levels, and Kaplan-Meier survival curves were
generated based on gene expression.
RESULTS: In the tumor tissue of PDA patients, compared to their matched adjacent 
tissue, expression levels of all circadian genes were lower, with statistical
significance for Per1, Per2, Per3, Cry1, Cry2, Tipin, Tim, CK1e, Bmal-ARNTL, and 
Clock (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.025). PDA tumors also expressed significantly lower levels of the
circadian genes when compared to benign lesions for Per1, Per2, Per3, Cry2,
Tipin, and CK1e. A significant association between low levels of expression in
the tumors and reduced survival was found with Per1, Per2, Per3, Cry2, Tipin,
CK1e, Clock, and Bmal-ARNTL.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results reveal for the first time a dysregulated transcription
of several circadian genes in PDA. Elevation of the gene levels in the benign and
matched adjacent tissues may be indicative of their role during the process of
tumorigenesis. The potential of using circadian genes as predictive markers of
the outcomes and survival and distinguishing PDA from benign pancreas must be
studied in larger populations to validate and demonstrate their eventual clinical
utility.

PMID: 23254314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e50435. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050435. Epub 2012 Dec 10.

Glucocorticoids affect 24 h clock genes expression in human adipose tissue
explant cultures.

Gómez-Abellán P(1), Díez-Noguera A, Madrid JA, Luján JA, Ordovás JM, Garaulet M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Biology, University of Murcia, Murcia,
Spain.

AIMS: to examine firstly whether CLOCK exhibits a circadian expression in human
visceral (V) and subcutaneous (S) adipose tissue (AT) in vitro as compared with
BMAL1 and PER2, and secondly to investigate the possible effect of the
glucocorticoid analogue dexamethasone (DEX) on positive and negative clock genes 
expression.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: VAT and SAT biopsies were obtained from morbid obese women 
(body mass index = 40 kg/m(2)) (n = 6). In order to investigate rhythmic
expression pattern of clock genes and the effect of DEX on CLOCK, PER2 and BMAL1 
expression, control AT (without DEX) and AT explants treated with DEX (2 hours)
were cultured during 24 h and gene expression was analyzed at the following
times: 10:00 h, 14:00 h, 18:00 h, 22:00 h, 02:00 h and 06:00 h, using qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: CLOCK, BMAL1 and PER2 expression exhibited circadian patterns in both
VAT and SAT explants that were adjusted to a typical 24 h sinusoidal curve. PER2 
expression (negative element) was in antiphase with respect to CLOCK and in phase
with BMAL1 expression (both positive elements) in the SAT (situation not present 
in VAT). A marked effect of DEX exposure on both positive and negative clock
genes expression patterns was observed. Indeed, DEX treatment modified the
rhythmicity pattern towards altered patterns with a period lower than 24 hours in
all genes and in both tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: 24 h patterns in CLOCK and BMAL1 (positive clock elements) and PER2 
(negative element) mRNA levels were observed in human adipose explants. These
patterns were altered by dexamethasone exposure.

PMCID: PMC3519463
PMID: 23251369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Diabetologia. 2013 Mar;56(3):497-507. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2779-7. Epub 2012
Dec 15.

Autonomous and self-sustained circadian oscillators displayed in human islet
cells.

Pulimeno P(1), Mannic T, Sage D, Giovannoni L, Salmon P, Lemeille S,
Giry-Laterriere M, Unser M, Bosco D, Bauer C, Morf J, Halban P, Philippe J,
Dibner C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, University Hospital of
Geneva, Aile Jura 4-771.2, Rue Gabrielle-Perret-Gentil 4, CH-1211 Geneva,
Switzerland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Following on from the emerging importance of the pancreas
circadian clock on islet function and the development of type 2 diabetes in
rodent models, we aimed to examine circadian gene expression in human islets. The
oscillator properties were assessed in intact islets as well as in beta cells.
METHODS: We established a system for long-term bioluminescence recording in
cultured human islets, employing lentivector gene delivery of the core clock gene
Bmal1 (also known as Arntl)-luciferase reporter. Beta cells were stably labelled 
using a rat insulin2 promoter fluorescent construct. Single-islet/cell
oscillation profiles were measured by combined bioluminescence-fluorescence
time-lapse microscopy.
RESULTS: Human islets synchronised in vitro exhibited self-sustained circadian
oscillations of Bmal1-luciferase expression at both the population and
single-islet levels, with period lengths of 23.6 and 23.9 h, respectively.
Endogenous BMAL1 and CRY1 transcript expression was circadian in synchronised
islets over 48 h, and antiphasic to REV-ERBa (also known as NR1D1), PER1, PER2,
PER3 and DBP transcript circadian profiles. HNF1A and PDX1 exhibited weak
circadian oscillations, in phase with the REV-ERBa transcript. Dispersed islet
cells were strongly oscillating as well, at population and single-cell levels.
Importantly, beta and non-beta cells revealed oscillatory profiles that were well
synchronised with each other.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We provide for the first time compelling evidence for
high-amplitude cell-autonomous circadian oscillators displayed in human
pancreatic islets and in dispersed human islet cells. Moreover, these clocks are 
synchronised between beta and non-beta cells in primary human islet cell
cultures.

PMCID: PMC3563957
PMID: 23242133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Cell Res. 2013 Feb;23(2):213-24. doi: 10.1038/cr.2012.170. Epub 2012 Dec 11.

Intermolecular recognition revealed by the complex structure of human CLOCK-BMAL1
basic helix-loop-helix domains with E-box DNA.

Wang Z(1), Wu Y, Li L, Su XD.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, and Biodynamic
Optical Imaging Center (BIOPIC), Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

CLOCK (circadian locomotor output cycles kaput) and BMAL1 (brain and muscle
ARNT-like 1) are both transcription factors of the circadian core loop in
mammals. Recently published mouse CLOCK-BMAL1 bHLH (basic helix-loop-helix)-PAS
(period-ARNT-single-minded) complex structure sheds light on the mechanism for
heterodimer formation, but the structural details of the protein-DNA recognition 
mechanisms remain elusive. Here we have elucidated the crystal structure of human
CLOCK-BMAL1 bHLH domains bound to a canonical E-box DNA. We demonstrate that
CLOCK and BMAL1 bHLH domains can be mutually selected, and that hydrogen-bonding 
networks mediate their E-box recognition. We identified a hydrophobic contact
between BMAL1 Ile80 and a flanking thymine nucleotide, suggesting that
CLOCK-BMAL1 actually reads 7-bp DNA and not the previously believed 6-bp DNA. To 
find potential non-canonical E-boxes that could be recognized by CLOCK-BMAL1, we 
constructed systematic single-nucleotide mutations on the E-box and measured
their relevant affinities. We defined two non-canonical E-box patterns with high 
affinities, AACGTGA and CATGTGA, in which the flanking A7-T7' base pair is
indispensable for recognition. These results will help us to identify functional 
CLOCK-BMAL1-binding sites in vivo and to search for clock-controlled genes.
Furthermore, we assessed the inhibitory role of potential phosphorylation sites
in bHLH regions. We found that the phospho-mimicking mutation on BMAL1 Ser78
could efficiently block DNA binding as well as abolish normal circadian
oscillation in cells. We propose that BMAL1 Ser78 should be a key residue
mediating input signal-regulated transcriptional inhibition for external cues to 
entrain the circadian clock by kinase cascade.

PMCID: PMC3567813
PMID: 23229515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Nat Med. 2012 Dec;18(12):1738-40. doi: 10.1038/nm.3010.

Metabolic jet lag when the fat clock is out of sync.

Asterholm IW, Scherer PE.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2012 Dec;18(12):1768-77.

PMCID: PMC3731391
PMID: 23223058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2013;20(3):267-76. Epub 2012 Dec 7.

Real-time analysis of the circadian oscillation of the Rev-Erb ß promoter.

Yang F(1), Inoue I, Kumagai M, Takahashi S, Nakajima Y, Ikeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Meitan General Hospital, Beijing, China.

AIM: Rev-Erb ß gene plays crucial roles in circadian rhythm, lipid and glucose
metabolism, and several diseases. The molecular mechanisms of the transcriptional
regulation of Rev-Erb ß that generate and determine the phase of the circadian
oscillation remain unclear.
METHODS: We analyzed the Rev-Erb ß promoter by luciferase reporter assays,
real-time bioluminescence monitoring assays and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays.
RESULTS: Luciferase reporter assays indicated that only the 5' region and exon 1 
have obvious promoter activity. Real-time bioluminescence monitoring assays
revealed that E1, E2, E3, D boxes are important for maintenance of the amplitude 
of Rev-Erb ß oscillation. Based on EMSA results, REV-ERBß binds ROREs in the
Bmal1 promoter region and inhibits Bmal1 promoter activity.
CONCLUSION: We provide direct evidence that three E-boxes and one D-box located
in the first intron are crucial for the phase of circadian oscillation in Rev-Erb
ß expression and that the sequences upstream from its transcription start site
function as a promoter with no circadian regulation. We also found that the E1
box affects the Rev-Erb ß oscillation phase. Our results offer new insight into
the role of Rev-Erb ß in the circadian rhythm system.

PMID: 23221024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2013 Feb;99(2):151-7. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2012.10.015. Epub 2012 Dec 1.

The major circadian pacemaker ARNT-like protein-1 (BMAL1) is associated with
susceptibility to gestational diabetes mellitus.

Pappa KI(1), Gazouli M, Anastasiou E, Iliodromiti Z, Antsaklis A, Anagnou NP.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Athens School of 
Medicine, Athens, Greece. kpappa@med.uoa.gr

AIMS: Recently a relationship between circadian clock function and the risk for
type 2 diabetes (T2D) has been shown. BMAL1 is a key component of the mammalian
molecular clock. Two SNPs in the BMAL1 gene have been identified to confer T2D
susceptibility. In the present study we investigated for the first time the
association between the BMAL1 gene and the risk for GDM, in a Greek population.
METHODS: We studied 185 women with GDM and 161 non-diabetic controls for BMAL1
polymorphisms. For BMAL1 mRNA expression, peripheral leukocytes were harvested
from 20 GDM and 20 control women, harboring different genotypes for the tested
polymorphisms, using real-time quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: The minor allele (A) of the BMAL1 rs7950226 (G>A) polymorphism was found
to be significantly associated with an increased risk of GDM (P=0.025). Analysis 
of the second BMAL1 rs11022775 (T>C) polymorphism, showed that the C-allele
frequency was strongly increased in women with GDM (P=4.455e-06). The CC genotype
was also significantly overrepresented in GDM vs. controls (P=0.00001).
Additionally, the rs7950226G/rs11022775C and rs7950226A/rs11022775C haplotypes
were also found to be associated with increased susceptibility to GDM.
Furthermore, the expression levels of BMAL1 mRNA were significantly lower in GDM 
patients than in controls.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that the impairment of the BMAL1 clock gene
expression is closely associated with GDM susceptibility.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23206673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e50602. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050602. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

Heterogeneous expression of the core circadian clock proteins among neuronal cell
types in mouse retina.

Liu X(1), Zhang Z, Ribelayga CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at Houston, Medical School, Houston, Texas, United States of
America.

Circadian rhythms in metabolism, physiology, and behavior originate from
cell-autonomous circadian clocks located in many organs and structures throughout
the body and that share a common molecular mechanism based on the clock genes and
their protein products. In the mammalian neural retina, despite evidence
supporting the presence of several circadian clocks regulating many facets of
retinal physiology and function, the exact cellular location and genetic
signature of the retinal clock cells remain largely unknown. Here we examined the
expression of the core circadian clock proteins CLOCK, BMAL1, NPAS2, PERIOD
1(PER1), PERIOD 2 (PER2), and CRYPTOCHROME2 (CRY2) in identified neurons of the
mouse retina during daily and circadian cycles. We found concurrent clock protein
expression in most retinal neurons, including cone photoreceptors, dopaminergic
amacrine cells, and melanopsin-expressing intrinsically photosensitive ganglion
cells. Remarkably, diurnal and circadian rhythms of expression of all clock
proteins were observed in the cones whereas only CRY2 expression was found to be 
rhythmic in the dopaminergic amacrine cells. Only a low level of expression of
the clock proteins was detected in the rods at any time of the daily or circadian
cycle. Our observations provide evidence that cones and not rods are
cell-autonomous circadian clocks and reveal an important disparity in the
expression of the core clock components among neuronal cell types. We propose
that the overall temporal architecture of the mammalian retina does not result
from the synchronous activity of pervasive identical clocks but rather reflects
the cellular and regional heterogeneity in clock function within retinal tissue.

PMCID: PMC3506613
PMID: 23189207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):20679-84. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1218699110. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

PKC<U+03B3> participates in food entrainment by regulating BMAL1.

Zhang L(1), Abraham D, Lin ST, Oster H, Eichele G, Fu YH, Ptácek LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158,
USA.

Temporally restricted feeding (RF) can phase reset the circadian clocks in
numerous tissues in mammals, contributing to altered timing of behavioral and
physiological rhythms. However, little is known regarding the underlying
molecular mechanism. Here we demonstrate a role for the gamma isotype of protein 
kinase C (PKC<U+03B3>) in food-mediated entrainment of behavior and the molecular clock.
We found that daytime RF reduced late-night activity in wild-type mice but not
mice homozygous for a null mutation of PKC<U+03B3> (PKC<U+03B3>(-/-)). Molecular analysis
revealed that PKC<U+03B3> exhibited RF-induced changes in activation patterns in the
cerebral cortex and that RF failed to substantially phase shift the oscillation
of clock gene transcripts in the absence of PKC<U+03B3>. PKC<U+03B3> exerts effects on the
clock, at least in part, by stabilizing the core clock component brain and muscle
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator like 1 (BMAL1) and reducing its
ubiquitylation in a deubiquitination-dependent manner. Taken together, these
results suggest that PKC<U+03B3> plays a role in food entrainment by regulating BMAL1
stability.

PMCID: PMC3528600
PMID: 23185022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Brain Res. 2013 Jan 23;1491:44-53. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.11.008. Epub 2012
Nov 15.

Influence of aging on Bmal1 and Per2 expression in extra-SCN oscillators in
hamster brain.

Duncan MJ(1), Prochot JR, Cook DH, Tyler Smith J, Franklin KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Kentucky College of
Medicine, 800 Rose Street, Lexington, KY 40536-0298, USA. marilyn.duncan@uky.edu

Deletion of the core clock gene, Bmal1, ablates circadian rhythms and accelerates
aging, leading to cognitive deficits and tissue atrophy (e.g., skeletal muscle)
(Kondratov et al., 2006, Kondratova et al., 2010). Although normal aging has been
shown to attenuate Bmal1 expression in the master circadian pacemaker in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), relatively little is known about age-related
changes in Bmal1 expression in other tissues, where Bmal1 may have multiple
functions. This study tested the hypothesis that aging reduces Bmal1 expression
in extra-SCN oscillators including brain substrates for memory and in skeletal
muscle. Brains and gastrocnemius muscles were collected from young (3-5 months)
and old hamsters (17-21 months) euthanized at four times of day. Bmal1 mRNA
expression was determined by conducting in situ hybridization on brain sections
or real-time PCR on muscle samples. The results showed age-related attenuation of
Bmal1 expression in many brain regions, and included loss of diurnal rhythms in
the hippocampal CA2 and CA3 subfields, but no change in muscle. In situ
hybridization for Per2 mRNA was also conducted and showed age-related reduction
of diurnal rhythm amplitude selectively in the hippocampal CA1 and DG subfields. 
In conclusion, aging has tissue-dependent effects on Bmal1 expression in
extra-SCN oscillators. These finding on normal aging will provide a reference for
comparing potential changes in Bmal1 and Per2 expression in age-related
pathologies. In conjunction with previous reports, the results suggest the
possibility that attenuation of clock gene expression in some brain regions (the 
hippocampus, cingulate cortex and SCN) may contribute to age-related cognitive
deficits.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3530017
PMID: 23159832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Genes Dev. 2012 Nov 15;26(22):2536-49. doi: 10.1101/gad.200584.112.

CLOCK deubiquitylation by USP8 inhibits CLK/CYC transcription in Drosophila.

Luo W(1), Li Y, Tang CH, Abruzzi KC, Rodriguez J, Pescatore S, Rosbash M.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

A conserved transcriptional feedback loop underlies animal circadian rhythms. In 
Drosophila, the transcription factors CLOCK (CLK) and CYCLE (CYC) activate the
transcription of direct target genes like period (per) and timeless (tim). They
encode the proteins PER and TIM, respectively, which repress CLK/CYC activity.
Previous work indicates that repression is due to a direct PER-CLK/CYC
interaction as well as CLK/CYC phosphorylation. We describe here the role of
ubiquitin-specific protease 8 (USP8) in circadian transcriptional repression as
well as the importance of CLK ubiquitylation in CLK/CYC transcription activity.
usp8 loss of function (RNAi) or expression of a dominant-negative form of the
protein (USP8-DN) enhances CLK/CYC transcriptional activity and alters fly
locomotor activity rhythms. Clock protein and mRNA molecular oscillations are
virtually absent within circadian neurons of USP8-DN flies. Furthermore, CLK
ubiquitylation cycles robustly in wild-type flies and peaks coincident with
maximal CLK/CYC transcription. As USP8 interacts with CLK and expression of
USP8-DN increases CLK ubiquitylation, the data indicate that USP8 deubiquitylates
CLK, which down-regulates CLK/CYC transcriptional activity. Taken together with
the facts that usp8 mRNA cycles and that its transcription is activated directly 
by CLK/CYC, USP8, like PER and TIM, contributes to the transcriptional feedback
loop cycle that underlies circadian rhythms.

PMCID: PMC3505823
PMID: 23154984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Elife. 2012 Nov 13;1:e00011. doi: 10.7554/eLife.00011.

Nascent-Seq reveals novel features of mouse circadian transcriptional regulation.

Menet JS(1), Rodriguez J, Abruzzi KC, Rosbash M.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, National Center for Behavioral Genomics, and 
Department of Biology Brandeis University , Waltham , United States.

A substantial fraction of the metazoan transcriptome undergoes circadian
oscillations in many cells and tissues. Based on the transcription feedback loops
important for circadian timekeeping, it is commonly assumed that this mRNA
cycling reflects widespread transcriptional regulation. To address this issue, we
directly measured the circadian dynamics of mouse liver transcription using
Nascent-Seq (genome-wide sequencing of nascent RNA). Although many genes are
rhythmically transcribed, many rhythmic mRNAs manifest poor transcriptional
rhythms, indicating a prominent contribution of post-transcriptional regulation
to circadian mRNA expression. This analysis of rhythmic transcription also showed
that the rhythmic DNA binding profile of the transcription factors CLOCK and
BMAL1 does not determine the transcriptional phase of most target genes. This
likely reflects gene-specific collaborations of CLK:BMAL1 with other
transcription factors. These insights from Nascent-Seq indicate that it should
have broad applicability to many other gene expression regulatory
issues.DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00011.001.

PMCID: PMC3492862
PMID: 23150795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48892. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048892. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Circadian regulation of food-anticipatory activity in molecular clock-deficient
mice.

Takasu NN(1), Kurosawa G, Tokuda IT, Mochizuki A, Todo T, Nakamura W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oral Chronobiology, Graduate School of Dentistry, Osaka
University, Osaka, Japan.

In the mammalian brain, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the anterior
hypothalamus is considered to be the principal circadian pacemaker, keeping the
rhythm of most physiological and behavioral processes on the basis of light/dark 
cycles. Because restriction of food availability to a certain time of day elicits
anticipatory behavior even after ablation of the SCN, such behavior has been
assumed to be under the control of another circadian oscillator. According to
recent studies, however, mutant mice lacking circadian clock function exhibit
normal food-anticipatory activity (FAA), a daily increase in locomotor activity
preceding periodic feeding, suggesting that FAA is independent of the known
circadian oscillator. To investigate the molecular basis of FAA, we examined
oscillatory properties in mice lacking molecular clock components. Mice with SCN 
lesions or with mutant circadian periods were exposed to restricted feeding
schedules at periods within and outside circadian range. Periodic feeding led to 
the entrainment of FAA rhythms only within a limited circadian range. Cry1(-/-)
mice, which are known to be a "short-period mutant," entrained to a shorter
period of feeding cycles than did Cry2(-/-) mice. This result indicated that the 
intrinsic periods of FAA rhythms are also affected by Cry deficiency. Bmal1(-/-) 
mice, deficient in another essential element of the molecular clock machinery,
exhibited a pre-feeding increase of activity far from circadian range, indicating
a deficit in circadian oscillation. We propose that mice possess a
food-entrainable pacemaker outside the SCN in which canonical clock genes such as
Cry1, Cry2 and Bmal1 play essential roles in regulating FAA in a circadian
oscillatory manner.

PMCID: PMC3492221
PMID: 23145013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e46835. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046835. Epub 2012 Nov 5.

The interplay of cis-regulatory elements rules circadian rhythms in mouse liver.

Korencic A(1), Bordyugov G, Koir R, Rozman D, Golicnik M, Herzel H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.

The mammalian circadian clock is driven by cell-autonomous transcriptional
feedback loops that involve E-boxes, D-boxes, and ROR-elements. In peripheral
organs, circadian rhythms are additionally affected by systemic factors. We show 
that intrinsic combinatorial gene regulation governs the liver clock. With a
temporal resolution of 2 h, we measured the expression of 21 clock genes in mouse
liver under constant darkness and equinoctial light-dark cycles. Based on these
data and known transcription factor binding sites, we develop a six-variable gene
regulatory network. The transcriptional feedback loops are represented by
equations with time-delayed variables, which substantially simplifies modelling
of intermediate protein dynamics. Our model accurately reproduces measured
phases, amplitudes, and waveforms of clock genes. Analysis of the network reveals
properties of the clock: overcritical delays generate oscillations; synergy of
inhibition and activation enhances amplitudes; and combinatorial modulation of
transcription controls the phases. The agreement of measurements and simulations 
suggests that the intrinsic gene regulatory network primarily determines the
circadian clock in liver, whereas systemic cues such as light-dark cycles serve
to fine-tune the rhythms.

PMCID: PMC3489864
PMID: 23144788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Nat Med. 2012 Dec;18(12):1768-77. doi: 10.1038/nm.2979. Epub 2012 Nov 11.

Obesity in mice with adipocyte-specific deletion of clock component Arntl.

Paschos GK(1), Ibrahim S, Song WL, Kunieda T, Grant G, Reyes TM, Bradfield CA,
Vaughan CH, Eiden M, Masoodi M, Griffin JL, Wang F, Lawson JA, Fitzgerald GA.

Author information: 
(1)Perelman School of Medicine, Institute for Translational Medicine and
Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2012 Dec;18(12):1738-40.

Adipocytes store excess energy in the form of triglycerides and signal the levels
of stored energy to the brain. Here we show that adipocyte-specific deletion of
Arntl (also known as Bmal1), a gene encoding a core molecular clock component,
results in obesity in mice with a shift in the diurnal rhythm of food intake, a
result that is not seen when the gene is disrupted in hepatocytes or pancreatic
islets. Changes in the expression of hypothalamic neuropeptides that regulate
appetite are consistent with feedback from the adipocyte to the central nervous
system to time feeding behavior. Ablation of the adipocyte clock is associated
with a reduced number of polyunsaturated fatty acids in adipocyte triglycerides. 
This difference between mutant and wild-type mice is reflected in the circulating
concentrations of polyunsaturated fatty acids and nonesterified polyunsaturated
fatty acids in hypothalamic neurons that regulate food intake. Thus, this study
reveals a role for the adipocyte clock in the temporal organization of energy
regulation, highlights timing as a modulator of the adipocyte-hypothalamic axis
and shows the impact of timing of food intake on body weight.

PMCID: PMC3782286
PMID: 23142819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Chronobiol Int. 2012 Dec;29(10):1289-99. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2012.728660. Epub 
2012 Nov 6.

Circadian oscillations of molecular clock components in the cerebellar cortex of 
the rat.

Rath MF(1), Rohde K, Møller M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, Panum Institute, Faculty of
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
mrath@sund.ku.dk

The central circadian clock of the mammalian brain resides in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus. At the molecular level, the circadian
clockwork of the SCN constitutes a self-sustained autoregulatory feedback
mechanism reflected by the rhythmic expression of clock genes. However, recent
studies have shown the presence of extrahypothalamic oscillators in other areas
of the brain including the cerebellum. In the present study, the authors unravel 
the cerebellar molecular clock by analyzing clock gene expression in the
cerebellum of the rat by use of radiochemical in situ hybridization and
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. The authors here show that all 
core clock genes, i.e., Per1, Per2, Per3, Cry1, Cry2, Clock, Arntl, and Nr1d1, as
well as the clock-controlled gene Dbp, are expressed in the granular and Purkinje
cell layers of the cerebellar cortex. Among these genes, Per1, Per2, Per3, Cry1, 
Arntl, Nr1d1, and Dbp were found to exhibit circadian rhythms in a sequential
temporal manner similar to that of the SCN, but with several hours of delay. The 
results of lesion studies indicate that the molecular oscillatory profiles of
Per1, Per2, and Cry1 in the cerebellum are controlled, though possibly
indirectly, by the central clock of the SCN. These data support the presence of a
circadian oscillator in the cortex of the rat cerebellum.

PMID: 23131067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Dokl Biol Sci. 2012 Sep-Oct;446:323-6. doi: 10.1134/S0012496612050146. Epub 2012 
Nov 6.

Expression of the CLOCK, BMAL1, and PER1 circadian genes in human oral mucosa
cells as dependent on CLOCK gene polymorphic variants.

Kurbatova IV(1), Kolomeichuk SN, Topchieva LV, Korneva VA, Nemova NN.

Author information: 
(1)Karelian Scientific Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Petrozavodsk, Russia.

PMID: 23129285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46204. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046204. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Traumatic brain injury-induced dysregulation of the circadian clock.

Boone DR(1), Sell SL, Micci MA, Crookshanks JM, Parsley M, Uchida T, Prough DS,
DeWitt DS, Hellmich HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston,
Texas, United States of America.

Circadian rhythm disturbances are frequently reported in patients recovering from
traumatic brain injury (TBI). Since circadian clock output is mediated by some of
the same molecular signaling cascades that regulate memory formation
(cAMP/MAPK/CREB), cognitive problems reported by TBI survivors may be related to 
injury-induced dysregulation of the circadian clock. In laboratory animals,
aberrant circadian rhythms in the hippocampus have been linked to cognitive and
memory dysfunction. Here, we addressed the hypothesis that circadian rhythm
disruption after TBI is mediated by changes in expression of clock genes in the
suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) and hippocampus. After fluid-percussion TBI or sham 
surgery, male Sprague-Dawley rats were euthanized at 4 h intervals, over a 48 h
period for tissue collection. Expression of circadian clock genes was measured
using quantitative real-time PCR in the SCN and hippocampus obtained by laser
capture and manual microdissection respectively. Immunofluorescence and Western
blot analysis were used to correlate TBI-induced changes in circadian gene
expression with changes in protein expression. In separate groups of rats,
locomotor activity was monitored for 48 h. TBI altered circadian gene expression 
patterns in both the SCN and the hippocampus. Dysregulated expression of key
circadian clock genes, such as Bmal1 and Cry1, was detected, suggesting
perturbation of transcriptional-translational feedback loops that are central to 
circadian timing. In fact, disruption of circadian locomotor activity rhythms in 
injured animals occurred concurrently. These results provide an explanation for
how TBI causes disruption of circadian rhythms as well as a rationale for the
consideration of drugs with chronobiotic properties as part of a treatment
strategy for TBI.

PMCID: PMC3463592
PMID: 23056261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Circadian Rhythms. 2012 Oct 5;10(1):7. doi: 10.1186/1740-3391-10-7.

Investigation of a non-invasive method of assessing the equine circadian clock
using hair follicle cells.

Watts LM(1), Browne JA, Murphy BA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture and Food Science, University College Dublin, Belfield,
Dublin 4, Ireland. barbara.murphy@ucd.ie.

BACKGROUND: A comprehensive understanding of the equine circadian clock involves 
the evaluation of circadian clock gene expression. A non-invasive and effective
method for detecting equine clock gene expression has yet to be established.
Currently, research surrounding this area has relied on collecting tissue
biopsies or blood samples that can often be costly, time consuming and
uncomfortable for the animal.
METHODS: Five mares were individually stabled under a light-dark (LD) cycle that 
mimicked the external environmental photoperiod during a time of year
corresponding with the vernal equinox. Hair follicles were collected every 4 h
over a 24-h period by plucking hairs from the mane. RNA was extracted and
quantitative (q) PCR assays were performed to determine temporal expression
patterns for the core clock genes; ARNTL, CRY1, PER1, PER2, NR1D2 and the clock
controlled gene, DBP.
RESULTS: Repeated measures ANOVA for the clock gene transcripts PER1 and PER2 and
the clock controlled gene, DBP, revealed significant variation in expression over
time (p<U+2009><<U+2009>.05, respectively). Cosinor analysis confirmed a significant 24-h
temporal component for PER1 (p = .002) and DBP (p = .0033) and also detected
rhythmicity for NR1D2 (p = .0331).
CONCLUSIONS: We show that the extraction of RNA from equine hair follicle cells
can identify the circadian 24 h oscillations of specific clock genes and a
clock-controlled gene and therefore provide a valuable non-invasive method for
evaluating the equine peripheral circadian clock. This method will serve as a
useful tool for future evaluations of equine circadian rhythms and their response
to environmental changes.

PMCID: PMC3514281
PMID: 23039139  [PubMed]


317. Sci Signal. 2012 Oct 2;5(244):pt4. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2003333.

Circadian rhythms of glucocorticoid hormone actions in target tissues: potential 
clinical implications.

Kino T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Reproductive and Adult Endocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development-NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA. kinot@mail.nih.gov

Organisms face unforeseen short- and long-term changes in the environment
(stressors). To defend against these changes, organisms have developed a stress
system that includes the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, which employs
glucocorticoids and the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) for signal transduction. In 
addition, organisms live under the strong influence of day-night cycles and,
hence, have also developed a highly conserved circadian clock system for
adjusting their activities to recurring environmental changes. This regulatory
system creates and maintains internal circadian rhythmicity by employing a
self-oscillating molecular pacemaker composed of the Clock-Bmal1 heterodimer and 
other transcription factors. The circadian clock consists of a central master
clock in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the brain hypothalamus and peripheral
slave clocks in virtually all organs and tissues. The HPA axis and the circadian 
clock system communicate with each other at multiple levels. The central clock
controls the HPA axis, creating the diurnal oscillation of circulating
adrenocorticotropic hormone and cortisol, and the HPA axis adjusts the circadian 
rhythmicity of the peripheral clocks in response to various stressors through the
GR. Further, Clock-Bmal1 regulates the response to glucocorticoids in peripheral 
tissues through acetylation of the GR, possibly antagonizing the biologic actions
of diurnally fluctuating circulating cortisol. Importantly, dysregulation in the 
clock system and the HPA axis may cause similar pathologic
manifestations--including obesity, metabolic syndrome, and cardiovascular
disease--by uncoupling circulating cortisol concentrations from tissue
sensitivity to glucocorticoids.

PMCID: PMC3777266
PMID: 23033538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Yale J Biol Med. 2012 Sep;85(3):387-401. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

The role of circadian clocks in metabolic disease.

Li MD(1), Li CM, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Section of Comparative
Medicine, and Integrative Cell Signaling and Neurobiology of Metabolism Program, 
Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. mindian.li@yale.edu

The circadian clock is a highly conserved timing system, resonating physiological
processes to 24-hour environmental cycles. Circadian misalignment is emerging as 
a risk factor of metabolic disease. The molecular clock resides in all metabolic 
tissues, the dysfunction of which is associated with perturbed energy metabolism.
In this article, we will review current knowledge about molecular mechanisms of
the circadian clock and the role of clocks in the physiology and pathophysiology 
of metabolic tissues.

PMCID: PMC3447202
PMID: 23012586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 9;109(41):16576-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1214209109. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

bHLH-PAS heterodimer of methoprene-tolerant and Cycle mediates circadian
expression of juvenile hormone-induced mosquito genes.

Shin SW(1), Zou Z, Saha TT, Raikhel AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology and the Institute for Integrative Genome Biology,
University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

Juvenile hormone (JH) governs a great diversity of processes in insect
development and reproduction. It plays a critical role in controlling the
gonadotrophic cycles of female mosquitoes by preparing tissues for blood
digestion and egg development. Here, we show that in female Aedes aegypti
mosquitoes JH III control of gene expression is mediated by a heterodimer of two 
bHLH-PAS proteins-the JH receptor methoprene-tolerant (MET) and Cycle (CYC,
AAEL002049). We identified Aedes CYC as a MET-interacting protein using yeast
two-hybrid screening. Binding of CYC and MET required the presence of JH III. In 
newly eclosed female mosquitoes, the expression of two JH-responsive genes, Kr-h1
and Hairy, was dependent on both the ratio of light to dark periods and JH III.
Their expression was compromised by in vivo RNA interference (RNAi) depletions of
CYC, MET, and the steroid receptor coactivator SRC/FISC. Moreover, JH III was not
effective in induction of Kr-h1 and Hairy gene expression in vitro in fat bodies 
of female mosquitoes with RNAi-depleted CYC, MET or SRC/FISC. A sequence
containing an E-box-like motif from the Aedes Kr-h1 gene promoter specifically
interacted with a protein complex, which included MET and CYC from the female
mosquito fat body nuclear extract. These results indicate that a MET/CYC
heterodimer mediates JH III activation of Kr-h1 and Hairy genes in the context of
light-dependent circadian regulation in female mosquitoes during posteclosion
development. This study provides an important insight into the understanding of
the molecular basis of JH action.

PMCID: PMC3478602
PMID: 23012454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Biol Rhythms. 2012 Oct;27(5):353-64.

A mechanism for circadian control of pacemaker neuron excitability.

Ruben M(1), Drapeau MD, Mizrak D, Blau J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA.

Although the intracellular molecular clocks that regulate circadian (~24 h)
behavioral rhythms are well understood, it remains unclear how molecular clock
information is transduced into rhythmic neuronal activity that in turn drives
behavioral rhythms. To identify potential clock outputs, the authors generated
expression profiles from a homogeneous population of purified pacemaker neurons
(LN(v)s) from wild-type and clock mutant Drosophila. They identified a group of
genes with enriched expression in LN(v)s and a second group of genes rhythmically
expressed in LN(v)s in a clock-dependent manner. Only 10 genes fell into both
groups: 4 core clock genes, including period (per) and timeless (tim), and 6
genes previously unstudied in circadian rhythms. The authors focused on one of
these 6 genes, Ir, which encodes an inward rectifier K(+) channel likely to
regulate resting membrane potential, whose expression peaks around dusk. Reducing
Ir expression in LN(v)s increased larval light avoidance and lengthened the
period of adult locomotor rhythms, consistent with increased LN(v) excitability. 
In contrast, increased Ir expression made many adult flies arrhythmic and
dampened PER protein oscillations. The authors propose that rhythmic Ir
expression contributes to daily rhythms in LN(v) neuronal activity, which in turn
feed back to regulate molecular clock oscillations.

PMCID: PMC4019749
PMID: 23010658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Chronobiol Int. 2012 Nov;29(9):1180-94. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2012.719967. Epub
2012 Sep 24.

CLOCK, PER2 and BMAL1 DNA methylation: association with obesity and metabolic
syndrome characteristics and monounsaturated fat intake.

Milagro FI(1), Gómez-Abellán P, Campión J, Martínez JA, Ordovás JM, Garaulet M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Sciences, Physiology and Toxicology,
University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

The circadian clock system instructs 24-h rhythmicity on gene expression in
essentially all cells, including adipocytes, and epigenetic mechanisms may
participate in this regulation. The aim of this research was to investigate the
influence of obesity and metabolic syndrome (MetS) features in clock gene
methylation and the involvement of these epigenetic modifications in the
outcomes. Sixty normal-weight, overweight and obese women followed a 16-weeks
weight reduction program. DNA methylation levels at different CpG sites of CLOCK,
BMAL1 and PER2 genes were analyzed by Sequenom's MassARRAY in white blood cells
obtained before the treatment. Statistical differences between normal-weight and 
overweight + obese subjects were found in the methylation status of different CpG
sites of CLOCK (CpGs 1, 5-6, 8 and 11-14) and, with lower statistical
significance, in BMAL1 (CpGs 6-7, 8, 15 and 16-17). The methylation pattern of
different CpG sites of the three genes showed significant associations with
anthropometric parameters such as body mass index and adiposity, and with a MetS 
score. Moreover, the baseline methylation levels of CLOCK CpG 1 and PER2 CpGs 2-3
and 25 correlated with the magnitude of weight loss. Interestingly, the
percentage of methylation of CLOCK CpGs 1 and 8 showed associations with the
intake of monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids. This study
demonstrates for the first time an association between methylation status of CpG 
sites located in clock genes (CLOCK, BMAL1 and PER2) with obesity, MetS and
weight loss. Moreover, the methylation status of different CpG sites in CLOCK and
PER2 could be used as biomarkers of weight-loss success, particularly CLOCK CPGs 
5-6.

PMID: 23003921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2013 Apr;57(4):686-97. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201200212. Epub 2012 
Sep 24.

Differential gene expression and methylation in the retinoid/PPARA pathway and of
tumor suppressors may modify intestinal tumorigenesis induced by low folate in
mice.

Leclerc D(1), Cao Y, Deng L, Mikael LG, Wu Q, Rozen R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Montreal Children's Hospital Research Institute,
McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

SCOPE: Inadequate folate intake increases risk for colorectal cancer. We
previously showed that low-folate diets induced intestinal tumors in BALB/c mice,
but not in C57BL/6 mice. We suggested that DNA damage, altered methylation, and
reduced apoptosis could contribute to tumorigenesis in this model.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To identify genes involved in tumorigenesis, we compared
gene expression profiles in preneoplastic intestine of BALB/c and C57BL/6
mice-fed low folate. We identified 74 upregulated and 90 downregulated genes in
BALB/c compared to C57BL/6 mice. We validated decreased expression of Bcmo1 and
increased expression of Aldh1a, which would be expected to upregulate the
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARA) pathway, and confirmed
the expected upregulation of several Ppara downstream genes. We verified, in
BALB/c mice, reduced expression of Sprr2a, a gene that increases resistance to
oxidative damage, and of two oncosuppressors (Bmp5 and Arntl). Low folate
increased Ppara and Aldh1a1 expression, and decreased Bcmo1, Sprr2a, and Bmp5
expression in BALB/c, compared to BALB/c on control diets. Bcmo1, Ppara, and Bmp5
showed differential DNA methylation related to strain, diet, and/or Mthfr
genotype.
CONCLUSION: Disturbed regulation of the retinoid/PPARA pathway, which influences 
oxidative damage, and altered expression of tumor suppressors may contribute to
intestinal tumorigenesis induced by low-folate intake.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23001810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Blood. 2012 Dec 6;120(24):4873-81. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-06-436188. Epub 2012
Sep 18.

Genome-wide association study for circulating levels of PAI-1 provides novel
insights into its regulation.

Huang J(1), Sabater-Lleal M, Asselbergs FW, Tregouet D, Shin SY, Ding J, Baumert 
J, Oudot-Mellakh T, Folkersen L, Johnson AD, Smith NL, Williams SM, Ikram MA,
Kleber ME, Becker DM, Truong V, Mychaleckyj JC, Tang W, Yang Q, Sennblad B, Moore
JH, Williams FM, Dehghan A, Silbernagel G, Schrijvers EM, Smith S, Karakas M,
Tofler GH, Silveira A, Navis GJ, Lohman K, Chen MH, Peters A, Goel A, Hopewell
JC, Chambers JC, Saleheen D, Lundmark P, Psaty BM, Strawbridge RJ, Boehm BO,
Carter AM, Meisinger C, Peden JF, Bis JC, McKnight B, Öhrvik J, Taylor K,
Franzosi MG, Seedorf U, Collins R, Franco-Cereceda A, Syvänen AC, Goodall AH,
Yanek LR, Cushman M, Müller-Nurasyid M, Folsom AR, Basu S, Matijevic N, van Gilst
WH, Kooner JS, Hofman A, Danesh J, Clarke R, Meigs JB; DIAGRAM Consortium,
Kathiresan S, Reilly MP; CARDIoGRAM Consortium, Klopp N, Harris TB, Winkelmann
BR, Grant PJ, Hillege HL, Watkins H; C4D Consortium, Spector TD, Becker LC, Tracy
RP, März W, Uitterlinden AG, Eriksson P, Cambien F; CARDIOGENICS Consortium,
Morange PE, Koenig W, Soranzo N, van der Harst P, Liu Y, O'Donnell CJ, Hamsten A.

Collaborators: Attwood T, Belz S, Braund P, Brocheton J, Cambien F, Cooper J,
Diemert P, Deloukas P, Eardman J, Foad N, Godefroy T, Goodall AH, Gracey J, Gray 
E, Gwilliams R, Heimerl S, Hengstenberg C, Jolley J, Krishnan U, Lloyd-Jones H,
Liljedahl U, Lugauer I, Lundmark P, Moore JS, Montalescot G, Muir D, Murray E,
Nelson CP, Neudert J, Niblett D, O'Leary K, Ouwehand WH, Pollard H, Proust C,
Rankin A, Rendon A, Rice CM, Sager HB, Samani NJ, Sambrook J, Schmitz G, Scholz
M, Schroeder L, Schunkert H, Stephens J, Syvannen AC, Tennstedt S, Wallace C,
Crisp-Hihn A, Maouche S.

We conducted a genome-wide association study to identify novel associations
between genetic variants and circulating plasminogen activator inhibitor-1
(PAI-1) concentration, and examined functional implications of variants and genes
that were discovered. A discovery meta-analysis was performed in 19 599 subjects,
followed by replication analysis of genome-wide significant (P < 5 × 10(-8))
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 10 796 independent samples. We further 
examined associations with type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease, assessed 
the functional significance of the SNPs for gene expression in human tissues, and
conducted RNA-silencing experiments for one novel association. We confirmed the
association of the 4G/5G proxy SNP rs2227631 in the promoter region of SERPINE1
(7q22.1) and discovered genome-wide significant associations at 3 additional
loci: chromosome 7q22.1 close to SERPINE1 (rs6976053, discovery P = 3.4 ×
10(-10)); chromosome 11p15.2 within ARNTL (rs6486122, discovery P = 3.0 ×
10(-8)); and chromosome 3p25.2 within PPARG (rs11128603, discovery P = 2.9 ×
10(-8)). Replication was achieved for the 7q22.1 and 11p15.2 loci. There was
nominal association with type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease at ARNTL (P 
< .05). Functional studies identified MUC3 as a candidate gene for the second
association signal on 7q22.1. In summary, SNPs in SERPINE1 and ARNTL and an SNP
associated with the expression of MUC3 were robustly associated with circulating 
levels of PAI-1.

PMCID: PMC3520624
PMID: 22990020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mol Cell. 2012 Oct 26;48(2):277-87. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.08.012. Epub 2012 
Sep 13.

Circadian Dbp transcription relies on highly dynamic BMAL1-CLOCK interaction with
E boxes and requires the proteasome.

Stratmann M(1), Suter DM, Molina N, Naef F, Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Sciences III, University of Geneva, and
National Centre of Competence in Research Frontiers in Genetics, 1211 Geneva,
Switzerland.

The transcription factors BMAL1 and CLOCK drive the circadian transcription of
clock and clock-controlled genes, such as Dbp. To investigate the kinetics of
BMAL1 binding to target genes in real time, we generated a cell line harboring
tandem arrays of Dbp repeats and monitored the binding of a fluorescent BMAL1
fusion protein to these arrays by time-lapse microscopy. BMAL1 occupancy at the
Dbp locus was highly circadian and strictly dependent on CLOCK. Moreover,
BMAL1-CLOCK associations with Dbp were extremely unstable and displayed
stochastic, proteasome-dependent fluctuations. Proteasome inhibition prolonged
the residence time of BMAL1-CLOCK but resulted in an immediate attenuation of Dbp
transcription. In cells harboring a single Dbp-luciferase reporter gene copy,
this silencing was shown to be caused by a decrease in both the frequencies and
sizes of transcriptional bursts. Thus, BMAL1 and CLOCK may act as Kamikaze
activators, in that they are rapidly degraded once bound to Dbp chromatin.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22981862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. ACS Chem Biol. 2012 Nov 16;7(11):1817-21. doi: 10.1021/cb300432s. Epub 2012 Sep
14.

Construction of a rhythm transfer system that mimics the cellular clock.

Imanishi M(1), Yamamoto K, Yamada H, Hirose Y, Okamura H, Futaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan.
imiki@scl.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Creation of an artificial oscillating gene expression system is one of the most
challenging issues in synthetic biology. Here, we constructed a simple system to 
manipulate gene expression patterns to be circadian, reflecting the intrinsic
cellular clock, by fusing a core clock protein, BMAL1 or CLOCK, with a zinc
finger-type DNA binding domain. Circadian rhythmic gene expression was induced
only when the target gene contained zinc finger-binding sequences. To our
knowledge, this simple approach is the first to manipulate gene expression
patterns into circadian rhythms and would be applicable to various endogenous
genes.

PMID: 22967180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;32(22):4585-94. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00334-12. Epub 2012 Sep 
10.

Distinct roles of DBHS family members in the circadian transcriptional feedback
loop.

Kowalska E(1), Ripperger JA, Muheim C, Maier B, Kurihara Y, Fox AH, Kramer A,
Brown SA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.

Factors interacting with core circadian clock components are essential to achieve
transcriptional feedback necessary for metazoan clocks. Here, we show that all
three members of the Drosophila behavior human splicing (DBHS) family of
RNA-binding proteins play a role in the mammalian circadian oscillator,
abrogating or altering clock function when overexpressed or depleted in cells.
Although these proteins are members of so-called nuclear paraspeckles, depletion 
of paraspeckles themselves via silencing of the structural noncoding RNA (ncRNA) 
Neat1 did not affect overall clock function, suggesting that paraspeckles are not
required for DBHS-mediated circadian effects. Instead, we show that the proteins 
bound to circadian promoter DNA in a fashion that required the PERIOD (PER)
proteins and potently repressed E-box-mediated transcription but not
cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter-mediated transcription when they were exogenously 
recruited. Nevertheless, mice with one or both copies of these genes deleted show
only small changes in period length or clock gene expression in vivo. Data from
transient transfections show that each of these proteins can either repress or
activate, depending on the context. Taken together, our data suggest that all of 
the DBHS family members serve overlapping or redundant roles as transcriptional
cofactors at circadian clock-regulated genes.

PMCID: PMC3486183
PMID: 22966205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Cell Biochem Funct. 2013 Mar;31(2):166-72. doi: 10.1002/cbf.2871. Epub 2012 Sep
7.

Over-expression of circadian clock gene Bmal1 affects proliferation and the
canonical Wnt pathway in NIH-3T3 cells.

Lin F(1), Chen Y, Li X, Zhao Q, Tan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Orthodontic Centre, West China College of Stomatology, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China.

Comment in
    Cell Biochem Funct. 2013 Oct;31(7):626-7.

Bmal1 is a transcription factor that plays a central role in the regulation of
circadian rhythms. Recent study reported that Bmal1-/- mice displayed many known 
features of premature ageing, such as reduction of bone mass. Our previous study 
has found that both the proliferation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
(BMSCs) and Bmal1 expression decreased with advancing age. It seemed that a
positive correlation existed between Bmal1 protein level and the proliferative
activity of BMSCs. ß-catenin, the core factor of the canonical Wnt pathway, also 
showed reduced expression in aged mice. In order to further confirm this, we
constructed a lentiviral vector to over-express Bmal1 in NIH-3T3 cells;
successful transfection was verified. The cell proliferation rate of infected
cells was higher than the non-transfected NIH-3T3 cells, suggesting that
circadian clock gene Bmal1 can promote proliferation. ß-catenin showed an
increased expression in NIH-3T3 cells after Bmal1 over-expression, indicating
that activation of the canonical Wnt pathway might be the mechanism underlying
the effect of circadian clock gene Bmal on promoting cell proliferation.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22961668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Gene. 2012 Dec 1;510(2):118-25. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.08.022. Epub 2012 Aug
29.

Identification of a new clock-related element EL-box involved in circadian
regulation by BMAL1/CLOCK and HES1.

Ueshima T(1), Kawamoto T, Honda KK, Noshiro M, Fujimoto K, Nakao S, Ichinose N,
Hashimoto S, Gotoh O, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

Several cis-acting elements play critical roles in maintaining circadian
expression of clock and clock-controlled genes. Using in silico analysis, we
identified 10 sequence motifs that are correlated with the circadian phases of
gene expression in the cartilage. One of these motifs, an E-box-like
clock-related element (EL-box; GGCACGAGGC), can mediate BMAL1/CLOCK-induced
transcription, which is typically regulated through an E-box or E'-box.
Expression of EL-box-containing genes, including Ank, Dbp, and Nr1d1 (Rev-erba), 
was induced by BMAL1/CLOCK or BMAL1/NPAS2. Compared with the E-box, the EL-box
elements had distinct responsiveness to DEC1, DEC2, and HES1: suppressive actions
of DEC1 and DEC2 on the EL-box were less potent than those on the E-box. HES1,
which is known to bind to the N-box (CACNAG), suppressed enhancer activity of the
EL-box, but not the E-box. In the Dbp promoter, an EL-box worked cooperatively
with a noncanonical (NC) E-box to mediate BMAL1/CLOCK actions. These findings
suggest that in addition to known clock elements, the EL-box element may
contribute to circadian regulation of clock and clock-controlled genes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22960268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. BMC Mol Biol. 2012 Sep 7;13:27. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-13-27.

Clock-controlled mir-142-3p can target its activator, Bmal1.

Tan X(1), Zhang P, Zhou L, Yin B, Pan H, Peng X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: microRNAs (miRNAs) are shown to be involved in the regulation of
circadian clock. However, it remains largely unknown whether miRNAs can regulate 
the core clock genes (Clock and Bmal1).
RESULTS: In this study, we found that mir-142-3p directly targeted the 3'UTR of
human BMAL1 and mouse Bmal1. The over-expression (in 293ET and NIH3T3 cells) and 
knockdown (in U87MG cells) of mir-142-3p reduced and up-regulated the Bmal1/BMAL1
mRNA and protein levels, respectively. Moreover, the expression level of
mir-142-3p oscillated in serum-shocked NIH3T3 cells and the results of ChIP and
luciferase reporter assays suggested that the expression of mir-142-3p was
directly controlled by CLOCK/BMAL1 heterodimers in NIH3T3 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that mir-142-3p can directly target the 3'UTR
of Bmal1. In addition, the expression of mir-142-3p is controlled by CLOCK/BMAL1 
heterodimers, suggesting a potential negative feedback loop consisting of the
miRNAs and the core clock genes. These findings open new perspective for studying
the molecular mechanism of circadian clock.

PMCID: PMC3482555
PMID: 22958478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Cell Tissue Res. 2012 Dec;350(3):539-48. doi: 10.1007/s00441-012-1489-2. Epub
2012 Sep 1.

Expression of the clock genes Per1 and Bmal1 during follicle development in the
rat ovary. Effects of gonadotropin stimulation and hypophysectomy.

Gräs S(1), Georg B, Jørgensen HL, Fahrenkrug J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Herlev Hospital, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. soegr@heh.regionh.dk

Daily oscillations of clock genes have recently been demonstrated in the ovaries 
of several species. Clock gene knockout or mutant mice demonstrate a variety of
reproductive defects. Accumulating evidence suggests that these rhythms act to
synchronise the expression of specific ovarian genes to hypothalamo-pituitary
signals and that they are regulated by one or both of the gonadotropins. The aim 
of this study has been to examine the spatio-temporal expression of the clock
genes Per1 and Bmal1 during gonadotropin-independent and gonadotropin-dependent
follicle development in the rat ovary. We have examined the ovaries of
prepubertal rats, of prepubertal rats stimulated with equine chorionic
gonadotropin (eCG)/human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and of hypophysectomised
adult animals. Using quantitative reverse transcription with the polymerase chain
reaction, in situ hybridisation histochemistry and immunohistochemistry, we have 
demonstrated that the expression of the two clock genes is low and arrhythmic in 
ovarian cells during early gonadotropin-independent follicle development in
prepubertal animals and in hypophysectomised animals. We have also demonstrated
that the expression of the clock genes becomes rhythmic following eCG stimulation
in the theca interna cells and the secondary interstitial cells and that,
following additional hCG stimulation, the expression of the clock genes also
becomes rhythmic in the granulosa cells of preovulatory follicles. These findings
link the initiation of clock gene rhythms in the rat ovary to the luteinising
hormone receptor and suggest a functional link to androgen and progesterone
production. In hypophysectomised animals, rhythmic clock gene expression is also 
observed in the corpora lutea and in secondary interstitial cells demonstrating
that, in these compartments, entrainment of clock gene rhythms is
gonadotropin-independent.

PMID: 22940729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 19;287(43):36081-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.408963. Epub
2012 Aug 30.

Clock genes influence gene expression in growth plate and endochondral
ossification in mice.

Takarada T(1), Kodama A, Hotta S, Mieda M, Shimba S, Hinoi E, Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kanazawa University Graduate School, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan.

We have previously shown transient promotion by parathyroid hormone of Period-1
(Per1) expression in cultured chondrocytes. Here we show the modulation by clock 
genes of chondrogenic differentiation through gene transactivation of the master 
regulator of chondrogenesis Indian hedgehog (IHH) in chondrocytes of the growth
plate. Several clock genes were expressed with oscillatory rhythmicity in
cultured chondrocytes and rib growth plate in mice, whereas chondrogenesis was
markedly inhibited in stable transfectants of Per1 in chondrocytic ATDC5 cells
and in rib growth plate chondrocytes from mice deficient of brain and muscle aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like (BMAL1). Ihh promoter activity was
regulated by different clock gene products, with clear circadian rhythmicity in
expression profiles of Ihh in the growth plate. In BMAL1-null mice, a predominant
decrease was seen in Ihh expression in the growth plate with a smaller body size 
than in wild-type mice. BMAL1 deficit led to disruption of the rhythmic
expression profiles of both Per1 and Ihh in the growth plate. A clear rhythmicity
was seen with Ihh expression in ATDC5 cells exposed to dexamethasone. In young
mice defective of BMAL1 exclusively in chondrocytes, similar abnormalities were
found in bone growth and Ihh expression. These results suggest that endochondral 
ossification is under the regulation of particular clock gene products expressed 
in chondrocytes during postnatal skeletogenesis through a mechanism relevant to
the rhythmic Ihh expression.

PMCID: PMC3476276
PMID: 22936800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Science. 2012 Oct 19;338(6105):349-54. doi: 10.1126/science.1226339. Epub 2012
Aug 30.

Transcriptional architecture and chromatin landscape of the core circadian clock 
in mammals.

Koike N(1), Yoo SH, Huang HC, Kumar V, Lee C, Kim TK, Takahashi JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9111, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2012 Oct 19;338(6105):338-40.

The mammalian circadian clock involves a transcriptional feed back loop in which 
CLOCK and BMAL1 activate the Period and Cryptochrome genes, which then feedback
and repress their own transcription. We have interrogated the transcriptional
architecture of the circadian transcriptional regulatory loop on a genome scale
in mouse liver and find a stereotyped, time-dependent pattern of transcription
factor binding, RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) recruitment, RNA expression, and
chromatin states. We find that the circadian transcriptional cycle of the clock
consists of three distinct phases: a poised state, a coordinated de novo
transcriptional activation state, and a repressed state. Only 22% of messenger
RNA (mRNA) cycling genes are driven by de novo transcription, suggesting that
both transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms underlie the mammalian
circadian clock. We also find that circadian modulation of RNAPII recruitment and
chromatin remodeling occurs on a genome-wide scale far greater than that seen
previously by gene expression profiling.

PMCID: PMC3694775
PMID: 22936566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Cell Cycle. 2012 Oct 1;11(19):3691-700. doi: 10.4161/cc.21946. Epub 2012 Aug 30.

Identification of an estrogen-regulated circadian mechanism necessary for breast 
acinar morphogenesis.

Rossetti S(1), Corlazzoli F, Gregorski A, Azmi NH, Sacchi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY,
USA.

Altered estrogen receptor a (ERA) signaling and altered circadian rhythms are
both features of breast cancer. By using a method to entrain circadian
oscillations in human cultured cells, we recently reported that the expression of
key clock genes oscillates in a circadian fashion in ERA-positive breast
epithelial cells but not in breast cancer cells, regardless of their ERA status. 
Moreover, we reported that ERA mRNA oscillates in a circadian fashion in
ERA-positive breast epithelial cells, but not in ERA-positive breast cancer
cells. By using ERA-positive HME1 breast epithelial cells, which can be both
entrained in vitro and can form mammary gland-like acinar structures in
three-dimensional (3D) culture, first we identified a circuit encompassing ERA
and an estrogen-regulated loop consisting of two circadian clock genes, PER2 and 
BMAL1. Further, we demonstrated that this estrogen-regulated circuit is necessary
for breast epithelial acinar morphogenesis. Disruption of this circuit due to
ERA-knockdown, negatively affects the estrogen-sustained circadian PER2-BMAL1
mechanism as well as the formation of 3D HME1 acini. Conversely, knockdown of
either PER2 or BMAL1, by hampering the PER2-BMAL1 loop of the circadian clock,
negatively affects ERA circadian oscillations and 3D breast acinar morphogenesis.
To our knowledge, this study provides the first evidence of the implication of an
ERA-circadian clock mechanism in the breast acinar morphogenetic process.

PMCID: PMC3478319
PMID: 22935699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Orv Hetil. 2012 Sep 2;153(35):1370-9. doi: 10.1556/OH.2012.29436.

[Physiological and pathophysiological role of the circadian clock system].

[Article in Hungarian]

Halmos T(1), Suba I.

Author information: 
(1)Mazsihisz Szeretetkórház Metabolikus Ambulancia Budapest Amerikai út 53-55.
1145. fishwash@t-online.hu

It has been well known for ages that in living organisms the rhythmicity of
biological processes is linked to the ~ 24-hour light-dark cycle. However, the
exact function of the circadian clock system has been explored only in the past
decades. It came to light that the photosensitive primary "master clock" is
situated in the suprachiasmatic photosensitive nuclei of the special hypothalamic
region, and that it is working according to ~24-hour changes of light and
darkness. The master clock sends its messages to the peripheral "slave clocks".
In many organs, like pancreatic ß-cells, the slave clocks have autonomic
functions as well. Two essential components of the clock system are proteins
encoded by the CLOCK and BMAL1 genes. CLOCK genes are in interaction with
endonuclear receptors such as peroxisoma-proliferator activated receptors and
Rev-erb-a, as well as with the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, regulating
the adaptation to stressors, energy supply, metabolic processes and
cardiovascular system. Melatonin, the product of corpus pineale has a significant
role in the functions of the clock system. The detailed discovery of the clock
system has changed our previous knowledge about the development of many diseases.
The most explored fields are hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, metabolic
processes, mental disorders, cancers, sleep apnoe and joint disorders. CLOCK
genes influence ageing as well. The recognition of the periodicity of biological 
processes makes the optimal dosing of certain drugs feasible. The more detailed
discovery of the interaction of the clock system might further improve treatment 
and prevention of many disorders.

PMID: 22935429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Inflammation. 2013 Feb;36(1):152-62. doi: 10.1007/s10753-012-9530-x.

Adenosine A2A receptor and TNF-a regulate the circadian machinery of the human
monocytic THP-1 cells.

Perez-Aso M(1), Feig JL, Mediero A, Cronstein BN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Medicine, Department of Medicine, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. Miguel.PerezAso@nyumc.org

Erratum in
    Inflammation. 2013 Feb;36(1):163. Aránzazu, Mediero [corrected to Mediero,
Aránzazu].

Morning stiffness and increased symptoms of inflammatory arthritis are among the 
most common manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Tumor necrosis alpha
(TNF-a), an important mediator of inflammation in RA, regulates the circadian
expression of clock proteins, and adenosine A(2A) receptors (A(2A)R) mediate many
of the anti-inflammatory and antirheumatic actions of methotrexate, the
cornerstone drug in the treatment of RA. We found that A(2A)R activation and
TNF-a activated the clock core loop of the human monocytic THP-1 cell line. We
further observed that interleukin (IL)-10, but not IL-12, mRNA expression
fluctuates in a circadian fashion and that TNF-a and A(2A)R stimulation combined 
increased IL-10 expression. Interestingly, TNF-a, but not CGS21680, dramatically 
inhibited IL-12 mRNA expression. The demonstration that A(2A)R and TNF-a regulate
the intrinsic circadian clock in immune cells provides an explanation for both
the pathologic changes in circadian rhythms in RA and for the adverse circadian
effects of methotrexate, such as fatigue.

PMCID: PMC3553238
PMID: 22923002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Exp Mol Med. 2012 Nov 30;44(11):642-52. doi: 10.3858/emm.2012.44.11.073.

Circadian regulation of low density lipoprotein receptor promoter activity by
CLOCK/BMAL1, Hes1 and Hes6.

Lee YJ(1), Han DH, Pak YK, Cho SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Neurodegeneration Control Research Center,
Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701, Korea.

Low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) plays an important role in the
cholesterol homeostasis. We examined the possible circadian regulation of LDLR
and mechanism(s) underlying it. In mice, blood glucose and plasma triglyceride,
total and high density lipoprotein cholesterol varied distinctively throughout a 
day. In addition, LDLR mRNA oscillated in the liver in a functional
clock-dependent manner. Accordingly, analysis of human LDLR promoter sequence
revealed three putative E-boxes, raising the possible regulation of LDLR
expression by E-box-binding transcription factors. To test this possibility,
human LDLR promoter reporter constructs were transfected into HepG2 cells and the
effects of CLOCK/BMAL1, Hes1, and Hes6 expression were analyzed. It was found
that positive circadian transcription factor complex CLOCK/BMAL1 upregulated
human LDLR promoter activity in a serum-independent manner, while Hes family
members Hes1 and Hes6 downregulated it only under serum-depleted conditions. Both
effects were mapped to proximal promoter region of human LDLR, where mutation or 
deletion of well-known sterol regulatory element (SRE) abolished only the
repressive effect of Hes1. Interestingly, hes6 and hes1 mRNA oscillated in an
anti-phasic manner in the wild-type but not in the per1-/-per2 -/- mouse.
Comparative analysis of mouse, rat and human hes6 genes revealed that three
E-boxes are conserved among three species. Transfection and site-directed
mutagenesis studies with hes6 reporter constructs confirmed that the third E-box 
in the exon IV is functionally induced by CLOCK/BMAL1. Taken together, these
results suggest that LDLR expression is under circadian control involving
CLOCK/BMAL1 and Hes family members Hes1 and Hes6.

PMCID: PMC3509181
PMID: 22913986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42713. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042713. Epub 2012 Aug 13.

Timed maternal melatonin treatment reverses circadian disruption of the fetal
adrenal clock imposed by exposure to constant light.

Mendez N(1), Abarzua-Catalan L, Vilches N, Galdames HA, Spichiger C, Richter HG, 
Valenzuela GJ, Seron-Ferre M, Torres-Farfan C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Anatomía, Histología y Patología, Universidad Austral de Chile,
Valdivia, Chile.

Surprisingly, in our modern 24/7 society, there is scant information on the
impact of developmental chronodisruption like the one experienced by shift worker
pregnant women on fetal and postnatal physiology. There are important differences
between the maternal and fetal circadian systems; for instance, the
suprachiasmatic nucleus is the master clock in the mother but not in the fetus.
Despite this, several tissues/organs display circadian oscillations in the fetus.
Our hypothesis is that the maternal plasma melatonin rhythm drives the fetal
circadian system, which in turn relies this information to other fetal tissues
through corticosterone rhythmic signaling. The present data show that suppression
of the maternal plasma melatonin circadian rhythm, secondary to exposure of
pregnant rats to constant light along the second half of gestation, had several
effects on fetal development. First, it induced intrauterine growth retardation. 
Second, in the fetal adrenal in vivo it markedly affected the mRNA expression
level of clock genes and clock-controlled genes as well as it lowered the content
and precluded the rhythm of corticosterone. Third, an altered in vitro fetal
adrenal response to ACTH of both, corticosterone production and relative
expression of clock genes and steroidogenic genes was observed. All these changes
were reversed when the mother received a daily dose of melatonin during the
subjective night; supporting a role of melatonin on overall fetal development and
pointing to it as a 'time giver' for the fetal adrenal gland. Thus, the present
results collectively support that the maternal circadian rhythm of melatonin is a
key signal for the generation and/or synchronization of the circadian rhythms in 
the fetal adrenal gland. In turn, low levels and lack of a circadian rhythm of
fetal corticosterone may be responsible of fetal growth restriction; potentially 
inducing long term effects in the offspring, possibility that warrants further
research.

PMCID: PMC3418288
PMID: 22912724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Circ Res. 2012 Oct 12;111(9):1157-65. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.261750. Epub
2012 Aug 20.

Increased superoxide and endothelial NO synthase uncoupling in blood vessels of
Bmal1-knockout mice.

Anea CB(1), Cheng B, Sharma S, Kumar S, Caldwell RW, Yao L, Ali MI, Merloiu AM,
Stepp DW, Black SM, Fulton DJ, Rudic RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Georgia Health Sciences University,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

RATIONALE: Disruption of the circadian clock in mice produces vascular
dysfunction as evidenced by impairments in endothelium-dependent signaling,
vasomotion, and blood vessel remodeling. Although the altered function of
endothelial NO synthase and the overproduction of reactive oxygen species are
central to dysfunction of the endothelium, to date, the impact of the circadian
clock on endothelial NO synthase coupling and vascular reactive oxygen species
production is not known.
OBJECTIVE: The goals of the present study were to determine whether deletion of a
critical component of the circadian clock, Bmal1, can influence endothelial NO
synthase coupling and reactive oxygen species levels in arteries from
Bmal1-knockout (KO) mice.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Endothelial function was reduced in aortae from Bmal1-KO
mice and improved by scavenging reactive oxygen species with polyethylene
glycol-superoxide dismutase and nonselectively inhibiting cyclooxygenase isoforms
with indomethacin. Aortae from Bmal1-KO mice exhibited enhanced superoxide levels
as determined by electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy and dihydroethidium
fluorescence, an elevation that was abrogated by administration of
nitro-l-arginine methyl ester. High-performance liquid chromatography analysis
revealed a reduction in tetrahydrobiopterin and an increase in dihydrobiopterin
levels in the lung and aorta of Bmal1-KO mice, whereas supplementation with
tetrahydrobiopterin improved endothelial function in the circadian clock KO mice.
Furthermore, levels of tetrahydrobiopterin, dihydrobiopterin, and the key enzymes
that regulate biopterin bioavailability, GTP cyclohydrolase and dihydrofolate
reductase exhibited a circadian expression pattern.
CONCLUSIONS: Having an established influence in the metabolic control of glucose 
and lipids, herein, we describe a novel role for the circadian clock in
metabolism of biopterins, with a significant impact in the vasculature, to
regulate coupling of endothelial NO synthase, production of superoxide, and
maintenance of endothelial function.

PMCID: PMC3740771
PMID: 22912383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Oct;40(19):9482-92. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks779. Epub 2012
Aug 16.

Rhythmic binding of Topoisomerase I impacts on the transcription of Bmal1 and
circadian period.

Onishi Y(1), Kawano Y.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology, Higashi 1-1-1, Tsukuba 305-8566, Japan.
y-onishi@aist.go.jp

The Bmal1 gene is essential for the circadian system, and its promoter has a
unique open chromatin structure. We examined the mechanism of topoisomerase I
(Top1) to understand the role of the unique chromatin structure in Bmal1 gene
regulation. Camptothecin, a Top1 inhibitor, and Top1 small interfering RNA
(siRNA) enhanced Baml1 transcription and lengthened its circadian period. Top1 is
located at an intermediate region between two ROREs that are critical
cis-elements of circadian transcription and the profile of Top1 binding indicated
anti-phase circadian oscillation of Bmal1 transcription. Promoter assays showed
that the Top1-binding site is required for transcriptional suppression and that
it functions cooperatively with the distal RORE, supporting that Bmal1
transcription is upregulated by Top1 inhibition. A DNA fragment between the
ROREs, where the Top1-binding site is located, behaved like a right-handed
superhelical twist, and modulation of Top1 activity by camptothecin and Top1
siRNA altered the footprint profile, indicating modulation of the chromatin
structure. These data indicate that Top1 modulates the chromatin structure of the
Bmal1 promoter, regulates Bmal1 transcription and influences the circadian
period.

PMCID: PMC3479213
PMID: 22904072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Sep 7;425(4):902-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.08.008. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Rhythmic expression of circadian clock genes in human leukocytes and beard hair
follicle cells.

Watanabe M(1), Hida A, Kitamura S, Enomoto M, Ohsawa Y, Katayose Y, Nozaki K,
Moriguchi Y, Aritake S, Higuchi S, Tamura M, Kato M, Mishima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychophysiology, National Institute of Mental Health, National 
Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, 4-1-1 Ogawa-Higashi, Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8553,
Japan.

Evaluating individual circadian rhythm traits is crucial for understanding the
human biological clock system. The present study reports characterization of
physiological and molecular parameters in 13 healthy male subjects under a
constant routine condition, where interfering factors were kept to minimum. We
measured hormonal secretion levels and examined temporal expression profiles of
circadian clock genes in peripheral leukocytes and beard hair follicle cells. All
13 subjects had prominent daily rhythms in melatonin and cortisol secretion.
Significant circadian rhythmicity was found for PER1 in 9 subjects, PER2 in 3
subjects, PER3 in all 13 subjects, and BMAL1 in 8 subjects in leukocytes.
Additionally, significant circadian rhythmicity was found for PER1 in 5 of 8
subjects tested, PER2 in 2 subjects, PER3 in 6 subjects, and BMAL1 in 3 subjects 
in beard hair follicle cells. The phase of PER1 and PER3 rhythms in leukocytes
correlated significantly with that of physiological rhythms. Our results
demonstrate that leukocytes and beard hair follicle cells possess an endogenous
circadian clock and suggest that PER1 and PER3 expression would be appropriate
biomarkers and hair follicle cells could be a useful tissue source for the
evaluation of biological clock traits in individuals.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22902636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Nutr Biochem. 2013 May;24(5):859-67. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2012.05.006. Epub
2012 Aug 16.

Retinoic acid receptors move in time with the clock in the hippocampus. Effect of
a vitamin-A-deficient diet.

Navigatore-Fonzo LS(1), Golini RL, Ponce IT, Delgado SM, Plateo-Pignatari MG,
Gimenez MS, Anzulovich AC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chronobiology, Multidisciplinary Institute of Biological
Research San Luis (IMIBIO-SL), National Council of Science and Technology
(CONICET), National University of San Luis (UNSL). Chacabuco y Pedernera,
D5700HHW, San Luis, Argentina.

An endogenous time-keeping mechanism controls circadian biological rhythms in
mammals. Previously, we showed that vitamin A deficiency modifies clock BMAL1 and
PER1 as well as BDNF and neurogranin daily rhythmicity in the rat hippocampus
when animals are maintained under 12-h-light:12-h-dark conditions. Retinoic acid 
nuclear receptors, retinoic acid receptors (RARs) and retinoid X receptors
(RXRs), have been detected in the same brain area. Our objectives were (a) to
analyze whether RARa, RARß and RXRß exhibit a circadian variation in the rat
hippocampus and (b) to investigate the effect of a vitamin-A-deficient diet on
the circadian expression of BMAL1, PER1 and retinoic acid receptors (RARs and
RXRß) genes. Holtzman male rats from control and vitamin-A-deficient groups were 
maintained under 12-h-light:12-h-dark or 12-h-dark:12-h-dark conditions during
the last week of treatment. RARa, RARß, RXRß, BMAL1 and PER1 transcript and
protein levels were determined in hippocampus samples isolated every 4 h in a
24-h period. Regulatory regions of RARs and RXRß genes were scanned for
clock-responsive sites, while BMAL1 and PER1 promoters were analyzed for retinoic
acid responsive elements and retinoid X responsive elements. E-box and
retinoid-related orphan receptor responsive element sites were found on
regulatory regions of retinoid receptors genes, which display an endogenously
controlled circadian expression in the rat hippocampus. Those temporal profiles
were modified when animals were fed with a vitamin-A-deficient diet. Similarly,
the nutritional vitamin A deficiency phase shifted BMAL1 and abolished PER1
circadian expression at both mRNA and protein levels. Our data suggest that
vitamin A deficiency may affect the circadian expression in the hippocampus by
modifying the rhythmic profiles of retinoic acid receptors.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3504648
PMID: 22902328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42695. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042695. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Circadian proteins CLOCK and BMAL1 in the chromatoid body, a RNA processing
granule of male germ cells.

Peruquetti RL(1), de Mateo S, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Epigenetics and Metabolism, School of Medicine, University of
California Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of America.

Spermatogenesis is a complex differentiation process that involves genetic and
epigenetic regulation, sophisticated hormonal control, and extensive structural
changes in male germ cells. RNA nuclear and cytoplasmic bodies appear to be
critical for the progress of spermatogenesis. The chromatoid body (CB) is a
cytoplasmic organelle playing an important role in RNA post-transcriptional and
translation regulation during the late steps of germ cell differentiation. The CB
is also important for fertility determination since mutations of genes encoding
its components cause infertility by spermatogenesis arrest. Targeted ablation of 
the Bmal1 and Clock genes, which encode central regulators of the circadian clock
also result in fertility defects caused by problems other than spermatogenesis
alterations. We show that the circadian proteins CLOCK and BMAL1 are localized in
the CB in a stage-specific manner of germ cells. Both BMAL1 and CLOCK proteins
physically interact with the ATP-dependent DEAD-box RNA helicase MVH (mouse VASA 
homolog), a hallmark component of the CB. BMAL1 is differentially expressed
during the spermatogenic cycle of seminiferous tubules, and Bmal1 and Clock
deficient mice display significant CB morphological alterations due to BMAL1
ablation or low expression. These findings suggest that both BMAL1 and CLOCK
contribute to CB assembly and physiology, raising questions on the role of the
circadian clock in reproduction and on the molecular function that CLOCK and
BMAL1 could potentially have in the CB assembly and physiology.

PMCID: PMC3416844
PMID: 22900038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Cell Cycle. 2012 Sep 1;11(17):3304-11. doi: 10.4161/cc.21669. Epub 2012 Aug 16.

The RelB subunit of NF<U+03BA>B acts as a negative regulator of circadian gene
expression.

Bellet MM(1), Zocchi L, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Epigenetics and Metabolism, School of Medicine, University of
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.

The circadian system controls a large array of physiological and metabolic
functions. The molecular organization of the circadian clock is complex,
involving various elements organized in feedback regulatory loops. Here we
demonstrate that the RelB subunit of NF<U+03BA>B acts as a repressor of circadian
transcription. RelB physically interacts with the circadian activator BMAL1 in
the presence of CLOCK to repress circadian gene expression at the promoter of the
clock-controlled gene Dbp. The repression is independent of the circadian
negative regulator CRY. Notably, RelB -/- fibroblasts have profound alterations
of circadian genes expression. These findings reveal a previously unforeseen
function for RelB as an important regulator of the mammalian circadian system in 
fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC3467027
PMID: 22894897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Cell Rep. 2012 Aug 30;2(2):231-41. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.07.005. Epub 2012
Aug 9.

Opposing effects of circadian clock genes bmal1 and period2 in regulation of
VEGF-dependent angiogenesis in developing zebrafish.

Jensen LD(1), Cao Z, Nakamura M, Yang Y, Bräutigam L, Andersson P, Zhang Y,
Wahlberg E, Länne T, Hosaka K, Cao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Molecular mechanisms underlying circadian-regulated physiological processes
remain largely unknown. Here, we show that disruption of the circadian clock by
both constant exposure to light and genetic manipulation of key genes in
zebrafish led to impaired developmental angiogenesis. A bmal1-specific morpholino
inhibited developmental angiogenesis in zebrafish embryos without causing obvious
nonvascular phenotypes. Conversely, a period2 morpholino accelerated angiogenic
vessel growth, suggesting that Bmal1 and Period2 display opposing angiogenic
effects. Using a promoter-reporter system consisting of various deleted
vegf-promoter mutants, we show that Bmal1 directly binds to and activates the
vegf promoter via E-boxes. Additionally, we provide evidence that knockdown of
Bmal1 leads to impaired Notch-inhibition-induced vascular sprouting. These
results shed mechanistic insight on the role of the circadian clock in regulation
of developmental angiogenesis, and our findings may be reasonably extended to
other types of physiological or pathological angiogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22884368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Science. 2012 Aug 17;337(6096):839-42. doi: 10.1126/science.1222826. Epub 2012
Aug 2.

Circadian rhythm of redox state regulates excitability in suprachiasmatic nucleus
neurons.

Wang TA(1), Yu YV, Govindaiah G, Ye X, Artinian L, Coleman TP, Sweedler JV, Cox
CL, Gillette MU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2012 Aug 17;337(6096):805-6.

Daily rhythms of mammalian physiology, metabolism, and behavior parallel the
day-night cycle. They are orchestrated by a central circadian clock in the brain,
the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). Transcription of clock genes is sensitive to
metabolic changes in reduction and oxidation (redox); however, circadian cycles
in protein oxidation have been reported in anucleate cells, where no
transcription occurs. We investigated whether the SCN also expresses redox cycles
and how such metabolic oscillations might affect neuronal physiology. We detected
self-sustained circadian rhythms of SCN redox state that required the molecular
clockwork. The redox oscillation could determine the excitability of SCN neurons 
through nontranscriptional modulation of multiple potassium (K(+)) channels.
Thus, dynamic regulation of SCN excitability appears to be closely tied to
metabolism that engages the clockwork machinery.

PMCID: PMC3490628
PMID: 22859819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Epigenetics. 2012 Sep;7(9):1046-56. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Diurnal expression of Dnmt3b mRNA in mouse liver is regulated by feeding and
hepatic clockwork.

Maekawa F(1), Shimba S, Takumi S, Sano T, Suzuki T, Bao J, Ohwada M, Ehara T,
Ogawa Y, Nohara K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Health Sciences, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, Tsukuba, Japan.

DNA methyltransferase 3B (DNMT3B) is critically involved in de novo DNA
methylation and genomic stability, while the regulatory mechanism in liver is
largely unknown. We previously reported that diurnal variation occurs in the mRNA
expression of Dnmt3b in adult mouse liver. The aim of this study was to determine
the mechanism underlying the diurnal expression pattern. The highest level and
the lowest level of Dnmt3b mRNA expression were confirmed to occur at dawn and in
the afternoon, respectively, and the expression pattern of Dnmt3b closely
coincided with that of Bmal1. Since the diurnal pattern of Dnmt3b mRNA expression
developed at weaning and scheduled feeding to separate the feeding cycle from the
light/dark cycle led to a phase-shift in the expression, it could be assumed that
feeding plays a critical role as an entrainment signal. In liver-specific Bmal1
knockout (L-Bmal1 KO) mice, L-Bmal1 deficiency resulted in significantly higher
levels of Dnmt3b at all measured time points, and the time when the expression
was the lowest in wild-type mice was shifted to earlier. Investigation of global 
DNA methylation revealed a temporal decrease of 5-methyl-cytosine percentage in
the genome of wild-type mice in late afternoon. By contrast, no such decrease in 
5-methyl-cytosine percentage was detected in L-Bmal1 KO mice, suggesting that
altered Dnmt3b expression affects the DNA methylation state. Taken together, the 
results suggest that the feeding and hepatic clockwork generated by the clock
genes, including Bmal1, regulate the diurnal variation in Dnmt3b mRNA expression 
and the consequent dynamic changes in global DNA methylation.

PMCID: PMC3515014
PMID: 22847467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Science. 2012 Jul 13;337(6091):165-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1224611.

Biochemistry. Nature's intricate clockwork.

Crane BR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14850, USA. bc69@cornell.edu

Comment on
    Science. 2012 Jul 13;337(6091):189-94.

PMID: 22798591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Endocrinology. 2012 Sep;153(9):4290-303. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1242. Epub 2012 Jun
29.

Loss of coiled-coil domain containing 80 negatively modulates glucose homeostasis
in diet-induced obese mice.

Tremblay F(1), Huard C, Dow J, Gareski T, Will S, Richard AM, Syed J, Bailey S,
Brenneman KA, Martinez RV, Perreault M, Lin Q, Gimeno RE.

Author information: 
(1)Centers for Therapeutic Innovation, Pfizer Inc., 3 Blackfan Circle, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. frederic.tremblay@pfizer.com

Coiled-coil domain containing 80 (Ccdc80) is a secreted protein highly enriched
in mouse and human white adipose tissue (WAT) that plays an important role during
adipocyte differentiation in vitro. To investigate the physiological function of 
Ccdc80 in energy and glucose homeostasis, we generated mice in which the gene
encoding Ccdc80 was disrupted. Mice lacking Ccdc80 showed increased sensitivity
to diet-induced hyperglycemia and glucose intolerance while displaying reduced
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in vivo. Gene expression analysis by
microarray revealed that only 10 transcripts were simultaneously altered in
pancreas, skeletal muscle, and WAT from Ccdc80(-/-) mice, including some
components of the circadian clock. Expression of the core clock member
Arntl/Bmal1 was reduced whereas that of the oscillating transcription factors Dbp
and Tef was increased in all tissues examined. Furthermore, knockdown of Ccdc80
in 3T3-L1 cells led to an increase of Dbp mRNA levels during adipocyte
differentiation, suggesting that Ccdc80 might be involved in the regulation of
this gene in a cell-autonomous manner. Importantly, transcriptional alterations
in Ccdc80(-/-) mice were associated with changes in feeding behavior, increased
caloric intake, decreased energy expenditure, and obesity. Taken together, our
results suggest that Ccdc80 is a novel modulator of glucose and energy
homeostasis during diet-induced obesity.

PMID: 22753645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 17;109(29):11758-63. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1209592109. Epub 2012 Jul 2.

Brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1) controls circadian cell
proliferation and susceptibility to UVB-induced DNA damage in the epidermis.

Geyfman M(1), Kumar V, Liu Q, Ruiz R, Gordon W, Espitia F, Cam E, Millar SE,
Smyth P, Ihler A, Takahashi JS, Andersen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, CA
92697, USA.

The role of the circadian clock in skin and the identity of genes participating
in its chronobiology remain largely unknown, leading us to define the circadian
transcriptome of mouse skin at two different stages of the hair cycle, telogen
and anagen. The circadian transcriptomes of telogen and anagen skin are largely
distinct, with the former dominated by genes involved in cell proliferation and
metabolism. The expression of many metabolic genes is antiphasic to cell
cycle-related genes, the former peaking during the day and the latter at night.
Consistently, accumulation of reactive oxygen species, a byproduct of oxidative
phosphorylation, and S-phase are antiphasic to each other in telogen skin.
Furthermore, the circadian variation in S-phase is controlled by BMAL1 intrinsic 
to keratinocytes, because keratinocyte-specific deletion of Bmal1 obliterates
time-of-day-dependent synchronicity of cell division in the epidermis leading to 
a constitutively elevated cell proliferation. In agreement with higher cellular
susceptibility to UV-induced DNA damage during S-phase, we found that mice are
most sensitive to UVB-induced DNA damage in the epidermis at night. Because in
the human epidermis maximum numbers of keratinocytes go through S-phase in the
late afternoon, we speculate that in humans the circadian clock imposes
regulation of epidermal cell proliferation so that skin is at a particularly
vulnerable stage during times of maximum UV exposure, thus contributing to the
high incidence of human skin cancers.

PMCID: PMC3406811
PMID: 22753467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep 1;40(17):8519-35. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

ROR<U+03B3> directly regulates the circadian expression of clock genes and downstream
targets in vivo.

Takeda Y(1), Jothi R, Birault V, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Systems Biology Group, Biostatistics Branch, Division of
Intramural Research, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,
National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

In this study, we demonstrate that the lack of retinoic acid-related orphan
receptor (ROR) <U+03B3> or a expression in mice significantly reduced the peak
expression level of Cry1, Bmal1, E4bp4, Rev-Erba and Per2 in an ROR isotype- and 
tissue-selective manner without affecting the phase of their rhythmic expression.
Analysis of ROR<U+03B3>/RORa double knockout mice indicated that in certain tissues ROR<U+03B3>
and RORa exhibited a certain degree of redundancy in regulating clock gene
expression. Reporter gene analysis showed that ROR<U+03B3> was able to induce reporter
gene activity through the RORE-containing regulatory regions of Cry1, Bmal1,
Rev-Erba and E4bp4. Co-expression of Rev-Erba or addition of a novel ROR
antagonist repressed this activation. ChIP-Seq and ChIP-Quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction (QPCR) analysis demonstrated that in vivo ROR<U+03B3> regulate
these genes directly and in a Zeitgeber time (ZT)-dependent manner through these 
ROREs. This transcriptional activation by RORs was associated with changes in
histone acetylation and chromatin accessibility. The rhythmic expression of ROR<U+03B3>1
by clock proteins may lead to the rhythmic expression of ROR<U+03B3>1 target genes. The 
presence of ROR<U+03B3> binding sites and its down-regulation in ROR<U+03B3>-/- liver suggest
that the rhythmic expression of Avpr1a depends on ROR<U+03B3> consistent with the
concept that ROR<U+03B3>1 provides a link between the clock machinery and its regulation
of metabolic genes.

PMCID: PMC3458568
PMID: 22753030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Feb 25;366(2):163-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.06.017.
Epub 2012 Jun 28.

AMPK at the crossroads of circadian clocks and metabolism.

Jordan SD(1), Lamia KA.

Author information: 
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, Department of Chemical Physiology, La Jolla,
CA 92037, USA.

Circadian clocks coordinate behavior and physiology with daily environmental
cycles and thereby optimize the timing of metabolic processes such as glucose
production and insulin secretion. Such circadian regulation of metabolism
provides an adaptive advantage in diverse organisms. Mammalian clocks are
primarily based on a transcription and translation feedback loop in which a
heterodimeric complex of the transcription factors CLOCK (circadian locomotor
output cycles kaput) and BMAL1 (brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1) activates
the expression of its own repressors, the period (PER1-3) and cryptochrome (CRY1 
and CRY2) proteins. Posttranslational modification of these core clock components
is critical for setting clock time or adjusting the speed of the clock.
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is one of several metabolic sensors that have
been reported to transmit energy-dependent signals to the mammalian clock. AMPK
does so by driving the phosphorylation and destabilization of CRY and PER
proteins. In addition, AMPK subunit composition, sub-cellular localization, and
substrate phosphorylation are dependent on clock time. Given the well-established
role of AMPK in diverse aspects of metabolic physiology, the reciprocal
regulation of AMPK and circadian clocks likely plays an important role in
circadian metabolic regulation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3502724
PMID: 22750052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Neurosci. 2012 Jun 27;32(26):8900-18. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5586-11.2012.

Period coding of Bmal1 oscillators in the suprachiasmatic nucleus.

Myung J(1), Hong S, Hatanaka F, Nakajima Y, De Schutter E, Takumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Osaka Bioscience Institute, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan.

Circadian oscillators in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) collectively
orchestrate 24 h rhythms in the body while also coding for seasonal rhythms.
Although synchronization is required among SCN oscillators to provide robustness 
for regular timekeeping (Herzog et al., 2004), heterogeneity of period and phase 
distributions is needed to accommodate seasonal variations in light duration
(Pittendrigh and Daan, 1976b). In the mouse SCN, the heterogeneous phase
distribution has been recently found in the cycling of clock genes Period 1 and
Period 2 (Per1, Per2) and has been shown to reorganize by relative day lengths
(Inagaki et al., 2007). However, it is not yet clearly understood what underlies 
the spatial patterning of Per1 and Per2 expression (Yamaguchi et al., 2003; Foley
et al., 2011) and its plasticity. We found that the period of the oscillation in 
Bmal1 expression, a positive-feedback component of the circadian clock, preserves
the behavioral circadian period under culture and drives clustered oscillations
in the mouse SCN. Pharmacological and physical isolations of SCN subregions
indicate that the period of Bmal1 oscillation is subregion specific and is
preserved during culture. Together with computer simulations, we show that either
the intercellular coupling does not strongly influence the Bmal1 oscillation or
the nature of the coupling is more complex than previously assumed. Furthermore, 
we have found that the region-specific periods are modulated by the light
conditions that an animal is exposed to. Based on these, we suggest that the
period forms the basis of seasonal coding in the SCN.

PMID: 22745491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Oct;39(10):9783-9. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1844-0. Epub 2012
Jun 20.

Differential responses of peripheral circadian clocks to a short-term feeding
stimulus.

Wu T(1), Fu O, Yao L, Sun L, Zhuge F, Fu Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of Biological and Environmental Engineering, Zhejiang University of
Technology, No. 6 District, Zhaohui, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310032, China.

To investigate the effects of a short-term feeding stimulus on the expression of 
circadian genes in peripheral tissues, we examined the effects of a 30-min
feeding stimulus on the rapid responses and circadian phases of five clock genes 
(Bmal1, Cry1, Per1, Per2 and Per3) and a clock-controlled gene (Dbp) in the heart
and kidney of rats. A 30 min feeding stimulus was sufficient to alter the
transcript levels and circadian phases of peripheral clock genes in a
tissue-specific manner. The transcript levels of most clock genes (Bmal1, Cry1,
Per1, and Per2) were significantly down-regulated in the heart within 2 h, which 
were affected marginally in the kidney (except Per1). In addition to the rapid
response of clock gene expression, we found that the circadian phases of these
clock genes were markedly shifted by the 30-min feeding stimulus in the heart
within 1 day. However, the same feeding stimulus almost not affected the peak
phases of these clock genes in the kidney. Moreover, these differential responses
of peripheral clocks to the 30-min feeding were also similarly reflected in the
expression of circadian output gene Dbp. Therefore, a 30-min feeding stimulus was
sufficient to induce dyssynchronized peripheral circadian rhythm and might
further result in disordered downstream physiological function in rats.

PMID: 22714924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2012 Aug 15;303(4):H475-85. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00238.2012. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Development of dilated cardiomyopathy in Bmal1-deficient mice.

Lefta M(1), Campbell KS, Feng HZ, Jin JP, Esser KA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Muscle Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, 
USA.

Circadian rhythms are approximate 24-h oscillations in physiology and behavior.
Circadian rhythm disruption has been associated with increased incidence of
hypertension, coronary artery disease, dyslipidemia, and other cardiovascular
pathologies in both humans and animal models. Mice lacking the core circadian
clock gene, brain and muscle aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT)-like protein (Bmal1), are behaviorally arrhythmic, die prematurely, and
display a wide range of organ pathologies. However, data are lacking on the role 
of Bmal1 on the structural and functional integrity of cardiac muscle. In the
present study, we demonstrate that Bmal1(-/-) mice develop dilated cardiomyopathy
with age, characterized by thinning of the myocardial walls, dilation of the left
ventricle, and decreased cardiac performance. Shortly after birth the Bmal1(-/-) 
mice exhibit a transient increase in myocardial weight, followed by regression
and later onset of dilation and failure. Ex vivo working heart preparations
revealed systolic ventricular dysfunction at the onset of dilation and failure,
preceded by downregulation of both myosin heavy chain isoform mRNAs. We observed 
structural disorganization at the level of the sarcomere with a shift in titin
isoform composition toward the stiffer N2B isoform. However, passive tension
generation in single cardiomyocytes was not increased. Collectively, these
findings suggest that the loss of the circadian clock gene, Bmal1, gives rise to 
the development of an age-associated dilated cardiomyopathy, which is associated 
with shifts in titin isoform composition, altered myosin heavy chain gene
expression, and disruption of sarcomere structure.

PMCID: PMC3423146
PMID: 22707558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Dev Dyn. 2012 Aug;241(8):1365-73. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23821.

Circadian clock genes Bmal1 and Clock during early chick development.

Gonçalves L(1), Vinhas M, Pereira R, Pais De Azevedo T, Bajanca F, Palmeirim I.

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Medicine Program, Departamento de Ciências Biomédicas e Medicina,
Universidade do Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, Faro, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: The circadian clock is a well-described temporal organizer in adult
organisms. Despite the particularly evident need for temporal control during
embryo development, the effect of environmental cues is still greatly neglected. 
Few studies have reported circadian clock gene expression in early embryonic
stages. However, nothing is known about circadian clock gene expression and
function in the first stages of avian embryogenesis.
RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS: In this work, the presence and spatial distribution of core 
circadian clock Bmal1 and Clock transcripts were thoroughly characterized during 
the first 50 hr of chick development using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), single and double whole-mount in situ hybridization and
subsequent cross-section histology analysis. RT-PCR detected both Bmal1 and Clock
transcripts since the egg is laid and until the embryo reaches the 22-somite
stage. Whole-mount in situ hybridization showed that Bmal1 and Clock are
expressed in the Hensen's node and primitive streak at early gastrula stage.
Later, both mRNAs are present in the developing nervous system, optic vesicle,
notochord, foregut, and somites. Clock was further identified in the developing
heart. Noticeably, Bmal1 and Clock are expressed with a "salt and pepper"
pattern, suggesting the existence of nonentrained oscillatory transcription which
could play a nondependent dark/light function during chick embryo development.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22700438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Dent Res. 2012 Aug;91(8):783-8. doi: 10.1177/0022034512451450. Epub 2012 Jun
14.

Clock genes show circadian rhythms in salivary glands.

Zheng L(1), Seon YJ, McHugh J, Papagerakis S, Papagerakis P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics and Pediatric Dentistry, School of Dentistry,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Circadian rhythms are endogenous self-sustained oscillations with 24-hour periods
that regulate diverse physiological and metabolic processes through complex gene 
regulation by "clock" transcription factors. The oral cavity is bathed by saliva,
and its amount and content are modified within regular daily intervals. The clock
mechanisms that control salivary production remain unclear. Our objective was to 
evaluate the expression and periodicity of clock genes in salivary glands.
Real-time quantitative RT-PCR, in situ hybridization, and immunohistochemistry
were performed to show circadian mRNA and protein expression and localization of 
key clock genes (Bmal1, Clock, Per1, and Per2), ion and aqua channel genes (Ae2a,
Car2, and Aqp5), and salivary gland markers. Clock gene mRNAs and clock proteins 
were found differentially expressed in the serous acini and duct cells of all
major salivary glands. The expression levels of clock genes and Aqp5 showed
regular oscillatory patterns under both light/dark and complete-dark conditions. 
Bmla1 overexpression resulted in increased Aqp5 expression levels. Analysis of
our data suggests that salivary glands have a peripheral clock mechanism that
functions both in normal light/dark conditions and in the absence of light. This 
finding may increase our understanding of the control mechanisms of salivary
content and flow.

PMCID: PMC3398790
PMID: 22699207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2012;24(5):759-67. doi: 10.1071/RD11164.

Generation of myometrium-specific Bmal1 knockout mice for parturition analysis.

Ratajczak CK(1), Asada M, Allen GC, McMahon DG, Muglia LM, Smith D, Bhattacharyya
S, Muglia LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Biology Program, Washington University, St Louis, MO 63110,
USA.

Human and rodent studies indicate a role for circadian rhythmicity and associated
clock gene expression in supporting normal parturition. The importance of clock
gene expression in tissues besides the suprachiasmatic nucleus is emerging. Here,
a Bmal1 conditional knockout mouse line and a novel Cre transgenic mouse line
were used to examine the role of myometrial Bmal1 in parturition. Ninety-two
percent (22/24) of control females but only 64% (14/22) of females with disrupted
myometrial Bmal1 completed parturition during the expected time window of 5p.m.
on Day 19 through to 9a.m. on Day 19.5 of gestation. However, neither serum
progesterone levels nor uterine transcript expression of the
contractile-associated proteins Connexin43 and Oxytocin receptor differed between
females with disrupted myometrial Bmal1 and controls during late gestation. The
data indicate a role for myometrial Bmal1 in maintaining normal time of day of
parturition.

PMID: 22697126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2012 Aug;113(3):385-92. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00244.2012. Epub 2012 Jun 7.

Circadian disruption alters mouse lung clock gene expression and lung mechanics.

Hadden H(1), Soldin SJ, Massaro D.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Regeneration Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Georgetown University
School of Medicine, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.

Most aspects of human physiology and behavior exhibit 24-h rhythms driven by a
master circadian clock in the brain, which synchronizes peripheral clocks. Lung
function and ventilation are subject to circadian regulation and exhibit
circadian oscillations. Sleep disruption, which causes circadian disruption, is
common in those with chronic lung disease, and in the general population;
however, little is known about the effect on the lung of circadian disruption. We
tested the hypothesis circadian disruption alters expression of clock genes in
the lung and that this is associated with altered lung mechanics. Female and male
mice were maintained on a 12:12-h light/dark cycle (control) or exposed for 4 wk 
to a shifting light regimen mimicking chronic jet lag (CJL). Airway resistance
(Rn), tissue damping (G), and tissue elastance (H) did not differ between control
and CJL females. Rn at positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 2 and 3 cmH(2)O
was lower in CJL males compared with controls. G, H, and G/H did not differ
between CJL and control males. Among CJL females, expression of clock genes,
Bmal1 and Rev-erb alpha, was decreased; expression of their repressors, Per2 and 
Cry 2, was increased. Among CJL males, expression of Clock was decreased; Per 2
and Rev-erb alpha expression was increased. We conclude circadian disruption
alters lung mechanics and clock gene expression and does so in a sexually
dimorphic manner.

PMCID: PMC3426166
PMID: 22678966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Biol Rhythms. 2012 Jun;27(3):237-45. doi: 10.1177/0748730412442830.

The circadian clock modulates enamel development.

Lacruz RS(1), Hacia JG, Bromage TG, Boyde A, Lei Y, Xu Y, Miller JD, Paine ML,
Snead ML.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Ostrow School of Dentistry,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. rodrigo@usc.edu

Fully mature enamel is about 98% mineral by weight. While mineral crystals appear
very early during its formative phase, the newly secreted enamel is a soft
gel-like matrix containing several enamel matrix proteins of which the most
abundant is amelogenin (Amelx). Histological analysis of mineralized dental
enamel reveals markings called cross-striations associated with daily increments 
of enamel formation, as evidenced by injections of labeling dyes at known time
intervals. The daily incremental growth of enamel has led to the hypothesis that 
the circadian clock might be involved in the regulation of enamel development. To
identify daily rhythms of clock genes and Amelx, we subjected murine ameloblast
cells to serum synchronization to analyze the expression of the circadian
transcription factors Per2 and Bmal1 by real-time PCR. Results indicate that
these key genetic regulators of the circadian clock are expressed in synchronized
murine ameloblast cell cultures and that their expression profile follows a
circadian pattern with acrophase and bathyphase for both gene transcripts in
antiphase. Immunohistological analysis confirms the protein expression of Bmal
and Cry in enamel cells. Amelx expression in 2-day postnatal mouse molars
dissected every 4 hours for a duration of 48 hours oscillated with an
approximately 24-hour period, with a significant approximately 2-fold decrease in
expression during the dark period compared to the light period. The expression of
genes involved in bicarbonate production (Car2) and transport (Slc4a4), as well
as in enamel matrix endocytosis (Lamp1), was greater during the dark period,
indicating that ameloblasts express these proteins when Amelx expression is at
the nadir. The human and mouse Amelx genes each contain a single nonconserved
E-box element within 10 kb upstream of their respective transcription start
sites. We also found that within 2 kb of the transcription start site of the
human NFYA gene, which encodes a positive regulator of amelogenin, there is an
E-box element that is conserved in rodents and other mammals. Moreover, we found 
that Nfya expression in serum-synchronized murine ameloblasts oscillated with a
strong 24-hour rhythm. Taken together, our data support the hypothesis that the
circadian clock temporally regulates enamel development.

PMCID: PMC3511783
PMID: 22653892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Science. 2012 Jul 13;337(6091):189-94. doi: 10.1126/science.1222804. Epub 2012
May 31.

Crystal structure of the heterodimeric CLOCK:BMAL1 transcriptional activator
complex.

Huang N(1), Chelliah Y, Shan Y, Taylor CA, Yoo SH, Partch C, Green CB, Zhang H,
Takahashi JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2012 Jul 13;337(6091):165-6.

The circadian clock in mammals is driven by an autoregulatory transcriptional
feedback mechanism that takes approximately 24 hours to complete. A key component
of this mechanism is a heterodimeric transcriptional activator consisting of two 
basic helix-loop-helix PER-ARNT-SIM (bHLH-PAS) domain protein subunits, CLOCK and
BMAL1. Here, we report the crystal structure of a complex containing the mouse
CLOCK:BMAL1 bHLH-PAS domains at 2.3 Å resolution. The structure reveals an
unusual asymmetric heterodimer with the three domains in each of the two
subunits--bHLH, PAS-A, and PAS-B--tightly intertwined and involved in
dimerization interactions, resulting in three distinct protein interfaces.
Mutations that perturb the observed heterodimer interfaces affect the stability
and activity of the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex as well as the periodicity of the
circadian oscillator. The structure of the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex is a starting
point for understanding at an atomic level the mechanism driving the mammalian
circadian clock.

PMCID: PMC3694778
PMID: 22653727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Anesthesiology. 2012 Jul;117(1):149-60. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e31825b4fc1.

Regulation of peripheral clock to oscillation of substance P contributes to
circadian inflammatory pain.

Zhang J(1), Li H, Teng H, Zhang T, Luo Y, Zhao M, Li YQ, Sun ZS.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Mental Health, Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The daily fluctuations of many physiologic and behavioral parameters 
are differentially influenced by either central or peripheral clocks in mammals. 
Since substance P (SP) oscillates in some brain tissues and plays an
indispensable role in modulating inflammatory pain at the spinal level, we
speculated that SP mediates circadian nociception transmission at the spinal
level.
METHODS: In the present study behavioral observation, real-time polymerase chain 
reaction, luciferase assay, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and
immunohistochemistry stain methods were used to investigate the role of SP in the
spinal circadian nociception transmission and its regulation mechanism.
RESULTS: Our results showed that under transcriptional regulation of BMAL1:CLOCK 
heterodimers, SP's coding gene Tac1 expression oscillates in dorsal root ganglion
(n = 36), but not in the spinal dorsal horn. Further, the expression of SP cycled
in the spinal dorsal horn, and this rhythmicity was potentially determined by
circadian expression of Tac1 in dorsal root ganglion. Furthermore, the variation 
of SP expression induced by formalin was fluctuated in a similar rhythm to
behavioral nociceptive response induced by formalin (n = 48); and the nociceptive
behavioral circadian rhythm could be abolished through blockade of the
SP-Neurokinin 1 receptor pathway (n = 70). Lastly, the variations of spinal SP
expression and behavioral nociceptive response were in step, and both were
changed by the deletion mutation of clock gene.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that spinal SP probably plays a pivotal role in
modulating circadian inflammatory pain and suggest that peripheral
circadian-regulated signaling is potentially an essential pathway for circadian
nociceptive transmission.

PMID: 22634872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Mol Neurosci. 2012 Nov;48(3):584-96. Epub 2012 May 24.

Altered rhythm of adrenal clock genes, StAR and serum corticosterone in VIP
receptor 2-deficient mice.

Fahrenkrug J(1), Georg B, Hannibal J, Jørgensen HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Bispebjerg Hospital, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen 2400, Denmark. jfah0001@bbh.regionh.dk

The circadian time-keeping system consists of clocks in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN) and in peripheral organs including an adrenal clock linked to the
rhythmic corticosteroid production by regulating steroidogenic acute regulatory
protein (StAR). Clock cells contain an autonomous molecular oscillator based on a
group of clock genes and their protein products. Mice lacking the VPAC2 receptor 
display disrupted circadian rhythm of physiology and behaviour, and therefore, we
using real-time RT-PCR quantified (1) the mRNAs for the clock genes Per1 and
Bmal1 in the adrenal gland and SCN, (2) the adrenal Star mRNA and (3) the serum
corticosterone concentration both during a light/dark (L/D) cycle and at constant
darkness in wild type (WT) and VPAC2 receptor-deficient mice (VPAC2-KO). We also 
examined if PER1 and StAR were co-localised in the adrenal steroidogenic cells.
Per1 and Bmal1 mRNA showed a 24-h rhythmic expression in the adrenal of WT mice
under L/D and dark conditions. During a L/D cycle, the adrenal clock gene rhythm 
in VPAC2-KO mice was phase-advanced by approximately 6 h compared to WT mice and 
became arrhythmic in constant darkness. A significant 24-h rhythmic variation in 
the adrenal Star mRNA expression and circulating corticosterone concentration was
similarly phase-advanced during the L/D cycle. The loss of adrenal clock gene
rhythm in the VPAC2 receptor knockout mice after transfer into constant darkness 
was accompanied by disappearance of rhythmicity in Star mRNA expression and serum
corticosterone concentration. Double immunohistochemistry showed that the PER1
protein and StAR were co-localised in the same steroidogenic cells. Circulating
corticosterone plays a role in the circadian timing system and the misaligned
corticosterone rhythm in the VPAC2 receptor knockout mice could be involved in
their abnormal rhythms of physiology.

PMID: 22622901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2012 Aug;45(8):730-6. Epub 2012 May 24.

The expression of melanopsin and clock genes in Xenopus laevis melanophores and
their modulation by melatonin.

Bluhm AP(1), Obeid NN, Castrucci AM, Visconti MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiologia, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

Vertebrates have a central clock and also several peripheral clocks. Light
responses might result from the integration of light signals by these clocks. The
dermal melanophores of Xenopus laevis have a photoreceptor molecule denominated
melanopsin (OPN4x). The mechanisms of the circadian clock involve positive and
negative feedback. We hypothesize that these dermal melanophores also present
peripheral clock characteristics. Using quantitative PCR, we analyzed the pattern
of temporal expression of Opn4x and the clock genes Per1, Per2, Bmal1, and Clock 
in these cells, subjected to a 14-h light:10-h dark (14L:10D) regime or constant 
darkness (DD). Also, in view of the physiological role of melatonin in the dermal
melanophores of X. laevis, we determined whether melatonin modulates the
expression of these clock genes. These genes show a time-dependent expression
pattern when these cells are exposed to 14L:10D, which differs from the pattern
observed under DD. Cells kept in DD for 5 days exhibited overall increased mRNA
expression for Opn4x and Clock, and a lower expression for Per1, Per2, and Bmal1.
When the cells were kept in DD for 5 days and treated with melatonin for 1 h, 24 
h before extraction, the mRNA levels tended to decrease for Opn4x and Clock, did 
not change for Bmal1, and increased for Per1 and Per2 at different Zeitgeber
times (ZT). Although these data are limited to one-day data collection, and
therefore preliminary, we suggest that the dermal melanophores of X. laevis might
have some characteristics of a peripheral clock, and that melatonin modulates, to
a certain extent, melanopsin and clock gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3854240
PMID: 22618857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Cell Res. 2012 Sep;22(9):1319-21. doi: 10.1038/cr.2012.81. Epub 2012 May 22.

REV-ERB-erating nuclear receptor functions in circadian metabolism and
physiology.

Ripperger JA(1), Albrecht U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Unit of Biochemistry, University of Fribourg, Chemin du
Musée 5, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland.

A hallmark of the mammalian circadian timing system is synchronization of
physiology and behavior, but when this synchronization is disturbed, chronic
diseases such as metabolic syndrome and depression may develop. Three new studies
show that nuclear receptors of the Rev-Erb family impact the circadian oscillator
and its metabolic output and this can be modified with specific agonists. Hence, 
resynchronization of metabolic pathways by manipulation of the circadian
oscillator using REV-ERB-specific agonists may represent a feasible therapeutic
concept to target diseases rooted in a misaligned circadian system.

PMCID: PMC3434349
PMID: 22613952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. FASEB J. 2012 Aug;26(8):3453-63. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-205781. Epub 2012 May 18.

The clock gene, brain and muscle Arnt-like 1, regulates adipogenesis via Wnt
signaling pathway.

Guo B(1), Chatterjee S, Li L, Kim JM, Lee J, Yechoor VK, Minze LJ, Hsueh W, Ma K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Medicine, The Methodist Hospital
Research Institute, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Circadian clocks in adipose tissue are known to regulate adipocyte biology.
Although circadian dysregulation is associated with development of obesity, the
underlying mechanism has not been established. Here we report that disruption of 
the clock gene, brain and muscle Arnt-like 1 (Bmal1), in mice led to increased
adipogenesis, adipocyte hypertrophy, and obesity, compared to wild-type (WT)
mice. This is due to its cell-autonomous effect, as Bmal1 deficiency in embryonic
fibroblasts, as well as stable shRNA knockdown (KD) in 3T3-L1 preadipocyte and
C3H10T1/2 mesenchymal stem cells, promoted adipogenic differentiation. We
demonstrate that attenuation of Bmal1 function resulted in down-regulation of
genes in the canonical Wnt pathway, known to suppress adipogenesis. Promoters of 
these genes (Wnt10a, ß-catenin, Dishevelled2, TCF3) displayed Bmal1 occupancy,
indicating direct circadian regulation by Bmal1. As a result, Wnt signaling
activity was attenuated by Bmal1 KD and augmented by its overexpression.
Furthermore, stabilizing ß-catenin through Wnt ligand or GSK-3ß inhibition
achieved partial restoration of blunted Wnt activity and suppression of increased
adipogenesis induced by Bmal1 KD. Taken together, our study demonstrates that
Bmal1 is a critical negative regulator of adipocyte development through
transcriptional control of components of the canonical Wnt signaling cascade, and
provides a mechanistic link between circadian disruption and obesity.

PMID: 22611086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Curr Biol. 2012 Jun 5;22(11):1029-34. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.04.009. Epub 2012
May 10.

In vivo monitoring of peripheral circadian clocks in the mouse.

Tahara Y(1), Kuroda H, Saito K, Nakajima Y, Kubo Y, Ohnishi N, Seo Y, Otsuka M,
Fuse Y, Ohura Y, Komatsu T, Moriya Y, Okada S, Furutani N, Hirao A, Horikawa K,
Kudo T, Shibata S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, School of Advanced Science and
Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo 162-8480, Japan.

The mammalian circadian system is comprised of a central clock in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) and a network of peripheral oscillators located in 
all of the major organ systems. The SCN is traditionally thought to be positioned
at the top of the hierarchy, with SCN lesions resulting in an arrhythmic
organism. However, recent work has demonstrated that the SCN and peripheral
tissues generate independent circadian oscillations in Per1 clock gene expression
in vitro. In the present study, we sought to clarify the role of the SCN in the
intact system by recording rhythms in clock gene expression in vivo. A practical 
imaging protocol was developed that enables us to measure circadian rhythms
easily, noninvasively, and longitudinally in individual mice. Circadian
oscillations were detected in the kidney, liver, and submandibular gland studied 
in about half of the SCN-lesioned, behaviorally arrhythmic mice. However, their
amplitude was decreased in these organs. Free-running periods of peripheral
clocks were identical to those of activity rhythms recorded before the SCN
lesion. Thus, we can report for the first time that many of the fundamental
properties of circadian oscillations in peripheral clocks in vivo are maintained 
in the absence of SCN control.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22578421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Int J Cancer. 2012 Dec 15;131(12):2820-31. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27598. Epub 2012 May 
14.

The circadian clock gene BMAL1 is a novel therapeutic target for malignant
pleural mesothelioma.

Elshazley M(1), Sato M, Hase T, Yamashita R, Yoshida K, Toyokuni S, Ishiguro F,
Osada H, Sekido Y, Yokoi K, Usami N, Shames DS, Kondo M, Gazdar AF, Minna JD,
Hasegawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Aichi, Japan.

Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a highly aggressive neoplasm arising from
the mesothelial cells lining the parietal pleura and it exhibits poor prognosis. 
Although there has been significant progress in MPM treatment, development of
more efficient therapeutic approaches is needed. BMAL1 is a core component of the
circadian clock machinery and its constitutive overexpression in MPM has been
reported. Here, we demonstrate that BMAL1 may serve as a molecular target for
MPM. The majority of MPM cell lines and a subset of MPM clinical specimens
expressed higher levels of BMAL1 compared to a nontumorigenic mesothelial cell
line (MeT-5A) and normal parietal pleural specimens, respectively. A serum shock 
induced a rhythmical BMAL1 expression change in MeT-5A but not in ACC-MESO-1,
suggesting that the circadian rhythm pathway is deregulated in MPM cells. BMAL1
knockdown suppressed proliferation and anchorage-dependent and independent clonal
growth in two MPM cell lines (ACC-MESO-1 and H290) but not in MeT-5A. Notably,
BMAL1 depletion resulted in cell cycle disruption with a substantial increase in 
apoptotic and polyploidy cell population in association with downregulation of
Wee1, cyclin B and p21(WAF1/CIP1) and upregulation of cyclin E expression. BMAL1 
knockdown induced mitotic catastrophe as denoted by disruption of cell cycle
regulators and induction of drastic morphological changes including
micronucleation and multiple nuclei in ACC-MESO-1 cells that expressed the
highest level of BMAL1. Taken together, these findings indicate that BMAL1 has a 
critical role in MPM and could serve as an attractive therapeutic target for MPM.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3479344
PMID: 22510946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2012;29(3-4):407-16. doi: 10.1159/000338495. Epub 2012 Apr 
3.

Lycorine, a candidate for the control of period length in mammalian cells.

Onishi Y(1), Kawano Y, Yamazaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology, Higashi, Tsukuba, Japan. y-onishi@aist.go.jp

Plants of the Amaryllidaceae family have been used as therapeutic agents against 
CNS related maladies such as Alzheimer's disease. The known primary alkaloid
constituents have significant biological activity. We identified the Lycoris
alkaloids lycorine and lycoricidinol from Amaryllidaceae using a real-time
reporter gene assay system based on NIH3T3 cells. These alkaloids have a wide
spectrum of pharmacological actions and dose-dependently lengthen the circadian
period. When cells that had been incubated with lycorine or lycoricidinol were
washed and then incubated without these alkaloids, period length reverted to that
of control cells, suggesting that elongation of the circadian period induced by
lycorine and lycoricidinol is reversible. Although one of its major activities is
the inhibition of protein synthesis, lycorine induced dose-dependent period
elongation regardless of the presence of cycloheximide and moreover,
cycloheximide, itself did not affect period length, suggesting that lycorine
dose-dependently extends the circadian period by a mechanism other than
translational inhibition. Real-time RT-PCR showed that lycorine enhanced RORa and
Bmal1 transcription, and exogenous expression and knockdown of Bmal1 also caused 
long and short periods, respectively, thus confirming the phenotype indicated by 
lycorine. These data indicate that lycorine and lycoricidinol modulate Bmal1
transcription and the circadian period, and also suggest that Lycoris alkaloids
are novel contributors to the control of period length in mammalian cells.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22508048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Chronobiol Int. 2012 May;29(4):395-407. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2012.668505. Epub
2012 Apr 11.

The dual-oscillator system of Drosophila melanogaster under natural-like
temperature cycles.

Bywalez W(1), Menegazzi P, Rieger D, Schmid B, Helfrich-Förster C, Yoshii T.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology and Genetics, Theodor-Boveri Institute, Biocenter, University of 
Würzburg, Germany.

Dual-oscillator systems that control morning and evening activities can be found 
in a wide range of animals. The two coupled oscillators track dawn and dusk and
flexibly adapt their phase relationship to seasonal changes. This is also true
for the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster that serves as model organism to
understand the molecular and anatomical bases of the dual-oscillator system. In
the present study, the authors investigated which temperature parameters are
crucial for timing morning and evening activity peaks by applying natural-like
temperature cycles with different daylengths. The authors found that the morning 
peak synchronizes to the temperature increase in the morning and the evening peak
to the temperature decrease in the afternoon. The two peaks did not occur at
fixed absolute temperatures, but responded flexibly to daylength and overall
temperature level. Especially, the phase of the evening peak clearly depended on 
the absolute temperature level: it was delayed at high temperatures, whereas the 
phase of the M peak was less influenced. This suggests that the two oscillators
have different temperature sensitivities. The bimodal activity rhythm was absent 
in the circadian clock mutants Clk(Jrk) and cyc(01) and reduced in per(01) and
tim(01) mutants. Whereas the activity of Clk(Jrk) mutants just followed the
temperature cycles, that of per(01) and tim(01) mutants did not, suggesting that 
these mutants are not completely clockless. This study revealed new
characteristics of the dual-oscillator system in Drosophila that were not
detected under different photoperiods.

PMID: 22489637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Heredity (Edinb). 2012 Jul;109(1):63-70. doi: 10.1038/hdy.2012.14. Epub 2012 Apr 
4.

CD36-deficient congenic strains show improved glucose tolerance and distinct
shifts in metabolic and transcriptomic profiles.

edová L(1), Lika F, Krenová D, Kazdová L, Tremblay J, Krupková M, Corbeil G,
Hamet P, Kren V, eda O.

Author information: 
(1)First Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles 
University in Prague and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.

Deficiency of fatty acid translocase Cd36 has been shown to have a major role in 
the pathogenesis of metabolic syndrome in the spontaneously hypertensive rat
(SHR). We have tested the hypothesis that the effects of Cd36 mutation on the
features of metabolic syndrome are contextually dependent on genomic background. 
We have derived two new congenic strains by introgression of limited chromosome 4
regions of SHR origin, both including the defective Cd36 gene, into the genetic
background of a highly inbred model of insulin resistance and dyslipidemia,
polydactylous (PD) rat strain. We subjected standard diet-fed adult males of PD
and the congenic PD.SHR4 strains to metabolic, morphometric and transcriptomic
profiling. We observed significantly improved glucose tolerance and lower fasting
insulin levels in PD.SHR4 congenics than in PD. One of the PD.SHR4 strains showed
lower triglyceride concentrations across major lipoprotein fractions combined
with higher levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol compared with the PD
progenitor. The hepatic transcriptome assessment revealed a network of genes
differentially expressed between PD and PD.SHR4 with significant enrichment by
members of the circadian rhythmicity pathway (Arntl (Bmal1), Clock, Nfil3, Per2
and Per3). In summary, the introduction of the chromosome 4 region of SHR origin 
including defective Cd36 into the PD genetic background resulted in disconnected 
shifts of metabolic profile along with distinct changes in hepatic transcriptome.
The synthesis of the current results with those obtained in other Cd36-deficient 
strains indicates that the eventual metabolic effect of a deleterious mutation
such as that of SHR-derived Cd36 is not absolute, but rather a function of
complex interactions between environmental and genomic background, upon which it 
operates.

PMCID: PMC3375406
PMID: 22473311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. EMBO Rep. 2012 May 1;13(5):455-61. doi: 10.1038/embor.2012.37.

JNK regulates the photic response of the mammalian circadian clock.

Yoshitane H(1), Honma S, Imamura K, Nakajima H, Nishide SY, Ono D, Kiyota H,
Shinozaki N, Matsuki H, Wada N, Doi H, Hamada T, Honma K, Fukada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The posttranslational regulation of mammalian clock proteins has been assigned a 
time-keeping function, but seems to have more essential roles. Here we show that 
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), identified by inhibitor screening of BMAL1
phosphorylation at Ser 520/Thr 527/Ser 592, confers dynamic regulation on the
clock. Knockdown of JNK1 and JNK2 abrogates BMAL1 phosphorylation and lengthens
circadian period in fibroblasts. Mice deficient for neuron-specific isoform JNK3 
have altered behavioural rhythms, with longer free-running period and compromised
phase shifts to light. The locomotor rhythms are insensitive to intensity
variance of constant light, deviating from Aschoff's rule. Thus, JNK regulates a 
core characteristic of the circadian clock by controlling the oscillation speed
and the phase in response to light.

PMCID: PMC3343351
PMID: 22441692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Hippocampus. 2012 Aug;22(8):1720-32. doi: 10.1002/hipo.22007. Epub 2012 Mar 21.

Daily patterns of clock and cognition-related factors are modified in the
hippocampus of vitamin A-deficient rats.

Golini RS(1), Delgado SM, Navigatore Fonzo LS, Ponce IT, Lacoste MG, Anzulovich
AC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chronobiology, Multidisciplinary Institute of Biological
Research - San Luis, Argentina.

The circadian expression of clock and clock-controlled cognition-related genes in
the hippocampus would be essential to achieve an optimal daily cognitive
performance. There is some evidence that retinoid nuclear receptors (RARs and
RXRs) can regulate circadian gene expression in different tissues. In this study,
Holtzman male rats from control and vitamin A-deficient groups were sacrificed
throughout a 24-h period and hippocampus samples were isolated every 4 or 5 h.
RARa and RXRß expression level was quantified and daily expression patterns of
clock BMAL1, PER1, RORa, and REVERB genes, RORa and REVERB proteins, as well as
temporal expression of cognition-related RC3 and BDNF genes were determined in
the hippocampus of the two groups of rats. Our results show significant daily
variations of BMAL1, PER1, RORa, and REVERB genes, RORa and REVERB proteins and, 
consequently, daily oscillating expression of RC3 and BDNF genes in the rat
hippocampus. Vitamin A deficiency reduced RXRß mRNA level as well as the
amplitude of PER1, REVERB gene, and REVERB protein rhythms, and phase-shifted the
daily peaks of BMAL1 and RORa mRNA, RORa protein, and RC3 and BDNF mRNA levels.
Thus, nutritional factors, such as vitamin A and its derivatives the retinoids,
might modulate daily patterns of BDNF and RC3 expression in the hippocampus, and 
they could be essential to maintain an optimal daily performance at molecular
level in this learning-and-memory-related brain area.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3382039
PMID: 22434687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Apr 6;420(2):374-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.02.164. Epub 2012 Mar 8.

Rev-erba regulates circadian rhythms and StAR expression in rat granulosa cells
as identified by the agonist GSK4112.

Chen H(1), Chu G, Zhao L, Yamauchi N, Shigeyoshi Y, Hashimoto S, Hattori MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Marine Bioresource Sciences, Graduate School of
Agriculture, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

The Rev-erba gene is regarded as a circadian clock gene and clock-regulated gene 
which regulates the circadian transcriptional/translational loop in a subtle way.
Here, we first detected the circadian oscillation in mature granulosa cells from 
antral follicles using a real-time monitoring system of Per2 promoter activity
with the addition of FSH. Then we used GSK4112, an agonist ligand of Rev-erba, to
investigate the function of Rev-erba. GSK4112 treatment significantly reduced the
Per2-dLuc amplitude and induced the Per2 oscillation phase advance shift. GSK4112
significantly inhibited Bmal1 mRNA expression, whereas it did clearly stimulate
expression of StAR mRNA in a dose-dependent manner. Our data are the first to
show the Rev-erba function in the steroid biosynthesis of rat granulosa cells,
and to suggest that Rev-erba may coordinate circadian rhythm and metabolism in
rat ovaries.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22425774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Chronobiol Int. 2012 Apr;29(3):252-60. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2012.657319.

Expression of clock genes in human subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissues.

Zanquetta MM(1), Correa-Giannella ML, Giannella-Neto D, Alonso PA, Guimarães LM, 
Meyer A, Villares SM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Endocrinologia Celular e Molecular (LIM/25), Faculdade de
Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. mzanquetta@gmail.com

Disrupted circadian rhythms are associated with obesity and metabolic
alterations, but little is known about the participation of peripheral circadian 
clock machinery in these processes. The aim of the present study was to analyze
RNA expression of clock genes in subcutaneous (SAT) and visceral (VAT) adipose
tissues of male and female subjects in AM (morning) and PM (afternoon) periods,
and its interactions with body mass index (BMI). Ninety-one subjects (41 ± 11 yrs
of age) presenting a wide range of BMI (21.4 to 48.6 kg/m(2)) were included. SAT 
and VAT biopsies were obtained from patients undergoing abdominal surgeries.
Clock genes expressions were evaluated by qRT-PCR. The only clock gene that
showed higher expression (p <<U+2009>.0001) in SAT in comparison to VAT was PER1 of
female (372%) and male (326%) subjects. Different patterns of expression between 
the AM and PM periods were observed, in particular REV-ERBa, which was reduced (p
<<U+2009>.05) at the PM period in SAT and VAT of both women and men (women: ~53% lower; 
men: ~78% lower), whereas CLOCK expression was not altered. Relationships between
clock genes were different in SAT vs. VAT. BMI was negatively correlated with
SATPER1 (r =<U+2009>-.549; p =<U+2009>.001) and SATPER2 (r =<U+2009>-.613; p =<U+2009>.0001) and positively
with VATCLOCK (r =<U+2009>.541; p =<U+2009>.001) and VATBMAL1 (r =<U+2009>.468; p =<U+2009>.007) only in
women. These data suggest that the circadian clock machinery of adipose tissue
depots differs between female and male subjects, with a sex-specific effect
observed for some genes. BMI correlated with clock genes, but at this moment it
is not possible to establish the cause-effect relationship.

PMID: 22390238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Mar 9;419(2):441-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.02.076. Epub 2012 Feb 20.

Smad3 and Snail show circadian expression in human gingival fibroblasts, human
mesenchymal stem cell, and in mouse liver.

Sato F(1), Sato H, Jin D, Bhawal UK, Wu Y, Noshiro M, Kawamoto T, Fujimoto K,
Seino H, Morohashi S, Kato Y, Kijima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Bioscience, Hirosaki University Graduate School of
Medicine, Hirosaki 036-8562, Japan. fsatoDEC1DEC2@yahoo.co.jp

Smads are intracellular signaling mediators. Complexes of Smad2 and Smad3 with
Smad4 transmit transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-ß) receptor-induced
signaling. Snail plays important roles in mesoderm formation, gastrulation,
neural crest development, and epithelial mesenchymal transition. However, it
remains unknown whether Smad3 and Snail expression is circadian rhythm-dependent.
Here, we showed for the first time that Smad3 and Snail show circadian expression
in human gingival fibroblasts (HGF-1) and human mesenchymal stem cells (MSC)
after serum shock. They also showed circadian expression in the mouse liver. We
confirmed that BMAL1/2, DEC1/2, VEGF, and PER1/2/3 also show circadian expression
in both HGF-1 and MSC. The mRNA peaks and phases in circadian expression of these
genes differed between HGF-1 and MSC. In a luciferase assay, Smad3 promoter
activity was upregulated by CLOCK/BMAL1. These findings suggest that Smad3 and
Snail have circadian rhythm in vitro and vivo, and that circadian expression of
Smad3 depends on CLOCK/BMAL1.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22382019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. FASEB J. 2012 Jun;26(6):2414-23. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-201699. Epub 2012 Feb 27.

Assessment of circadian rhythms in humans: comparison of real-time fibroblast
reporter imaging with plasma melatonin.

Hasan S(1), Santhi N, Lazar AS, Slak A, Lo J, von Schantz M, Archer SN, Johnston 
JD, Dijk DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Surrey Sleep Research Centre, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences,
University of Surrey, Guildford, UK.

We compared the period of the rhythm of plasma melatonin, driven by the
hypothalamic circadian pacemaker, to in vitro periodicity in cultured peripheral 
fibroblasts to assess the effects on these rhythms of a polymorphism of PER3
(rs57875989), which is associated with sleep timing. In vitro circadian period
was determined using luminometry of cultured fibroblasts, in which the expression
of firefly luciferase was driven by the promoter of the circadian gene Arntl
(Bmal1). The period of the melatonin rhythm was assessed in a 9-d forced
desynchrony protocol, minimizing confounding effects of sleep-wake and light-dark
cycles on circadian rhythmicity. In vitro periods (32 participants, 24.61±0.33 h,
mean±SD) were longer than in vivo periods (31 participants, 24.16±0.17 h;
P<0.0001) but did not differ between PER3 genotypes (P>0.4). Analyses of
replicate in vitro assessments demonstrated that circadian period was
reproducible within individuals (intraclass correlation=0.62), but in vivo and in
vitro period assessments did not correlate (P>0.9). In accordance with circadian 
entrainment theory, in vivo period correlated with the timing of melatonin
(P<0.05) at baseline and with diurnal preference (P<0.05). Individual circadian
rhythms can be reliably assessed in fibroblasts but may not correlate with
physiological rhythms driven by the central circadian pacemaker.

PMCID: PMC3360144
PMID: 22371527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Chronobiol Int. 2012 Mar;29(2):103-30. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2011.645707.

DNA microarray analysis and functional profile of pituitary transcriptome under
core-clock protein BMAL1 control.

Guillaumond F(1), Becquet D, Boyer B, Bosler O, Delaunay F, Franc JL,
François-Bellan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Aix-Marseille University , INSERM-U624, Marseille, France.

Although it is known to contain five cell types that synthesize and release
hormones with a circadian pattern, the pituitary gland is poorly characterized as
a circadian oscillator. By a differential microarray analysis, 252 genes were
found to be differentially expressed in pituitaries from Bmal1(-/-) knockout
versus wild-type mice. By integrative analyses of the data set with the
Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) Bioinformatics
Resources annotation analysis system, pituitary genes with altered expression in 
Bmal1(-/-) mice were dispatched among functional categories. Clusters of genes
related to signaling and rhythmic processes as well as transcription regulators, 
in general, were found enriched in the data set, as were pathways such as
circadian rhythm, transforming growth factor ß (TGFß) signaling, valine, leucine,
and isoleucine degradation, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)
signaling pathways. Gene Ontology term overrepresentation analyses revealed
significant enrichment for genes involved in 10 key biological processes. To
determine whether genes with altered expression in Bmal1(-/-) mice were actually 
circadian genes, we further characterized in the mouse pituitary gland the daily 
pattern of some of these genes, including core-clock genes. Core-clock genes and 
genes selected from three identified overrepresented biological processes,
namely, hormone metabolic process, regulation of transcription from RNA
polymerase II promoter, and cell adhesion, displayed a rhythmic pattern. Given
the enrichment in genes dedicated to cell adhesion and their daily changes in the
pituitary, it is hypothesized that cell-cell interactions could be involved in
the transmission of information between endocrine cells, allowing rhythmic
hormone outputs to be controlled in a temporally precise manner.

PMID: 22324551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Lipids Health Dis. 2012 Feb 8;11:23. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-11-23.

Effect of H2S on the circadian rhythm of mouse hepatocytes.

Shang Z(1), Lu C, Chen S, Hua L, Qian R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Fudan University Shanghai
Medical College, Shanghai 200032, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Dysregulation of circadian rhythms can contribute to diseases of
lipid metabolism. NAD-dependent deacetylase sirtuin-1(SIRT1) is an important hub 
which links lipid metabolism with circadian clock by its deacetylation activity
depends on intracellular NAD+/NADH content ratio. Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is an
endogenous reductant which can affect the intracellular redox state. Therefore,
we hypothesized that exogenous H2S can affect the expression of circadian clock
genes mediated by sirt1 thereby affecting body's lipid metabolism. And also
because the liver is a typical peripheral circadian clock oscillator that is
intimately linked to lipid metabolism. Thus the effect of H2S were observed on
24-hour dynamic expression of 4 central circadian clock genes and sirt1gene in
primary cultured hepatocytes.
RESULTS: We established a hepatocyte model that showed a circadian rhythm by
serum shock method. And detected that the expression level and the peak of
circadian clock genes decreased gradually and H2S could maintain the expression
and amplitude of circadian clock genes such as Clock, Per2, Bmal1 and
Rev-erbawithin a certain period time. Accordingly the expression level of sirt1
in H2S group was significantly higher than that in the control group.
CONCLUSION: Exogenous reductant H2S maintain the circadian rhythm of clock gene
in isolated liver cells. We speculated that H2S has changed NAD+/NADH content
ratio in hepatocytes and enhanced the activity of SIRT1 protein directly or
indirectly, so as to maintain the rhythm of expression of circadian clock genes, 
they play a role in the prevention and treatment of lipid metabolism-related
disease caused by the biological clock disorders.

PMCID: PMC3292508
PMID: 22316301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Biol Rhythms. 2012 Feb;27(1):3-11. doi: 10.1177/0748730411429665.

A baculovirus photolyase with DNA repair activity and circadian clock regulatory 
function.

Biernat MA(1), Eker AP, van Oers MM, Vlak JM, van der Horst GT, Chaves I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Wageningen University, Wageningen, the Netherlands.

Cryptochromes and photolyases belong to the same family of flavoproteins but,
despite being structurally conserved, display distinct functions. Photolyases use
visible light to repair ultraviolet-induced DNA damage. Cryptochromes, however,
function as blue-light receptors, circadian photoreceptors, or repressors of the 
CLOCK/BMAL1 heterodimer, the transcription activator controlling the molecular
circadian clock. Here, we present evidence that the functional divergence between
cryptochromes and photolyases is not so univocal. Chrysodeixis chalcites
nucleopolyhedrovirus possesses 2 photolyase-like genes: phr1 and phr2. We show
that PHR1 and PHR2 are able to bind the CLOCK protein. Only for PHR2, however,
the physical interaction with CLOCK represses CLOCK/BMAL1-driven transcription.
This result shows that binding of photolyase per se is not sufficient to inhibit 
the CLOCK/BMAL1 heterodimer. PHR2, furthermore, affects the oscillation of
immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblasts, suggesting that PHR2 can regulate the
molecular circadian clock. These findings are relevant for further understanding 
the evolution of cryptochromes and photolyases as well as behavioral changes
induced in insects by baculoviruses.

PMID: 22306969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Neuroscience. 2012 Apr 5;207:198-207. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.01.025.
Epub 2012 Jan 20.

Differential maturation of the molecular clockwork in the olfactory bulb and
suprachiasmatic nucleus of the rabbit.

Montúfar-Chaveznava R(1), Hernández-Campos O, Hudson R, Caldelas I.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología del Distrito Federal, México.

Recent studies suggest that the main olfactory bulb (OB) represents a functional 
circadian pacemaker. In many altricial mammals, during pre-visual stages of
development the olfactory system plays a vital role in their survival. One
remarkable example is the European rabbit; the newborns are normally raised in a 
dark nursery burrow, and the lactating female briefly visits her young
approximately once every 24 h. Under these conditions, newborn rabbits depend on 
the circadian system to anticipate the arrival of the lactating doe as well as on
pheromonal cues on the mother's ventrum to locate nipples and suckle efficiently.
To investigate the development of the rabbit's circadian system, we characterized
the 24-h pattern of expression of clock genes in the OB and suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN) of pre-visual week-old rabbits and compared this with the pattern
of expression in visual juvenile rabbits several weeks after weaning. We report
for the first time that Per1, Cry1, and Bmal1 are expressed in the OB of newborn 
and juvenile rabbits. In addition, the diurnal pattern of clock gene expression
develops earlier in the OB than in the SCN of newborn rabbits. Given the early
maturation of the molecular clockwork and the biological relevance of this
structure during development, it is possible that the OB plays an important role 
in temporal regulation during pre-visual life in rabbits.

Copyright © 2012 IBRO. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22305885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Photochem Photobiol. 2012 Sep-Oct;88(5):1037-47. doi:
10.1111/j.1751-1097.2012.01099.x. Epub 2012 Feb 21.

The circadian control of skin and cutaneous photodamage.

Desotelle JA(1), Wilking MJ, Ahmad N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.

Biologically, light including ultraviolet (UV) radiation is vital for life.
However, UV exposure does not come without risk, as it is a major factor in the
development of skin cancer. Natural protections against UV damage may have been
affected by lifestyle changes over the past century, including changes in our sun
exposure due to working environments, and the use of sunscreens. In addition,
extended "day time" through the use of artificial light may contribute to the
disruption of our circadian rhythms; the daily cycles of changes in critical
bio-factors including gene expression. Circadian disruption has been implicated
in many health conditions, including cardiovascular, metabolic and psychiatric
diseases, as well as many cancers. Interestingly, the pineal hormone melatonin
plays a role in both circadian regulation as well as protection from UV skin
damage, and is therefore an important factor to consider when studying the impact
of UV light. This review discusses the beneficial and deleterious effects of
solar exposure, including UV skin damage, Vitamin D production, circadian rhythm 
disruption and the impact of melatonin. Understanding these benefits and risks is
critical for the development of protective strategies against solar radiation.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Photochemistry and Photobiology © 2012 The
American Society of Photobiology.

PMCID: PMC3371101
PMID: 22277067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Exp Gerontol. 2012 Mar;47(3):256-62. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2012.01.001. Epub 2012 
Jan 12.

Effect of premature aging on murine adipose tissue.

Hemmeryckx B(1), Hoylaerts MF, Lijnen HR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,
3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Erratum in
    Exp Gerontol. 2012 Aug;47(8):658.

To evaluate the effect of aging on adipose tissue development, subcutaneous (SC) 
and gonadal (GON) white and peri-aortic brown adipose tissues were analyzed of 10
and 30 week old mice deficient in the clock gene Bmal1 (brain and muscle arnt
like protein 1) (Bmal1(-/-)) and wild-type littermates (Bmal1(+/+)) kept on a
standard fat diet. At both ages, daily food intake was significantly decreased
for Bmal1(-/-) mice, associated with reduced hypothalamic expression of PPARa.
Between 10 and 30 weeks of age, the total body weight of Bmal1(+/+) mice
increased significantly, but that of Bmal1(-/-) mice did not change. Whereas for 
Bmal1(+/+) mice, both SC and GON fat mass increased with age, these decreased for
Bmal1(-/-) mice. This was associated with increased adipocyte size with age for
Bmal1(+/+) but not for Bmal1(-/-) mice. Adipose tissue related angiogenesis was
not affected by genotype or aging. Peri-aortic brown adipose tissue mass in 30
week old Bmal1(-/-) mice was significantly reduced as compared to age-matched
Bmal1(+/+) mice. Comparison of gene expression profiles in SC and GON adipose
tissues of both genotypes revealed very marked effects of Bmal1 gene deletion in 
itself on PAI-1 (4- to 13-fold downregulation), whereas the associated effect of 
premature aging was striking for leptin (90- to 130-fold downregulation). Thus,
premature aging in Bmal1(-/-) mice kept on normal chow was associated with
reduced adiposity.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22265801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Oncotarget. 2011 Dec;2(12):1279-90.

Selenium is a modulator of circadian clock that protects mice from the toxicity
of a chemotherapeutic drug via upregulation of the core clock protein, BMAL1.

Hu Y(1), Spengler ML, Kuropatwinski KK, Comas-Soberats M, Jackson M, Chernov MV, 
Gleiberman AS, Fedtsova N, Rustum YM, Gudkov AV, Antoch MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY, USA.

Selenium compounds are known as cancer preventive agents and are also able to
ameliorate the toxicity associated with anti-cancer radiation and chemotherapy in
mouse models. Sensitivity to the toxicity of chemotherapy is also modulated by
the circadian clock, molecular time-keeping system that underlie daily
fluctuations in multiple physiological and biochemical processes. Here we show
that these two mechanisms are interconnected. By screening a library of small
molecules in a cell-based reporter system, we identified L-methyl-selenocysteine 
as a positive regulator of the core clock protein, BMAL1. L-methyl-selenocysteine
up-regulates BMAL1 at the transcriptional level both in cultured cells and in
mice. We also show that in tissue culture selenium exerts its action by
interfering with TIEG1-mediated repression of Bmal1 promoter. Selenium treatment 
fails to protect BMAL1-deficient mice from toxicity induced by the
chemotherapeutic agent cyclophosphamide but does protect Clock mutant mice
deficient in circadian rhythm control but having normal BMAL1. These findings
define selenium as circadian modulator and indicate that the tissue protective
effect of selenium results, at least in part, from up-regulation of BMAL1
expression and subsequent enhancement of CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated transcription.

PMCID: PMC3282084
PMID: 22249125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Genes Cells. 2012 Feb;17(2):109-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2011.01574.x.

Regulation of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors Dec1 and Dec2 by RORa 
and their roles in adipogenesis.

Ozaki N(1), Noshiro M, Kawamoto T, Nakashima A, Honda K, Fukuzaki-Dohi U, Honma
S, Fujimoto K, Tanimoto K, Tanne K, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics and Craniofacial Developmental Biology, Hiroshima
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

DEC1 and DEC2, members of the basic helix-loop-helix superfamily, are involved in
various biological phenomena including clock systems, cell differentiation and
metabolism. In clock systems, Dec1 and Dec2 expression are up-regulated by the
CLOCK:BMAL1 heterodimer via E-box (CACGTG), exhibiting a circadian rhythm in the 
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the central circadian pacemaker and other
peripheral tissues. In this study, using assays of luciferase reporters,
electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation, we identified
novel nuclear receptor response elements, ROR response elements (RORE), in Dec1
and Dec2 promoters. These ROREs responded to the transcriptional activator RORa, 
but not to the repressor REVERBa, although the Bmal1 promoter responded to both
RORa and REVERBa. Therefore, RORa, but not REVERBa, is involved in the regulation
of Dec1 and Dec2 expression without significantly affecting their rhythmicity.
Since RORa, DEC1 and DEC2 reportedly suppressed adipogenic differentiation, we
examined expression of Rora, Dec1, Dec2 and other clock-controlled genes in
differentiating 3T3-L1 adipocytes. The results suggested that RORa suppresses
adipogenic differentiation at a later stage of differentiation by RORE-mediated
stimulation of Dec1 and Dec2 expression.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2012 by the Molecular Biology Society
of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22244086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jan 15;11(2):213-4. doi: 10.4161/cc.11.2.18786. Epub 2012 Jan
15.

Brain and muscle ARNT-like protein BMAL1 regulates ROS homeostasis and
senescence: a possible link to hypoxia-inducible factor-mediated pathway.

Razorenova OV.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Dec 1;10(23):4162-9.

PMID: 22223094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Chronobiol Int. 2012 Feb;29(1):66-74. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2011.636496.

Comparison of ß-adrenergic and glucocorticoid signaling on clock gene and
osteoblast-related gene expressions in human osteoblast.

Komoto S(1), Kondo H, Fukuta O, Togari A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, Aichi-Gakuin University,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan.

Most living organisms exhibit circadian rhythms that are generated by endogenous 
circadian clocks, the master one being present in the suprachiasmatic nuclei
(SCN). Output signals from the SCN are believed to transmit standard circadian
time to peripheral tissue through sympathetic nervous system and humoral routes. 
Therefore, the authors examined the expression of clock genes following treatment
with the ß-adrenergic receptor agonist, isoprenaline, or the synthetic
glucocorticoid, dexamethasone, in cultured human osteoblast SaM-1 cells. Cells
were treated with 10(-6) M isoprenaline or 10(-7) M dexamethasone for 2<U+2009>h and
gene expressions were determined using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
analysis. Treatment with isoprenaline or dexamethasone induced the circadian
expression of clock genes human period 1 (hPer1), hPer2, hPer3, and human brain
and muscle Arnt-like protein 1 (hBMAL1). Isoprenaline or dexamethasone treatment 
immediately increased hPer1 and hPer2 and caused circadian oscillation of hPer1
and hPer2 with three peaks within 48<U+2009>h. hPer3 expression had one peak after
isoprenaline or dexamethasone treatment. hBMAL expression had two peaks after
isoprenaline or dexamethasone treatment, the temporal pattern being in antiphase 
to that of the other clock genes. Dexamethasone treatment delayed the oscillation
of all clock genes for 2-6<U+2009>h compared with isoprenaline treatment. The authors
also examined the expression of osteoblast-related genes ha-1 type I collagen
(hCol1a1), halkaline phosphatase (hALP), and hosteocalcin (hOC). Isoprenaline
induced oscillation of hCol1a1, but not hALP and hOC. On the other hand,
dexamethasone induced oscillation of hCol1a1 and hALP, but not hOC. Isoprenaline 
up-regulated hCol1a1 expression, but dexamethasone down-regulated hCol1a1 and
hALP expression in the first phase.

PMID: 22217103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Biol Rhythms. 2011 Dec;26(6):552-60. doi: 10.1177/0748730411420247.

Daily rhythms in olfactory discrimination depend on clock genes but not the
suprachiasmatic nucleus.

Granados-Fuentes D(1), Ben-Josef G, Perry G, Wilson DA, Sullivan-Wilson A, Herzog
ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130-4899, USA.
dgranado@biology2.wustl.edu

The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) regulates a wide range of daily behaviors and
has been described as the master circadian pacemaker. The role of daily
rhythmicity in other tissues, however, is unknown. We hypothesized that circadian
changes in olfactory discrimination depend on a genetic circadian oscillator
outside the SCN. We developed an automated assay to monitor olfactory
discrimination in individual mice throughout the day. We found olfactory
sensitivity increased approximately 6-fold from a minimum during the day to a
peak in the early night. This circadian rhythm was maintained in SCN-lesioned
mice and mice deficient for the Npas2 gene but was lost in mice lacking Bmal1 or 
both Per1 and Per2 genes. We conclude that daily rhythms in olfactory sensitivity
depend on the expression of canonical clock genes. Olfaction is, thus, the first 
circadian behavior that is not based on locomotor activity and does not require
the SCN.

PMCID: PMC3658462
PMID: 22215613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Biol Rhythms. 2011 Dec;26(6):530-40. doi: 10.1177/0748730411419782.

Genetic interaction of Per1 and Dec1/2 in the regulation of circadian locomotor
activity.

Bode B(1), Shahmoradi A, Taneja R, Rossner MJ, Oster H.

Author information: 
(1)Circadian Rhythms Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry,
Göttingen, Germany.

Erratum in
    J Biol Rhythms. 2012 Apr;27(2):180. Taneja, Reshma [added].

In mammals, 24-h rhythms are controlled by a hierarchical system of endogenous
clocks, with a circadian pacemaker located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of
the hypothalamus that synchronizes peripheral oscillators throughout the body.
The molecular clock machinery is regulated by interlocked transcriptional
translational feedback loops (TTLs). The core TTL includes the transcriptional
modulators PER (1-3) and CRY (1/2) that feed back on their own expression by
interaction with CLOCK/BMAL1. An accessory loop involving the transcription
factors DEC1 and DEC2 has been described that also impinges on
CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated transactivation. In Drosophila, the DEC ortholog CWO shows
synergistic activity to PER. This prompted the authors to analyze PER1-DEC
interaction in the mammalian SCN. They generated Per1/Dec double and triple
mutant mice to monitor activity rhythms under entrained and free-running
conditions. Furthermore, they analyzed expression of the clock genes Per2,
Rev-Erba, and Bmal1 in wild-type and Per1/Dec mutant SCN by in situ
hybridization. The experiments reveal a critical role for Per1-Dec interaction in
regulating activity phase under entrained conditions. In constant darkness, a
synergistic function for Per1 and Dec1/2 in period regulation was found,
correlating with disrupted clock gene mRNA levels in the SCN. Luciferase reporter
gene assays indicate an activatory function of DECs on Bmal1 expression.
Together, the results suggest a partially redundant and bidirectional regulatory 
function for the 2 Dec genes in the TTL and a conservation of Per-Dec (Cwo)
synergism between vertebrate and invertebrate clocks.

PMID: 22215611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Apr;40(8):3419-30. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr1297. Epub 2011
Dec 30.

A non-canonical E-box within the MyoD core enhancer is necessary for circadian
expression in skeletal muscle.

Zhang X(1), Patel SP, McCarthy JJ, Rabchevsky AG, Goldhamer DJ, Esser KA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Muscle Biology, Department of Physiology, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

The myogenic differentiation 1 (MyoD) gene is a master regulator of myogenesis.
We previously reported that the expression of MyoD mRNA oscillates over 24<U+2009>h in
skeletal muscle and that the circadian clock transcription factors, BMAL1 (brain 
and muscle ARNT-like 1) and CLOCK (circadian locomotor output cycles kaput), were
bound to the core enhancer (CE) of the MyoD gene in vivo. In this study, we
provide in vivo and in vitro evidence that the CE is necessary for circadian
expression of MyoD in adult muscle. Gel shift assays identified a conserved
non-canonical E-box within the CE that is bound by CLOCK and BMAL1. Functional
analysis revealed that this E-box was required for full activation by BMAL1/CLOCK
and for in vitro circadian oscillation. Expression profiling of muscle of
CE(loxP/loxP) mice found approximately 1300 genes mis-expressed relative to
wild-type. Based on the informatics results, we analyzed the respiratory function
of mitochondria isolated from wild-type and CE(loxP/loxP) mice. These assays
determined that State 5 respiration was significantly reduced in CE(loxP/loxP)
muscle. The results of this work identify a novel element in the MyoD enhancer
that confers circadian regulation to MyoD in skeletal muscle and suggest that
loss of circadian regulation leads to changes in myogenic expression and
downstream mitochondrial function.

PMCID: PMC3333858
PMID: 22210883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2012 Mar;138(3):501-11. doi: 10.1007/s00432-011-1126-6. 
Epub 2011 Dec 24.

ARNTL2 and SERPINE1: potential biomarkers for tumor aggressiveness in colorectal 
cancer.

Mazzoccoli G(1), Pazienza V, Panza A, Valvano MR, Benegiamo G, Vinciguerra M,
Andriulli A, Piepoli A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Internal Medicine and Chronobiology Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo
della Sofferenza, Research Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, FG, Italy.
g.mazzoccoli@tin.it

PURPOSE: Cathepsin and plasmin may favor cancer cell invasion degrading
extracellular matrix. Plasmin formation from plasminogen is regulated by
plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1). ARNTL2 activates the promoters of
the PAI-1 gene, officially called SERPINE1, driving the circadian variation in
circulating PAI-1 levels.
METHODS: We evaluated ARNTL2 and SERPINE1 expression in 50 colorectal cancer
specimens and adjacent normal tissue and in colon cancer cell lines.
RESULTS: We found up-regulation of ARNTL2 (P = 0.004) and SERPINE1 (P = 0.002) in
tumor tissue. A statistically significant association was found between high
ARNTL2 mRNA levels and vascular invasion (P < 0.0001), and between high SERPINE1 
mRNA levels and microsatellite instability (MSI-H and MSI-L, P = 0.025). Sorting 
the subjects into quartile groups, a statistically significant association was
found between high ARNTL2 expression and lymph node involvement (P < 0.001),
between high SERPINE1 expression and grading (P < 0.001) and between high
SERPINE1 expression and MSI H-L (P < 0.0001). In SW480 cells, a more
proliferative model compared to CaCo2 cells, there were higher mRNA levels of
ARNTL2 (P < 0.001) and SERPINE1 (P = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: ARNTL2 and SERPINE1 expression is increased in colorectal cancer and 
in a highly proliferative colon cancer cell line and is related to tumor
invasiveness and aggressiveness.

PMID: 22198637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 10;109(2):582-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1106750109.
Epub 2011 Dec 19.

The nuclear receptor REV-ERBa mediates circadian regulation of innate immunity
through selective regulation of inflammatory cytokines.

Gibbs JE(1), Blaikley J, Beesley S, Matthews L, Simpson KD, Boyce SH, Farrow SN, 
Else KJ, Singh D, Ray DW, Loudon AS.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre,
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, United Kingdom.

Diurnal variation in inflammatory and immune function is evident in the
physiology and pathology of humans and animals, but molecular mechanisms and
mediating cell types that provide this gating remain unknown. By screening
cytokine responses in mice to endotoxin challenge at different times of day, we
reveal that the magnitude of response exhibited pronounced temporal dependence,
yet only within a subset of proinflammatory cytokines. Disruption of the
circadian clockwork in macrophages (primary effector cells of the innate immune
system) by conditional targeting of a key clock gene (bmal1) removed all temporal
gating of endotoxin-induced cytokine response in cultured cells and in vivo. Loss
of circadian gating was coincident with suppressed rev-erba expression,
implicating this nuclear receptor as a potential link between the clock and
inflammatory pathways. This finding was confirmed in vivo and in vitro through
genetic and pharmacological modulation of REV-ERBa activity. Circadian gating of 
endotoxin response was lost in rev-erba(-/-) mice and in cultured macrophages
from these animals, despite maintenance of circadian rhythmicity within these
cells. Using human macrophages, which show circadian clock gene oscillations and 
rhythmic endotoxin responses, we demonstrate that administration of a synthetic
REV-ERB ligand, or genetic knockdown of rev-erba expression, is effective at
modulating the production and release of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-6. This 
work demonstrates that the macrophage clockwork provides temporal gating of
systemic responses to endotoxin, and identifies REV-ERBa as the key link between 
the clock and immune function. REV-ERBa may therefore represent a unique
therapeutic target in human inflammatory disease.

PMCID: PMC3258648
PMID: 22184247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e27493. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027493. Epub 2011 Dec 2.

Association between circadian clock genes and diapause incidence in Drosophila
triauraria.

Yamada H(1), Yamamoto MT.

Author information: 
(1)Drosophila Genetic Resource Center, Kyoto Institute of Technology, Kyoto,
Japan.

Diapause is an adaptive response triggered by seasonal photoperiodicity to
overcome unfavorable seasons. The photoperiodic clock is a system that controls
seasonal physiological processes, but our knowledge about its physiological
mechanisms and genetic architecture remains incomplete. The circadian clock is
another system that controls daily rhythmic physiological phenomena. It has been 
argued that there is a connection between the two clocks. To examine the genetic 
connection between them, we analyzed the associations of five circadian clock
genes (period, timeless, Clock, cycle and cryptochrome) with the occurrence of
diapause in Drosophila triauraria, which shows a robust reproductive diapause
with clear photoperiodicity. Non-diapause strains found in low latitudes were
compared in genetic crosses with the diapause strain, in which the diapause trait
is clearly dominant. Single nucleotide polymorphism and deletion analyses of the 
five circadian clock genes in backcross progeny revealed that allelic differences
in timeless and cryptochrome between the strains were additively associated with 
the differences in the incidence of diapause. This suggests that there is a
molecular link between certain circadian clock genes and the occurrence of
diapause.

PMCID: PMC3229484
PMID: 22164210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Dec 16;416(3-4):337-42. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.11.037. Epub 2011 Nov 15.

Extracellular low pH affects circadian rhythm expression in human primary
fibroblasts.

Lee SK(1), Achieng E, Maddox C, Chen SC, Iuvone PM, Fukuhara C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Neuroscience Institute, Morehouse School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30310, USA.

Circadian rhythm is a fundamental biological system involved in the regulation of
various physiological functions. However, little is known about a nature or
function of circadian clock in human primary cells. In the present study, we have
applied in vitro real time circadian rhythm monitoring to study human clock
properties using primary skin fibroblasts. Among factors that affect human
physiology, slightly lower extracellular pH was chosen to test its effects on
circadian rhythm expression. We established human primary fibroblast cultures
obtained from three healthy subjects, stably delivered a circadian reporter gene 
Bmal1-luciferase, and recorded circadian rhythms in the culture medium at pH 7.2 
and 6.7. At pH 7.2, robust and sustained circadian rhythms were observed with
average period length 24.47 ± 0.03 h. Such rhythms were also found at pH 6.7;
however, period length was significantly shortened to 22.60 ± 0.20, amplitude was
increased, and damping rate was decreased. The effect of exposure to low pH on
the period length was reversible. The shortened period was unlikely caused by
factors affecting cell viability because cell morphology and MTT assay showed no 
significant difference between the two conditions. In summary, our results showed
that the circadian rhythm expression is affected at pH 6.7 in human primary
fibroblasts without affecting cell viability.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3243307
PMID: 22115778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Mol Psychiatry. 2012 Oct;17(10):988-95. doi: 10.1038/mp.2011.149. Epub 2011 Nov
22.

Adult attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder is associated with alterations in 
circadian rhythms at the behavioural, endocrine and molecular levels.

Baird AL(1), Coogan AN, Siddiqui A, Donev RM, Thome J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Molecular Psychiatry, Institute of Life
Science, School of Medicine, Swansea University, Swansea, UK.

Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in adults is associated with
impaired sleep, and it has been postulated that this impairment may contribute to
the psychopathology of this common condition. One key driver of sleep/wake cycles
is the circadian system, which at the molecular level consists of a series of
transcriptional feedback loops of clock genes, which in turn produce endocrine,
physiological and behavioural outputs with a near 24 h periodicity. We set out to
examine circadian rhythms at the behavioural, endocrine and molecular levels in
ADHD. Adults with ADHD as well as age- and sex-matched controls were recruited.
Circadian rhythms were measured by means of actigraphy for the determination of
gross motor patterns, by self-sampling of oral mucosa for assessment of rhythmic 
expression of the clock genes BMAL1 and PER2, and by estimation of salivary
cortisol and melatonin levels. Actigraphic analysis revealed significant diurnal 
and nocturnal hyperactivity in the ADHD group, as well as a significant shorter
period of best fit for the locomotor circadian rhythm in ADHD. BMAL1 and PER2
showed circadian rhythmicity in controls with this being lost in the ADHD group. 
Cortisol rhythms were significantly phase delayed in the ADHD group. These
findings indicate that adult ADHD is accompanied by significant changes in the
circadian system, which in turn may lead to decreased sleep duration and quality 
in the condition. Further, modulation of circadian rhythms may represent a novel 
therapeutic avenue in the management of ADHD.

PMID: 22105622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Cell Cycle. 2011 Dec 1;10(23):4162-9. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.23.18381. Epub 2011 Dec 
1.

Circadian clock protein BMAL1 regulates cellular senescence in vivo.

Khapre RV(1), Kondratova AA, Susova O, Kondratov RV.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Regulation in Health and Disease, BGES Department, Cleveland
State University, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Jan 15;11(2):213-4.

Deficiency of the circadian clock transcriptional factor BMAL1 results in the
development of premature aging in mice. In agreement with the accelerated aging
phenotype, we observed an increase in the number of senescent cells in different 
tissues (lungs, liver and spleen) of Bmal1(-/-) mice, which suggests the
important role of BMAL1 in the control of senescence in vivo. However, no
difference in the rate of proliferation and senescence between primary
fibroblasts isolated from wild-type and Bmal1(-/-) mice has been detected,
suggesting that BMAL1 does not play a significant role in replicative senescence 
in vitro. BMAL1 deficient fibroblasts had an increased sensitivity to hydrogen
peroxide treatment, and reduced sensitivity to DNA damaging anticancer drugs
etoposide and daunorubicin. Increased sensitivity of Bmal1(-/-) cells to
oxidative stress was p53 independent and correlated with the disrupted regulation
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis in BMAL1 deficient cells: indeed,
circadian oscillations of ROS level can be induced in wild-type but not in
Bmal1(-/-) cells. We propose that BMAL1 is important for the regulation of
oxidative stress and DNA damage responses, while deregulation of these processes 
upon BMAL1 deficiency leads to development of stress induced senescence in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3272294
PMID: 22101268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Endocrinol Nutr. 2012 Jan;59(1):50-61. doi: 10.1016/j.endonu.2011.08.002. Epub
2011 Nov 18.

[Chronobiological aspects of obesity and metabolic syndrome].

[Article in Spanish]

Gómez-Abellán P(1), Madrid JA, Ordovás JM, Garaulet M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Murcia,
Murcia, España.

Circadian rhythms (approximately 24h) are widely characterized at molecular level
and their generation is acknowledged to originate from oscillations in expression
of several clock genes and from regulation of their protein products. While
general entrainment of organisms to environmental light-dark cycles is mainly
achieved through the master clock of the suprachiasmatic nucleus in mammals, this
molecular clockwork is functional in several organs and tissues. Some studies
have suggested that disruption of the circadian system (chronodisruption (CD))
may be causal for manifestations of the metabolic syndrome. This review
summarizes (1) how molecular clocks coordinate metabolism and their specific role
in the adipocyte; (2) the genetic aspects of and scientific evidence for obesity 
as a chronobiological illness; and (3) CD and its causes and pathological
consequences. Finally, ideas about use of chronobiology for the treatment of
obesity are discussed.

Copyright © 2011 SEEN. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22100640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Genes Dev. 2011 Nov 15;25(22):2374-86. doi: 10.1101/gad.174110.111.

Drosophila CLOCK target gene characterization: implications for circadian
tissue-specific gene expression.

Abruzzi KC(1), Rodriguez J, Menet JS, Desrochers J, Zadina A, Luo W, Tkachev S,
Rosbash M.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, National Center for Behavioral Genomics,
Department of Biology, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts 02454, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2011 Nov 15;25(22):2321-6.

CLOCK (CLK) is a master transcriptional regulator of the circadian clock in
Drosophila. To identify CLK direct target genes and address circadian
transcriptional regulation in Drosophila, we performed chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) tiling array assays (ChIP-chip) with a number of
circadian proteins. CLK binding cycles on at least 800 sites with maximal binding
in the early night. The CLK partner protein CYCLE (CYC) is on most of these
sites. The CLK/CYC heterodimer is joined 4-6 h later by the transcriptional
repressor PERIOD (PER), indicating that the majority of CLK targets are regulated
similarly to core circadian genes. About 30% of target genes also show cycling
RNA polymerase II (Pol II) binding. Many of these generate cycling RNAs despite
not being documented in prior RNA cycling studies. This is due in part to
different RNA isoforms and to fly head tissue heterogeneity. CLK has specific
targets in different tissues, implying that important CLK partner proteins and/or
mechanisms contribute to gene-specific and tissue-specific regulation.

PMCID: PMC3222903
PMID: 22085964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Obes Surg. 2012 Jan;22(1):105-12. doi: 10.1007/s11695-011-0539-2.

Sexual dimorphism in clock genes expression in human adipose tissue.

Gómez-Abellán P(1), Madrid JA, Luján JA, Frutos MD, González R, Martínez-Augustín
O, de Medina FS, Ordovás JM, Garaulet M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Biology, University of Murcia, Campus de 
Espinardo, 30100 Murcia, Spain.

BACKGROUND: This study was carried out to investigate whether sex-related
differences exist in the adipocyte expression of clock genes from subcutaneous
abdominal and visceral fat depots in severely obese patients.
METHODS: We investigated 16 morbidly obese patients, eight men and eight women
(mean age 45 ± 20 years; mean BMI 46 ± 6 kg/m(2)), undergoing laparoscopic
gastric bypass surgery. Biopsies were taken as paired samples [subcutaneous and
visceral adipose tissue (AT)] at the beginning of the surgical process at 11:00 h
in the morning. Metabolic syndrome features such as waist circumference, plasma
glucose, triglycerides, total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol
(HDL-C), and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) were also studied. The
expression of clock genes (PER2, BMAL1, and CRY1) was measured by quantitative
real-time PCR, Western blot, and immunohistochemical analysis.
RESULTS: Gene expression was significantly higher in women than in men for the
three genes studied in both ATs (P < 0.05). In visceral fat, these differences
were more marked. (P < 0.001). Western blot analysis partially confirmed these
results since statistical differences were observed for PER2 in both ATs and for 
CRY1 in subcutaneous adipose tissue. There were no differences in BMAL1 protein
expression. Interestingly, clock gene expression level was correlated with LDL-C 
and HDL-C (P < 0.05). Moreover, we found significant associations with body fat
mass in women and with age in men.
CONCLUSIONS: Clock genes expression is sex dependent in human adipose tissue from
morbidly obese subjects and correlates to a decreased in metabolic
syndrome-related traits. These preliminary results make necessary to go deep into
the knowledge of the molecular basis of the sexual dimorphism in chronobiology.

PMCID: PMC4426975
PMID: 22081238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Nature. 2011 Nov 9;480(7376):209-14. doi: 10.1038/nature10649.

The circadian molecular clock creates epidermal stem cell heterogeneity.

Janich P(1), Pascual G, Merlos-Suárez A, Batlle E, Ripperger J, Albrecht U, Cheng
HY, Obrietan K, Di Croce L, Benitah SA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Regulation and UPF, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Nature. 2011 Dec 8;480(7376):185-7.
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jan;13(1):4-5.

Murine epidermal stem cells undergo alternate cycles of dormancy and activation, 
fuelling tissue renewal. However, only a subset of stem cells becomes active
during each round of morphogenesis, indicating that stem cells coexist in
heterogeneous responsive states. Using a circadian-clock reporter-mouse model,
here we show that the dormant hair-follicle stem cell niche contains coexisting
populations of cells at opposite phases of the clock, which are differentially
predisposed to respond to homeostatic cues. The core clock protein Bmal1
modulates the expression of stem cell regulatory genes in an oscillatory manner, 
to create populations that are either predisposed, or less prone, to activation. 
Disrupting this clock equilibrium, through deletion of Bmal1 (also known as
Arntl) or Per1/2, resulted in a progressive accumulation or depletion of dormant 
stem cells, respectively. Stem cell arrhythmia also led to premature epidermal
ageing, and a reduction in the development of squamous tumours. Our results
indicate that the circadian clock fine-tunes the temporal behaviour of epidermal 
stem cells, and that its perturbation affects homeostasis and the predisposition 
to tumorigenesis.

PMID: 22080954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Chronobiol Int. 2011 Nov;28(9):737-50. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2011.607374.

Advanced light-entrained activity onsets and restored free-running
suprachiasmatic nucleus circadian rhythms in per2/dec mutant mice.

Bode B(1), Taneja R, Rossner MJ, Oster H.

Author information: 
(1)Circadian Rhythms Group , Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry,
Göttingen, Germany.

Erratum in
    Chronobiol Int. 2012 Apr;29(3):377. Taneja, Reshma [added].

Many behavioral and physiological processes display diurnal (24-h) rhythms
controlled by an internal timekeeping system?the circadian clock. In mammals, a
circadian pacemaker is located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the
hypothalamus and synchronizes peripheral oscillators found in most other tissues 
with the external light-dark (LD) cycle. At the molecular level, circadian clocks
are regulated by transcriptional translational feedback loops (TTLs) involving a 
set of clock genes. The mammalian core TTL includes the transcriptional
modulators PER?(1?3) and CRY?(1/2) that inhibit their own expression by
interaction with CLOCK/NPAS2 and BMAL1 (ARNTL). The basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors DEC1 (BHLHE40) and DEC2 (BHLHE41) can interact with this
core TTL, forming an accessory feedback mechanism. The authors measured circadian
locomotor behavior and clock gene expression in the SCN of Per2/Dec double- and
triple-mutant mice to analyze the functional interaction of PER2 and DEC feedback
on circadian pacemaker function in the SCN. The data suggest a synergistic
interaction of Per2 and Dec1/2 in activity entrainment to a standard LD cycle,
correlating with a cumulative deficiency in negative-masking capacities in
Per2/Dec double- and triple-mutant mice and suggesting an involvement of
Per2-Dec1/2 interactivity in activity-onset regulation and masking under LD, but 
not under constant conditions. In contrast, under constant darkness (DD)
conditions, a deletion of either Dec1 or Dec2 partially rescued the Per2 mutant
short-period/arrhythmicity phenotype, accompanied by a restoration of time-of-day
effects on clock gene expression in the SCN. Together, these results show an
interaction of Per2 and Dec1/2 feedback processes in the SCN with differential
modes of interactivity under entrained and free-run conditions. (Author
correspondence: henrik.oster@mpibpc.mpg.de ).

PMID: 22080784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Chronobiol Int. 2011 Dec;28(10):968-72. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2011.613325.

Tissue-dependent alterations of the clock gene expression rhythms in
leptin-resistant Zucker diabetic fatty rats.

Motosugi Y(1), Ando H, Ushijima K, Maekawa T, Ishikawa E, Kumazaki M, Fujimura A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology , Department of Pharmacology, School of
Medicine, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Japan.

Recent studies have demonstrated that circadian clocks are impaired in liver and 
adipose tissue of both leptin-deficient ob/ob and leptin-resistant KK-A(y) mice. 
Because impairment of peripheral clocks precedes metabolic abnormalities in ob/ob
mice, leptin signaling might be important for modulating peripheral clocks. To
assess this hypothesis, the authors determined daily mRNA expression profiles of 
clock genes Clock, Arntl, Per1, Per2, Cry1, Dbp, and Nr1d1 in several tissues of 
leptin-receptor-deficient Zucker diabetic fatty (ZDF) rats. Transcript levels of 
some of these genes around the respective peak times decreased significantly in
the liver, but not in the suprachiasmatic nucleus, mesenteric adipose tissue, and
heart, compared to those in control rats. In contrast, mRNA levels of Per1 and
Dbp around the peak time increased in the aorta of ZDF rats. However, expression 
rhythms of these clock genes in serum-stimulated cultured cells isolated from the
aorta of ZDF rats were quite similar to those in serum-stimulated aortic cells of
control rats. These results show that systemic leptin signaling defect influences
peripheral clocks in a tissue-dependent manner, suggesting the possibility that
leptin indirectly modulates the clocks in at least a subset of peripheral
tissues.

PMID: 22080742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 30;286(52):44606-19. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.278903. Epub
2011 Nov 8.

O-GlcNAcylation, novel post-translational modification linking myocardial
metabolism and cardiomyocyte circadian clock.

Durgan DJ(1), Pat BM, Laczy B, Bradley JA, Tsai JY, Grenett MH, Ratcliffe WF,
Brewer RA, Nagendran J, Villegas-Montoya C, Zou C, Zou L, Johnson RL Jr, Dyck JR,
Bray MS, Gamble KL, Chatham JC, Young ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA.

The cardiomyocyte circadian clock directly regulates multiple myocardial
functions in a time-of-day-dependent manner, including gene expression,
metabolism, contractility, and ischemic tolerance. These same biological
processes are also directly influenced by modification of proteins by
monosaccharides of O-linked ß-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc). Because the
circadian clock and protein O-GlcNAcylation have common regulatory roles in the
heart, we hypothesized that a relationship exists between the two. We report that
total cardiac protein O-GlcNAc levels exhibit a diurnal variation in mouse
hearts, peaking during the active/awake phase. Genetic ablation of the circadian 
clock specifically in cardiomyocytes in vivo abolishes diurnal variations in
cardiac O-GlcNAc levels. These time-of-day-dependent variations appear to be
mediated by clock-dependent regulation of O-GlcNAc transferase and O-GlcNAcase
protein levels, glucose metabolism/uptake, and glutamine synthesis in an
NAD-independent manner. We also identify the clock component Bmal1 as an
O-GlcNAc-modified protein. Increasing protein O-GlcNAcylation (through
pharmacological inhibition of O-GlcNAcase) results in diminished Per2 protein
levels, time-of-day-dependent induction of bmal1 gene expression, and phase
advances in the suprachiasmatic nucleus clock. Collectively, these data suggest
that the cardiomyocyte circadian clock increases protein O-GlcNAcylation in the
heart during the active/awake phase through coordinated regulation of the
hexosamine biosynthetic pathway and that protein O-GlcNAcylation in turn
influences the timing of the circadian clock.

PMCID: PMC3247942
PMID: 22069332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2012 Mar 1;302(5):R587-97. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00393.2011. Epub 2011 Nov 2.

R-a-lipoic acid does not reverse hepatic inflammation of aging, but lowers lipid 
anabolism, while accentuating circadian rhythm transcript profiles.

Finlay LA(1), Michels AJ, Butler JA, Smith EJ, Monette JS, Moreau RF, Petersen
SK, Frei B, Hagen TM.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, 307 Linus Pauling Science Center, Oregon State Univ.,
Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.

To determine the effects of age and lipoic acid supplementation on hepatic gene
expression, we fed young (3 mo) and old (24 mo) male Fischer 344 rats a diet with
or without 0.2% (wt/wt) R-a-lipoic acid (LA) for 2 wk. Total RNA isolated from
liver tissue was analyzed by Affymetrix microarray to examine changes in
transcriptional profiles. Results showed elevated proinflammatory gene expression
in the aging liver and evidence for increased immune cell activation and tissue
remodeling, together representing 45% of the age-related transcriptome changes.
In addition, age-related increases in transcripts of genes related to fatty acid,
triglyceride, and cholesterol synthesis, including acetyl-CoA carboxylase-ß
(Acacb) and fatty acid synthase (Fasn), were observed. Supplementation of old
animals with LA did not reverse the necroinflammatory phenotype but,
intriguingly, altered the expression of genes governing circadian rhythm. Most
notably, Arntl, Npas2, and Per changed in a coordinated manner with respect to
rhythmic transcription. LA further caused a decrease in transcripts of several
bile acid and lipid synthesis genes, including Acacb and Fasn, which are
regulated by first-order clock transcription factors. Similar effects of LA
supplementation on bile acid and lipid synthesis genes were observed in young
animals. Transcript changes of lipid metabolism genes were corroborated by a
decrease in FASN and ACC protein levels. We conclude that advanced age is
associated with a necroinflammatory phenotype and increased lipid synthesis,
while chronic LA supplementation influences hepatic genes associated with lipid
and energy metabolism and circadian rhythm, regardless of age.

PMCID: PMC3311522
PMID: 22049228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Islets. 2011 Nov-Dec;3(6):381-8. doi: 10.4161/isl.3.6.18157.

Loss of Bmal1 leads to uncoupling and impaired glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion in ß-cells.

Lee J(1), Kim MS, Li R, Liu VY, Fu L, Moore DD, Ma K, Yechoor VK.

Author information: 
(1)DERC & Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, Department of
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

The circadian clock has been shown to regulate metabolic homeostasis. Mice with a
deletion of Bmal1, a key component of the core molecular clock, develop
hyperglycemia and hypoinsulinemia, suggesting ß-cell dysfunction. However, the
underlying mechanisms are not fully known. In this study, we investigated the
mechanisms underlying the regulation of ß-cell function by Bmal1. We studied
ß-cell function in global Bmal1-/- mice, in vivo and in isolated islets ex vivo, 
as well as in rat insulinoma cell lines with shRNA-mediated Bmal1 knockdown.
Global Bmal1-/- mice develop diabetes secondary to a significant impairment in
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS). There is a blunting of GSIS in both 
isolated Bmal1-/- islets and in Bmal1 knockdown cells, as compared to controls,
suggesting that this is secondary to a loss of cell-autonomous effect of Bmal1.
In contrast to previous studies, in these Bmal1-/- mice on a C57Bl/6 background, 
the loss of stimulated insulin secretion, interestingly, is with glucose but not 
to other depolarizing secretagogues, suggesting that events downstream of
membrane depolarization are largely normal in Bmal1-/- islets. This defect in
GSIS occurs as a result increased mitochondrial uncoupling with consequent
impairment of glucose-induced mitochondrial potential generation and ATP
synthesis, due to an upregulation of Ucp2. Inhibition of Ucp2, in isolated
islets, leads to a rescue of the glucose-induced ATP production and insulin
secretion in Bmal1-/- islets. Thus, Bmal1 regulates mitochondrial energy
metabolism to maintain normal GSIS and its disruption leads to diabetes due to a 
loss of GSIS.

PMCID: PMC3329519
PMID: 22045262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26622. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026622. Epub 2011 Oct 24.

Sleep loss reduces the DNA-binding of BMAL1, CLOCK, and NPAS2 to specific clock
genes in the mouse cerebral cortex.

Mongrain V(1), La Spada F, Curie T, Franken P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland. valerie.mongrain@umontreal.ca

We have previously demonstrated that clock genes contribute to the homeostatic
aspect of sleep regulation. Indeed, mutations in some clock genes modify the
markers of sleep homeostasis and an increase in homeostatic sleep drive alters
clock gene expression in the forebrain. Here, we investigate a possible mechanism
by which sleep deprivation (SD) could alter clock gene expression by quantifying 
DNA-binding of the core-clock transcription factors CLOCK, NPAS2, and BMAL1 to
the cis-regulatory sequences of target clock genes in mice. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP), we first showed that, as reported for the liver,
DNA-binding of CLOCK and BMAL1 to target clock genes changes in function of
time-of-day in the cerebral cortex. Tissue extracts were collected at ZT0 (light 
onset), -6, -12, and -18, and DNA enrichment of E-box or E'-box containing
sequences was measured by qPCR. CLOCK and BMAL1 binding to Cry1, Dbp, Per1, and
Per2 depended on time-of-day, with maximum values reached at around ZT6. We then 
observed that SD, performed between ZT0 and -6, significantly decreased
DNA-binding of CLOCK and BMAL1 to Dbp, consistent with the observed decrease in
Dbp mRNA levels after SD. The DNA-binding of NPAS2 and BMAL1 to Per2 was also
decreased by SD, although SD is known to increase Per2 expression in the cortex. 
DNA-binding to Per1 and Cry1 was not affected by SD. Our results show that the
sleep-wake history can affect the clock molecular machinery directly at the level
of chromatin binding thereby altering the cortical expression of Dbp and Per2 and
likely other targets. Although the precise dynamics of the relationship between
DNA-binding and mRNA expression, especially for Per2, remains elusive, the
results also suggest that part of the reported circadian changes in DNA-binding
of core clock components in tissues peripheral to the suprachiasmatic nuclei
could, in fact, be sleep-wake driven.

PMCID: PMC3200344
PMID: 22039518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Neurosci. 2011 Oct 26;31(43):15391-6. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2801-11.2011.

Bmal1 in the nervous system is essential for normal adaptation of circadian
locomotor activity and food intake to periodic feeding.

Mieda M(1), Sakurai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience and Integrative Physiology, Faculty of
Medicine, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan.
mieda@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Temporal restriction of feeding can entrain circadian behavioral and
physiological rhythms in mammals. These changes in biological rhythms are
postulated to be brought about by a putative food-entrainable oscillator (FEO)
that is independent of the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). However, the anatomical
substrates and molecular machinery of FEO remain elusive. We report here that
mice with a nervous system-specific deletion of Bmal1, an essential clock
component, had a marked deficit in entrainment of locomotor activity by periodic 
feeding, accompanied by reduced food intake and subsequent loss of body weight.
These mice exhibited a nearly normal light-entrainable activity rhythm driven by 
the SCN, because deletion of the Bmal1 gene in the SCN was only partial. These
findings suggest that an SCN-independent FEO in the nervous system requires Bmal1
and plays a critical role in adaptation of circadian locomotor activity and food 
intake to periodic feeding.

PMID: 22031885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2012 Jan 1;302(1):R193-206. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00367.2011. Epub 2011 Oct 26.

Circadian expression of clock and putative clock-controlled genes in skeletal
muscle of the zebrafish.

Amaral IP(1), Johnston IA.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Oceans Institute, School of Biology, University of St. Andrews, Fife,
Scotland, United Kingdom. ipgda@st-andrews.ac.uk

To identify circadian patterns of gene expression in skeletal muscle, adult male 
zebrafish were acclimated for 2 wk to a 12:12-h light-dark photoperiod and then
exposed to continuous darkness for 86 h with ad libitum feeding. The increase in 
gut food content associated with the subjective light period was much diminished 
by the third cycle, enabling feeding and circadian rhythms to be distinguished.
Expression of zebrafish paralogs of mammalian transcriptional activators of the
circadian mechanism (bmal1, clock1, and rora) followed a rhythmic pattern with a 
~24-h periodicity. Peak expression of rora paralogs occurred at the beginning of 
the subjective light period [Zeitgeber time (ZT)07 and ZT02 for roraa and rorab],
whereas the highest expression of bmal1 and clock paralogs occurred 12 h later
(ZT13-15 and ZT16 for bmal and clock paralogs). Expression of the transcriptional
repressors cry1a, per1a/1b, per2, per3, nr1d2a/2b, and nr1d1 also followed a
circadian pattern with peak expression at ZT0-02. Expression of the two paralogs 
of cry2 occurred in phase with clock1a/1b. Duplicated genes had a high
correlation of expression except for paralogs of clock1, nr1d2, and per1, with
cry1b showing no circadian pattern. The highest expression difference was
9.2-fold for the activator bmal1b and 51.7-fold for the repressor per1a. Out of
32 candidate clock-controlled genes, only myf6, igfbp3, igfbp5b, and hsf2 showed 
circadian expression patterns. Igfbp3, igfbp5b, and myf6 were expressed in phase 
with clock1a/1b and had an average of twofold change in expression from peak to
trough, whereas hsf2 transcripts were expressed in phase with cry1a and had a
7.2-fold-change in expression. The changes in expression of clock and
clock-controlled genes observed during continuous darkness were also observed at 
similar ZTs in fish exposed to a normal photoperiod in a separate control
experiment. The role of circadian clocks in regulating muscle maintenance and
growth are discussed.

PMID: 22031781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Brain Behav Immun. 2012 Mar;26(3):407-13. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2011.10.001. Epub
2011 Oct 13.

Circadian expression of clock genes in mouse macrophages, dendritic cells, and B 
cells.

Silver AC(1), Arjona A, Hughes ME, Nitabach MN, Fikrig E.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8022, USA.
adam.silver@yale.edu

In mammals, circadian and daily rhythms influence nearly all aspects of
physiology, ranging from behavior to gene expression. Functional molecular clocks
have been described in the murine spleen and splenic NK cells. The aim of our
study was to investigate the existence of molecular clock mechanisms in other
immune cells. Therefore, we measured the circadian changes in gene expression of 
clock genes (Per1, Per2, Bmal1, and Clock) and clock-controlled transcription
factors (Rev-erba and Dbp) in splenic enriched macrophages, dendritic cells, and 
B cells in both mice entrained to a light-dark cycle and under constant
environmental conditions. Our study reveals the existence of functional molecular
clock mechanisms in splenic macrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3336152
PMID: 22019350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Nov;31(11):2361-3. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.235754.

The clock is ticking as the clot thickens.

Conway EM.

Comment on
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Nov;31(11):2552-9.

PMID: 22011745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Croat Med J. 2011 Oct 15;52(5):594-603.

The impact of sleep deprivation and nighttime light exposure on clock gene
expression in humans.

Kavcic P(1), Rojc B, Dolenc-Groselj L, Claustrat B, Fujs K, Poljak M.

Author information: 
(1)1Institute of Clinical Neurophysiology, Division of Neurology, University
Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia. pavel.kavcic@gmail.com

AIM: To examine the effect of acute sleep deprivation under light conditions on
the expression of two key clock genes, hPer2 and hBmal1, in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) and on plasma melatonin and cortisol levels.
METHODS: Blood samples were drawn from 6 healthy individuals at 4-hour intervals 
for three consecutive nights, including a night of total sleep deprivation
(second night). The study was conducted in April-June 2006 at the University
Medical Centre Ljubljana.
RESULTS: We found a significant diurnal variation in hPer2 and hBmal1 expression 
levels under baseline (P<0.001, F=19.7, df=30 for hPer2 and P<0.001, F=17.6,
df=30 for hBmal1) and sleep-deprived conditions (P<0.001, F=9.2, df=30 for hPer2 
and P<0.001, F=13.2, df=30 for hBmal1). Statistical analysis with the single
cosinor method revealed circadian variation of hPer2 under baseline and of hBmal1
under baseline and sleep-deprived conditions. The peak expression of hPer2 was at
13:55 ± 1:15 hours under baseline conditions and of hBmal1 at 16:08 ± 1:18 hours 
under baseline and at 17:13 ± 1:35 hours under sleep-deprived conditions.
Individual cosinor analysis of hPer2 revealed a loss of circadian rhythm in 3
participants and a phase shift in 2 participants under sleep-deprived conditions.
The plasma melatonin and cortisol rhythms confirmed a conventional alignment of
the central circadian pacemaker to the habitual sleep/wake schedule.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that 40-hour acute sleep deprivation under light 
conditions may affect the expression of hPer2 in PBMCs..

PMCID: PMC3195968
PMID: 21990077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Oct 11;108(41):17147-52. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1112998108. Epub 2011 Oct 3.

Tissue-intrinsic dysfunction of circadian clock confers transplant
arteriosclerosis.

Cheng B(1), Anea CB, Yao L, Chen F, Patel V, Merloiu A, Pati P, Caldwell RW,
Fulton DJ, Rudic RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Vascular Biology Center, and
Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta,
GA 30912, USA.

The suprachiasmatic nucleus of the brain is the circadian center, relaying
rhythmic environmental and behavioral information to peripheral tissues to
control circadian physiology. As such, central clock dysfunction can alter
systemic homeostasis to consequently impair peripheral physiology in a manner
that is secondary to circadian malfunction. To determine the impact of circadian 
clock function in organ transplantation and dissect the influence of intrinsic
tissue clocks versus extrinsic clocks, we implemented a blood vessel grafting
approach to surgically assemble a chimeric mouse that was part wild-type (WT) and
part circadian clock mutant. Arterial isografts from donor WT mice that had been 
anastamosed to common carotid arteries of recipient WT mice (WT:WT) exhibited no 
pathology in this syngeneic transplant strategy. Similarly, when WT grafts were
anastamosed to mice with disrupted circadian clocks, the structural features of
the WT grafts immersed in the milieu of circadian malfunction were normal and
absent of lesions, comparable to WT:WT grafts. In contrast, aortic grafts from
Bmal1 knockout (KO) or Period-2,3 double-KO mice transplanted into littermate
control WT mice developed robust arteriosclerotic disease. These lesions observed
in donor grafts of Bmal1-KO were associated with up-regulation in T-cell
receptors, macrophages, and infiltrating cells in the vascular grafts, but were
independent of hemodynamics and B and T cell-mediated immunity. These data
demonstrate the significance of intrinsic tissue clocks as an autonomous
influence in experimental models of arteriosclerotic disease, which may have
implications with regard to the influence of circadian clock function in organ
transplantation.

PMCID: PMC3193243
PMID: 21969583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25382. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025382. Epub 2011 Sep 23.

The de-ubiquitinylating enzyme, USP2, is associated with the circadian clockwork 
and regulates its sensitivity to light.

Scoma HD(1), Humby M, Yadav G, Zhang Q, Fogerty J, Besharse JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America.

We have identified a novel component of the circadian clock that regulates its
sensitivity to light at the evening light to dark transition. USP2 (Ubiquitin
Specific Protease 2), which de-ubiquitinylates and stabilizes target proteins, is
rhythmically expressed in multiple tissues including the SCN. We have developed a
knockout model of USP2 and found that exposure to low irradiance light at ZT12
increases phase delays of USP2(-/-) mice compared to wildtype. We additionally
show that USP2b is in a complex with several clock components and regulates the
stability and turnover of BMAL1, which in turn alters the expression of several
CLOCK/BMAL1 controlled genes. Rhythmic expression of USP2 in the SCN and other
tissues offers a new level of control of the clock machinery through
de-ubiqutinylation and suggests a role for USP2 during circadian adaptation to
environmental day length changes.

PMCID: PMC3179520
PMID: 21966515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25231. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025231. Epub 2011 Sep 22.

Deficient of a clock gene, brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1), induces 
dyslipidemia and ectopic fat formation.

Shimba S(1), Ogawa T, Hitosugi S, Ichihashi Y, Nakadaira Y, Kobayashi M, Tezuka
M, Kosuge Y, Ishige K, Ito Y, Komiyama K, Okamatsu-Ogura Y, Kimura K, Saito M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Science, School of Pharmacy, Nihon University, Funabashi,
Chiba, Japan. shimba.shigeki@nihon-u.ac.jp

A link between circadian rhythm and metabolism has long been discussed. Circadian
rhythm is controlled by positive and negative transcriptional and translational
feedback loops composed of several clock genes. Among clock genes, the brain and 
muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1) and circadian locomotor output cycles kaput
(CLOCK) play important roles in the regulation of the positive rhythmic
transcription. In addition to control of circadian rhythm, we have previously
shown that BMAL1 regulates adipogenesis. In metabolic syndrome patients, the
function of BMAL1 is dysregulated in visceral adipose tissue. In addition,
analysis of SNPs has revealed that BMAL1 is associated with susceptibility to
hypertension and type II diabetes. Furthermore, the significant roles of BMAL1 in
pancreatic ß cells proliferation and maturation were recently reported. These
results suggest that BMAL1 regulates energy homeostasis. Therefore, in this
study, we examined whether loss of BMAL1 function is capable of inducing
metabolic syndrome. Deficient of the Bmal1 gene in mice resulted in elevation of 
the respiratory quotient value, indicating that BMAL1 is involved in the
utilization of fat as an energy source. Indeed, lack of Bmal1 reduced the
capacity of fat storage in adipose tissue, resulting in an increase in the levels
of circulating fatty acids, including triglycerides, free fatty acids, and
cholesterol. Elevation of the circulating fatty acids level induced the formation
of ectopic fat in the liver and skeletal muscle in Bmal1 -/- mice. Interestingly,
ectopic fat formation was not observed in tissue-specific (liver or skeletal
muscle) Bmal1 -/- mice even under high fat diet feeding condition. Therefore, we 
were led to conclude that BMAL1 is a crucial factor in the regulation of energy
homeostasis, and disorders of the functions of BMAL1 lead to the development of
metabolic syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3178629
PMID: 21966465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Science. 2011 Sep 30;333(6051):1881-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1206022.

Histone lysine demethylase JARID1a activates CLOCK-BMAL1 and influences the
circadian clock.

DiTacchio L(1), Le HD, Vollmers C, Hatori M, Witcher M, Secombe J, Panda S.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2011 Sep 30;333(6051):1833-4.

In animals, circadian oscillators are based on a transcription-translation
circuit that revolves around the transcription factors CLOCK and BMAL1. We found 
that the JumonjiC (JmjC) and ARID domain-containing histone lysine demethylase 1a
(JARID1a) formed a complex with CLOCK-BMAL1, which was recruited to the Per2
promoter. JARID1a increased histone acetylation by inhibiting histone deacetylase
1 function and enhanced transcription by CLOCK-BMAL1 in a demethylase-independent
manner. Depletion of JARID1a in mammalian cells reduced Per promoter histone
acetylation, dampened expression of canonical circadian genes, and shortened the 
period of circadian rhythms. Drosophila lines with reduced expression of the
Jarid1a homolog, lid, had lowered Per expression and similarly altered circadian 
rhythms. JARID1a thus has a nonredundant role in circadian oscillator function.

PMCID: PMC3204309
PMID: 21960634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Science. 2011 Sep 30;333(6051):1833-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1212842.

Circadian rhythms. A new histone code for clocks?

Brown SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, Zurich 8057,
Switzerland. steven.brown@pharma.uzh.ch

Comment on
    Science. 2011 Sep 30;333(6051):1881-5.

PMID: 21960618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Neuroscience. 2011 Dec 1;197:65-71. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.09.028. Epub
2011 Sep 17.

Restricted feeding regime affects clock gene expression profiles in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus of rats exposed to constant light.

Nováková M(1), Polidarová L, Sládek M, Sumová A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology v.v.i., Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Vídenská 1083, 14220 Prague 4, Czech Republic.

The master circadian clock located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) is
dominantly entrained by external light/dark cycle to run with a period of a solar
day, that is, 24 h, and synchronizes various peripheral clocks located in the
body's cells and tissues accordingly. A daily restricted normocaloric feeding
regime synchronizes the peripheral clocks but has no effect on SCN rhythmicity.
The aim of this study was to elucidate whether feeding regime may affect the
molecular mechanism generating SCN rhythmicity under conditions in which the
rhythmicity is disturbed, as occurs under constant light. The rats were
maintained under constant light for 30 days and were either fed ad libitum during
the whole period, or their access to food was restricted to only 6 h a day during
the last 2 weeks in constant light. Locomotor activity was monitored during the
whole experiment. On the last day in constant light, daily expression profiles of
the clock genes Per1, Per2, Bmal1, and Rev-erba were determined in the SCN of
both groups by in situ hybridization. Due to their exposure to constant light,
the rats fed ad libitum became completely arrhythmic, while those exposed to the 
restricted feeding were active mostly during the time of food availability. In
the SCN of behaviorally arrhythmic rats, no oscillations in Rev-erba and Bmal1
gene expression were detected, but very low amplitude, borderline significant,
oscillations in Per1 and Per2 persisted. Restricted feeding induced significant
circadian rhythms in Rev-erba and Bmal1 gene expression, but did not affect the
low amplitude oscillations of Per1 and Per2 expression. These findings
demonstrate that, under specific conditions, when the rhythmicity of the SCN is
disturbed and other temporal entraining cues are lacking, the SCN molecular
clockwork may likely sense temporal signals from changes in metabolic state
delivered by normocaloric food.

Copyright Â© 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21952132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Biol Rhythms. 2011 Oct;26(5):412-22. doi: 10.1177/0748730411414170.

Cardiac-specific mutation of Clock alters the quantitative measurements of
physical activities without changing behavioral circadian rhythms.

Ko ML(1), Shi L, Tsai JY, Young ME, Neuendorff N, Earnest DJ, Ko GY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX
77843-4458, USA.

Even though peripheral circadian oscillators in the cardiovascular system are
known to exist, the daily rhythms of the cardiovascular system are mainly
attributed to autonomic or hormonal inputs under the control of the central
oscillator, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). In order to examine the role of
peripheral oscillators in the cardiovascular system, we used a transgenic mouse
where the Clock gene is specifically disrupted in cardiomyocytes. In this
cardiomyocyte-specific CLOCK mutant (CCM) mouse model, the circadian input from
the SCN remains intact. Both CCM and wild-type (WT) littermates displayed
circadian rhythms in wheel-running behavior. However, the overall wheel-running
activities were significantly lower in CCM mice compared to WT over the course of
5 weeks, indicating that CCM mice either have lower baseline physical activities 
or they have lower physical adaptation abilities because daily wheel running,
like routine exercise, induces physical adaptation over a period of time. Upon
further biochemical analysis, it was revealed that the diurnal oscillations of
phosphorylation states of several kinases and protein expression of the L-type
voltage-gated calcium channel (L-VGCC) a1D subunit found in WT hearts were
abolished in CCM hearts, indicating that in mammalian hearts, the daily
oscillations of the activities of these kinases and L-VGCCs were downstream
elements of the cardiac core oscillators. However, the phosphorylation of p38
MAPK exhibited robust diurnal rhythms in both WT and CCM hearts, indicating that 
cardiac p38 could be under the influence of the central clock through
neurohormonal signals or be part of the circadian input pathway in
cardiomyocytes. Taken together, these results indicate that the cardiac core
oscillators have an impact in regulating circadian rhythmicities and cardiac
function.

© 2011 The Author(s)

PMCID: PMC3181102
PMID: 21921295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Biol Rhythms. 2011 Oct;26(5):379-89. doi: 10.1177/0748730411415363.

Synaptotagmin10-Cre, a driver to disrupt clock genes in the SCN.

Husse J(1), Zhou X, Shostak A, Oster H, Eichele G.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Behavior Department, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry,
Goettingen, Germany.

Surgical lesion of the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) profoundly affects the
circadian timing system. A complication of SCN ablations is the concomitant
scission of SCN afferents and efferents. Genetic disruption of the molecular
clockwork in the SCN provides a complementary, less invasive experimental
approach. The authors report the generation and functional analysis of a new Cre 
recombinase driver mouse that evokes homologous recombination with high
efficiency in the SCN. They inserted the Cre recombinase cDNA into the
Synaptotagmin10 (Syt10) locus, a gene strongly expressed in the SCN. Heterozygous
Synaptotagmin10-Cre (Syt10(Cre)) mice have no obvious circadian locomotor
phenotype, and homozygous animals show slightly reduced light-induced phase
delays. Crosses of Syt10(Cre) mice with ß-galactosidase reporter animals revealed
strong Cre activity in the vast majority of SCN cells. Cre activity is not
detected in nonneuronal tissues with the exception of the testis. The authors
demonstrate that conditionally deleting the clock gene Bmal1 using the Syt10(Cre)
driver renders animals arrhythmic.

© 2011 The Author(s)

PMID: 21921292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24521. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024521. Epub 2011 Sep 7.

Synchronization of circadian Per2 rhythms and HSF1-BMAL1:CLOCK interaction in
mouse fibroblasts after short-term heat shock pulse.

Tamaru T(1), Hattori M, Honda K, Benjamin I, Ozawa T, Takamatsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Advanced Research Center for Medical Science,
Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. tetamaru@med.toho-u.ac.jp

Circadian rhythms are the general physiological processes of adaptation to daily 
environmental changes, such as the temperature cycle. A change in temperature is 
a resetting cue for mammalian circadian oscillators, which are possibly regulated
by the heat shock (HS) pathway. The HS response (HSR) is a universal process that
provides protection against stressful conditions, which promote
protein-denaturation. Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is essential for HSR. In the
study presented here, we investigated whether a short-term HS pulse can reset
circadian rhythms. Circadian Per2 rhythm and HSF1-mediated gene expression were
monitored by a real-time bioluminescence assay for mPer2 promoter-driven
luciferase and HS element (HSE; HSF1-binding site)-driven luciferase activity,
respectively. By an optimal duration HS pulse (43°C for approximately 30
minutes), circadian Per2 rhythm was observed in the whole mouse fibroblast
culture, probably indicating the synchronization of the phases of each cell. This
rhythm was preceded by an acute elevation in mPer2 and HSF1-mediated gene
expression. Mutations in the two predicted HSE sites adjacent (one of them
proximally) to the E-box in the mPer2 promoter dramatically abolished circadian
mPer2 rhythm. Circadian Per2 gene/protein expression was not observed in
HSF1-deficient cells. These findings demonstrate that HSF1 is essential to the
synchronization of circadian rhythms by the HS pulse. Importantly, the
interaction between HSF1 and BMAL1:CLOCK heterodimer, a central circadian
transcription factor, was observed after the HS pulse. These findings reveal that
even a short-term HS pulse can reset circadian rhythms and cause the
HSF1-BMAL1:CLOCK interaction, suggesting the pivotal role of crosstalk between
the mammalian circadian and HSR systems.

PMCID: PMC3168500
PMID: 21915348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Sep 22;52(10):7416-22. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-6756.

Early-stage retinal melatonin synthesis impairment in streptozotocin-induced
diabetic wistar rats.

do Carmo Buonfiglio D(1), Peliciari-Garcia RA, do Amaral FG, Peres R, Nogueira
TC, Afeche SC, Cipolla-Neto J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

PURPOSE: Retinal melatonin synthesis occurs in the photoreceptor layer in a
circadian manner, controlling several physiologic rhythmic phenomena, besides
being the most powerful natural free radical scavenger. The purpose of the
present work was to evaluate the diurnal profile of retinal melatonin content and
the regulation of its synthesis in the retina of streptozotocin-induced diabetic 
rats.
METHODS: Diabetes was induced in male Wistar rats (12 hour-12 hour light/dark
cycle) with streptozotocin. Control, diabetic, and insulin-treated diabetic
animals were killed every 3 hours throughout the light-dark cycle. Retinal
melatonin content was measured by high-performance liquid chromatography,
arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AANAT) activity was analyzed by radiometric
assay, Bmal1 gene expression was determined by qPCR, and cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) content was assessed by ELISA.
RESULTS: Control animals showed a clear retinal melatonin and AANAT activity
daily rhythm, with high levels in the dark. Diabetic rats had both parameters
reduced, and the impairment was prevented by immediate insulin treatment. In
addition, the Bmal1 expression profile was lost in the diabetic group, and the
retinal cAMP level was reduced 6 hours after lights on and 3 hours after lights
off.
CONCLUSIONS: The present work shows a melatonin synthesis reduction in diabetic
rats retinas associated with a reduction in AANAT activity that was prevented by 
insulin treatment. The Bmal1-flattened gene expression and the cAMP reduction
seem to be responsible for the AANAT activity decrease in diabetic animals. The
melatonin synthesis reduction observed in the pineal gland of diabetic rats is
also observed in a local melatonin tissue synthesizer, the retina.

PMID: 21896852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Sep 30;413(3):414-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.08.103. Epub 2011 Aug 27.

Palmitate alters the rhythmic expression of molecular clock genes and orexigenic 
neuropeptide Y mRNA levels within immortalized, hypothalamic neurons.

Fick LJ(1), Fick GH, Belsham DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Canada.

The control of energy homeostasis within the hypothalamus is under the regulated 
control of homeostatic hormones, nutrients and the expression of neuropeptides
that alter feeding behavior. Elevated levels of palmitate, a predominant
saturated fatty acid in diet and fatty acid biosynthesis, alter cellular
function. For instance, a key mechanism involved in the development of insulin
resistance is lipotoxicity, through increased circulating saturated fatty acids. 
Although many studies have begun to determine the underlying mechanisms of
lipotoxicity in peripheral tissues, little is known about the effects of excess
lipids in the brain. To determine these mechanisms we used an immortalized,
clonal, hypothalamic cell line, mHypoE-44, to demonstrate that palmitate directly
alters the expression of molecular clock components, by increasing Bmal1 and
Clock, or by decreasing Per2, and Rev-erba, their mRNA levels and altering their 
rhythmic period within individual neurons. We found that these neurons
endogenously express the orexigenic neuropeptides NPY and AgRP, thus we
determined that palmitate administration alters the mRNA expression of these
neuropeptides as well. Palmitate treatment causes a significant increase in NPY
mRNA levels and significantly alters the phase of rhythmic expression. We
explored the link between AMPK and the expression of neuropeptide Y using the
AMPK inhibitor compound C and the AMP analog AICAR. AMPK inhibition decreased NPY
mRNA. AICAR also elevated basal NPY, but prevented the palmitate-mediated
increase in NPY mRNA levels. We postulate that this palmitate-mediated increase
in NPY and AgRP synthesis may initiate a detrimental positive feedback loop
leading to increased energy consumption.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21893042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Ukr Biokhim Zh (1999). 2011 May-Jun;83(3):5-24.

[Molecular mechanisms of circadian clock functioning].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Karbovskyi LL, Minchenko DO, Garmash IaA, Minchenko OG.

Most physiological processes of all organisms are rhythmic with a period of about
24 h and are generated by an endogenous biological CLOCK present in all cells.
However, there is also a central CLOCK--the primary circadian pacemaker which is 
localized in the suprachiasmatic nuclei of the mammalian hypothalamus. Factors of
groups Period (PER1, PER2 and PER3), BMAL (BMAL1 and BMAL2), CRYptochromes (CRY1 
and CRY2) as well as some other factors are the components of this circadian
CLOCK system. Some of these genes contain E-box sequences and their expression is
regulated by a transcription factor complex CLOCK-BMAL1. The enzymes responsible 
for the post-translational modification of circadian gene products are also the
components of circadian CLOCK system. These enzymes define CLOCK's work and
determine the duration of circadian biorhythm and functional state of the whole
organism. The most important of these enzymes are casein kinase-1epsilon and
-1delta. We have analysed data about the interconnection between the circadian
CLOCK system, cell cycle, and cancerogenesis as well as about the sensitivity of 
circadian gene expression to the action of toxic agents and nanomaterials.

PMID: 21888051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Zoolog Sci. 2011 Sep;28(9):671-5. doi: 10.2108/zsj.28.671.

Molecular characterization of alternative transcripts of the horse BMAL1 gene.

Bae JH(1), Ahn K, Nam GH, Lee CE, Park KD, Lee HK, Cho BW, Kim HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea.

The horse BMAL1 gene encodes the brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1, which is a
key regulator of circadian rhythmic systems in most organs and cells. The first
exon of the horse-specific BMAL1 gene is produced by an exonization event of
LINE3 (CR1) and SINE (MIR) was detected by bioinformatic analysis. Alternative
variants generated by cassette exon event in various horse tissues were also
detected by RT-PCR amplification and sequencing. The cDNA sequences of the horse 
transcripts (BMAL1a, BMAL1b) contain additional 21 bp and 71 bp fragments
relative to horse BMAL1. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR was performed to compare
the expression patterns between transcript variants in various horse tissues. The
results of these experiments showed splice variants that were widely expressed in
most tissues. Furthermore, they were highly expressed in cerebellum, heart, and
kidney.

PMID: 21882956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2011 Nov;21(11):751-9. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e32834a8621.

Ramipril modulates circadian gene expression in skeletal muscle.

Sauermann R(1), Schmidt WM, Krebs M, Brunner M, Müller M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria.

OBJECTIVES: Treatment with angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)-inhibitors
favorably affects glucose metabolism and the development of diabetes mellitus by 
largely elusive mechanisms. To identify these mechanisms, we studied the effect
of ACE-inhibition on gene expression in skeletal muscle, a primary target tissue 
for insulin in glucose homeostasis.
METHODS: A subject-blinded and analyst-blinded, placebo-controlled study was
conducted in nine healthy men. Two consecutive muscle biopsies were conducted
before and 9 h after a single dose of either 10-mg ramipril (n=6) or placebo
(n=3), (randomly allocated). Muscle ribonucleic acid was subjected to
transcriptome profiling.
RESULTS: In both ramipril-treated or placebo-treated individuals, the majority of
genes with differential expression between the two time points belonged to the
family of diurnally regulated genes, such as the NR1D1 and NR1D2 genes (nuclear
receptor subfamily 1, group D, members 1 and 2) or members of the period homolog 
family (PER1-3). Ramipril significantly modulated the expression of other
diurnally regulated genes, such as aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator-like (ARNTL), encoding aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator-like, a core component of the circadian clock (P=0.02). Concomitant 
attenuation of NR1D1 downregulation (-2.4-fold compared with -4.1-fold in
placebo; P=0.04), a transcriptional repressor of ARNTL, supported the view that
ramipril might modulate glucose homeostasis pathways involving the NR1D1 ARNTL
axis.
CONCLUSION: As circadian rhythms are deranged in patients who are diabetic,
modulated expression of circadian clock genes by ramipril could explain the
favorable metabolic effects of therapeutic ACE-inhibition.

PMID: 21881539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Nat Neurosci. 2011 Aug 28;14(10):1293-301. doi: 10.1038/nn.2911.

A circadian clock in hippocampus is regulated by interaction between
oligophrenin-1 and Rev-erba.

Valnegri P(1), Khelfaoui M, Dorseuil O, Bassani S, Lagneaux C, Gianfelice A,
Benfante R, Chelly J, Billuart P, Sala C, Passafaro M.

Author information: 
(1)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR) Institute of Neuroscience, Department
of Pharmacology, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.

Oligophrenin-1 regulates dendritic spine morphology in the brain. Mutations in
the oligophrenin-1 gene (OPHN1) cause intellectual disability. We discovered a
previously unknown partner of oligophrenin-1, Rev-erba, a nuclear receptor that
represses the transcription of circadian oscillators. We found that
oligophrenin-1 interacts with Rev-erba in the mouse brain, causing it to locate
to dendrites, reducing its repressor activity and protecting it from degradation.
Our results indicate the presence of a circadian oscillator in the hippocampus,
involving the clock gene Bmal1 (also known as Arntl), that is modulated by
Rev-erba and requires oligophrenin-1 for normal oscillation. We also found that
synaptic activity induced Rev-erba localization to dendrites and spines, a
process that is mediated by AMPA receptor activation and requires oligophrenin-1.
Our data reveal new interactions between synaptic activity and circadian
oscillators, and delineate a new means of communication between nucleus and
synapse that may provide insight into normal plasticity and the etiology of
intellectual disability.

© 2011 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21874017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23447. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023447. Epub 2011 Aug 16.

The Potorous CPD photolyase rescues a cryptochrome-deficient mammalian circadian 
clock.

Chaves I(1), Nijman RM, Biernat MA, Bajek MI, Brand K, da Silva AC, Saito S,
Yagita K, Eker AP, van der Horst GT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. i.chaves@erasmusmc.nl

Despite the sequence and structural conservation between cryptochromes and
photolyases, members of the cryptochrome/photolyase (flavo)protein family, their 
functions are divergent. Whereas photolyases are DNA repair enzymes that use
visible light to lesion-specifically remove UV-induced DNA damage, cryptochromes 
act as photoreceptors and circadian clock proteins. To address the functional
diversity of cryptochromes and photolyases, we investigated the effect of
ectopically expressed Arabidopsis thaliana (6-4)PP photolyase and Potorous
tridactylus CPD-photolyase (close and distant relatives of mammalian
cryptochromes, respectively), on the performance of the mammalian cryptochromes
in the mammalian circadian clock. Using photolyase transgenic mice, we show that 
Potorous CPD-photolyase affects the clock by shortening the period of behavioral 
rhythms. Furthermore, constitutively expressed CPD-photolyase is shown to reduce 
the amplitude of circadian oscillations in cultured cells and to inhibit
CLOCK/BMAL1 driven transcription by interacting with CLOCK. Importantly, we show 
that Potorous CPD-photolyase can restore the molecular oscillator in the liver of
(clock-deficient) Cry1/Cry2 double knockout mice. These data demonstrate that a
photolyase can act as a true cryptochrome. These findings shed new light on the
importance of the core structure of mammalian cryptochromes in relation to its
function in the circadian clock and contribute to our further understanding of
the evolution of the cryptochrome/photolyase protein family.

PMCID: PMC3156801
PMID: 21858120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Environ Health Perspect. 2011 Dec;119(12):1739-44. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1103593. Epub
2011 Aug 17.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor deficiency enhances insulin sensitivity and reduces
PPAR-a pathway activity in mice.

Wang C(1), Xu CX, Krager SL, Bottum KM, Liao DF, Tischkau SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine,
Springfield, Illinois 62974-9629, USA.

BACKGROUND: Numerous man-made pollutants activate the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR) and are risk factors for type 2 diabetes. AhR signaling also affects
molecular clock genes to influence glucose metabolism.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated mechanisms by which AhR activation affects glucose
metabolism.
METHODS: Glucose tolerance, insulin resistance, and expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-a (PPAR-a) and genes affecting glucose metabolism
or fatty acid oxidation and clock gene rhythms were investigated in wild-type
(WT) and AhR-deficient [knockout (KO)] mice. AhR agonists and small interfering
RNA (siRNA) were used to examine the effect of AhR on PPAR-a expression and
glycolysis in the liver cell line Hepa-1c1c7 (c7) and its c12 and c4 derivatives.
Brain, muscle ARNT-like protein 1 (Bmal1) siRNA and Ahr or Bmal1 expression
plasmids were used to analyze the effect of BMAL1 on PPAR-a expression in c7
cells.
RESULTS: KO mice displayed enhanced insulin sensitivity and improved glucose
tolerance, accompanied by decreased PPAR-a and key gluconeogenic and fatty acid
oxidation enzymes. AhR agonists increased PPAR-a expression in c7 cells. Both Ahr
and Bmal1 siRNA reduced PPAR-a and metabolism genes. Moreover, rhythms of BMAL1
and blood glucose were altered in KO mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate a link between AhR signaling, circadian
rhythms, and glucose metabolism. Furthermore, hepatic activation of the PPAR-a
pathway provides a mechanism underlying AhR-mediated insulin resistance.

PMCID: PMC3261983
PMID: 21849270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Aug 26;412(2):396-400. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.07.125. Epub 2011 Aug 3.

Time-imposed daily restricted feeding induces rhythmic expression of Fgf21 in
white adipose tissue of mice.

Oishi K(1), Konishi M, Murata Y, Itoh N.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Clock Research Group, Institute for Biological Resources and
Functions, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. k-ooishi@aist.go.jp

Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) is a key metabolic regulator that is induced 
by fasting and starvation, and its expression is thought to be regulated by the
circadian clock in the liver. To evaluate the functional role of FGF21 in the
circadian regulation of physiology and behavior, we examined the temporal
expression profiles of Fgf21 and circadian clock genes in addition to behavioral 
activity rhythms under adlibitum feeding (ALF) and time-imposed restricted
feeding (RF) in mice. Four hours of daily restricted feeding during the daytime
induced over an 80-fold increase in feeding-dependent rhythmic Fgf21 mRNA
expression in epididymal white adipose tissue (eWAT), although the expression
levels were continuously increased 10-fold in the liver of wild-type (WT) mice.
Refeeding subsequent to transient fasting revealed that refeeding but not fasting
remarkably induces Fgf21 expression in eWAT, although fasting-induced hepatic
Fgf21 expression is completely reversed by refeeding. The free-running period of 
locomotor activity rhythm under ALF and the food anticipatory activity (FAA)
under RF remained intact in Fgf21 knockout (KO) mice, suggesting that FGF21 is
dispensable for both the central clock in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) and
the food-entrainable oscillator that governs the FAA. Temporal expression
profiles of circadian genes such as mPer2 and BMAL1 were essentially identical in
both tissues between WT and Fgf21 KO mice under RF. The physiological role of the
refeeding-induced adipose Fgf21 expression remains to be elucidated.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21835167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22586. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022586. Epub 2011 Jul 22.

Expression and rhythmic modulation of circulating microRNAs targeting the clock
gene Bmal1 in mice.

Shende VR(1), Goldrick MM, Ramani S, Earnest DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, United
States of America.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) interact with 3' untranslated region (UTR) elements of target 
genes to regulate mRNA stability or translation and thus play a role in
regulating many different biological processes, including circadian rhythms.
However, specific miRNAs mediating the regulation of essential clock genes remain
largely unknown. Because vesicles containing membrane-bound miRNAs are present in
the circulatory system, we examined miRNAs predicted to target the clock gene,
Bmal1, for evidence of rhythmic fluctuations in circulating levels and modulatory
effects on the 3' UTR activity of Bmal1. A number of miRNAs with Bmal1 as a
predicted target were expressed in the serum of mice exposed to LD 12:12 and of
these miRNAs, miR-152 and miR-494 but not miR-142-3p were marked by diurnal
oscillations with bimodal peaks in expression occurring near the middle of the
day and 8 or 12 hr later during the night. Co-transfection of pre-miR
over-expression constructs for miR-494 and miR-142-3p in HEK293 cells had
significant effects in repressing luciferase-reported Bmal1 3' UTR activity by as
much as 60%, suggesting that these miRNAs may function as post-transcriptional
modulators of Bmal1. In conjunction with previous studies implicating miRNAs as
extracellular regulatory signals, our results suggest that circulating miRNAs may
play a role in the regulation of the molecular clockworks in peripheral circadian
oscillators.

PMCID: PMC3142187
PMID: 21799909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Nov;31(11):2552-9. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.229062.

Progression of the prothrombotic state in aging Bmal1-deficient mice.

Hemmeryckx B(1), Van Hove CE, Fransen P, Emmerechts J, Kauskot A, Bult H, Lijnen 
HR, Hoylaerts MF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Nov;31(11):2361-3.

OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study was to examine the functional relationship
between aging endothelium and thrombogenicity in a mouse model of premature
aging.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Coagulation tests and factors, blood cell counts, aorta
endothelial function, aorta gene expression, and FeCl(3)-induced thrombosis in
mesenteric blood vessels were analyzed in 10- to 30-week-old brain and muscle
ARNT-like protein-1 (Bmal1)-deficient (knockout [KO]) mice and wild-type
littermates. Ten-week-old KO mice manifested shortened prothrombin times (9.7
versus 11.3 seconds in wild-type) and elevated plasma fibrinogen (264 versus 172 
mg/dL). At 30 weeks, factor VII (198% versus 149%), and platelet counts (2049
versus 1354 K/µL) were increased in KO mice. Gene deficiency reduced the
vasoactive nitric oxide production at 10 and 30 weeks and tended to reduce and
increase the protein expression of thrombomodulin and von Willebrand factor,
respectively, with aging. Shortened venular and arteriolar occlusion times on
FeCl(3)-induced injury in 10-week-old KO mice confirmed higher thrombogenicity,
culminating in priapism, observed in 60% of 25- to 30-week-old KO males.
CONCLUSION: Endothelial dysfunction and a hypercoagulable state cause early
arterial and venous thrombogenicity in Bmal1 KO mice. With aging, progressive
endothelial dysfunction, rising platelet counts, and high factor VII further
enhance thrombogenicity, provoking priapism.

PMID: 21799179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Chronobiol Int. 2011 Jul;28(6):477-87. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2011.589933.

Alterations of circadian clockworks during differentiation and apoptosis of rat
ovarian cells.

Chu G(1), Yoshida K, Narahara S, Uchikawa M, Kawamura M, Yamauchi N, Xi Y,
Shigeyoshi Y, Hashimoto S, Hattori MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Marine Bioresource Sciences, Graduate School of
Agriculture, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Ovarian development is related to cell proliferation, differentiation, and
apoptosis of granulosa cells and luteal cells under the control of various
modulators, including follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone
(LH), and growth factors. In the present study, the expression of clock genes and
the related regulation mechanism were analyzed in different ovarian cell types
during differentiation and apoptosis. The authors focused on the circadian
expression of Per2 as a core clock gene for the maintenance of circadian rhythms.
By using a real-time monitoring system of the Per2 promoter activity, the
circadian oscillation was analyzed in the granulosa and luteal cells from
preantral follicles, antral follicles, and corpora lutea of immature Per2
promoter-destabilized luciferase transgenic rats that were primed with
diethylstilbestrol, equine chorionic gonadotropin (eCG), and/or human CG. In
addition, transcript levels of Per2, Bmal1, Clock, and Nampt were quantified by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Immunohistochemical studies
revealed strong circadian rhythmicity of PER2 protein in the luteal cells, but
apparently little rhythmicity in granulosa cells of both preantral and antral
follicles. In vitro monitoring of promoter activity showed generation of several 
oscillations in luteal cells after exposure to dexamethasone (DXM), whereas
oscillatory amplitudes of immature and mature granulosa cells were rapidly
attenuating. The circadian rhythm of the Bmal1 transcript levels, but not the
Per2 transcript, was very weak in the granulosa cells, as compared with that in
luteal cells. Granulosa cells gained a strong circadian rhythm ability of the
Per2 promoter activity after stimulation with FSH for 3 days. In contrast, LH had
little effect on the circadian rhythm before stimulation of granulosa cells with 
FSH, probably owing to lack of LH receptor. In luteal cells, induction of
apoptosis by inhibiting progesterone synthesis resulted in deregulation of Per2
circadian oscillation. Transcript levels of Bmal1 and Clock, but not Per2 and
Nampt, were significantly decreased in apoptotic luteal cells. The Bmal1
transcript level was particularly reduced. Consequently, these results strongly
suggest the circadian clockwork alters in ovarian cells during follicular
development, luteinization, and apoptosis, and expression of Bmal1 may be related
to the switch-on and switch-off of the circadian oscillation.

PMID: 21797776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Cancer. 2012 Feb 15;118(4):937-46. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26348. Epub 2011 Jul 19.

Functional polymorphisms of circadian positive feedback regulation genes and
clinical outcome of Chinese patients with resected colorectal cancer.

Zhou F(1), He X, Liu H, Zhu Y, Jin T, Chen C, Qu F, Li Y, Bao G, Chen Z, Xing J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, Xi'an, China.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have demonstrated that circadian genes play a role
in the development and progression of many cancers. This study aims to assess the
effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in circadian genes on
recurrence and survival of colorectal cancer (CRC) patients.
METHODS: Nine functional SNPs in 3 genes (CLOCK, NPAS2, and BMAL1) on the
circadian positive feedback loop were selected and genotyped using the Sequenom
iPLEX genotyping system in a cohort of 411 resected Chinese CRC patients.
Multivariate Cox proportional hazards model and Kaplan-Meier curve were used for 
the prognosis analysis.
RESULTS: The authors identified 2 SNPs in the CLOCK gene to be significantly
associated with CRC overall survival. SNP rs3749474 exhibited a significant
association with survival of CRC patients in the additive model (hazard ratio
[HR], 0.55; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.37-0.81; P = .003). In addition,
patients carrying the heterozygous variant of rs1801260 had significantly
increased overall survival compared with those carrying homozygous wild-type
genotype (HR, 0.31; 95% CI, 0.11-0.88; P = .03). Findings from functional assay
provided further biological support for these significant associations.
Stratified analysis found no modifying effect of chemotherapy on the prognostic
significance of both SNPs. Moreover, we observed cumulative effects of these 2
SNPs on CRC overall survival (P for trend = .01). Compared with patients carrying
no unfavorable genotypes, those carrying 2 unfavorable genotypes had a 2.92-fold 
increased risk of death (P = .03).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest for the first time that CLOCK gene polymorphisms
may serve as an independent prognostic marker for CRC patients.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 21773969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Eur J Neurosci. 2011 Aug;34(3):507-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07772.x.
Epub 2011 Jul 19.

Rat photoreceptor circadian oscillator strongly relies on lighting conditions.

Sandu C(1), Hicks D, Felder-Schmittbuhl MP.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Neurobiologie des Rythmes, CNRS UPR 3212 - Université de
Strasbourg, Institut des Neurosciences Cellulaires et Intégratives, Strasbourg,
France.

Mammalian retina harbours a self-sustained circadian clock able to synchronize to
the light : dark (LD) cycle and to drive cyclic outputs such as night-time
melatonin synthesis. Clock genes are expressed in distinct parts of the tissue,
and it is presently assumed that the retina contains several circadian
oscillators. However, molecular organization of cell type-specific clockworks has
been poorly investigated. Here, we questioned the presence of a circadian clock
in rat photoreceptors by studying 24-h kinetics of clock and clock output gene
expression in whole photoreceptor layers isolated by vibratome sectioning. To
address the importance of light stimulation towards photoreceptor clock
properties, animals were exposed to 12 : 12 h LD cycle or 36 h constant darkness.
Clock, Bmal1, Per1, Per2, Cry1, Cry2, RevErba and Rorß clock genes were all found
to be expressed in photoreceptors and to display rhythmic transcription in LD
cycle. Clock genes in whole retinas, used as a reference, also showed rhythmic
expression with marked similarity to the profiles in pure photoreceptors. In
contrast, clock gene oscillations were no longer detectable in photoreceptor
layers after 36 h darkness, with the exception of Cry2 and Rorß. Importantly,
transcripts from two well-characterized clock output genes, Aanat (arylalkylamine
N-acetyltransferase) and c-fos, retained sustained rhythmicity. We conclude that 
rat photoreceptors contain the core machinery of a circadian oscillator likely to
be operative and to drive rhythmic outputs under exposure to a 24-h LD cycle.
Constant darkness dramatically alters the photoreceptor clockwork and circadian
functions might then rely on inputs from extra-photoreceptor oscillators.

© 2011 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience © 2011 Federation of
European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21771113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2011 Oct;301(4):G634-43. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00206.2011. Epub 2011 Jul 14.

Melatonin inhibits cholangiocyte hyperplasia in cholestatic rats by interaction
with MT1 but not MT2 melatonin receptors.

Renzi A(1), Glaser S, Demorrow S, Mancinelli R, Meng F, Franchitto A, Venter J,
White M, Francis H, Han Y, Alvaro D, Gaudio E, Carpino G, Ueno Y, Onori P, Alpini
G.

Author information: 
(1)Temple, TX 76504, USA. galpini@tamu.edu

Erratum in
    Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2011 Nov;301(5):G943.

In bile duct-ligated (BDL) rats, large cholangiocytes proliferate by activation
of cAMP-dependent signaling. Melatonin, which is secreted from pineal gland as
well as extrapineal tissues, regulates cell mitosis by interacting with melatonin
receptors (MT1 and MT2) modulating cAMP and clock genes. In the liver, melatonin 
suppresses oxidative damage and ameliorates fibrosis. No information exists
regarding the role of melatonin in the regulation of biliary hyperplasia. We
evaluated the mechanisms of action by which melatonin regulates the growth of
cholangiocytes. In normal and BDL rats, we determined the hepatic distribution of
MT1, MT2, and the clock genes, CLOCK, BMAL1, CRY1, and PER1. Normal and BDL
(immediately after BDL) rats were treated in vivo with melatonin before
evaluating 1) serum levels of melatonin, bilirubin, and transaminases; 2)
intrahepatic bile duct mass (IBDM) in liver sections; and 3) the expression of
MT1 and MT2, clock genes, and PKA phosphorylation. In vitro, large cholangiocytes
were stimulated with melatonin in the absence/presence of luzindole (MT1/MT2
antagonist) and 4-phenyl-2-propionamidotetralin (MT2 antagonist) before
evaluating cell proliferation, cAMP levels, and PKA phosphorylation.
Cholangiocytes express MT1 and MT2, CLOCK, BMAL1, CRY1, and PER1 that were all
upregulated following BDL. Administration of melatonin to BDL rats decreased
IBDM, serum bilirubin and transaminases levels, the expression of all clock
genes, cAMP levels, and PKA phosphorylation in cholangiocytes. In vitro,
melatonin decreased the proliferation, cAMP levels, and PKA phosphorylation,
decreases that were blocked by luzindole. Melatonin may be important in the
management of biliary hyperplasia in human cholangiopathies.

PMCID: PMC3191552
PMID: 21757639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. PLoS Genet. 2011 Jul;7(7):e1002167. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002167. Epub 2011 
Jul 7.

Adult circadian behavior in Drosophila requires developmental expression of
cycle, but not period.

Goda T(1), Mirowska K, Currie J, Kim MH, Rao NV, Bonilla G, Wijnen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Circadian clocks have evolved as internal time keeping mechanisms that allow
anticipation of daily environmental changes and organization of a daily program
of physiological and behavioral rhythms. To better examine the mechanisms
underlying circadian clocks in animals and to ask whether clock gene expression
and function during development affected subsequent daily time keeping in the
adult, we used the genetic tools available in Drosophila to conditionally
manipulate the function of the CYCLE component of the positive regulator
CLOCK/CYCLE (CLK/CYC) or its negative feedback inhibitor PERIOD (PER).
Differential manipulation of clock function during development and in adulthood
indicated that there is no developmental requirement for either a running clock
mechanism or expression of per. However, conditional suppression of CLK/CYC
activity either via per over-expression or cyc depletion during metamorphosis
resulted in persistent arrhythmic behavior in the adult. Two distinct mechanisms 
were identified that may contribute to this developmental function of CLK/CYC and
both involve the ventral lateral clock neurons (LN(v)s) that are crucial to
circadian control of locomotor behavior: (1) selective depletion of cyc
expression in the LN(v)s resulted in abnormal peptidergic small-LN(v) dorsal
projections, and (2) PER expression rhythms in the adult LN(v)s appeared to be
affected by developmental inhibition of CLK/CYC activity. Given the conservation 
of clock genes and circuits among animals, this study provides a rationale for
investigating a possible similar developmental role of the homologous mammalian
CLOCK/BMAL1 complex.

PMCID: PMC3131292
PMID: 21750685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. PLoS Genet. 2011 Jun;7(6):e1002143. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002143. Epub 2011 
Jun 23.

Genomic convergence among ERRa, PROX1, and BMAL1 in the control of metabolic
clock outputs.

Dufour CR(1), Levasseur MP, Pham NH, Eichner LJ, Wilson BJ, Charest-Marcotte A,
Duguay D, Poirier-Héon JF, Cermakian N, Giguère V.

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, Montréal, Canada.

Metabolic homeostasis and circadian rhythms are closely intertwined biological
processes. Nuclear receptors, as sensors of hormonal and nutrient status, are
actively implicated in maintaining this physiological relationship. Although the 
orphan nuclear receptor estrogen-related receptor a (ERRa, NR3B1) plays a central
role in the control of energy metabolism and its expression is known to be cyclic
in the liver, its role in temporal control of metabolic networks is unknown. Here
we report that ERRa directly regulates all major components of the molecular
clock. ERRa-null mice also display deregulated locomotor activity rhythms and
circadian period lengths under free-running conditions, as well as altered
circulating diurnal bile acid and lipid profiles. In addition, the ERRa-null mice
exhibit time-dependent hypoglycemia and hypoinsulinemia, suggesting a role for
ERRa in modulating insulin sensitivity and glucose handling during the 24-hour
light/dark cycle. We also provide evidence that the newly identified ERRa
corepressor PROX1 is implicated in rhythmic control of metabolic outputs. To help
uncover the molecular basis of these phenotypes, we performed genome-wide
location analyses of binding events by ERRa, PROX1, and BMAL1, an integral
component of the molecular clock. These studies revealed the existence of
transcriptional regulatory loops among ERRa, PROX1, and BMAL1, as well as
extensive overlaps in their target genes, implicating these three factors in the 
control of clock and metabolic gene networks in the liver. Genomic convergence of
ERRa, PROX1, and BMAL1 transcriptional activity thus identified a novel node in
the molecular circuitry controlling the daily timing of metabolic processes.

PMCID: PMC3121748
PMID: 21731503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Chronobiol Int. 2011 May;28(5):381-9. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2011.566398.

Daily rhythmic expression patterns of clock1a, bmal1, and per1 genes in retina
and hypothalamus of the rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss.

Patiño MA(1), Rodríguez-Illamola A, Conde-Sieira M, Soengas JL, Míguez JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioloxía Funcional e Ciencias da Saúde, Facultade de Bioloxía,
Universidade de Vigo, Vigo, Pontevedra, Spain.

Living organisms show daily rhythms in physiology, behavior, and gene expression,
which are due to the presence of endogenous clocks that synchronize biological
processes to the 24-h light/dark cycle. In metazoans, generation of circadian
rhythmicity is a consequence of specialized tissues known as "master clocks,"
having different locations among species. A few studies have described clock-gene
expression in fish neural tissues, but none of them assessed clock-gene
expression in different discrete regions. The present study was designed to
explore the presence/absence of circadian clock-gene expression in the rainbow
trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) retina and hypothalamus. Juvenile fish were
acclimated to a 12:12 light (L)-dark (D) cycle. Then, retina and hypothalamus
were collected from animals kept under LD conditions or constant darkness (DD)
for 24 h. Real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR) assays were performed to quantify expression of the core circadian genes
Clock1a, Bmal1, and Per1 as representative members of the circadian oscillator.
All clock genes analyzed in the retina and hypothalamus showed circadian
fluctuations. However, gene expression peaked in the rainbow trout hypothalamus
with a 3-h (Clock1a and Bmal1) or 6-h (Per1) delay relative to that observed in
the retina, the latter showing highest expression levels at zeitgeber times 9
(ZT9) for Clock1a and Bmal1, and at ZT21 for Per1. When exposed to DD, the
rhythmic gene expression pattern was maintained for all genes in the rainbow
trout retina, but only for Clock1a and Per1 in the hypothalamus. Bmal1 failed to 
cycle under DD, suggesting that hypothalamic clock function might depend on
either several clock-gene isoforms or regulation from external inputs. Overall,
these data indicate that representative molecular members of the core circadian
clock are present in both the retina and hypothalamus of rainbow trout.

PMID: 21721853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jul 15;410(4):834-40. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.06.074. Epub 2011 Jun 15.

Identification of transcriptional regulatory elements required for the Mup2
expression in circadian clock mutant mice.

Cho YH(1), Kim D, Choi I, Bae K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science and Technology, Yonsei University, Wonju
220-710, Republic of Korea.

The suprachiasmatic nuclei in the mammalian brain function as the regulators of
circadian rhythm and coordinate the peripheral oscillators. Losses of clock genes
alter gene expression and behavior. Here, we investigated whether disruption of
the circadian clock and glucocorticoid signals would influence the gene
expression of major urinary protein (Mup) in mice. Both Mup2 mRNA and protein
showed biphasic rhythms with similar phase relationships. However, the peak of
the rhythm is shifted in mPeriod2 circadian clock mutant mice. We identified two 
E-boxes and one glucocorticoid response element (GRE) as regulatory elements for 
Mup2 transcription. While CLOCK binds to the E-boxes constantly, glucocorticoid
receptor was capable of binding to the GRE in a timely manner. All together, our 
results indicate that Mup2 expression is regulated by both the circadian clock
and glucocorticoid.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21703244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Science. 2011 Jun 17;332(6036):1436-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1196766.

A molecular mechanism for circadian clock negative feedback.

Duong HA(1), Robles MS, Knutti D, Weitz CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Circadian rhythms in mammals are generated by a feedback loop in which the three 
PERIOD (PER) proteins, acting in a large complex, inhibit the transcriptional
activity of the CLOCK-BMAL1 dimer, which represses their own expression. Although
fundamental, the mechanism of negative feedback in the mammalian clock, or any
eukaryotic clock, is unknown. We analyzed protein constituents of PER complexes
purified from mouse tissues and identified PSF (polypyrimidine tract-binding
protein-associated splicing factor). Our analysis indicates that PSF within the
PER complex recruits SIN3A, a scaffold for assembly of transcriptional inhibitory
complexes and that the PER complex thereby rhythmically delivers histone
deacetylases to the Per1 promoter, which repress Per1 transcription. These
findings provide a function for the PER complex and a molecular mechanism for
circadian clock negative feedback.

PMCID: PMC3859310
PMID: 21680841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Feb 5;349(1):38-44. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.05.007.
Epub 2011 Jun 1.

The role of clock genes and rhythmicity in the liver.

Schmutz I(1), Albrecht U, Ripperger JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Unit of Biochemistry, University of Fribourg, Fribourg,
Switzerland.

The liver is the important organ to maintain energy homeostasis of an organism.
To achieve this, many biochemical reactions run in this organ in a rhythmic
fashion. An elegant way to coordinate the temporal expression of genes for
metabolic enzymes relies in the link to the circadian timing system. In this
fashion not only a maximum of synchronization is achieved, but also anticipation 
of daily recurring events is possible. Here we will focus on the input and output
pathways of the hepatic circadian oscillator and discuss the recently found
flexibility of its circadian transcriptional networks.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 21664421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Neurosci Lett. 2011 Jul 25;499(3):186-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.05.058. Epub 
2011 May 30.

Decreased expression of Bmal2 in patients with Parkinson's disease.

Ding H(1), Liu S, Yuan Y, Lin Q, Chan P, Cai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical
University, Key Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Diseases of Ministry of
Education, Beijing 100053, PR China.

Bmal1 is one of the central regulators of the clock machinery. Recently, we
examined the expression profile of Bmal1 in total leukocytes for a 12h duration
during the evening, overnight, and the morning, in subjects with Parkinson's
disease (PD) and healthy controls. The results indicate that the expression of
Bmal1 is significantly lower in PD patients versus control subjects. However, it 
is still unclear whether other key regulators of the clock machinery, especially 
Bmal2, the paralog of Bmal1, are also expressed differently in PD. To address
this issue, the expression profiles of Bmal2, Clock, and Dec1 were examined in
the same samples using real-time RT-PCR assay. The results show a difference in
the expression pattern of Bmal2, but not Clock and Dec1. The expression of Bmal2 
is significantly lower in PD at 21:00 h (p=0.005) and 00:00 h (p=0.025). These
results together with our previous findings suggest that the molecular clock in
total leukocytes is disturbed in PD patients.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21658431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Biol Rhythms. 2011 Jun;26(3):200-9. doi: 10.1177/0748730411401740.

Effects of vasoactive intestinal peptide genotype on circadian gene expression in
the suprachiasmatic nucleus and peripheral organs.

Loh DH(1), Dragich JM, Kudo T, Schroeder AM, Nakamura TJ, Waschek JA, Block GD,
Colwell CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of
California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90024-1759, USA.

The neuropeptide vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) has emerged as a key
candidate molecule mediating the synchronization of rhythms in clock gene
expression within the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). In addition, neurons
expressing VIP are anatomically well positioned to mediate communication between 
the SCN and peripheral oscillators. In this study, we examined the temporal
expression profile of 3 key circadian genes: Per1, Per2 , and Bmal1 in the SCN,
the adrenal glands and the liver of mice deficient for the Vip gene (VIP KO), and
their wild-type counterparts. We performed these measurements in mice held in a
light/dark cycle as well as in constant darkness and found that rhythms in gene
expression were greatly attenuated in the VIP-deficient SCN. In the periphery,
the impact of the loss of VIP varied with the tissue and gene measured. In the
adrenals, rhythms in Per1 were lost in VIP-deficient mice, while in the liver,
the most dramatic impact was on the phase of the diurnal expression rhythms.
Finally, we examined the effects of the loss of VIP on ex vivo explants of the
same central and peripheral oscillators using the PER2::LUC reporter system. The 
VIP-deficient mice exhibited low amplitude rhythms in the SCN as well as altered 
phase relationships between the SCN and the peripheral oscillators. Together,
these data suggest that VIP is critical for robust rhythms in clock gene
expression in the SCN and some peripheral organs and that the absence of this
peptide alters both the amplitude of circadian rhythms as well as the phase
relationships between the rhythms in the SCN and periphery.

PMCID: PMC3942163
PMID: 21628547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Biol Rhythms. 2011 Jun;26(3):187-99. doi: 10.1177/0748730411401579.

Modulation of clock gene expression by the transcriptional coregulator receptor
interacting protein 140 (RIP140).

Poliandri AH(1), Gamsby JJ, Christian M, Spinella MJ, Loros JJ, Dunlap JC, Parker
MG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.

Circadian rhythms are generated in central and peripheral tissues by an
intracellular oscillating timing mechanism known as the circadian clock. Several 
lines of evidence show a strong and bidirectional interplay between metabolism
and circadian rhythms. Receptor interacting protein 140 (RIP140) is a coregulator
for nuclear receptors and other transcription factors that represses catabolic
pathways in metabolic tissues. Although RIP140 functions as a corepressor for
most nuclear receptors, mounting evidence points to RIP140 as a dual coregulator 
that can repress or activate different sets of genes. Here, we demonstrate that
RIP140 mRNA and protein levels are under circadian regulation and identify RIP140
as a modulator of clock gene expression, suggesting that RIP140 can participate
in a feedback mechanism affecting the circadian clock. We show that the absence
of RIP140 disturbs the basal levels of BMAL1 and other clock genes, reducing the 
amplitude of their oscillations. In addition, we demonstrate that RIP140 is
recruited to retinoid-related orphan receptor (ROR) binding sites on the BMAL1
promoter, directly interacts with RORa, and increases transcription from the
BMAL1 promoter in a RORa-dependent manner. These results indicate that RIP140 is 
not only involved in metabolic control but also acts as a coactivator for RORa,
influencing clock gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3207295
PMID: 21628546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 22;286(29):25891-902. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.254680. Epub
2011 May 25.

Biochemical analysis of the canonical model for the mammalian circadian clock.

Ye R(1), Selby CP, Ozturk N, Annayev Y, Sancar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina School
of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

The current consensus model for the circadian clock in mammals is based on a
transcription-translation feedback loop. In this model, CRY and PER proteins
repress their own transcription by suppressing the transactivator function of the
CLOCK:BMAL1 heterodimer directly (physical model) and by facilitating
post-translational modifications (chemical model). Most of the data for this
model come from genetic and cell biological experiments. Here, we have purified
all of the core clock proteins and performed in vitro and in vivo biochemical
experiments to test the physical model. We find that CLOCK:BMAL1 binds to an
E-box sequence in DNA and that CRY binds stably to the CLOCK:BMAL1:E-box ternary 
complex independently of PER. Both CRY and PER bind to CLOCK and BMAL1 off DNA
but, in contrast to CRY, PER does not bind to the CLOCK:BMAL1:E-box complex.
Unexpectedly, PER actually interferes with the binding of CRY to the
CLOCK:BMAL1:E-box ternary complex. CRY likely destabilizes the CLOCK:BMAL1
heterodimer on DNA by a post-translational mechanism after binding to the
complex. These findings support some aspects of the canonical model, but also
suggest that some key features of the model need to be revised.

PMCID: PMC3138243
PMID: 21613214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Neuroendocrinology. 2011;94(1):75-83. doi: 10.1159/000327430. Epub 2011 Apr 22.

A noradrenergic sensitive endogenous clock is present in the rat pineal gland.

Wongchitrat P(1), Felder-Schmittbuhl MP, Govitrapong P, Phansuwan-Pujito P,
Simonneaux V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Srinakharinwirot University, Bangkok, Thailand.

The aim of this study was to examine the occurrence of endogenous oscillations of
Per1, Per2, Bmal1 and Rev-erba genes in rat pineal explants and to investigate
their regulation by adrenergic ligands. Our results show a significant and
sustained rhythm of Per2,Bmal1 and Rev-erba gene expression for up to 48 h in
cultured pineal gland with a pattern similar to that observed in vivo. By
contrast, the rhythms of Per1 and Aa-nat, the rate-limiting enzyme for melatonin 
synthesis, were strongly attenuated after 24 h in culture. Addition of the
exogenous adrenergic agonist isoproterenol on cultured pineal glands induced a
short-term increase in mRNA levels of Per1 and Aa-nat, but not those of
Per2,Bmal1 and Rev-erba. This study demonstrates that the rat pineal gland hosts 
a circadian oscillator as evidenced by the sustained, noradrenergic-independent, 
endogenous oscillations of Per2, Bmal1 and Rev-erba mRNA levels in cultured
tissues. Only expression of Per1 was stimulated by adrenergic ligands suggesting 
that, in vivo, the adrenergic input could synchronize the pineal clock by acting 
selectively on Per1.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21525730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Neuroscience. 2011 Jun 30;185:1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.04.024. Epub
2011 Apr 19.

Noradrenergic regulation of period1 expression in spinal astrocytes is involved
in protein kinase A, c-Jun N-terminal kinase and extracellular signal-regulated
kinase activation mediated by a1- and ß2-adrenoceptors.

Sugimoto T(1), Morioka N, Sato K, Hisaoka K, Nakata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 
University, Kasumi 1-2-3, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Our recent data suggest that noradrenaline (NA) regulates expression of Per1 mRNA
in rat C6 cells, as a model of brain astrocytes, by two distinct NA-mediating
pathways. Although C6 cells possess potential astrocyte-type characteristics, we 
hypothesize that astrocytes located in a distinct tissue or organ play specific
roles consistent with their own unique functions in response to the surrounding
environment. We have herein found in primary rat spinal astrocytes using
real-time RT-PCR that NA induced robust transient increases in Per1, Cry1, Cry2
and Bmal1 mRNA expression. Cry1, Cry2 and Bmal1 expressions induced by NA were
attenuated by transfection of Per1 small interference RNA (siRNA). The effect of 
NA on Per1 expression was partially blocked by either prazosin (a selective
antagonist of a1-adrenoceptor) or ICI118551 (a selective antagonist of
ß2-adrenoceptor), and completely blocked by the combination of both antagonists. 
Treatment with H89 (a protein kinase A [PKA] inhibitor), SP600125 (a c-Jun
N-terminal kinase [JNK] inhibitor), or PD98059 (an extracellular signal-regulated
kinase [ERK] inhibitor), partially inhibited NA-induced Per1 mRNA expression, and
the combination of these three inhibitors inhibited expression to nearly a
non-stimulated level. Furthermore, NA phosphorylated not only ERK but also JNK1, 
an effect that was detected by western blotting. These actions were inhibited
only by prazosin, and not by ICI118551. In addition, we found that NA induced
phosphorylation of transcription-related proteins such as cAMP response element
binding protein (CREB) and c-Jun. These phosphorylation processes were regulated 
through distinct pathways: CREB phosphorylation was dependent on the PKA and JNK 
pathways but c-Jun phosphorylation was mediated by the ERK and JNK pathways.
These results suggest that Per1 plays a key role in noradrenergic regulation on
clock gene expression in spinal astrocytes and activation of a1 and ß2
adrenoceptors are of importance in regulation of Per1 mRNA expression via
PKA/JNK-CREB and ERK/JNK-c-Jun cascades.

Copyright © 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21524690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 24;286(25):22414-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.244749. Epub
2011 Apr 25.

Quantitative analyses of cryptochrome-mBMAL1 interactions: mechanistic insights
into the transcriptional regulation of the mammalian circadian clock.

Czarna A(1), Breitkreuz H, Mahrenholz CC, Arens J, Strauss HM, Wolf E.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Structural Cell Biology,
Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany.

The mammalian cryptochromes mCRY1 and mCRY2 act as transcriptional repressors
within the 24-h transcription-translational feedback loop of the circadian clock.
The C-terminal tail and a preceding predicted coiled coil (CC) of the mCRYs as
well as the C-terminal region of the transcription factor mBMAL1 are involved in 
transcriptional feedback repression. Here we show by fluorescence polarization
and isothermal titration calorimetry that purified mCRY1/2CCtail proteins form
stable heterodimeric complexes with two C-terminal mBMAL1 fragments. The longer
mBMAL1 fragment (BMAL490) includes Lys-537, which is rhythmically acetylated by
mCLOCK in vivo. mCRY1 (but not mCRY2) has a lower affinity to BMAL490 than to the
shorter mBMAL1 fragment (BMAL577) and a K537Q mutant version of BMAL490. Using
peptide scan analysis we identify two mBMAL1 binding epitopes within the coiled
coil and tail regions of mCRY1/2 and document the importance of positively
charged mCRY1 residues for mBMAL1 binding. A synthetic mCRY coiled coil peptide
binds equally well to the short and to the long (wild-type and K537Q mutant)
mBMAL1 fragments. In contrast, a peptide including the mCRY1 tail epitope shows a
lower affinity to BMAL490 compared with BMAL577 and BMAL490(K537Q). We propose
that Lys-537(mBMAL1) acetylation enhances mCRY1 binding by affecting
electrostatic interactions predominantly with the mCRY1 tail. Our data reveal
different molecular interactions of the mCRY1/2 tails with mBMAL1, which may
contribute to the non-redundant clock functions of mCRY1 and mCRY2. Moreover, our
study suggests the design of peptidic inhibitors targeting the interaction of the
mCRY1 tail with mBMAL1.

PMCID: PMC3121388
PMID: 21521686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Curr Biol. 2011 May 10;21(9):756-61. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.02.037. Epub 2011
Apr 21.

NEMO kinase contributes to core period determination by slowing the pace of the
Drosophila circadian oscillator.

Yu W(1), Houl JH, Hardin PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and The Center for Biological Clocks Research, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX 77845-3258, USA.

The Drosophila circadian oscillator is comprised of transcriptional feedback
loops that are activated by CLOCK (CLK) and CYCLE (CYC) and repressed by PERIOD
(PER) and TIMELESS (TIM) [1]. The timing of CLK-CYC activation and PER-TIM
repression is regulated posttranslationally, in part through rhythmic
phosphorylation of CLK, PER, and TIM [2-4]. Although kinases that control PER and
TIM levels and subcellular localization have been identified [5-10], additional
kinases are predicted to target PER, TIM, and/or CLK to promote time-specific
transcriptional repression. We screened for kinases that alter circadian behavior
via clock cell-directed RNA interference (RNAi) and identified the
proline-directed kinase nemo (nmo) as a novel component of the circadian
oscillator. Both nmo RNAi knockdown and a nmo hypomorphic mutant shorten
circadian period, whereas nmo overexpression lengthens circadian period. CLK
levels increase when nmo expression is knocked down in clock cells, whereas CLK
levels decrease and PER and TIM accumulation are delayed when nmo is
overexpressed in clock cells. These data suggest that nmo slows the pace of the
circadian oscillator by altering CLK, PER, and TIM expression, thereby
contributing to the generation of an ~24 hr circadian period.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3090582
PMID: 21514156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2011 Dec;19(12):2394-403. doi: 10.1038/oby.2011.79. Epub
2011 Apr 21.

Replication and extension of association between common genetic variants in SIM1 
and human adiposity.

Swarbrick MM(1), Evans DS, Valle MI, Favre H, Wu SH, Njajou OT, Li R, Zmuda JM,
Miljkovic I, Harris TB, Kwok PY, Vaisse C, Hsueh WC.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center and Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, California, USA.

Haplo-insufficiency of the bHLH (basic helix-loop-helix) transcription factor
single-minded 1 (SIM1) causes severe obesity in mice and humans. We hypothesized 
that common genetic variations in/near SIM1 could exert more subtle effects on
its function and associate with human adiposity. First, SIM1 coding regions were 
sequenced in severely obese subjects, and two common nonsynonymous
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) in complete linkage disequilibrium (LD) 
were identified: Pro352Thr (rs3734354) and Ala371Val (rs3734355). We next carried
out a SNP association study of five adiposity traits (BMI, % body fat, abdominal 
visceral and subcutaneous fat, and leptin concentrations) in 1,699 whites and
1,173 blacks. TagSNPs covering SIM1 and nearby conserved regions, and the only
common nsSNP in SIM1's binding partner aryl-hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator 2 (ARNT2) (Gly679Ser/rs4072568), were investigated. The effects of
rs3734355/4 on SIM1 activity were tested using an in vitro reporter assay. We
replicated previous observations that homozygosity for the 371Val allele was
associated with higher BMI in white males (P = 0.003). Together with previous
findings in white males (combined n = 3,479), BMI was increased by 1.10 kg/m(2)
in 371Val homozygotes (95% confidence interval (CI): 0.25-1.95 kg/m(2), P =
0.01). In vitro, the 352Thr-371Val haplotype impaired SIM1 transcriptional
activity by 22% (P < 0.0001). TagSNP analysis of SIM1 revealed two SNPs in the 3'
region (rs9390322 and rs7746743) and another in intron 5 (rs3734353) to be
significantly associated with various adiposity measures in ethnicity- and
sex-specific manners after multiple testing correction. In white males, rs4072568
in ARNT2 was also associated with BMI (P = 9 × 10(-4)) and % body fat (P =
0.001). Our findings implicate heritable defects of the SIM1-ARNT2 axis in the
predisposition to human obesity.

PMCID: PMC4646950
PMID: 21512513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Endocrinology. 2011 May;152(5):1734-8. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-0226.

Naughty melatonin: how mothers tick off their fetus.

Simonneaux V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Neurobiologie des Rythmes, Institut des Neurosciences
Cellulaires et Intégratives, Unité Propre de Recherche Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique 3212, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg Cedex, France. 
simonneaux@inci-cnrs.unistra.fr

Comment on
    Endocrinology. 2011 May;152(5):1891-900.

PMID: 21511985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Diabetologia. 2011 Jul;54(7):1831-40. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2138-0. Epub 2011
Apr 15.

The insulin-melatonin antagonism: studies in the LEW.1AR1-iddm rat (an animal
model of human type 1 diabetes mellitus).

Peschke E(1), Hofmann K, Bähr I, Streck S, Albrecht E, Wedekind D, Mühlbauer E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Martin Luther University
Halle-Wittenberg, Grosse Steinstrasse 52, 06097 Halle, Germany.
elmar.peschke@medizin.uni-halle.de

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: It is well documented that melatonin influences insulin
secretion mediated by G-protein-coupled melatonin receptor isoforms MT1 and MT2, 
which are present in rat and human pancreatic islets, as well as in rat
insulinoma cells. Recent investigations have proven that hyperinsulinaemic
Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rats, which are a rat model of type 2 diabetic rats, and
humans have decreased melatonin plasma levels, whereas a streptozotocin-induced
rat model of diabetes developed reduced insulin levels combined with increased
melatonin levels.
METHODS: Plasma levels of glucose, insulin and melatonin as well as RNA
expression of pineal Aanat, Hiomt (also known as Asmt), insulin receptor,
adrenoceptor ß1 and the clock genes Per1 and Bmal1 (also known as Arntl) were
determined in male and female LEW.1AR1-iddm rats as well as in
insulin-substituted LEW.1AR1-iddm rats.
RESULTS: Severe hypoinsulinaemia in diabetic LEW.1AR1-iddm rats was associated
with decreased body weight and increased melatonin plasma levels combined with
mainly elevated expression of Aanat, Hiomt, pineal insulin receptor and
adrenoceptor ß1. The changes were normalised by insulin substitution. Diurnal
profiles of plasma melatonin and of antagonistic clock genes Per1 and Bmal1 were 
maintained in diabetic and insulin-substituted rats.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The assumed causal relation between elevated
melatonin and reduced insulin levels in LEW.1AR1-iddm rats is supported by the
observation that insulin substitution normalised these changes. Further support
for this interpretation comes from the observation that in GK rats an increase of
plasma insulin was combined with a decrease of plasma noradrenaline
(norepinephrine), the most important activator of melatonin synthesis. These
relationships between the noradrenergic and insulin pathway support the existence
of melatonin-insulin antagonism.

PMID: 21491159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Biol Rhythms. 2011 Apr;26(2):160-70. doi: 10.1177/0748730410395732.

Circadian clock gene expression in brain regions of Alzheimer 's disease patients
and control subjects.

Cermakian N(1), Lamont EW, Boudreau P, Boivin DB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Chronobiology, Douglas Mental Health University
Institute, McGill University, 6875 LaSalle Blvd., Montreal (QC) H4H 1R3 Canada.
nicolas.cermakian@mcgill.ca

Circadian oscillators have been observed throughout the rodent brain. In the
human brain, rhythmic expression of clock genes has been reported only in the
pineal gland, and little is known about their expression in other regions. The
investigators sought to determine whether clock gene expression could be detected
and whether it varies as a function of time of day in the bed nucleus of the
stria terminalis (BNST) and cingulate cortex, areas known to be involved in
decision making and motivated behaviors, as well as in the pineal gland, in the
brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and aged controls. Relative
expression levels of PERIOD1 (PER1 ), PERIOD2 (PER2), and Brain and muscle
Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1) were detected by quantitative PCR in all 3 brain
regions. A harmonic regression model revealed significant 24-h rhythms of PER1 in
the BNST of AD subjects. A significant rhythm of PER2 was found in the cingulate 
cortex and BNST of control subjects and in all 3 regions of AD patients. In
controls, BMAL1 did not show a diurnal rhythm in the cingulate cortex but
significantly varied with time of death in the pineal and BNST and in all 3
regions for AD patients. Notable differences in the phase of clock gene rhythms
and phase relationships between genes and regions were observed in the brains of 
AD compared to those of controls. These results indicate the presence of multiple
circadian oscillators in the human brain and suggest altered synchronization
among these oscillators in the brain of AD patients.

© 2011 Sage Publications

PMID: 21454296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Diabetes. 2011 May;60(5):1577-81. doi: 10.2337/db10-1098. Epub 2011 Mar 16.

Rhythmic diurnal gene expression in human adipose tissue from individuals who are
lean, overweight, and type 2 diabetic.

Otway DT(1), Mäntele S, Bretschneider S, Wright J, Trayhurn P, Skene DJ,
Robertson MD, Johnston JD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Surrey, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Previous animal studies suggest a functional relationship between
metabolism, type 2 diabetes, and the amplitude of daily rhythms in white adipose 
tissue (WAT). However, data interpretation is confounded by differences in
genetic background and diet or limited sampling points. We have taken the novel
approach of analyzing serial human WAT biopsies across a 24-h cycle in controlled
laboratory conditions.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Lean (n = 8), overweight/obese (n = 11), or
overweight/obese type 2 diabetic (n = 8) volunteers followed a strict sleep-wake 
and dietary regimen for 1 week prior to the laboratory study. They were then
maintained in controlled light-dark conditions in a semirecumbent posture and fed
hourly during wake periods. Subcutaneous WAT biopsies were collected every 6 h
over 24 h, and gene expression was measured by quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: Lean individuals exhibited significant (P < 0.05) temporal changes of
core clock (PER1, PER2, PER3, CRY2, BMAL1, and DBP) and metabolic (REVERBa,
RIP140, and PGC1a) genes. The BMAL1 rhythm was in approximate antiphase with the 
other clock genes. It is noteworthy that there was no significant effect (P >
0.05) of increased body weight or type 2 diabetes on rhythmic gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The robust nature of these rhythms and their relative phasing
indicate that WAT now can be considered as a peripheral tissue suitable for the
study of in vivo human rhythms. Comparison of data between subject groups clearly
indicates that obesity and type 2 diabetes are not related to the amplitude of
rhythmic WAT gene expression in humans maintained under controlled conditions.

PMCID: PMC3292333
PMID: 21411511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Biosci Rep. 2012 Feb;32(1):45-52. doi: 10.1042/BSR20110002.

The harmala alkaloid harmine is a modulator of circadian Bmal1 transcription.

Onishi Y(1), Oishi K, Kawano Y, Yamazaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (AIST), Higashi 1-1-1, Tsukuba 305-8566, Japan.
y-onishi@aist.go.jp

Biological rhythms are orchestrated by a cell-autonomous clock system that drives
the rhythmic cascade of clock genes. We established an assay system using NIH 3T3
cells stably expressing the Bmal1 promoter-driven luciferase reporter gene and
used it to analyse circadian oscillation of the gene. Modulators of PKC (protein 
kinase C) revealed that an activator and an inhibitor represented short- and
long-period phenotypes respectively which were consistent with reported effects
of PKC on the circadian clock and validated the assay system. We examined the
effects of the alkaloid harmine, contained in Hoasca, which has a wide spectrum
of pharmacological actions, on circadian rhythms using the validated assay
system. Harmine dose dependently elongated the period. Furthermore, EMSA
(electrophoretic mobility-shift assay) and Western-blot analysis showed that
harmine enhanced the transactivating function of RORa (retinoid-related orphan
receptor a), probably by increasing its nuclear translocation. Exogenous
expression of RORa also caused a long period, confirming the phenotype indicated 
by harmine. These results suggest that harmine extends the circadian period by
enhancing RORa function and that harmine is a new candidate that contributes to
the control of period length in mammalian cells.

PMID: 21401525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. PLoS Biol. 2011 Feb;9(2):e1000595. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000595. Epub 2011
Feb 22.

Genome-wide and phase-specific DNA-binding rhythms of BMAL1 control circadian
output functions in mouse liver.

Rey G(1), Cesbron F, Rougemont J, Reinke H, Brunner M, Naef F.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland.

The mammalian circadian clock uses interlocked negative feedback loops in which
the heterodimeric basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor BMAL1/CLOCK is a
master regulator. While there is prominent control of liver functions by the
circadian clock, the detailed links between circadian regulators and downstream
targets are poorly known. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with deep 
sequencing we obtained a time-resolved and genome-wide map of BMAL1 binding in
mouse liver, which allowed us to identify over 2,000 binding sites, with peak
binding narrowly centered around Zeitgeber time 6. Annotation of BMAL1 targets
confirms carbohydrate and lipid metabolism as the major output of the circadian
clock in mouse liver. Moreover, transcription regulators are largely
overrepresented, several of which also exhibit circadian activity. Genes of the
core circadian oscillator stand out as strongly bound, often at promoter and
distal sites. Genomic sequence analysis of the sites identified E-boxes and
tandem E1-E2 consensus elements. Electromobility shift assays showed that E1-E2
sites are bound by a dimer of BMAL1/CLOCK heterodimers with a spacing-dependent
cooperative interaction, a finding that was further validated in transactivation 
assays. BMAL1 target genes showed cyclic mRNA expression profiles with a phase
distribution centered at Zeitgeber time 10. Importantly, sites with E1-E2
elements showed tighter phases both in binding and mRNA accumulation. Finally,
analyzing the temporal profiles of BMAL1 binding, precursor mRNA and mature mRNA 
levels showed how transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation contribute 
differentially to circadian expression phase. Together, our analysis of a dynamic
protein-DNA interactome uncovered how genes of the core circadian oscillator
crosstalk and drive phase-specific circadian output programs in a complex tissue.

PMCID: PMC3043000
PMID: 21364973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Endocrinology. 2011 May;152(5):1891-900. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1260. Epub 2011 Mar
1.

A circadian clock entrained by melatonin is ticking in the rat fetal adrenal.

Torres-Farfan C(1), Mendez N, Abarzua-Catalan L, Vilches N, Valenzuela GJ,
Seron-Ferre M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiopatología, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Facultad de 
Medicina, Universidad de Chile, Casilla 16038, Santiago 9, Santiago, Chile.
ctorresf@med.uchile.cl

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2011 May;152(5):1734-8.

The adrenal gland in the adult is a peripheral circadian clock involved in the
coordination of energy intake and expenditure, required for adaptation to the
external environment. During fetal life, a peripheral circadian clock is present 
in the nonhuman primate adrenal gland. Whether this extends to the fetal adrenal 
gland like the rat is unknown. Here we explored in vivo and in vitro whether the 
rat fetal adrenal is a peripheral circadian clock entrained by melatonin. We
measured the 24-h changes in adrenal content of corticosterone and in the
expression of clock genes Per-2 and Bmal-1 and of steroidogenic acute regulatory 
protein (StAR), Mt1 melatonin receptor, and early growth response protein 1
(Egr-1) expression. In culture, we explored whether oscillatory expression of
these genes persisted during 48 h and the effect of a 4-h melatonin pulse on
their expression. In vivo, the rat fetal adrenal gland showed circadian
expression of Bmal-1 and Per-2 in antiphase (acrophases at 2200 and 1300 h,
respectively) as well as of Mt1 and Egr-1. This was accompanied by circadian
rhythms of corticosterone content and of StAR expression both peaking at 0600 h. 
The 24-h oscillatory expression of Bmal-1, Per-2, StAR, Mt1, and Egr-1 persisted 
during 48 h in culture; however, the antiphase between Per-2 and Bmal-1 was lost.
The pulse of melatonin shifted the acrophases of all the genes studied and
restored the antiphase between Per-2 and Bmal-1. Thus, in the rat, the fetal
adrenal is a strong peripheral clock potentially amenable to regulation by
maternal melatonin.

PMID: 21363938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Horm Metab Res. 2011 May;43(5):337-42. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1271693. Epub 2011 Feb
17.

Melatonin exerts direct inhibitory actions on ACTH responses in the human adrenal
gland.

Campino C(1), Valenzuela FJ, Torres-Farfan C, Reynolds HE, Abarzua-Catalan L,
Arteaga E, Trucco C, Guzmán S, Valenzuela GJ, Seron-Ferre M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Endocrinología, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

In nonhuman primates and rodents, melatonin acting directly on the adrenal gland,
inhibits glucocorticoid response to ACTH. In these species, an intrinsic adrenal 
circadian clock is involved in ACTH-stimulated glucocorticoid production. We
investigated whether these findings apply to the human adrenal gland by
determining i) expression of clock genes in vivo and ii) direct effects of
melatonin in ACTH-stimulated adrenal explants over a) expression of the clock
genes PER1 (Period 1) mRNA and BMAL1 [Brain-Muscle (ARNT)-like] protein,
ACTH-induced steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR), and 3ß-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase (3ß-HSD) and b) over cortisol and progesterone production. Adrenal 
tissue was obtained from 6 renal cancer patients undergoing unilateral
nephrectomy-adrenalectomy. Expression of the clock genes PER1, PER2, CRY2
(Cryptochrome 2), CLOCK (Circadian Locomotor Output Cycles Kaput) and BMAL1, was 
investigated by RT-PCR in a normal adrenal and in an adenoma. In independent
experiments, explants from 4 normal adrenals were preincubated in culture medium 
(6 h) followed by 12 h in: medium alone; ACTH (100 nM); ACTH plus melatonin (100 
nM); and melatonin alone. The explants' content of PER1 mRNA (real-time PCR) and 
StAR, 3ß-HSD, BMAL1 (immuno slot-blot), and their cortisol and progesterone
production (RIA) were measured. The human adrenal gland expresses the clock genes
PER1, PER2, CRY2, CLOCK, and BMAL1. ACTH increased PER1 mRNA, BMAL1, StAR, and
3ß-HSD protein levels, and cortisol and progesterone production. Melatonin
inhibited these ACTH effects. Our study demonstrates, for the first time, direct 
inhibitory effects of melatonin upon several ACTH responses in the human adrenal 
gland.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 21332028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Toxicol Sci. 2011 Jan;36(1):9-22.

Sex and circadian modulatory effects on rat liver as assessed by transcriptome
analyses.

Hirao J(1), Nishimura M, Arakawa S, Niino N, Mori K, Furukawa T, Sanbuissho A,
Manabe S, Nishihara M, Mori Y.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Safety Research Laboratories, Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., Fukuroi,
Shizuoka, Japan. hirao.jun.hw@daiichisankyo.co.jp

The present study was designed to fully uncover sex and circadian modulatory
effects on rat liver. Hepatic transcriptome analyses were performed at 4 hr
intervals of a day-night cycle using young adult male and female rats. Sexually
dimorphic genes, which were identified by a cross-sex comparison of time series
data, included representative sex-predominant genes such as male- or
female-predominant cytochrome P450 subfamilies (Cyp2c11, Cyp2c12, Cyp2c13, and
Cyp3a2), sulfotransferases, and glutathione S-transferase Yc2. The identified
sexually dimorphic genes were over-represented in the metabolism of retinols,
xenobiotics, linoleic acids, or androgen and estrogen, or bile acid biosynthesis.
Furthermore, transcription factor targets modeling suggested that transcription
factors SP1, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF4-alpha), and signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) serve as core nodes in the 
regulatory networks. On the other hand, Fourier transform analyses extracted
universal circadian-regulated genes in both sexes. The circadian-regulated genes 
included clock or clock-controlled genes such as aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator-like (Arntl), period homolog 2 (Per2), and D site albumin
promoter binding protein (Dbp). The extracted cyclic genes were over-represented 
in major tissue activities, e.g. the urea cycle and the metabolism of amino
acids, fatty acids, or glucose, indicating that the major liver functions are
under circadian control. The transcription factor targets modeling suggested that
transcription factors SP1, HNF4-alpha, and c-Myc proto-oncogene protein (c-MYC)
serve as major hubs in the circadian-regulatory gene networks. Interestingly,
transcription factors SP1 and HNF4-alpha are likely to orchestrate not only
sexually dimorphic, but also circadian-regulated genes even though each criterion
was rather mutually exclusive. This suggests the cross-talk between those
regulations. Sexual dimorphism is likely to interact with circadian rhythmicity
via overlapping gene regulatory networks on rat liver.

PMID: 21297337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Endocrinology. 2011 Apr;152(4):1347-54. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1068. Epub 2011 Feb 
1.

Impairment of peripheral circadian clocks precedes metabolic abnormalities in
ob/ob mice.

Ando H(1), Kumazaki M, Motosugi Y, Ushijima K, Maekawa T, Ishikawa E, Fujimura A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology, School of
Medicine, Jichi Medical University, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

Recent studies have demonstrated relationships between the dysfunction of
circadian clocks and the development of metabolic abnormalities, but the
chicken-and-egg question remains unresolved. To address this issue, we
investigated the cause-effect relationship in obese, diabetic ob/ob mice.
Compared with control C57BL/6J mice, the daily mRNA expression profiles of the
clock and clock-controlled genes Clock, Bmal1, Cry1, Per1, Per2, and Dbp were
substantially dampened in the liver and adipose tissue, but not the hypothalamic 
suprachiasmatic nucleus, of 10-wk-old ob/ob mice. Four-week feeding of a
low-calorie diet and administration of leptin over a 7-d period attenuated, to a 
significant and comparable extent, the observed metabolic abnormalities (obesity,
hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, and hypercholesterolemia) in the ob/ob mice.
However, only leptin treatment improved the impaired peripheral clocks. In
addition, clock function, assessed by measuring levels of Per1, Per2, and Dbp
mRNA at around peak times, was also reduced in the peripheral tissues of 3-wk-old
ob/ob mice without any overt metabolic abnormalities. Collectively these results 
indicate that the impairment of peripheral clocks in ob/ob mice does not result
from metabolic abnormalities but may instead be at least partially caused by
leptin deficiency itself. Further studies are needed to clarify how leptin
deficiency affects peripheral clocks.

PMID: 21285316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Feb;112(2):433-8. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22957.

Per-1 is a specific clock gene regulated by parathyroid hormone (PTH) signaling
in osteoblasts and is functional for the transcriptional events induced by PTH.

Hanyu R(1), Hayata T, Nagao M, Saita Y, Hemmi H, Notomi T, Nakamoto T, Schipani
E, Knonenbery H, Kaneko K, Kurosawa H, Ezura Y, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Medical Research Institute Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, Bunkyo-Ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Per-1 is one of the clock genes and is known to regulate various biological
events including bone mass determination. Parathyroid hormone is anabolic to bone
while the mechanism of its action is not fully understood. Here, we examined the 
role of PTH on Per-1 gene expression under osteoblast specific PTH signaling.
Constitutively active PTH receptor (caPPR) expressed specifically in osteoblasts 
in transgenic mice activates Per-1 gene expression in bone. This is specific as
expression of other clock gene Bmal-1 is not affected by caPPR over-expression.
Per-1 is also expressed in osteoblastic cell line. Interestingly, Per-1
expression is required for PTH signaling-induced CRE dependent transcription.
This is forming a positive feed back loop in the anabolic action of PTH signaling
and Per-1 in bone. These data indicate that PTH singling in osteoblasts activates
Per-1 gene expression in vivo in association with its anabolic action in bone at 
least in part through the regulation of transcriptional events.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21268064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 11;6(1):e15848. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015848.

Circadian rhythm and cartilage extracellular matrix genes in osseointegration: a 
genome-wide screening of implant failure by vitamin D deficiency.

Mengatto CM(1), Mussano F, Honda Y, Colwell CS, Nishimura I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Advanced Prosthodontics, Biomaterials and Hospital Dentistry, The 
Jane and Jerry Weintraub Center for Reconstructive Biotechnology, University of
California Los Angeles School of Dentistry, Los Angeles, California, United
States of America.

BACKGROUND: Successful dental and orthopedic implants require the establishment
of an intimate association with bone tissue; however, the mechanistic explanation
of how biological systems accomplish osseointegration is still incomplete. We
sought to identify critical gene networks involved in osseointegration by
exploring the implant failure model under vitamin D deficiency.
METHODOLOGY: Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed to control or vitamin
D-deficient diet prior to the osteotomy surgery in the femur bone and the
placement of T-shaped Ti4Al6V implant. Two weeks after the osteotomy and implant 
placement, tissue formed at the osteotomy site or in the hollow chamber of
T-shaped implant was harvested and total RNA was evaluated by whole genome
microarray analyses.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Two-way ANOVA of microarray data identified 103 genes that
were significantly (>2 fold) modulated by the implant placement and vitamin D
deficiency. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses assigned the 
highest z-score to the circadian rhythm pathway including neuronal PAS domain 2
(NPAS2), and period homolog 2 (Per2). NPAS2 and Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator-like (ARNTL/Bmal 1) were upregulated around implant and diminished
by vitamin D deficiency, whereas the expression pattern of Per2 was
complementary. Hierarchical cluster analysis further revealed that NPAS2 was in a
group predominantly composed of cartilage extracellular matrix (ECM) genes.
Whereas the expression of bone ECM genes around implant was not significantly
affected by vitamin D deficiency, cartilage ECM genes were modulated by the
presence of the implant and vitamin D status. In a proof-of-concept in vitro
study, the expression of cartilage type II and X collagens was found upregulated 
when mouse mesenchymal stem cells were cultured on implant disk with 1,25D
supplementation.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that the circadian rhythm system and cartilage
extracellular matrix may be involved in the establishment of osseointegration
under vitamin D regulation.

PMCID: PMC3019224
PMID: 21264318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. World J Biol Psychiatry. 2011 Dec;12(8):638-44. doi:
10.3109/15622975.2010.543149. Epub 2011 Jan 20.

Haloperidol alters circadian clock gene product expression in the mouse brain.

Coogan AN(1), Papachatzaki MM, Clemens C, Baird A, Donev RM, Joosten J, Zachariou
V, Thome J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, National University of Ireland Maynooth, Co.
Kildare, Republic of Ireland. andrew.coogan@nuim.ie

OBJECTIVES: Circadian rhythms are patterns in behavioural and physiological
measures that recur on a daily basis and are driven by an endogenous circadian
timekeeping system whose molecular machinery consists of a number of clock genes.
The typical anti-psychotic haloperidol has previously been shown to induce
significant deficiencies in circadian timing in patients. In this study we
examined the impact of haloperidol treatment on molecular components of the
circadian clock in the mouse brain.
METHODS: We examined how haloperidol treatment, either acute (both at day and
night) or chronically over 14 days, alters the expression of three clock gene
protein products (PER1, PER2, BMAL1) across the mouse brain by means of
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Chronic haloperidol treatment significantly decreases the expression
levels of PER1 in a number of brain areas, including the hippocampus, the
prefrontal and cingulate cerebral cortex and the paraventricular nucleus of the
hypothalamus. PER2 expression was only altered in the dentate gyrus and the CA3, 
and BMAL1 expression was only altered in the paraventricular nucleus of the
hypothalamus.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that haloperidol has the potential to alter
circadian rhythms via modulation of circadian clock gene expression.

PMID: 21250933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 4;286(9):7033-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.207217. Epub 2011
Jan 3.

Stoichiometric relationship among clock proteins determines robustness of
circadian rhythms.

Lee Y(1), Chen R, Lee HM, Lee C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Florida State
University, Tallahassee, Florida 32312, USA.

The mammalian circadian oscillator is primarily driven by an essential negative
feedback loop comprising a positive component, the CLOCK-BMAL1 complex, and a
negative component, the PER-CRY complex. Numerous studies suggest that feedback
inhibition of CLOCK-BMAL1 is mediated by time-dependent physical interaction with
its direct target gene products PER and CRY, suggesting that the ratio between
the negative and positive complexes must be important for the molecular
oscillator and rhythm generation. We explored this idea by altering expression of
clock components in fibroblasts derived from Per2(Luc) and Per mutant mice, a
cell system extensively used to study in vivo clock mechanisms. Our data
demonstrate that the stoichiometric relationship between clock components is
critical for the robustness of circadian rhythms and provide insights into the
mechanistic organization of the negative feedback loop. Our findings may explain 
why certain mutant mice or cells are arrhythmic, whereas others are rhythmic, and
suggest that robustness of circadian rhythms can be increased even in wild-type
cells by modulating the stoichiometry.

PMCID: PMC3044960
PMID: 21199878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Toxicol Lett. 2011 Mar 5;201(2):116-22. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2010.12.013. Epub
2010 Dec 21.

Circadian clock disruption in the mouse ovary in response to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Tischkau SA(1), Jaeger CD, Krager SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Southern Illinois University, School of Medicine, 
801N. Rutledge, Springfield, IL 62794-9629, USA. stischkau@siumed.edu

Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) by the highly toxic,
prototypical ligand, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) or other
dioxin-like compounds compromises ovarian function by altering follicle
maturation and steroid synthesis. Although alteration of transcription after
nuclear translocation and heterodimerization of AhR with its binding partner,
aryl hydrocarbon nuclear transporter (ARNT), is often cited as a primary
mechanism for mediating the toxic effects of dioxins, recent evidence indicates
that crosstalk between AhR and several other signaling pathways also occurs. Like
the circadian clock genes, AhR is a member of the basic helix-loop-helix,
Per-ARNT-SIM (bHLH-PAS) domain family of proteins. Thus, these studies tested the
hypothesis that TCDD can act to alter circadian clock regulation in the ovary.
Adult female c57bl6/J mice entrained to a typical 12h light/12h dark cycle were
exposed to a single 1 µg/kg dose of TCDD by gavage. Six days after exposure,
animals were released into constant darkness and ovaries were collected every 4h 
over a 24h period. Quantitative real-time PCR and immunoblot analysis
demonstrated that TCDD exposure alters expression of the canonical clock genes,
Bmal1 and Per2 in the ovary. AhR transcript and protein, which displayed a
circadian pattern of expression in the ovaries of control mice, were also altered
after TCDD treatment. Immunohistochemistry studies revealed co-localization of
AhR with BMAL1 in various ovarian cell types. Furthermore, co-immunoprecipitation
demonstrated time-of-day dependent interactions of AhR with BMAL1 that were
enhanced after TCDD treatment. Collectively these studies suggest that crosstalk 
between classical AhR signaling and the molecular circadian clockworks may be
responsible for altered ovarian function after TCDD exposure.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3039055
PMID: 21182907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Gene Expr Patterns. 2011 Mar-Apr;11(3-4):202-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2010.12.002.
Epub 2010 Dec 13.

Expression of clock proteins in developing tooth.

Zheng L(1), Papagerakis S, Schnell SD, Hoogerwerf WA, Papagerakis P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics and Pediatric Dentistry, School of Dentistry,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Morphological and functional changes during ameloblast and odontoblast
differentiation suggest that enamel and dentin formation is under circadian
control. Circadian rhythms are endogenous self-sustained oscillations with
periods of 24h that control diverse physiological and metabolic processes.
Mammalian clock genes play a key role in synchronizing circadian functions in
many organs. However, close to nothing is known on clock genes expression during 
tooth development. In this work, we investigated the expression of four clock
genes during tooth development. Our results showed that circadian clock genes
Bmal1, clock, per1, and per2 mRNAs were detected in teeth by RT-PCR.
Immunohistochemistry showed that clock protein expression was first detected in
teeth at the bell stage (E17), being expressed in EOE and dental papilla cells.
At post-natal day four (PN4), all four clock proteins continued to be expressed
in teeth but with different intensities, being strongly expressed within the
nucleus of ameloblasts and odontoblasts and down-regulated in dental pulp cells. 
Interestingly, at PN21 incisor, expression of clock proteins was down-regulated
in odontoblasts of the crown-analogue side but expression was persisting in
root-analogue side odontoblasts. In contrast, both crown and root odontoblasts
were strongly stained for all four clock proteins in first molars at PN21. Within
the periodontal ligament (PDL) space, epithelial rests of Malassez (ERM) showed
the strongest expression among other PDL cells. Our data suggests that clock
genes might be involved in the regulation of ameloblast and odontoblast
functions, such as enamel and dentin protein secretion and matrix mineralization.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3073654
PMID: 21156215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Aging (Albany NY). 2010 Dec;2(12):936-44.

Deficiency of circadian protein CLOCK reduces lifespan and increases age-related 
cataract development in mice.

Dubrovsky YV(1), Samsa WE, Kondratov RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences and Center for
Gene Regulation in Health and Disease, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, OH 
44115, USA.

Circadian clock is implicated in the regulation of aging. The transcription
factor CLOCK, a core component of the circadian system, operates in complex with 
another circadian clock protein BMAL1. Recently it was demonstrated that BMAL1
deficiency results in premature aging in mice. Here we investigate the aging of
mice deficient for CLOCK protein. Deficiency of the CLOCK protein significantly
affects longevity: the average lifespan of Clock-/- mice is reduced by 15%
compared with wild type mice, while maximum lifespan is reduced by more than 20%.
CLOCK deficiency also results in the development of two age-specific pathologies 
in these mice, cataracts and dermatitis, at a much higher rate than in wild type 
mice. In contrast to BMAL1 deficient animals, Clock-/- mice do not develop a
premature aging phenotype and do not develop the multiple age-associated
pathologies characteristic of BMAL1 deficiency. Thus, although CLOCK and BMAL1
form a transcriptional complex, the physiological result of their deficiency is
different. Our results suggest that CLOCK plays an important role in aging,
specifically; CLOCK activity is critical for the regulation of normal physiology 
and aging of the lens and skin.

PMCID: PMC3034182
PMID: 21149897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Cell Res. 2010 Dec;20(12):1285-8. doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.152. Epub 2010 Nov 9.

CRY links the circadian clock and CREB-mediated gluconeogenesis.

Hatori M(1), Panda S.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

PMID: 21124321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Dec;17(12):1414-21. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1961. Epub 2010
Nov 28.

The histone methyltransferase MLL1 permits the oscillation of circadian gene
expression.

Katada S(1), Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Unite 904 INSERM-Epigenetic Control and Neuronal Plasticity, Department of
Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, Irvine,
California, USA.

The classical view of the molecular clock is based on interlocked
transcriptional-translational feedback loops. Because a substantial fraction of
the mammalian genome is expressed in a circadian manner, chromatin remodeling has
been proposed to be crucial in clock function. Here we show that Lys4 (K4)
trimethylation of histone H3 is rhythmic and follows the same profile as
previously described H3 acetylation on circadian promoters. MLL1, a mammalian
homolog of Drosophila trithorax, is an H3K4-specific methyltransferase implicated
in transcriptional control. We demonstrate that MLL1 is essential for circadian
transcription and cyclic H3K4 trimethylation. MLL1 is in a complex with
CLOCK-BMAL1 and contributes to its rhythmic recruitment to circadian promoters
and to H3 acetylation. Yet MLL1 fails to interact with CLOCK<U+0394>19, providing an
explanation for this mutation's dominant negative phenotype. Our results favor a 
scenario in which H3K4 trimethylation by MLL1 is required to establish a
permissive chromatin state for circadian transcription.

PMID: 21113167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Mol Cell Biochem. 2011 Feb;348(1-2):53-60. doi: 10.1007/s11010-010-0636-x. Epub
2010 Nov 14.

Effect of phase delay lighting rotation schedule on daily expression of per2,
bmal1, rev-erba, ppara, and pdk4 genes in the heart and liver of Wistar rats.

Szántóová K(1), Zeman M, Veselá A, Herichová I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Physiology and Ethology, Comenius University Bratislava, 
Bratislava, Slovak Republic.

Under synchronized conditions daily rhythms run in precise phase relationships.
Long lasting shift-work disturbs circadian rhythms and causes metabolism
dysfunction. As a result of frequent shifts of the light (L):dark (D) cycle the
circadian system has to adjust to a new regimen repeatedly, and organism can
never achieve complete adjustment of all circadian rhythms. Nuclear receptor
PPARa is supposed to be a functional interface between circadian clock and
metabolism, and its interconnection with rev-erba and pdk4 was proven. The aim of
this study was to elucidate responsiveness of the circadian system to the LD
cycle mimicking the rotating shift-work with 8-h phase delay every second day.
Expression of key clock genes and clock controlled metabolic genes rev-erba,
ppara, and pdk4 was analyzed in the liver and heart of rats by real time PCR.
Control Wistar rats were exposed to the regular LD cycle 12:12. The second group 
was exposed to the LD regimen mimicking shift-work with 8-h phase delays during
period of 10 weeks. Sampling was performed in 4-h intervals during 24-h cycle.
Clock gene expression in the heart and liver of shifted rats was rhythmic and
phase delayed by 8-9 h compared to control. Expression of metabolic genes was
influenced more in the liver than in the heart. Results indicate that frequent
shifts of LD cycle may interfere with control of lipid metabolism.

PMID: 21076970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Int J Legal Med. 2011 May;125(3):385-91. doi: 10.1007/s00414-010-0527-4. Epub
2010 Nov 11.

Estimating time of death based on the biological clock.

Kimura A(1), Ishida Y, Hayashi T, Nosaka M, Kondo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera,
Wakayama, 641-8509, Japan.

The biological clock may stop at the time of death in a dead body. Therefore, the
biological clock seems useful for estimating the time of death. In this study, we
tried to read the biological clock in tissues from dead bodies to estimate the
time of death using molecular biological techniques. At first, we examined
real-time RT-PCR analysis of gene expression for mPer2 and mBmal1, which
constitutes a feedback loop in the oscillation system, in the kidney, liver, and 
heart of mice. We could detect circadian oscillation of these gene expressions in
mouse tissues even at <48 h after death. Thus, the ratio of mPer2/mBmal1 was
found to be useful for estimating the time of death. We next applied this method 
to the liver, kidney, and heart obtained from forensic autopsy cases with less
than 72 h of postmortem interval. Significant circadian oscillation of
hPer2/hBmal1 ratio could be detected in these autopsy samples. We further
examined gene expression for hRev-Erba, a component of another feedback loop. The
ratios of hRev-Erba/hBmal1 showed higher amplitude of oscillation than those of
hPer2/hBmal1 and are considered more suitable for estimating the time of death.
In particular, a hRev/hBmal1 ratio of >50 indicated the time of death as
0200-0900 hours, and a hRev/hBmal1 ratio that considerably exceeded 75 indicated 
the time of death as 0200-0800 hours. On the other hand, a hRev/hBmal1 ratio of
less than 25 strongly indicated the time of death as 1000-2300 hours. Taken
together, these findings indicate that gene expression analyses of the biological
clock could be powerful methods for estimation of the time of death.

PMID: 21069371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2011 Mar;19(3):659-61. doi: 10.1038/oby.2010.266. Epub
2010 Oct 28.

Impact of clock gene Bmal1 deficiency on nutritionally induced obesity in mice.

Hemmeryckx B(1), Himmelreich U, Hoylaerts MF, Lijnen HR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

To evaluate the hypothesis that the clock gene Bmal1 (brain and muscle arnt like 
protein-1) plays a role in the development of obesity, 5-week-old male
Bmal1-deficient (Bmal1(-/-)) mice and wild-type littermates (Bmal1(+/+)) were
kept on a high-fat diet (HFD) for 15 weeks. Despite an initial accelerated weight
gain of Bmal1(-/-) mice, body weight and subcutaneous (SC) and gonadal (GON)
adipose tissue mass were comparable to Bmal1(+/+) mice at the end of the diet
period. Noninvasive magnetic resonance imaging scanning revealed a modest
increase in fat content in Bmal1(-/-) mice after 10 weeks of HFD, whereas at the 
start and the end of the HFD feeding no differences were observed between both
genotypes. After 15 weeks of HFD, adipocyte and blood vessel size and density
were similar for Bmal1(+/+) and Bmal1(-/-) mice. However, the weight of major
organs was significantly reduced in Bmal1(-/-) mice, confirming the premature
ageing phenotype. Thus, we hypothesize that an initial accelerated increase in
body weight and fat mass of Bmal1(-/-) mice on HFD may have been offset by the
effect of premature ageing on organ weight, resulting in comparable weights after
15 weeks of HFD.

PMID: 21030946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Chronobiol Int. 2010 Oct;27(9-10):1735-53. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2010.515324.

Proxisome proliferator-activated receptor-a mediates high-fat, diet-enhanced
daily oscillation of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 activity in mice.

Hayashida S(1), Kuramoto Y, Koyanagi S, Oishi K, Fujiki J, Matsunaga N, Ikeda E, 
Ohdo S, Shimeno H, Soeda S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Fukuoka
University, 8-19-1 Nanakuma Jonan-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.

Acute thrombotic events frequently occur in the early morning among
hyperlipidemic patients. The activity of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1
(PAI-1), a potent inhibitor of the fibrinolytic system, oscillates daily, and
this is considered one mechanism that underlies the morning onset of acute
thrombotic events in hyperlipidemia. Although several studies have reported the
expression of the PAI-1 gene is under the control of the circadian clock system, 
the molecular mechanism of the circadian transactivation of PAI-1 gene under
hyperlipidemic conditions remains to be elucidated. Here, the authors
investigated whether hyperlipidemia induced by a high-fat diet (HFD) enhances the
daily oscillation of plasma PAI-1 activity in mice. The mRNA levels of the PAI-1 
gene were increased and rhythmically fluctuated with high-oscillation amplitude
in the livers of wild-type mice fed with the HFD. Circadian expression of
proxisome proliferator-activated receptor-a (PPARa) mRNA was also augmented as
well as that of PAI-1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed the HFD-induced
hyperlipidemia significantly increased the binding of PPARa to the PAI-1
promoter. Luciferase reporter analysis using primary hepatocytes revealed
CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated PAI-1 promoter activity was synergistically enhanced by
cotransfection with PPARa/retinoid X receptor-a (RXRa), and this synergistic
transactivation was repressed by negative limbs of the circadian clock, PERIOD2
and CRYPTOCHROME1. As expected, HFD-induced PAI-1 mRNA expression was
significantly attenuated in PPARa-null mice. These results suggest a molecular
link between the circadian clock and lipid metabolism system in the regulation of
PAI-1 gene expression, and provide an aid for understanding why hyperlipidemia
increases the risk of acute thrombotic events in the morning.

PMID: 20969520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. PLoS Biol. 2010 Oct 12;8(10):e1000513. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000513.

Emergence of noise-induced oscillations in the central circadian pacemaker.

Ko CH(1), Yamada YR, Welsh DK, Buhr ED, Liu AC, Zhang EE, Ralph MR, Kay SA,
Forger DB, Takahashi JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Biol. 2010;8(10) doi:
10.1371/annotation/45e0bb8b-69bd-4ba0-bb9e-6641bce10fc6..

Bmal1 is an essential transcriptional activator within the mammalian circadian
clock. We report here that the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of Bmal1-null mutant
mice, unexpectedly, generates stochastic oscillations with periods that overlap
the circadian range. Dissociated SCN neurons expressed fluctuating levels of PER2
detected by bioluminescence imaging but could not generate circadian oscillations
intrinsically. Inhibition of intercellular communication or cyclic-AMP signaling 
in SCN slices, which provide a positive feed-forward signal to drive the
intracellular negative feedback loop, abolished the stochastic oscillations.
Propagation of this feed-forward signal between SCN neurons then promotes
quasi-circadian oscillations that arise as an emergent property of the SCN
network. Experimental analysis and mathematical modeling argue that both
intercellular coupling and molecular noise are required for the stochastic
rhythms, providing a novel biological example of noise-induced oscillations. The 
emergence of stochastic circadian oscillations from the SCN network in the
absence of cell-autonomous circadian oscillatory function highlights a previously
unrecognized level of circadian organization.

PMCID: PMC2953532
PMID: 20967239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 2;107(44):19090-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1014523107. Epub 2010 Oct 18.

CLOCK and BMAL1 regulate MyoD and are necessary for maintenance of skeletal
muscle phenotype and function.

Andrews JL(1), Zhang X, McCarthy JJ, McDearmon EL, Hornberger TA, Russell B,
Campbell KS, Arbogast S, Reid MB, Walker JR, Hogenesch JB, Takahashi JS, Esser
KA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 60609, USA.

MyoD, a master regulator of myogenesis, exhibits a circadian rhythm in its mRNA
and protein levels, suggesting a possible role in the daily maintenance of muscle
phenotype and function. We report that MyoD is a direct target of the circadian
transcriptional activators CLOCK and BMAL1, which bind in a rhythmic manner to
the core enhancer of the MyoD promoter. Skeletal muscle of Clock(<U+0394>19) and
Bmal1(-/-) mutant mice exhibited ~30% reductions in normalized maximal force. A
similar reduction in force was observed at the single-fiber level. Electron
microscopy (EM) showed that the myofilament architecture was disrupted in
skeletal muscle of Clock(<U+0394>19), Bmal1(-/-), and MyoD(-/-) mice. The alteration in 
myofilament organization was associated with decreased expression of actin,
myosins, titin, and several MyoD target genes. EM analysis also demonstrated that
muscle from both Clock(<U+0394>19) and Bmal1(-/-) mice had a 40% reduction in
mitochondrial volume. The remaining mitochondria in these mutant mice displayed
aberrant morphology and increased uncoupling of respiration. This mitochondrial
pathology was not seen in muscle of MyoD(-/-) mice. We suggest that altered
expression of both Pgc-1a and Pgc-1ß in Clock(<U+0394>19) and Bmal1(-/-) mice may
underlie this pathology. Taken together, our results demonstrate that disruption 
of CLOCK or BMAL1 leads to structural and functional alterations at the cellular 
level in skeletal muscle. The identification of MyoD as a clock-controlled gene
provides a mechanism by which the circadian clock may generate a muscle-specific 
circadian transcriptome in an adaptive role for the daily maintenance of adult
skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC2973897
PMID: 20956306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011 Jan;300(1):H241-50. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00190.2010. Epub 2010 Oct 15.

Circadian regulation of cardiovascular function: a role for vasoactive intestinal
peptide.

Schroeder A(1), Loh DH, Jordan MC, Roos KP, Colwell CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California,
Los Angeles, California 90024, USA.

The circadian system, driven by the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), regulates
properties of cardiovascular function. The dysfunction of this timing system can 
result in cardiac pathology. The neuropeptide vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)
is crucial for circadian rhythms in a number of biological processes including
SCN electrical activity and wheel running behavior. Anatomic evidence indicates
that SCN neurons expressing VIP are well positioned to drive circadian regulation
of cardiac function through interactions with the autonomic centers. In this
study, we tested the hypothesis that loss of VIP would result in circadian
deficits in heart rate (HR) and clock gene expression in cardiac tissue. We
implanted radiotelemetry devices into VIP-deficient mice and wild-type (WT)
controls and continuously recorded HR, body temperature, and cage activity in
freely moving mice. Under light-dark conditions, VIP-deficient mice displayed
weak rhythms in HR, body temperature, and cage activity, with onsets that were
advanced in phase compared with WT mice. Similarly, clock gene expression in
cardiac tissue was rhythmic but phase advanced in mutant mice. In constant
darkness, the normal circadian rhythms in HR were lost in VIP-deficient mice;
however, most mutant mice continued to exhibit circadian rhythms of body
temperature with shortened free-running period. The loss of VIP altered, but did 
not abolish, autonomic regulation of HR. Analysis of the echocardiograms did not 
find any evidence for a loss of cardiac function in VIP-deficient mice, and the
size of the hearts did not differ between genotypes. These results demonstrate
that VIP is an important regulator of physiological circadian rhythmicity in the 
heart.

PMCID: PMC4116412
PMID: 20952671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2010 Dec;18(12):1552-6. doi:
10.1016/j.joca.2010.10.006. Epub 2010 Oct 13.

HIF-2a as a possible therapeutic target of osteoarthritis.

Saito T(1), Kawaguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Bone & Cartilage Regenerative Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Endochondral ossification, a conversion process from nonvascularized
and hypoxic cartilage to highly vascularized bone, plays a crucial role in
osteoarthritis (OA) development as well as in physiological skeletal growth. We
have shown that hypoxia-inducible factor-2a (HIF-2a, encoded by EPAS1) is an
extensive regulator of the endochondal ossification process. Here we review the
possible signaling network regulating OA development on the axis of HIF-2a.
METHODS: Peer reviewed publications published prior to August 2010 were searched 
in the Pubmed database. Articles that were relevant to HIF and molecular
mechanisms of the endochondral ossification and OA were selected.
RESULTS: As a trigger of OA, mechanical stress may induce the upstream NF-<U+03BA>B
signal and HIF-2a expression in joint cartilage of mice and humans, which causes 
transactivation of endochondral ossification-related molecules with the most
potent ß-subunit partner aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator-like (ARNTL). In
contrast to HIF-2a, HIF-1a functions to maintain cartilage via a distinct
mechanism, so that the shifting of the HIFs might possibly be involved in an OA
pathogenesis.
CONCLUSION: Signals on the HIF-2a axis from NF-<U+03BA>B signaling to the endochondral
ossification-related molecules, possibly in combination with HIF-2a and ARNTL,
may represent a rational therapeutic target for OA with minimal effects on
physiological skeletal homeostasis.

Copyright © 2010 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20950696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 21;286(3):2132-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.148395. Epub 2010 
Oct 11.

Cell fate determination factor Dachshund reprograms breast cancer stem cell
function.

Wu K(1), Jiao X, Li Z, Katiyar S, Casimiro MC, Yang W, Zhang Q, Willmarth NE,
Chepelev I, Crosariol M, Wei Z, Hu J, Zhao K, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA. kmwu2005@gmail.com

The cell fate determination factor Dachshund was cloned as a dominant inhibitor
of the hyperactive epidermal growth factor receptor ellipse. The expression of
Dachshund is lost in human breast cancer associated with poor prognosis. Breast
tumor-initiating cells (TIC) may contribute to tumor progression and therapy
resistance. Here, endogenous DACH1 was reduced in breast cancer cell lines with
high expression of TIC markers and in patient samples of the basal breast cancer 
phenotype. Re-expression of DACH1 reduced new tumor formation in serial
transplantations in vivo, reduced mammosphere formation, and reduced the
proportion of CD44(high)/CD24(low) breast tumor cells. Conversely, lentiviral
shRNA to DACH1 increased the breast (B)TIC population. Genome-wide expression
studies of mammary tumors demonstrated DACH1 repressed a molecular signature
associated with stem cells (SOX2, Nanog, and KLF4) and genome-wide ChIP-seq
analysis identified DACH1 binding to the promoter of the Nanog, KLF4, and Lin28
genes. KLF4/c-Myc and Oct4/Sox2 antagonized DACH1 repression of BTIC. Mechanistic
studies demonstrated DACH1 directly repressed the Nanog and Sox2 promoters via a 
conserved domain. Endogenous DACH1 regulates BTIC in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3023510
PMID: 20937839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Dec;30(24):5636-48. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00781-10. Epub 2010 Oct 
11.

Genome-wide profiling of the core clock protein BMAL1 targets reveals a strict
relationship with metabolism.

Hatanaka F(1), Matsubara C, Myung J, Yoritaka T, Kamimura N, Tsutsumi S, Kanai A,
Suzuki Y, Sassone-Corsi P, Aburatani H, Sugano S, Takumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Osaka Bioscience Institute, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Circadian rhythms are common to most organisms and govern much of homeostasis and
physiology. Since a significant fraction of the mammalian genome is controlled by
the clock machinery, understanding the genome-wide signaling and epigenetic basis
of circadian gene expression is essential. BMAL1 is a critical circadian
transcription factor that regulates genes via E-box elements in their promoters. 
We used multiple high-throughput approaches, including chromatin
immunoprecipitation-based systematic analyses and DNA microarrays combined with
bioinformatics, to generate genome-wide profiles of BMAL1 target genes. We reveal
that, in addition to E-boxes, the CCAATG element contributes to elicit robust
circadian expression. BMAL1 occupancy is found in more than 150 sites, including 
all known clock genes. Importantly, a significant proportion of BMAL1 targets
include genes that encode central regulators of metabolic processes. The database
generated in this study constitutes a useful resource to decipher the network of 
circadian gene control and its intimate links with several fundamental
physiological functions.

PMCID: PMC3004277
PMID: 20937769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Cell Sci. 2010 Oct 15;123(Pt 20):3547-57. doi: 10.1242/jcs.070300.

Coactivation of the CLOCK-BMAL1 complex by CBP mediates resetting of the
circadian clock.

Lee Y(1), Lee J, Kwon I, Nakajima Y, Ohmiya Y, Son GH, Lee KH, Kim K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and 21st Frontier Program in Neuroscience,
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

The transcription factor CLOCK-BMAL1 is a core component of the molecular clock
machinery that drives circadian gene expression and physiology in mammals.
Recently, we reported that this heterodimeric transcription factor functions as a
signaling molecule in response to the resetting stimuli via the Ca²+-dependent
protein kinase C pathway. Here, we demonstrate that the CREB-binding protein
(CBP) plays a key role in rapid activation of the CLOCK-BMAL1 heterodimer that
leads to phase resetting of the circadian clock. Under physiological conditions, 
a bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) assay revealed that CLOCK and
BMAL1 dimerize in the cytoplasm and subsequently translocate into the nucleus in 
response to serum stimuli (mean time duration was 29.2 minutes and mean velocity 
0.7 µm/minute). Concomitantly, BMAL1 rapidly recruited CBP on Per1 promoter
E-box, but not p300 (a functional analog of CBP), in the discrete nuclear foci.
However, recruitment of CBP by cAMP/Ca²+ response element-binding (CREB) protein 
on CRE was not markedly increased upon delivery of the resetting stimuli.
Furthermore, overexpression of CBP greatly potentiated the CLOCK-BMAL1-mediated
Per1 transcription, and this effect was completely abolished by site-directed
mutation of E-box elements, but not by the mutation of CRE in the Per1 promoter. 
Furthermore, molecular knockdown of CBP severely dampened circadian oscillation
of clock gene expression triggered by the resetting stimuli. These findings
suggest that CBP recruitment by BMAL1 mediates acute transactivation of
CLOCK-BMAL1, thereby inducing immediate-early Per1 transcription and phase
resetting of the circadian clock.

PMID: 20930143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Diabetologia. 2011 Jan;54(1):120-4. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1920-8. Epub 2010 Oct
3.

An intrinsic circadian clock of the pancreas is required for normal insulin
release and glucose homeostasis in mice.

Sadacca LA(1), Lamia KA, deLemos AS, Blum B, Weitz CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Loss of circadian clocks from all tissues causes defective
glucose homeostasis as well as loss of feeding and activity rhythms. Little is
known about peripheral tissue clocks, so we tested the hypothesis that an
intrinsic circadian clock of the pancreas is important for glucose homeostasis.
METHODS: We monitored real-time bioluminescence of pancreas explants from
circadian reporter mice and examined clock gene expression in beta cells by
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridisation. We generated mice selectively
lacking the essential clock gene Bmal1 (also known as Arntl) in the pancreas and 
tested mutant mice and littermate controls for glucose and insulin tolerance,
insulin production and behaviour. We examined islets isolated from mutants and
littermate controls for glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and total insulin
content.
RESULTS: Pancreas explants exhibited robust circadian rhythms. Clock genes Bmal1 
and Per1 were expressed in beta cells. Despite normal activity and feeding
behaviour, mutant mice lacking clock function in the pancreas had severe glucose 
intolerance and defective insulin production; their isolated pancreatic islets
had defective glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, but normal total insulin
content.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The mouse pancreas has an autonomous clock function
and beta cells are very likely to be one of the pancreatic cell types possessing 
an intrinsic clock. The Bmal1 circadian clock gene is required in the pancreas,
probably in beta cells, for normal insulin secretion and glucose homeostasis. Our
results provide evidence for a previously unrecognised molecular regulator of
pancreatic glucose-sensing and/or insulin secretion.

PMCID: PMC2995870
PMID: 20890745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2010 Dec;37(12):1154-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1681.2010.05451.x.

Downregulation of the circadian rhythm related gene Arntl2 suppresses diabetes
protection in Idd6 NOD.C3H congenic mice.

He CX(1), Avner P, Boitard C, Rogner UC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Génétique Moléculaire Murine, Paris, France.

1. Our previous studies of the murine genetic locus Idd6 revealed the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like protein 2 (Arntl2) as a candidate 
gene for type 1 diabetes; and in Idd6 NOD.C3H congenic mice, Arntl2 upregulation 
is linked to decreased diabetes development. 2. In the present study, shRNA
plasmids capable of suppressing Arntl2 expression were developed and given to
diabetes resistant NOD.C3H congenic mice by hydrodynamic tail vein injection. The
effects of Arntl2 suppression on diabetes incidence and immune cell numbers were 
investigated. 3. Diabetes incidence was increased by Arntl2 mRNA interference in 
the congenic strain and this was associated with an increase in CD4(+) T cells
and a decrease in regulatory T cells in the peripheral immune system. 4. These
results provide additional support for the protective role of the Arntl2 gene
located in locus Idd6 in diabetes progression in NOD.C3H congenic mice.

© 2010 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology © 2010 
Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 20880188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Oct 12;107(41):17721-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1012991107. Epub 2010 Sep 27.

Circadian CLOCK histone acetyl transferase localizes at ND10 nuclear bodies and
enables herpes simplex virus gene expression.

Kalamvoki M(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Expression of herpes simplex virus genes at the initiation of replication
involves two steps that take place at ND10 nuclear bodies. These are suppression 
of cellular repressors that attempt to silence viral DNA and remodeling of the
viral chromatin to make it accessible for transcription. In earlier studies we
reported on the mechanism by which viral proteins ICP0 and U(S)3 protein kinase
modify and disrupt the HDAC1/CoREST/REST/LSD1 repressor complex. The remodeling
step requires in addition acetylation of histones bound to DNA. In an attempt to 
identify the enzyme, we took note of the observation that ICP0 physically and
functionally interacts with Bmal1, a partner of the CLOCK histone acetyl
transferase, and key members of the bHLH-PAS family of transcriptional factors.
The Bmal11 and CLOCK heterodimer is best known as a regulator of the circadian
oscillation in the mammalian CLOCK system. In this article we report the
following: (i) in infected cells both Bmal1 and CLOCK localize at ND10 bodies;
(ii) wild-type virus stabilizes the CLOCK protein; (iii) overexpression of CLOCK 
partially compensates for the absence of ICP0 and enables higher yields in cells 
infected with a <U+0394>ICP0 mutant and this activity is not expressed by CLOCK mutants 
lacking histone acetyl transferase activity; and (iv) depletion of CLOCK in cells
infected with wild-type virus results in significant decrease in the expression
of all viral proteins tested. We conclude that ICP0 interacts with Bmal1 and by
extension with CLOCK histone acetyl transferase to remodel viral chromatin.

PMCID: PMC2955081
PMID: 20876123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 10;285(50):38987-9000. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.175182. Epub
2010 Sep 22.

The transcriptional repressor ID2 can interact with the canonical clock
components CLOCK and BMAL1 and mediate inhibitory effects on mPer1 expression.

Ward SM(1), Fernando SJ, Hou TY, Duffield GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Galvin Life Science Center, University of
Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana 46556, USA.

ID2 is a rhythmically expressed HLH transcriptional repressor. Deletion of Id2 in
mice results in circadian phenotypes, highlighted by disrupted locomotor activity
rhythms and an enhanced photoentrainment response. ID2 can suppress the
transactivation potential of the positive elements of the clock, CLOCK-BMAL1, on 
mPer1 and clock-controlled gene (CCG) activity. Misregulation of CCGs is observed
in Id2(-/-) liver, and mutant mice exhibit associated alterations in lipid
homeostasis. These data suggest that ID2 contributes to both input and output
components of the clock and that this may be via interaction with the bHLH clock 
proteins CLOCK and BMAL1. The aim of the present study was to explore this
potential interaction. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis revealed the capability of 
ID2 to complex with both CLOCK and BMAL1, and mammalian two-hybrid analysis
revealed direct interactions of ID2, ID1 and ID3 with CLOCK and BMAL1. Deletion
of the ID2 HLH domain rendered ID2 ineffective at inhibiting CLOCK-BMAL1
transactivation, suggesting that interaction between the proteins is via the HLH 
region. Immunofluorescence analysis revealed overlapping localization of ID2 with
CLOCK and BMAL1 in the cytoplasm. Overexpression of CLOCK and BMAL1 in the
presence of ID2 resulted in a significant reduction in their nuclear
localization, revealing that ID2 can sequester CLOCK and BMAL1 to the cytoplasm. 
Serum stimulation of Id2(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts resulted in an enhanced
induction of mPer1 expression. These data provide the basis for a molecular
mechanism through which ID2 could regulate aspects of both clock input and output
through a time-of-day specific interaction with CLOCK and BMAL1.

PMCID: PMC2998095
PMID: 20861012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2010 Nov;109(5):1328-36. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01327.2009. Epub 2010 Sep 16.

Circadian regulation of locomotor activity and skeletal muscle gene expression in
the horse.

Martin AM(1), Elliott JA, Duffy P, Blake CM, Ben Attia S, Katz LM, Browne JA,
Gath V, McGivney BA, Hill EW, Murphy BA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture, Food Science and Veterinary Medicine, University
College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland.

Circadian rhythms are innate 24-h cycles in behavioral and biochemical processes 
that permit physiological anticipation of daily environmental changes.
Elucidating the relationship between activity rhythms and circadian patterns of
gene expression may contribute to improved human and equine athletic performance.
Six healthy, untrained mares were studied to determine whether locomotor activity
behavior and skeletal muscle gene expression reflect endogenous circadian
regulation. Activity was recorded for three consecutive 48-h periods: as a group 
at pasture (P), and individually stabled under a light-dark (LD) cycle and in
constant darkness (DD). Halter-mounted Actiwatch-L data-loggers recorded light
exposure and motor activity. Analysis of mean activity (average counts/min,
activity bouts/day, average bout length) and cosinor parameters (acrophase,
amplitude, mesor, goodness of fit) revealed a predominantly ultradian (8.9 ± 0.7 
bouts/24 h) and weakly circadian pattern of activity in all three conditions (P, 
LD, DD). A more robust circadian pattern was observed during LD and DD. Muscle
biopsies were obtained from the middle gluteal muscles every 4 h for 24 h under
DD. One-way qRT-PCR results confirmed the circadian expression (P < 0.05) of six 
core clock genes (Arntl, Per1, Per2, Nr1d1, Nr1d2, Dbp) and the muscle-specific
transcript, Myf6. Additional genes, Ucp3, Nrip1, and Vegfa, demonstrated P values
approaching significance. These findings demonstrate circadian regulation of
muscle function and imply that human management regimes may strengthen, or
unmask, equine circadian behavioral outputs. As exercise synchronizes circadian
rhythms, our findings provide a basis for future work determining peak times for 
training and competing horses, to reduce injury and to achieve optimal
performance.

PMID: 20847133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Sep 14;11:69. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-69.

Identification of two amino acids in the C-terminal domain of mouse CRY2
essential for PER2 interaction.

Ozber N(1), Baris I, Tatlici G, Gur I, Kilinc S, Unal EB, Kavakli IH.

Author information: 
(1)Material Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Koc University,
Rumeli Feneri Yolu, 34450 Sariyer, Istanbul, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Cryptochromes (CRYs) are a class of flavoprotein blue-light signaling
receptors found in plants and animals, and they control plant development and the
entrainment of circadian rhythms. They also act as integral parts of the central 
circadian oscillator in humans and other animals. In mammals, the CLOCK-BMAL1
heterodimer activates transcription of the Per and Cry genes as well as
clock-regulated genes. The PER2 proteins interact with CRY and CKIe, and the
resulting ternary complexes translocate into the nucleus, where they negatively
regulate the transcription of Per and Cry core clock genes and other
clock-regulated output genes. Recent studies have indicated that the extended
C-termini of the mammalian CRYs, as compared to photolyase proteins, interact
with PER proteins.
RESULTS: We identified a region on mCRY2 (between residues 493 and 512)
responsible for direct physical interaction with mPER2 by mammalian two-hybrid
and co-immunoprecipitation assays. Moreover, using oligonucleotide-based
degenerate PCR, we discovered that mutation of Arg-501 and Lys-503 of mCRY2
within this C-terminal region totally abolishes interaction with PER2.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results identify mCRY2 amino acid residues that interact with
the mPER2 binding region and suggest the potential for rational drug design to
inhibit CRYs for specific therapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC2944120
PMID: 20840750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Dec;30(12):2535-43. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.214379. Epub 2010 Sep 9.

Matrix metalloproteinase 2 and 9 dysfunction underlie vascular stiffness in
circadian clock mutant mice.

Anea CB(1), Ali MI, Osmond JM, Sullivan JC, Stepp DW, Merloiu AM, Rudic RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, GA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine if elasticity in blood vessels is compromised in
circadian clock-mutant mice (Bmal1-knockout [KO] and Per-triple KO) and if matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) might confer these changes in compliance.
METHODS AND RESULTS: High-resolution ultrasonography in vivo revealed impaired
remodeling and increased pulse-wave velocity in the arteries of Bmal1-KO and
Per-triple KO mice. In addition, compliance of remodeled arteries and naïve
pressurized arterioles ex vivo from Bmal1-KO and Per-triple KO mice was reduced, 
consistent with stiffening of the vascular bed. The observed vascular stiffness
was coincident with dysregulation of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in Bmal1-KO mice.
Furthermore, inhibition of MMPs improved indexes of pathological remodeling in
wild-type mice, but the effect was abolished in Bmal1-KO mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Circadian clock dysfunction contributes to hardening of arteries,
which may involve impaired control of the extracellular matrix composition.

PMCID: PMC2988111
PMID: 20829506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Biol Reprod. 2011 Jan;84(1):124-9. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.085126. Epub 2010 
Sep 8.

Temporal control of spermatogenesis is independent of the central circadian
pacemaker in Djungarian hamsters (Phodopus sungorus).

Klose M(1), Grote K, Lerchl A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Engineering and Science, Jacobs University, Bremen, Germany.

In mammals, the duration of the cycle of the seminiferous epithelium (DCSE)
largely differs between species, but is remarkably stable within a species,
usually showing variations of 1%-3%. It is difficult to change the DCSE, e.g., by
hormones or chemicals. Initial experiments, employing quantitative RT-PCR, aimed 
at investigating the diurnal profiles of the clock genes Arntl (previously called
Bmal1) and Per1 in testes and kidneys of Djungarian hamsters (Phodopus sungorus).
While the testicular levels of Arntl were almost constant, clear diurnal
variations were identified for Per1. In order to clarify whether day length
(T-cycle) is a factor for DSCE, adult male hamsters (n = 20 per group) were
exposed to normal (T = 24 h), prolonged (T = 25 h), or shortened (T = 23 h)
T-cycles, with cycles thus being longer or shorter by 4.2% compared to the normal
condition. Exposure lasted for 43 days, during which the activity of the animals 
was recorded to confirm entrainment. DCSE was estimated by incorporation of
bromodeoxyuridine in dividing cells and the immunohistochemical localization of
labeled cells in stages I-XII of the seminiferous epithelium. Despite the low
variability of the results and the close agreement with previously published
data, no effects of prolonged or shortened T-cycles on DCSE could be identified
(24 h: 7.98 ± 0.05 days; 23 h: 7.94 ± 0.04 days; 25 h: 7.91 ± 0.03 days; P >
0.05). The results strongly indicate that the high temporal precision of
spermatogenesis is independent of the central circadian clock.

PMID: 20826727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2010 Dec 1;138(3):183-92. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2010.07.017. Epub 2010 Aug 10.

The effect of dexamethasone on clock gene mRNA levels in bovine neutrophils and
lymphocytes.

Nebzydoski SJ(1), Pozzo S, Nemec L, Rankin MK, Gressley TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Food Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE
19716, USA.

Circadian rhythms are driven by oscillating expression of a family of
transcription factors called clock genes. In rodents, clock genes drive circadian
rhythms in white blood cell function, and glucocorticoids are believed to
regulate these rhythms. Little is known about circadian rhythms of cattle white
blood cells. The objectives of this study were: (1) to quantify mRNA levels of
clock genes in neutrophils and lymphocytes over 24h in healthy steers; and (2) to
quantify effects of dexamethasone on clock gene mRNA levels in bovine neutrophils
and lymphocytes. We hypothesized that bovine neutrophils and lymphocytes would
display 24h variations in clock gene mRNA levels and that those patterns would be
disrupted by glucocorticoid treatment. Six Holstein steers were injected with 0
or 0.10mg/kg body weight dexamethasone according to a crossover design.
Neutrophils and lymphocytes were collected from jugular blood at 0, 4, 8, 12, 16,
20, and 24h relative to treatment administration. Neutrophil and lymphocyte mRNA 
levels of the clock genes Clock, Bmal1, Per1, Per2, Cry1, Cry2, Rev-erba, and
CK1<U+025B> were quantified. For neutrophils, an interaction between treatment and time 
was found for Clock, Cry1, and CK1<U+025B>. Time affected Clock, Per1, Cry1, Rev-erba,
and CK1<U+025B>. For all of those genes except Per1, neutrophils from control steers
displayed 24h changes of mRNA levels characteristic of circadian regulated cells.
The dexamethasone treatment increased neutrophil mRNA levels of Per1, decreased
Clock, Cry1, Cry2, and Rev-erba, and tended to decrease Bmal1. These results
suggest that circadian rhythms have the potential to impact bovine neutrophil
function, and that glucocorticoid-induced disruption of neutrophil circadian
rhythms may contribute to periparturient immunosuppression. For lymphocytes, an
interaction between treatment and time was observed for Per1 and tended to occur 
for Per2 and Cry2. Although time affected Per1 and Rev-erba, distinct 24h
patterns of lymphocyte clock gene mRNA levels were not evident as they were in
neutrophils. Treatment increased Per1 and decreased Cry2, but the magnitude of
the treatment effect was small. In summary, 24h patterns in clock gene mRNA
levels were observed in bovine neutrophils and to some degree in lymphocytes, and
these patterns were disrupted by dexamethasone administration. Although further
research is needed, individual variation in white blood cell circadian rhythms
and glucocorticoid responsiveness may help to explain individual differences in
periparturient disease susceptibility.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20807668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Oct 1;202(1):22-6. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.07.121.

ETV6-ARNT fusion in a patient with childhood T lymphoblastic leukemia.

Otsubo K(1), Kanegane H, Eguchi M, Eguchi-Ishimae M, Tamura K, Nomura K, Abe A,
Ishii E, Miyawaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Toyama, Japan.

The ETS variant gene 6 (ETV6) gene is located at 12p13, and is frequently
involved in translocations in various human neoplasms, resulting in the
expression of fusion proteins consisting of the amino-terminal part of ETV6 and
unrelated transcription factors or protein tyrosine kinases. Leukemia with
t(1;12)(q21;p13) was previously described in a 5-year-old boy with acute
myeloblastic leukemia (AML-M2) who exhibited a novel ETV6-aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) fusion protein. We herein report the case of
a 2-year-old boy with T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) harboring
t(1;12)(q21;p13). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with a ETV6
dual-color DNA probe revealed that the split signals of the ETV6 gene in 96.7% of
bone marrow cells, indicating rearrangement of the ETV6 gene. Therefore, we
performed a FISH analysis with bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) probes
containing the ARNT, BCL9, and MLLT11 genes located at 1q21, and these results
indicated that the ARNT gene might be involved in the t(1;12)(q21;p13). Reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis disclosed the existence of a
ETV6-ARNT fusion gene. To our knowledge, the current report is novel in its
report of the ETV6-ARNT fusion in childhood T-ALL. The ETV6-ARNT fusion is
associated not only with AML but also with T-ALL.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20804916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2010;26(2):155-66. doi: 10.1159/000320547. Epub 2010 Aug
24.

Circadian expression of clock- and tumor suppressor genes in human oral mucosa.

Zieker D(1), Jenne I, Koenigsrainer I, Zdichavsky M, Nieselt K, Buck K, Zieker J,
Beckert S, Glatzle J, Spanagel R, Koenigsrainer A, Northoff H, Loeffler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Visceral and Transplant Surgery, University of
Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. derek.zieker@med.uni-tuebingen.de

PURPOSE: Circadian rhythms are daily oscillations of multiple biological
processes driven by endogenous clocks. Imbalance of these rhythms has been
associated with cancerogenesis in humans. To further elucidate the role circadian
clocks have in cellular growth control, tumor suppression and cancer treatment,
it is revealing to know how clock genes and clock-controlled genes are regulated 
in healthy humans.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Therefore comparative microarray analyses were conducted
investigating the relative mRNA expression of clock genes throughout a 24-hour
period in cell samples obtained from oral mucosa of eight healthy diurnally
active male study participants. Differentially expressed selected genes of
interest were additionally evaluated using qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis revealed 33 significant differentially regulated
clock genes and clock- controlled genes, throughout a one day period (6.00h,
12.00h, 18.00h, 24.00h). Hereof were 16 clock genes and 17 clock- controlled
genes including tumor suppressor- and oncogenes. qRT-PCR of selected genes of
interest, such as hPER2, hCRY1, hBMAL1, hCCRN4L and hSMAD5 revealed significant
circadian regulations.
CONCLUSION: Our study revealed a proper circadian regulation profile of several
clock- and tumor suppressor genes at defined points in time in the participants
studied. These findings could provide important information regarding genes
displaying the same expression profile in the gastrointestinal tract amounting to
a physiological expression profile of healthy humans. In the future asynchronous 
regulations of those genes might be an additional assistant method to detect
derivations distinguishing normal from malignant tissue or assessing risk factors
for cancer.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20798499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 13;5(8):e12190. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012190.

Sex-related differences in gene expression following Coxiella burnetii infection 
in mice: potential role of circadian rhythm.

Textoris J(1), Ban LH, Capo C, Raoult D, Leone M, Mege JL.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche sur les Maladies Infectieuses Tropicales et Emergentes,
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 6236,
Faculté de Médecine, Marseille, France.

BACKGROUND: Q fever, a zoonosis due to Coxiella burnetii infection, exhibits
sexual dimorphism; men are affected more frequently and severely than women for a
given exposure. Here we explore whether the severity of C. burnetii infection in 
mice is related to differences in male and female gene expression profiles.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Mice were infected with C. burnetii for 24 hours,
and gene expression was measured in liver cells using microarrays. Multiclass
analysis identified 2,777 probes for which expression was specifically modulated 
by C. burnetti infection. Only 14% of the modulated genes were sex-independent,
and the remaining 86% were differentially expressed in males and females.
Castration of males and females showed that sex hormones were responsible for
more than 60% of the observed gene modulation, and this reduction was most
pronounced in males. Using functional annotation of modulated genes, we
identified four clusters enriched in males that were related to cell-cell
adhesion, signal transduction, defensins and cytokine/Jak-Stat pathways.
Up-regulation of the IL-10 and Stat-3 genes may account for the high
susceptibility of men with Q fever to C. burnetii infection and autoantibody
production. Two clusters were identified in females, including the circadian
rhythm pathway, which consists of positive (Clock, Arntl) and negative (Per)
limbs of a feedback loop. We found that Clock and Arntl were down-modulated
whereas Per was up-regulated; these changes may be associated with efficient
bacterial elimination in females but not in males, in which an exacerbated host
response would be prominent.
CONCLUSION: This large-scale study revealed for the first time that circadian
rhythm plays a major role in the anti-infectious response of mice, and it
provides a new basis for elucidating the role of sexual dimorphism in human
infections.

PMCID: PMC2921390
PMID: 20730052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Nutr Biochem. 2011 Apr;22(4):334-43. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2010.02.012. Epub
2010 Aug 5.

Clock genes regulate the feeding schedule-dependent diurnal rhythm changes in
hexose transporter gene expressions through the binding of BMAL1 to the
promoter/enhancer and transcribed regions.

Iwashina I(1), Mochizuki K, Inamochi Y, Goda T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nutritional Physiology and School of Food and Nutritional
Sciences, The University of Shizuoka and Global COE, 52-1 Yada, Shizuoka-shi,
Shizuoka 4228526, Japan.

The expression of hexose transporter genes (SGLT1, GLUT5 and GLUT2) in mice with 
ad libitum feeding under light (7:00-19:00)-dark (19:00-7:00) cycle gradually
increased from a basal level at 7:00 and reached a maximum at 19:00, coinciding
with the start of dark phase feeding. The peaks of these gene expressions were
shifted to 7:00 in mice that were subjected to a restricted feeding schedule from
9:00 to 17:00. The expression of BMAL1, a transcription factor driving the
central feedback loop of the clock genes, was followed by the increase of hexose 
transporter gene expressions. The expressions of Per1-3, genes related to
negative regulation of BMAL1, were the highest at or just after the time of
maximal expression of the hexose transporter genes in both the group fed ad
libitum and the restricted feeding group. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed that the binding of BMAL1 to the promoter
and/or transcribed regions of hexose transporters and Per 2 genes was associated 
with changes in their expressions. These results suggest that diurnal changes in 
expression of hexose transporter genes depend on the feeding schedule and are
directly regulated by a feedback loop of clock genes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20688499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Immunogenetics. 2010 Sep;62(9):585-92. doi: 10.1007/s00251-010-0467-7. Epub 2010 
Jul 30.

Inhibition of type 1 diabetes by upregulation of the circadian rhythm-related
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like 2.

He CX(1), Prevot N, Boitard C, Avner P, Rogner UC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Génétique Moléculaire Murine, 25 rue du Docteur
Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

The genetic locus Idd6 is involved in type 1 diabetes development in the
non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse through its effect on the immune system and in
particular, on T cell activities. Analysis of congenic strains for Idd6 has
established the Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like 2 (Arntl2) as
a likely candidate gene. In this study we investigate the role of Arntl2 in the
autoimmune disease and T cell activation. An Arntl2 expressing plasmid was
transfected into CD4(+) T cells by nucleofection. Expression levels of cytokines 
and CD4(+) T cell activation markers, cell death, apoptosis, and cell
proliferation rates were characterized in ex vivo experiments whilst in vivo the 
transfected cells were transferred into NOD.SCID mice to monitor diabetes
development. The results demonstrate that Arntl2 overexpression leads to
inhibition of CD4(+) T cell proliferation and decreases in their diabetogenic
activity without influence on the expression levels of cytokines, CD4(+) T cell
activation markers, cell death, and apoptosis. Our findings suggest that Arntl2
at the Idd6 locus may act via the inhibition of CD4(+) T cell proliferation and
the reduction in the diabetogenic activity of CD4(+) T cells to protect against
autoimmune type 1 diabetes in the NOD mice.

PMID: 20676886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Nature. 2010 Jul 29;466(7306):571-2. doi: 10.1038/466571a.

Metabolism: Tick, tock, a beta-cell clock.

Lamia KA, Evans RM.

Comment on
    Nature. 2010 Jul 29;466(7306):627-31.

PMCID: PMC3610560
PMID: 20671699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Basic Res Cardiol. 2011 Jan;106(1):37-50. doi: 10.1007/s00395-010-0110-7. Epub
2010 Jul 27.

Altered circadian rhythm of cardiac ß3-adrenoceptor activity following myocardial
infarction in the rat.

Zhou L(1), Zhang P, Cheng Z, Hao W, Wang R, Fang Q, Cao JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy
of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, China.

Circadian rhythms influence the incidence of adverse cardiac events but the
underlying mechanisms are not well defined. We sought to investigate the role of 
the ß3-adrenoceptor (ß3-AR) in cardiac circadian disorders and arrhythmia
severity after myocardial infarction (MI). MI was created by ligating the left
anterior descending coronary artery of the rat heart in situ. Circadian
variations of the myocardial expressions of ß3-AR and clock genes Bmal1 and Npas2
were examined by real time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction,
Western blot and immunohistochemistry. Electrocardiograms and myocardial
contraction were recorded in vivo and/or ex vivo. Ventricular tachyarrhythmias
were induced by isoprenaline. Normal rats showed circadian oscillations in both
the myocardial transcriptional expression of ß3-AR and the ß3-AR-induced positive
chronotropic and negative inotropic cardiac effects. However, these circadian
rhythms were significantly blunted or even abolished in rats with either acute MI
(within 24 h) or healed MI (14 days after coronary ligation). The nocturnal level
of ß3-AR protein was higher in MI rats than in normal rats. In contrast, the
circadian oscillations of the transcripts of Bmal1 and Npas2 in the myocardium
were significantly augmented in rats with either acute MI or healed MI. BRL37344,
a preferential ß3-AR selective agonist, reduced the occurrence of ventricular
tachycardia (VT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF) in rats with either acute MI
or healed MI. We conclude that circadian rhythms of myocardial ß3-AR activities
are disturbed after MI and ß3-AR activation offers anti-arrhythmic protection.

PMID: 20661603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Jan;226(1):132-40. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22314.

Deficiency in core circadian protein Bmal1 is associated with a prothrombotic and
vascular phenotype.

Somanath PR(1), Podrez EA, Chen J, Ma Y, Marchant K, Antoch M, Byzova TV.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Experimental Therapeutics, College of Pharmacy, University of
Georgia, HM 1200 Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.
sshenoy@mail.mcg.edu

Aging is associated with both the disturbances of circadian rhythms and a
prothrombotic phenotype. It remains poorly understood how the circadian system
regulates thrombosis, a critical outcome of aging-related cardiovascular disease.
Using multiple in vivo models, we now show that mice with genetic ablation of the
core clock gene Bmal1, which display pre-mature aging, have a dramatic
prothrombotic phenotype. This phenotype is mechanistically linked to changes in
the regulation of key risk factors for cardiovascular disease. These include
circulating vWF, fibrinogen, and PAI-1, all of which are significantly elevated
in Bmal1(-/-) mice. We also show that major circadian transcriptional regulators 
CLOCK and Bmal1 directly regulate the activity of vWF promoter and that lack of
Bmal1 results in upregulation of vWF both at mRNA and protein level. Here we
report a direct regulation of vWF expression in endothelial cells by biological
clock gene Bmal1. This study establishes a mechanistic connection between Bmal1
and cardiovascular phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2982145
PMID: 20658528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Anim Reprod Sci. 2010 Sep;121(3-4):225-35. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2010.05.020. Epub 2010 Jun 4.

Expression analysis of circadian genes in oocytes and preimplantation embryos of 
cattle and rabbits.

Amano T(1), Tokunaga K, Kakegawa R, Yanagisawa A, Takemoto A, Tatemizo A,
Watanabe T, Hatanaka Y, Matsushita A, Kishi M, Anzai M, Kato H, Mitani T,
Kishigami S, Saeki K, Hosoi Y, Iritani A, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, Kinki University, Kinokawa, Wakayama,
Japan. amino@waka.kindai.ac.jp

We previously showed that circadian genes clock, bmal1, cry1, cry2, per1, and
per2 are expressed and function as maternal mRNA regulating events in the oocytes
and preimplantation embryos of mice. Recent evidence indicates however that
either or both expression profiles of circadian genes in some tissues, and
transcript sequences of circadian genes, differ to generate the physiological
differences between diurnal and nocturnal species. We therefore investigated the 
expression profiles of circadian genes in oocytes and preimplantation embryos of 
species other than mice, namely cattle and rabbits, representing diurnal and
nocturnal species, respectively, and determined the protein sequences of
circadian genes in these species. Quantitative real-time PCR revealed that all
circadian genes considered in this study were present in the oocytes and
preimplantation embryos of both species, and the transcript amounts of clock,
cry1 and per1 contained in oocytes were significantly higher than in
preimplantation embryos of both species. The transcripts of clock, cry1, and per1
of cattle and rabbits were determined by primer walking, and functional domains
in the estimated amino acid sequences were compared between cattle and rabbits
and with those of humans and mice. The sequences of clock, cry1, and per1 in
cattle and rabbits closely resembled those in mice (85-100% homologies), and no
difference based on diurnality or nocturnality was observed. These findings
suggest that circadian genes in the oocytes and preimplantation embryos of
mammals fulfill the same functions across species as maternal mRNA.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20619978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Biochem. 2010 Sep;148(3):319-26. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvq069. Epub 2010 Jun 23.

Effects of the biological clock gene Bmal1 on tumour growth and anti-cancer drug 
activity.

Zeng ZL(1), Wu MW, Sun J, Sun YL, Cai YC, Huang YJ, Xian LJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, P.R. China.

The Bmal1 gene plays a key role in controlling circadian rhythms. To better
understand how the Bmal1 gene affects tumour growth and the response to
anti-cancer drugs, we examined the effect of knockdown of Bmal1 by RNAi both in
vitro and in vivo. Down-regulation of Bmal1 gene expression accelerated cell
proliferation in vitro and promoted tumour growth in mice. Suppressing Bmal1
expression in murine colon cancer cells (C26) and fibroblast cells (L929)
decreased apoptosis induced by Etoposid, reduced the distribution of cells in the
G2/M phases treated by Docetaxel and decreased DNA damage induced by Cisplatin.
Loss of Bmal1 reduced the expression of per1, per2, per3, wee1 and p53. The
expression of p21 and c-myc was also altered in certain cell lines. However,
Bmal1 deficiency increased the protein levels of cdc2, cyclin B1, cyclin D1 and
cyclin E. Wee1 and cyclin A expression was minimally altered. Thus, the circadian
clock gene Bmal1 plays a role in regulating tumour cell apoptosis, cell-cycle
progression and DNA damage response and in homoeostasis regulation.
Down-regulation of Bmal1 accelerates the development of tumours and may influence
the response to anti-cancer drugs.

PMID: 20576619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Nov;38(20):6831-40. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq550. Epub 2010
Jun 22.

Predictive response-relevant clustering of expression data provides insights into
disease processes.

Hopcroft LE(1), McBride MW, Harris KJ, Sampson AK, McClure JD, Graham D, Young G,
Holyoake TL, Girolami MA, Dominiczak AF.

Author information: 
(1)Inference Group, Department of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, and
Gartnavel General Hospital, 1053 Great Western Road, Glasgow G12 0YN, UK.

This article describes and illustrates a novel method of microarray data analysis
that couples model-based clustering and binary classification to form clusters of
`response-relevant' genes; that is, genes that are informative when
discriminating between the different values of the response. Predictions are
subsequently made using an appropriate statistical summary of each gene cluster, 
which we call the `meta-covariate' representation of the cluster, in a probit
regression model. We first illustrate this method by analysing a leukaemia
expression dataset, before focusing closely on the meta-covariate analysis of a
renal gene expression dataset in a rat model of salt-sensitive hypertension. We
explore the biological insights provided by our analysis of these data. In
particular, we identify a highly influential cluster of 13 genes--including three
transcription factors (Arntl, Bhlhe41 and Npas2)-that is implicated as being
protective against hypertension in response to increased dietary sodium.
Functional and canonical pathway analysis of this cluster using Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis implicated transcriptional activation and circadian rhythm signalling,
respectively. Although we illustrate our method using only expression data, the
method is applicable to any high-dimensional datasets. Expression data are
available at ArrayExpress (accession number E-MEXP-2514) and code is available at
http://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/inference/metacovariateanalysis/.

PMCID: PMC2978340
PMID: 20571087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Biosystems. 2010 Aug;101(2):136-43. doi: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2010.06.001. Epub
2010 Jun 8.

cAMP-regulated dynamics of the mammalian circadian clock.

Wang J(1), Zhou T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Informatics, Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou,
China. wangjunweilj@yahoo.com.cn

Previous molecular description of the mammalian timekeeping mechanism was based
mainly on transcriptional/translational feedback loops (TTFLs). However, a recent
experimental report challenges such a molecular architecture, showing that the
cAMP signaling is an indispensable component of the mammalian circadian clock. In
this paper, we develop a reduced mathematical model that characterizes the
mammalian circadian network. The model with 8-state differential equations
incorporates both TTFLs and cAMP-mediated feedback loop. In agreement with
experimental observations, our results show that: (1) the model simulates
sustained circadian (23.4-h periodic) oscillations in constant darkness and
entrained circadian dynamics by light-dark cycles; (2) circadian rhythmicity is
lost without cAMP signaling; (3) the system is resilient to large fluctuations in
transcriptional rates; (4) it successfully simulates the phenotypes of
Per1(-/-)/Per2(-/-) double-mutant mice and Bmal1(-/-) mutant mice. Our study
implies that to understand the circadian pacemaking in suprachiasmatic nucleus
neurons, the TTFLs should not be isolated from intracellular cAMP-dependent
signaling.

PMID: 20570634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Ann Med. 2010 Sep;42(6):404-15. doi: 10.3109/07853890.2010.499134.

Circadian regulation of cell cycle: Molecular connections between aging and the
circadian clock.

Khapre RV(1), Samsa WE, Kondratov RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological, Geological, and Environmental Sciences and Center
for Gene Regulation in Health and Diseases, Cleveland State University,
Cleveland, OH 44143, USA.

The circadian clock generates oscillations in physiology and behavior, known as
circadian rhythms. Links between the circadian clock genes Periods, Bmal1, and
Cryptochromes and aging and cancer are emerging. Circadian clock gene expression 
is changed in human pathologies, and transgenic mice with mutations in clock
genes develop cancer and premature aging. Control of genome integrity and cell
proliferation play key roles in the development of age-associated pathologies and
carcinogenesis. Here, we review recent data on the connection between the
circadian clock and control of the cell cycle. The circadian clock regulates the 
activity and expression of several critical cell cycle and cell cycle
check-point-related proteins, and in turn cell cycle-associated proteins regulate
circadian clock proteins. DNA damage can reset the circadian clock, which
provides a molecular mechanism for reciprocal regulation between the circadian
clock and the cell cycle. This circadian clock-dependent control of cell
proliferation, together with other known physiological functions of the circadian
clock such as the control of metabolism, oxidative and genotoxic stress response,
and DNA repair, opens new horizons for understanding the mechanisms behind aging 
and carcinogenesis.

PMID: 20568980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nature. 2010 Jul 29;466(7306):627-31. doi: 10.1038/nature09253.

Disruption of the clock components CLOCK and BMAL1 leads to hypoinsulinaemia and 
diabetes.

Marcheva B(1), Ramsey KM, Buhr ED, Kobayashi Y, Su H, Ko CH, Ivanova G, Omura C, 
Mo S, Vitaterna MH, Lopez JP, Philipson LH, Bradfield CA, Crosby SD, JeBailey L, 
Wang X, Takahashi JS, Bass J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2010 Jul 29;466(7306):571-2.

The molecular clock maintains energy constancy by producing circadian
oscillations of rate-limiting enzymes involved in tissue metabolism across the
day and night. During periods of feeding, pancreatic islets secrete insulin to
maintain glucose homeostasis, and although rhythmic control of insulin release is
recognized to be dysregulated in humans with diabetes, it is not known how the
circadian clock may affect this process. Here we show that pancreatic islets
possess self-sustained circadian gene and protein oscillations of the
transcription factors CLOCK and BMAL1. The phase of oscillation of islet genes
involved in growth, glucose metabolism and insulin signalling is delayed in
circadian mutant mice, and both Clock and Bmal1 (also called Arntl) mutants show 
impaired glucose tolerance, reduced insulin secretion and defects in size and
proliferation of pancreatic islets that worsen with age. Clock disruption leads
to transcriptome-wide alterations in the expression of islet genes involved in
growth, survival and synaptic vesicle assembly. Notably, conditional ablation of 
the pancreatic clock causes diabetes mellitus due to defective beta-cell function
at the very latest stage of stimulus-secretion coupling. These results
demonstrate a role for the beta-cell clock in coordinating insulin secretion with
the sleep-wake cycle, and reveal that ablation of the pancreatic clock can
trigger the onset of diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC2920067
PMID: 20562852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Alcohol Alcohol. 2010 Jul-Aug;45(4):303-11. doi: 10.1093/alcalc/agq035. Epub 2010
Jun 16.

Circadian clock gene polymorphisms in alcohol use disorders and alcohol
consumption.

Kovanen L(1), Saarikoski ST, Haukka J, Pirkola S, Aromaa A, Lönnqvist J, Partonen
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse Services, National Institute
for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland. leena.kovanen@thl.fi

AIMS: Circadian clock genes are involved in the development of drug-induced
behaviors and regulate neurotransmission pathways in addiction. Our aim was to
study whether circadian clock gene polymorphisms predispose to alcohol dependence
or abuse or other alcohol-related characteristics.
METHODS: The study sample comprised of 512 individuals having alcohol dependence 
or alcohol abuse (according to Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV)) and their 511 age- and sex-matched controls. 
This population-based sample was drawn from a cohort (n = 7415), representative
of the Finnish general population aged 30 and over. Altogether 42
single-nucleotide polymorphisms of 19 genes related to the circadian pacemaker
system were genotyped.
RESULTS: ARNTL rs6486120 T(+) allelic status (P = 0.0007, q = 0.17), ADCYAP1
rs2856966 GG genotype (P = 0.0006, q = 0.17) and VIP CC haplotype
(rs3823082-rs688136) (P = 0.0006) were suggestively associated with alcohol
consumption in socially drinking controls. ARNTL2 GT haplotype
(rs7958822-rs4964057) associated suggestively with alcohol abuse diagnosis (P =
0.0013). Earlier findings on the associations of DRD2 and NPY with alcohol
dependence were supported: DRD2/ANKK1 Taq1A(1) increased (P = 0.04) and NPY Pro7 
decreased (P = 0.01) the risk of alcohol dependence.
CONCLUSIONS: ARNTL, ARNTL2, VIP and ADCYAP1 were indicated as having influence on
alcohol use or abuse. The role of DRD2 and NPY on alcohol dependence was also
supported.

PMID: 20554694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Genes Dev. 2010 Jun 15;24(12):1317-28. doi: 10.1101/gad.578810.

Flexible phase adjustment of circadian albumin D site-binding protein (DBP) gene 
expression by CRYPTOCHROME1.

Stratmann M(1), Stadler F, Tamanini F, van der Horst GT, Ripperger JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland.

The albumin D site-binding protein (DBP) governs circadian transcription of a
number of hepatic detoxification and metabolic enzymes prior to the activity
phase and subsequent food intake of mice. However, the behavior of mice is
drastically affected by the photoperiod. Therefore, continuous adjustment of the 
phase of circadian Dbp expression is required in the liver. Here we describe a
direct impact of CRYPTOCHROME1 (CRY1) on the phase of Dbp expression. Dbp and the
nuclear receptor Rev-Erbalpha are circadian target genes of BMAL1 and CLOCK.
Surprisingly, dynamic CRY1 binding to the Dbp promoter region delayed BMAL1 and
CLOCK-mediated transcription of Dbp compared with Rev-Erbalpha. Extended presence
of CRY1 in the nucleus enabled continuous uncoupling of the phase of Dbp from
Rev-Erbalpha expression upon change from short to longer photoperiods. CRY1 thus 
maintained the peak of DBP accumulation close to the activity phase. In contrast,
Rev-Erbalpha expression was phase-locked to the circadian oscillator and shaped
by accumulation of its own gene product. Our data indicate that fine-tuning of
circadian transcription in the liver is even more sophisticated than expected.

PMCID: PMC2885666
PMID: 20551177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cell Cycle. 2010 Jul 1;9(13):2515-21.

PERsuading nuclear receptors to dance the circadian rhythm.

Ripperger JA(1), Schmutz I, Albrecht U.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medicine, Unit of Biochemistry, University of Fribourg, Fribourg,
Switzerland.

The recurring light/dark cycle that has a period length of about 24 hours has
been internalized in various organisms in the form of a circadian clock. This
clock allows a precise orchestration of biochemical and physiological processes
in the body thus improving performance. Recently, we found that the clock
component PERIOD2 (PER2) can coordinate transcriptional regulation of metabolic, 
physiological, or behavioral pathways by interacting with nuclear receptors. PER2
appears to act as co-regulator of nuclear receptors linking clock function and
transcriptional regulation at the level of protein-protein interactions. Here, we
provide additional evidence for modulation of nuclear receptor dependent
transcription by PER2 underscoring the broad implication of our finding. Taken
together, our findings provide a base for the understanding of various disorders 
including mood disorders that have their roots in a temporal deregulation of
basic metabolic processes.

© 2010 Landes Bioscience

PMID: 20543573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Curr Biol. 2010 Jul 13;20(13):1209-15. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2010.05.029. Epub 2010 
Jun 10.

Clock and cycle limit starvation-induced sleep loss in Drosophila.

Keene AC(1), Duboué ER, McDonald DM, Dus M, Suh GS, Waddell S, Blau J.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA.
keene@nyu.edu

Neural systems controlling the vital functions of sleep and feeding in mammals
are tightly interconnected: sleep deprivation promotes feeding, whereas
starvation suppresses sleep. Here we show that starvation in Drosophila potently 
suppresses sleep, suggesting that these two homeostatically regulated behaviors
are also integrated in flies. The sleep-suppressing effect of starvation is
independent of the mushroom bodies, a previously identified sleep locus in the
fly brain, and therefore is regulated by distinct neural circuitry. The circadian
clock genes Clock (Clk) and cycle (cyc) are critical for proper sleep suppression
during starvation. However, the sleep suppression is independent of light cues
and of circadian rhythms as shown by the fact that starved period mutants sleep
like wild-type flies. By selectively targeting subpopulations of Clk-expressing
neurons, we localize the observed sleep phenotype to the dorsally located
circadian neurons. These findings show that Clk and cyc act during starvation to 
modulate the conflict of whether flies sleep or search for food.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2929698
PMID: 20541409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Pineal Res. 2010 Aug;49(1):60-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2010.00767.x. Epub
2010 May 27.

Melatonin resynchronizes dysregulated circadian rhythm circuitry in human
prostate cancer cells.

Jung-Hynes B(1), Huang W, Reiter RJ, Ahmad N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Prostate cancer (PCa) is a major age-related malignancy as increasing age
correlates with increased risk for developing this neoplasm. Similarly,
alterations in circadian rhythms have also been associated with the aging
population and cancer risk. The pineal hormone melatonin is known to regulate
circadian rhythms, which is under the control of a core set of genes: Period 1,
2, 3 (Per 1-3); Cryptochrome 1, 2 (Cry 1, 2); Clock, and Bmal 1, 2. Melatonin
levels have been shown to decrease in patients with cancer and exogenous
melatonin exhibits antiproliferative effects against certain cancers. In this
study, we challenged the hypothesis that melatonin imparts antiproliferative
effects in prostate cancer via resynchronization of deregulated core clock
circuitry. We found that Clock and Per2 protein levels were downregulated whereas
Bmal1 protein levels were upregulated in PCa cells, compared to normal prostate
cells. Additionally, employing automated quantitative analysis of a microarray
containing human tissues, we found that compared to benign tissues, Clock and
Per2 levels were downregulated, whereas Bmal1 levels were upregulated in PCa and 
other proliferative prostatic conditions. Overexpression of Per2 was found to
result in a significant loss of PCa cell growth and viability. Interestingly,
melatonin treatment resulted in an increase in Per2 and Clock and a reduction in 
Bmal1 in PCa cells. Further, melatonin treatment resulted in a resynchronization 
of oscillatory circadian rhythm genes (Dbp and Per2). Our data support our
hypothesis and suggest that melatonin should be thoroughly investigated as an
agent for the management of PCa and other age-related malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3158680
PMID: 20524973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Aging (Albany NY). 2010 May;2(5):251-4.

The aging clock: to 'BMAL'icious toward learning and memory.

Gerstner JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 53706, USA.
jrgerstn@wisc.edu

Comment on
    Aging (Albany NY). 2010 May;2(5):285-97.

PMCID: PMC2898011
PMID: 20519776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Aging (Albany NY). 2010 May;2(5):285-97.

Circadian clock proteins control adaptation to novel environment and memory
formation.

Kondratova AA(1), Dubrovsky YV, Antoch MP, Kondratov RV.

Author information: 
(1)Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, OH 44195, USA.

Comment in
    Aging (Albany NY). 2010 May;2(5):259-60.
    Aging (Albany NY). 2010 Jun;2(6):320-1.
    Aging (Albany NY). 2010 May;2(5):251-4.

Deficiency of the transcription factor BMAL1, a core component of the circadian
clock, results in an accelerated aging phenotype in mice. The circadian clock
regulates many physiological processes and was recently implicated in control of 
brain-based activities, such as memory formation and the regulation of emotions. 
Aging is accompanied by the decline in brain physiology, particularly decline in 
the response and adaptation to novelty. We investigated the role of the circadian
clock in exploratory behavior and habituation to novelty using the open field
paradigm. We found that mice with a deficiency of the circadian transcription
factor BMAL1 display hyperactivity in novel environments and impaired intra- and 
intersession habituation, indicative of defects in short- and long-term memory
formation. In contrast, mice double-deficient for the circadian proteins CRY1 and
CRY2 (repressors of the BMAL1-mediated transcription) demonstrate reduced
activity and accelerated habituation when compared to wild type mice. Mice with
mutation in theClock gene (encoding the BMAL1 transcription partner) show normal 
locomotion, but increased rearing activity and impaired intersession habituation.
BMAL1 is highly expressed in the neurons of the hippocampus - a brain region
associated with spatial memory formation; BMAL1 deficiency disrupts circadian
oscillation in gene expression and reactive oxygen species homeostasis in the
brain, which may be among the possible mechanisms involved. Thus, we suggest that
the BMAL1:CLOCK activity is critical for the proper exploratory and habituation
behavior, and that the circadian clock prepares organism for a new round of
everyday activities through optimization of behavioral learning.

PMCID: PMC2898019
PMID: 20519775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Anal Biochem. 2010 Sep 15;404(2):165-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2010.05.024. Epub 2010
May 25.

Detection of the CLOCK/BMAL1 heterodimer using a nucleic acid probe with cycling 
probe technology.

Nakagawa K(1), Yamamoto T, Yasuda A.

Author information: 
(1)Life Science Laboratory, Advanced Materials Laboratories, Sony Corporation,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510,
Japan. kazuhiro.nakagawa@jp.sony.com

An isothermal signal amplification technique for specific DNA sequences, known as
cycling probe technology (CPT), has enabled rapid acquisition of genomic
information. Here we report an analogous technique for the detection of an
activated transcription factor, a transcription element-binding assay with
fluorescent amplification by apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) site lysis cycle (TEFAL).
This simple amplification assay can detect activated transcription factors by
using a unique nucleic acid probe containing a consensus binding sequence and an 
AP site, which enables the CPT reaction with AP endonuclease. In this article, we
demonstrate that this method detects the functional CLOCK/BMAL1 heterodimer via
the TEFAL probe containing the E-box consensus sequence to which the CLOCK/BMAL1 
heterodimer binds. Using TEFAL combined with immunoassays, we measured
oscillations in the amount of CLOCK/BMAL1 heterodimer in serum-stimulated HeLa
cells. Furthermore, we succeeded in measuring the circadian accumulation of the
functional CLOCK/BMAL1 heterodimer in human buccal mucosa cells. TEFAL
contributes greatly to the study of transcription factor activation in mammalian 
tissues and cell extracts and is a powerful tool for less invasive investigation 
of human circadian rhythms.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20507820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Affect Disord. 2010 Oct;126(1-2):161-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2010.04.002. Epub
2010 May 14.

Altered expression of circadian rhythm genes among individuals with a history of 
depression.

Gouin JP(1), Connors J, Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Glaser R, Malarkey WB, Atkinson C,
Beversdorf D, Quan N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, USA. gouin.1@osu.edu

BACKGROUND: Depression has been associated with several circadian rhythm
perturbations, suggesting a disruption of the circadian clock system in affective
disorders. The interaction of several circadian clock genes generates these daily
circadian rhythms.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study evaluated whether circadian gene expression
differed between individuals with a history of depression and participants
without a similar history. The participants were 60 healthy older adults. Half of
the participants had a history of depression. Real-time quantitative polymerase
chain reaction was used to measure the circadian gene Clock, BMAL1, Period1, and 
Period2 messenger RNA levels in peripheral blood leukocytes.
RESULTS: Individuals with a history of depression had higher Clock, Period1, and 
Bmal1 mRNA levels, compared to non-depressed participants.
LIMITATIONS: Although circadian gene expression fluctuates throughout the day,
clock gene mRNA levels were evaluated only in the morning.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that disruptions of the molecular mechanisms
underlying the circadian clock system may be associated with depression.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2930045
PMID: 20471092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2010;22(5):743-50. doi: 10.1071/RD09243.

Clock gene expression in gravid uterus and extra-embryonic tissues during late
gestation in the mouse.

Ratajczak CK(1), Herzog ED, Muglia LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Biology Program, Washington University, St Louis, MO 63110,
USA.

Evidence in humans and rodents suggests the importance of circadian rhythmicity
in parturition. A molecular clock underlies the generation of circadian
rhythmicity. While this molecular clock has been identified in numerous tissues, 
the expression and regulation of clock genes in tissues relevant to parturition
is largely undefined. Here, the expression and regulation of the clock genes
Bmal1, Clock, cryptochrome (Cry1/2) and period (Per1/2) was examined in the
murine gravid uterus, placenta and fetal membranes during late gestation. All
clock genes examined were expressed in the tissues of interest throughout the
last third of gestation. Upregulation of a subset of these clock genes was
observed in each of these tissues in the final two days of gestation. Oscillating
expression of mRNA for a subset of the examined clock genes was detected in the
gravid uterus, placenta and fetal membranes. Furthermore, bioluminescence
recording on explants from gravid Per2::luciferase mice indicated rhythmic
expression of PER2 protein in these tissues. These data demonstrate expression
and rhythmicity of clock genes in tissues relevant to parturition indicating a
potential contribution of peripheral molecular clocks to this process.

PMCID: PMC3816753
PMID: 20450826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Biosci Rep. 2011 Feb;31(1):57-62. doi: 10.1042/BSR20100007.

HSG cells, a model in the submandibular clock.

Onishi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biological Resources and Functions, National Institute of
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Japan. y-onishi@aist.go.jp

Circadian rhythm of vital processes is essential to health, and various tissues
show unique peripheral rhythms. HSG is the human submandibular gland cell line
that has been used for analysing the effects of steroids and growth factors. In
the present study, we analysed the transcriptional regulation of the BMAL1 gene, 
a critical component of the mammalian clock system to investigate the possibility
of using HSG cells as a model system of the submandibular clock. The BMAL1 gene
was expressed with circadian oscillation after stimulation with dexamethasone,
and its regulatory region contained two recognition motifs for ROR (retinoic
acid-receptor-related orphan receptor) and ROREs [RORa (ROR a-subunit)-binding
elements] in hypomethylated CpG islands with an open chromatin structure.
REV-ERBa was expressed with circadian oscillation, and knockdown experiments
suggested that REV-ERBa is involved in circadian transcription of the BMAL1 gene 
in HSG cells. These results are similar to those in NIH 3T3 cells, a standard
model for the circadian system, whereas RORa required for REV-ERBa antagonism was
expressed very little in HSG cells. These findings show that in the salivary
gland cell line HSG there is a rhythm in the core oscillator components BMAL1 and
REV-ERBa, indicating that circadian-based transcriptional regulation can be
modelled in this peripheral cell type.

PMID: 20446921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Insect Physiol. 2010 Sep;56(9):1291-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2010.04.012.
Epub 2010 Apr 28.

Molecular cloning and functional analysis of the clock genes, Clock and cycle, in
the firebrat Thermobia domestica.

Kamae Y(1), Tanaka F, Tomioka K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bioscience, Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology,
Okayama University, Kita-ku, Okayama, Japan.

Comparative molecular analysis reveals a wide variation of clock mechanisms among
insects. In this study, the clock gene homologues of Clock (Td'Clk) and cycle
(Td'cyc) were cloned from an apterygote insect, Thermobia domestica. Structural
analysis showed that Td'CLK includes bHLH, PAS-A, PAS-B domains but lacks a
polyglutamine repeat in the C terminal region that is implicated for
transcriptional activity in Drosophila CLK. Td'CYC contains a BCTR domain in its 
C terminal in addition to the common domains found in Drosophila CYC, i.e. bHLH, 
PAS-A, PAS-B domains. Unlike in Drosophila, Td'Clk mRNA levels showed no
significant daily fluctuation, while Td'cyc exhibited rhythmic expression. A
single injection of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) of Td'Clk or Td'cyc into the
abdomen of adult firebrats effectively knocked down respective mRNA levels and
abolished the rhythmic expression of Td'cyc. Most Td'Clk or Td'cyc dsRNA-injected
firebrats lost their circadian locomotor rhythm in constant darkness up to 30
days after injection, whereas those injected with DsRed2 dsRNA as a negative
control clearly maintained it. From these results, it is likely that Td'Clk and
Td'cyc are involved in the circadian clock machinery in the firebrat. However,
the structure and expression profile of Td'Clk and Td'cyc more closely resembles 
those of mammals than Drosophila.

PMID: 20416313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Pharm. 2010 Jun 7;7(3):805-14. doi: 10.1021/mp900303s.

Evaluating the gene-expression profiles of HeLa cancer cells treated with
activated and nonactivated poly(amidoamine) dendrimers, and their DNA complexes.

Kuo JH(1), Liou MJ, Chiu HC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy 
and Science, 60 Erh-Jen Road, Sec. 1, Jen-Te, Tainan 717, Taiwan.
kuojunghua@yahoo.com.tw

Using dendrimers in cancer therapy as nonviral vectors for gene delivery seems
promising. The biological performance of a dendrimer-based gene delivery system
depends heavily on its molecular architecture. The transfection activity of
dendrimers is significantly improved by processes activated in the heat
degradation treatment of solvolysis. However, very little is known about the
molecular mechanisms that dendrimers produce in cancer cells. We studied the
changes in global gene-expression profiles in human cervical cancer HeLa cells
exposed to nonactivated and activated poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimers, alone 
or in complexes with plasmid DNA (dendriplexes). Real-time quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction was used to confirm four regulated genes 
(PHF5A, ARNTL2, CHD4, and P2RX7) affected by activated dendrimers and
dendriplexes. Activated and nonactivated dendrimers and dendriplexes alike
induced multiple gene expression changes, some of which overlapped with their
dendriplexes. Dendrimer activation improved transfection efficiency and induced
additional gene expression changes in HeLa cells. Dendrimers and dendriplexes
principally affect genes with the molecular functions of nucleic acid binding and
transcription activity, metal-ion binding, enzyme activity, receptor activity,
and protein binding. Our findings provide a deeper insight into the changes in
gene expression patterns caused by the molecular structure of PAMAM dendrimers
for gene-based cancer therapy.

PMID: 20394435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Brain Res. 2010 Jun 14;1337:21-31. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.03.113. Epub 2010
Apr 9.

Impact of aging on diurnal expression patterns of CLOCK and BMAL1 in the mouse
brain.

Wyse CA(1), Coogan AN.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience and Molecular Psychiatry, Institute of Life Sciences, School of
Medicine, University of Swansea, Singleton Park, Swansea, SA2 8PP, UK.

Mammalian circadian rhythms are generated by a network of transcriptional and
translational loops in the expression of a panel of clock genes in various brain 
and peripheral sites. Many of the output rhythms controlled by this system are
significantly affected by ageing, although the mechanisms of age-related
circadian dysfunction remain opaque. The aim of this study was to investigate the
effect of aging on the daily oscillation of two clock gene proteins (CLOCK,
BMAL1) in the mouse brain. Clock gene protein expression in the brain was
measured by means of immunohistochemistry in groups of young (4 months) and older
(16 months) mice sampled every 4h over a 24-h cycle. CLOCK and BMAL1 were
constitutively expressed in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN; the master
circadian pacemaker) in young adult animals. We report novel rhythmic expression 
of CLOCK and BMAL1 in a number of extra-SCN sites in the young mouse brain,
including the hippocampus, amygdala and the paraventricular, arcuate and
dorsomedial nuclei of the hypothalamus. Aging altered the amplitude and/or phase 
of expression in these regions. These results indicate hitherto unreported
expression patterns of CLOCK and BMAL1 in non-SCN brain circadian oscillators,
and suggest that alterations of these patterns may contribute to age-related
circadian dysfunction.

(c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20382135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 2;5(4):e10007. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010007.

ARNTL (BMAL1) and NPAS2 gene variants contribute to fertility and seasonality.

Kovanen L(1), Saarikoski ST, Aromaa A, Lönnqvist J, Partonen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse Services, National Institute
for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Circadian clocks guide the metabolic, cell-division, sleep-wake,
circadian and seasonal cycles. Abnormalities in these clocks may be a health
hazard. Circadian clock gene polymorphisms have been linked to sleep, mood and
metabolic disorders. Our study aimed to examine polymorphisms in four key
circadian clock genes in relation to seasonal variation, reproduction and
well-being in a sample that was representative of the general population, aged 30
and over, living in Finland.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the ARNTL,
ARNTL2, CLOCK and NPAS2 genes were genotyped in 511 individuals. 19 variants were
analyzed in relation to 31 phenotypes that were assessed in a health interview
and examination study. With respect to reproduction, women with ARNTL rs2278749
TT genotype had more miscarriages and pregnancies, while NPAS2 rs11673746 T
carriers had fewer miscarriages. NPAS2 rs2305160 A allele carriers had lower
Global Seasonality Scores, a sum score of six items i.e. seasonal variation of
sleep length, social activity, mood, weight, appetite and energy level.
Furthermore, carriers of A allele at NPAS2 rs6725296 had greater loadings on the 
metabolic factor (weight and appetite) of the global seasonality score, whereas
individuals with ARNTL rs6290035 TT genotype experienced less seasonal variation 
of energy level.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: ARNTL and NPAS2 gene variants were associated with
reproduction and with seasonal variation. Earlier findings have linked ARNTL to
infertility in mice, but this is the first time when any polymorphism of these
genes is linked to fertility in humans.

PMCID: PMC2848852
PMID: 20368993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. EMBO J. 2010 Apr 21;29(8):1389-400. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.34. Epub 2010 Mar 18.

Interaction of MAGED1 with nuclear receptors affects circadian clock function.

Wang X(1), Tang J, Xing L, Shi G, Ruan H, Gu X, Liu Z, Wu X, Gao X, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Model Animal for Disease Study, Model Animal Research
Center, Medical School of Nanjing University, Pukou District, Nanjing, China.

The circadian clock has a central role in physiological adaption and anticipation
of day/night changes. In a genetic screen for novel regulators of circadian
rhythms, we found that mice lacking MAGED1 (Melanoma Antigen Family D1) exhibit a
shortened period and altered rest-activity bouts. These circadian phenotypes are 
proposed to be caused by a direct effect on the core molecular clock network that
reduces the robustness of the circadian clock. We provide in vitro and in vivo
evidence indicating that MAGED1 binds to RORalpha to bring about positive and
negative effects on core clock genes of Bmal1, Rev-erbalpha and E4bp4 expression 
through the Rev-Erbalpha/ROR responsive elements (RORE). Maged1 is a non-rhythmic
gene that, by binding RORalpha in non-circadian way, enhances rhythmic input and 
buffers the circadian system from irrelevant, perturbing stimuli or noise. We
have thus identified and defined a novel circadian regulator, Maged1, which is
indispensable for the robustness of the circadian clock to better serve the
organism.

PMCID: PMC2868574
PMID: 20300063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Comp Neurol. 2010 May 15;518(10):1837-46. doi: 10.1002/cne.22306.

Spatial and temporal expression patterns of Bmal delineate a circadian clock in
the nervous system of Branchiostoma lanceolatum.

Wicht H(1), Laedtke E, Korf HW, Schomerus C.

Author information: 
(1)Fachbereich Medizin der Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universität, Dr.
Senckenbergische Anatomie, D-60590 Frankfurt, Germany.

We cloned the homologue of the clock gene Bmal from a cephalochordate,
Branchiostoma lanceolatum (syn. amphioxus). Amphioxus possesses a single copy of 
this gene (amphiBmal) that encodes for a protein of 649 amino acids, which is
quite similar to BMALs of other chordates. The gene is expressed by a restricted 
cell group in the anterior vesicle of the neural tube, and its expression site
coincides with that of another clock gene, namely, amphiPer. The expression of
amphiBmal shows a rhythmic fluctuation that persists under constant darkness and 
is, thus, circadian. Similar to the situation in craniates, the peak phases of
the amphiBmal and amphiPer expression are offset by 12 hours. Based on these
observations and the putative homology between the diencephalon of vertebrates
and the anterior vesicle of lancelets, we suggest a homology between the
suprachiasmatic nucleus of craniates and the amphiBmal/amphiPer-expressing cell
group of amphioxus.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20235090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2010 Oct;23(10):1172-5. doi:
10.3109/14767051003677947.

The circadian rhythm of expression of Bmal1 and Cry1 in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells of preterm neonates.

Chen A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, the Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China. chen_an29@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To determine circadian rhythms of circadian genes in the peripheral
blood mononuclear cells in preterm neonates.
STUDY DESIGN: Ten premature neonates, gestational age from 30 to 31 weeks were
recruited. Infants with birth asphyxia, RDS, apnea, malformation, infection or
haemolytic diseases were excluded. At 7AM and 7PM on the 1st day, 7th day and
14th day of hospitalisation, peripheral venous blood was obtained from the
premature babies and real-time RTPCR was used to determine the expression of
Bmal1 and Cry1.
RESULTS: The expression of bmal1 did not have statistical difference between 7AM 
and 7PM on the 1st day, 7th day and 14th day. Neither did the cry1.
CONCLUSION: There was no circadian rhythm of bmal1 and cry1 in PBMC of preterm
neonates in our NICU.

PMID: 20222832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Endocrinology. 2010 May;151(5):2287-96. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-1252. Epub 2010 Mar 
9.

Episodes of prolactin gene expression in GH3 cells are dependent on selective
promoter binding of multiple circadian elements.

Bose S(1), Boockfor FR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Dynamics, Department of Regenerative Medicine and Cell
Biology, MedicalUniversity of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 294251, 
USA.

Prolactin (PRL) gene expression in mammotropes occurs in pulses, but the
mechanism(s) underlying this dynamic process remains obscure. Recent findings
from our laboratory of an E-box in the rat PRL promoter (E-box133) that can
interact with the circadian factors, circadian locomoter output cycles kaput
(CLOCK) and brain and muscle aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like 
protein (BMAL)-1, and was necessary for pulse activity raised the intriguing
possibility that the circadian system may be central to this oscillatory process.
In this study, we used serum-shocked GH(3) cells, established previously to
synchronize PRL pulses between cells in culture, to reveal that pulses of PRL
mRNA are linked temporally to the expression of bmal1, cry1, per1, and per3 mRNA 
in these cells. Moreover, we found that each of these circadian factors binds to 
the rat PRL promoter by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis. Using EMSA
analysis, we observed that two sites present in the proximal promoter region,
E-box133 and E-box10, bind circadian factors differentially (E-box133 interacted 
with BMAL1, cryptochrome-1, period (PER)-1, and PER3 but not PER2 and E-box10
bound BMAL1, cryptochrome-1, PER2, PER3 but not PER1). More importantly,
down-regulation of any factor binding E-box133 significantly reduced PRL mRNA
levels during pulse periods. Our results demonstrate clearly that certain
circadian elements binding to the E-box133 site are required for episodes of PRL 
mRNA expression in serum-shocked GH(3) cultures. Moreover, our findings of
binding-related differences between functionally distinct E-boxes demonstrate not
only that E-boxes can bind different components but suggest that the number and
type of circadian elements that bind to an E-box is central in dictating its
function.

PMCID: PMC2869263
PMID: 20215567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Chronobiol Int. 2010 Jan;27(1):194-203. doi: 10.3109/07420520903398617.

Associations of metabolic parameters and ethanol consumption with messenger RNA
expression of clock genes in healthy men.

Ando H(1), Ushijima K, Kumazaki M, Eto T, Takamura T, Irie S, Kaneko S, Fujimura 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology, School of
Medicine, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Japan.

Recent studies suggest that the impairment of circadian clock function causes
various pathological conditions, such as obesity, diabetes, and alcoholism, and
an altered mRNA expression of clock genes was found under these conditions.
However, it remains to be determined whether clock gene expression varies
depending on metabolic conditions even in healthy people. To address this issue, 
we investigated the associations of metabolic parameters and alcohol consumption 
with mRNA expression of clock genes (CLOCK, BMAL1, PER1, PER2, and PER3) in
peripheral blood cells obtained from 29 healthy non-obese elderly men (age 51-78 
yrs) who adhered to a regular sleep-wake routine, through a single time-of-day
venous blood sampling at approximately 09:00 h. There were significant
correlations between (1) waist circumference and mRNA level of PER1 (r =-0.43),
(2) plasma glucose concentration and PER2 (r =-0.50), (3) ethanol consumption and
BMAL1 (r =-0.43), and (4) serum gamma-GTP concentration (a sensitive marker of
alcohol consumption) and PER2 (r =-0.40). These results suggest mRNA expression
of clock genes is associated with obesity, glucose tolerance, and ethanol
consumption even in healthy people.

PMID: 20205566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Reproduction. 2010 Jun;139(6):1077-90. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0523. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

Reproductive biology of female Bmal1 null mice.

Boden MJ(1), Varcoe TJ, Voultsios A, Kennaway DJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, Robinson Institute, Research
Centre for Reproductive Health, Discipline of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia.

The light/dark cycle and suprachiasmatic nucleus rhythmicity are known to have
important influences on reproductive function of rodents. We studied reproductive
function in female heterozygous and homozygous brain and muscle ARNT-like protein
1 (Bmal1, also known as Arntl) null mice, which lack central and peripheral
cellular rhythms. Heterozygous Bmal1 mice developed normally and were fertile,
with apparent normal pregnancy progression and litter size, although postnatal
mortality up to weaning was high (1.1-1.3/litter). The genotype distribution was 
skewed with both heterozygous and null genotypes underrepresented (1.0:1.7:0.7;
P<0.05), suggesting loss of a single Bmal1 allele may impact on postnatal
survival. Homozygous Bmal1 null mice were 30% lighter at weaning, and while they 
grew at a similar rate to the wild-type mice, they never achieved a comparable
body weight. They had delayed vaginal opening (4 days), disrupted estrus
cyclicity, and reduced ovarian weight (30%). Bmal1 null mice had a 40% reduction 
in ductal length and a 43% reduction in ductal branches in the mammary gland.
Surprisingly, the Bmal1 mice ovulated, but progesterone synthesis was reduced in 
conjunction with altered corpora lutea formation. Pregnancy failed prior to
implantation presumably due to poor embryo development. While Bmal1 null ovaries 
responded to pregnant mare serum gonadotropin/human chorionic gonadotropin
stimulation, ovulation rate was reduced, and the fertilized oocytes progressed
poorly to blastocysts and failed to implant. The loss of Bmal1 gene expression
resulted in a loss of rhythmicity of many genes in the ovary and downregulation
of Star. In conclusion, it is clear that the profound infertility of Bmal1 null
mice is multifactorial.

PMID: 20200203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 17;5(2):e9273. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009273.

Cryptochrome genes are highly expressed in the ovary of the African clawed frog, 
Xenopus tropicalis.

Kubo Y(1), Takeuchi T, Okano K, Okano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering and Bioscience, Graduate School of
Advanced Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan.

Cryptochromes (CRYs) are flavoproteins sharing high homology with photolyases.
Some of them have function(s) including transcription regulation in the circadian
clock oscillation, blue-light photoreception for resetting the clock phase, and
light-dependent magnetoreception. Vertebrates retain multiple sets of CRY or
CRY-related genes, but their functions are yet unclear especially in the lower
vertebrates. Although CRYs and the other circadian clock components have been
extensively studied in the higher vertebrates such as mice, only a few model
species have been studied in the lower vertebrates. In this study, we identified 
two CRYs, XtCRY1 and XtCRY2 in Xenopus tropicalis, an excellent experimental
model species. Examination of tissue specificity of their mRNA expression by
real-time PCR analysis revealed that both the XtCRYs showed extremely high mRNA
expression levels in the ovary. The mRNA levels in the ovary were about 28-fold
(XtCry1) and 48-fold (XtCry2) higher than levels in the next abundant tissues,
the retina and kidney, respectively. For the functional analysis of the XtCRYs,
we cloned circadian positive regulator XtCLOCK and XtBMAL1, and found circadian
enhancer E-box in the upstream of XtPer1 gene. XtCLOCK and XtBMAL1 exhibited
strong transactivation from the XtPer1 E-box element, and both the XtCRYs
inhibited the XtCLOCK:XtBMAL1-mediated transactivation, thereby suggesting this
element to drive the circadian transcription. These results revealed a conserved 
main feedback loop in the X. tropicalis circadian clockwork and imply a possible 
physiological importance of CRYs in the ovarian functions such as synthesis of
steroid hormones and/or control of estrus cycles via the transcription
regulation.

PMCID: PMC2822860
PMID: 20174658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 18;5(2):e9259. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009259.

Systematic analysis of circadian genes in a population-based sample reveals
association of TIMELESS with depression and sleep disturbance.

Utge SJ(1), Soronen P, Loukola A, Kronholm E, Ollila HM, Pirkola S,
Porkka-Heiskanen T, Partonen T, Paunio T.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Genomics Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare,
Helsinki, Finland.

Disturbances in the circadian pacemaker system are commonly found in individuals 
with depression and sleep-related problems. We hypothesized that some of the
canonical circadian clock genes would be associated with depression accompanied
by signs of disturbed sleep, early morning awakening, or daytime fatigue. We
tested this hypothesis in a population-based sample of the Health 2000 dataset
from Finland, including 384 depressed individuals and 1270 controls, all with
detailed information on sleep and daytime vigilance, and analyzed this set of
individuals with regard to 113 single-nucleotide polymorphisms of 18 genes of the
circadian system. We found significant association between TIMELESS variants and 
depression with fatigue (D+FAT+) (rs7486220: pointwise P = 0.000099, OR = 1.66;
corrected empirical P for the model of D+FAT+ = 0.0056; haplotype 'C-A-A-C' of
rs2291739-rs2291738-rs7486220-rs1082214: P = 0.0000075, OR = 1.72) in females,
and association to depression with early morning awakening (D+EMA+) (rs1082214:
pointwise P = 0.0009, OR = 2.70; corrected empirical P = 0.0374 for the model
D+EMA+; haplotype 'G-T' of rs7486220 and rs1082214: P = 0.0001, OR = 3.01) in
males. There was significant interaction of gender and TIMELESS (for example with
rs1082214, P = 0.000023 to D+EMA+ and P = 0.005 to D+FAT+). We obtained supported
evidence for involvement of TIMELESS in sleeping problems in an independent set
of control individuals with seasonal changes in mood, sleep duration, energy
level and social activity in females (P = 0.036, = 0.123 for rs1082214) and with 
early morning awakening or fatigue in males (P = 0.038 and P = 0.0016,
respectively, for rs1082214). There was also some evidence of interaction between
TIMELESS and PER1 in females to D+FAT+ as well as between TIMELESS and ARNTL,
RORA or NR1D1 in males to D+EMA+. These findings support a connection between
circadian genes and gender-dependent depression and defective sleep regulation.

PMCID: PMC2823770
PMID: 20174623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Circ Res. 2010 Feb 19;106(3):447-62. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.208355.

Circadian rhythms and metabolic syndrome: from experimental genetics to human
disease.

Maury E(1), Ramsey KM, Bass J.

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University, Pancoe-ENH Pavilion Room 4405, 2200 Campus Dr,
Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

The incidence of the metabolic syndrome represents a spectrum of disorders that
continue to increase across the industrialized world. Both genetic and
environmental factors contribute to metabolic syndrome and recent evidence has
emerged to suggest that alterations in circadian systems and sleep participate in
the pathogenesis of the disease. In this review, we highlight studies at the
intersection of clinical medicine and experimental genetics that pinpoint how
perturbations of the internal clock system, and sleep, constitute risk factors
for disorders including obesity, diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease,
thrombosis and even inflammation. An exciting aspect of the field has been the
integration of behavioral and physiological approaches, and the emerging insight 
into both neural and peripheral tissues in disease pathogenesis. Consideration of
the cell and molecular links between disorders of circadian rhythms and sleep
with metabolic syndrome has begun to open new opportunities for mechanism-based
therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC2837358
PMID: 20167942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cell Cycle. 2010 Mar 1;9(5):853-4. Epub 2010 Mar 30.

PERpetual motion of the circadian negative feedback loop.

Lee C(1), Chen R, Lee HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Florida State
University, Tallahassee, FL, USA. Choogon.lee@med.fsu.edu

PMID: 20160481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Endocrinology. 2010 Apr;151(4):1570-80. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-1133. Epub 2010 Feb 
16.

Protein malnutrition during pregnancy in C57BL/6J mice results in offspring with 
altered circadian physiology before obesity.

Sutton GM(1), Centanni AV, Butler AA.

Author information: 
(1)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, 6400 Perkins Road, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana 70808, USA. suttongm@pbrc.edu

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2010 Apr;151(4):1385-6.

The mechanisms linking intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) with adulthood
obesity and diabetes are unclear. These studies investigated energy homeostasis
in 8- and 20-wk-old male and female mice subjected to protein deficiency in
utero. Pregnant C57BL/6J female mice were fed a protein-deficient diet (6%
protein). Undernourished offspring (UO) and controls (CO) were cross-fostered to 
lactating dams fed a 20% control diet. The 24-h profiles of energy expenditure,
feeding behavior, physical activity, and whole-body substrate preference was
assessed using 8-wk UO and CO weaned onto control diet. Blood chemistries,
glucose tolerance, and expression of genes involved in hepatic lipid and glucose 
metabolism were analyzed in 8- and 20-wk-old CO and UO fed control or a high-fat 
diet. UO exhibited IUGR with catch-up growth at 8 wk of age and increased
severity of diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance by 20 wk of age.
Therefore, fetal malnutrition in the C57BL/6J mouse increases sensitivity to
diet-induced obesity. Abnormal daily rhythms in food intake and metabolism,
increased lipogenesis, and inflammation preceded obesity in the UO group.
Arrhythmic expression of circadian oscillator genes was evident in brain, liver, 
and muscle of UO at 8 and 20 wk of age. Expression of the clock-associated
nuclear receptor and transcription repressor Rev-erbalpha was reduced in liver
and muscle of UO. Altered circadian physiology may be symptomatic of the
metabolic dysregulation associated with IUGR, and altered feeding behavior and
substrate metabolism may contribute to the obese phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2850243
PMID: 20160133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Genes Dev. 2010 Feb 15;24(4):345-57. doi: 10.1101/gad.564110.

The mammalian clock component PERIOD2 coordinates circadian output by interaction
with nuclear receptors.

Schmutz I(1), Ripperger JA, Baeriswyl-Aebischer S, Albrecht U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Unit of Biochemistry, University of Fribourg, 1700
Fribourg, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2010 Apr 15;24(8):741-7.

Mammalian circadian clocks provide a temporal framework to synchronize biological
functions. To obtain robust rhythms with a periodicity of about a day, these
clocks use molecular oscillators consisting of two interlocked feedback loops.
The core loop generates rhythms by transcriptional repression via the Period
(PER) and Cryptochrome (CRY) proteins, whereas the stabilizing loop establishes
roughly antiphasic rhythms via nuclear receptors. Nuclear receptors also govern
many pathways that affect metabolism and physiology. Here we show that the core
loop component PER2 can coordinate circadian output with the circadian
oscillator. PER2 interacts with nuclear receptors including PPARalpha and
REV-ERBalpha and serves as a coregulator of nuclear receptor-mediated
transcription. Consequently, PER2 is rhythmically bound at the promoters of
nuclear receptor target genes in vivo. In this way, the circadian oscillator can 
modulate the expression of nuclear receptor target genes like Bmal1, Hnf1alpha,
and Glucose-6-phosphatase. The concept that PER2 may propagate clock information 
to metabolic pathways via nuclear receptors adds an important facet to the
clock-dependent regulation of biological networks.

PMCID: PMC2816734
PMID: 20159955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Aging (Albany NY). 2009 Dec 30;1(12):979-87.

Antioxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine ameliorates symptoms of premature aging
associated with the deficiency of the circadian protein BMAL1.

Kondratov RV(1), Vykhovanets O, Kondratova AA, Antoch MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, Cleveland
State University, Cleveland, OH 44115, USA. r_kondratov@csu.ohio.edu

Deficiency of the circadian clock protein BMAL1 leads to premature aging and
increased levels of reactivate oxygen species in several tissues of mice. In
order to investigate the role of oxidative stress in accelerated aging and
development of age-related pathologies, we continuously administered the
antioxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine toBmal1-deficient mice through their entire
lifespan by supplementing drinking water. We found that the life long treatment
with antioxidant significantly increased average and maximal lifespan and reduced
the rate of age-dependent weight loss and development of cataracts. At the same
time, it had no effect on time of onset and severity of other age-related
pathologies characteristic of Bmal1-/- mice, such as joint ossification, reduced 
hair regrowth and sarcopenia. We conclude that chronic oxidative stress affects
longevity and contributes to the development of at least some age-associated
pathology, although ROS-independent mechanisms may also play a role. Our
bioinformatics analysis identified the presence of a conservative E box element
in the promoter regions of several genes encoding major antioxidant enzymes. We
speculate that BMAL1 controls antioxidant defense by regulating the expression of
major antioxidant enzymes.

PMCID: PMC2815755
PMID: 20157581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Curr Biol. 2010 Feb 23;20(4):316-21. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.12.034. Epub 2010
Feb 11.

Circadian clock gene Bmal1 is not essential; functional replacement with its
paralog, Bmal2.

Shi S(1), Hida A, McGuinness OP, Wasserman DH, Yamazaki S, Johnson CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235,
USA.

Most of the central circadian clock genes in the mouse exist as paralog pairs
(Per1 and Per2, Cry1 and Cry2, Clock and Npas2) in which each gene of the pair
must be knocked out to confer arrhythmicity. The only exception to this pattern
is Bmal1 (also known as Mop3), the single knockout of which confers
arrhythmicity, despite the presence of its paralog, Bmal2 (also known as Mop9).
The knockout of Bmal1 also has significant effects on longevity, metabolism, etc.
These results have led to the conclusion that Bmal1 is a singularly essential
clock gene and that Bmal2 has a minimal role in the clock system. In contrast, we
find that expression of Bmal2 from a constitutively expressed promoter can rescue
the clock and metabolic phenotypes of Bmal1-knockout mice, including rhythmic
locomotor activity, rhythmic metabolism, low body weight, and enhanced fat
deposition. Combined with the data of Bunger and colleagues, who reported that
knockout of Bmal1 downregulates Bmal2, we conclude that Bmal1 and Bmal2 form a
circadian paralog pair that is functionally redundant and that, in the mouse,
Bmal2 is regulated by Bmal1 such that knockout of Bmal1 alone results in a
functionally double Bmal1 and Bmal2 knockout. Therefore, the role(s) of Bmal2 may
be more important than has been appreciated heretofore.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2907674
PMID: 20153195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Med Sci (Paris). 2010 Jan;26(1):49-56. doi: 10.1051/medsci/201026149.

[Circadian rhythms and systems biology].

[Article in French]

Goldbeter A(1), Gérard C, Leloup JC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de chronobiologie théorique, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Campus
Plaine, CP 231, B-1050 Bruxelles, Belgique. agoldbet@ulb.ac.be

Cellular rhythms represent a field of choice for studies in system biology. The
examples of circadian rhythms and of the cell cycle show how the experimental and
modeling approaches contribute to clarify the conditions in which periodic
behavior spontaneously arises in regulatory networks at the cellular level.
Circadian rhythms originate from intertwined positive and negative feedback loops
controlling the expression of several clock genes. Models can be used to address 
the dynamical bases of physiological disorders related to dysfunctions of the
mammalian circadian clock. The cell cycle is driven by a network of
cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks). Modeled in the form of four modules coupled
through multiple regulatory interactions, the Cdk network operates in an
oscillatory manner in the presence of sufficient amounts of growth factor. For
circadian rhythms and the cell cycle, as for other recently observed cellular
rhythms, periodic behavior represents an emergent property of biological systems 
related to their regulatory structure.

PMID: 20132775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Toxicol Sci. 2010 May;115(1):98-108. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq022. Epub 2010 Jan
27.

Disruption of CLOCK-BMAL1 transcriptional activity is responsible for aryl
hydrocarbon receptor-mediated regulation of Period1 gene.

Xu CX(1), Krager SL, Liao DF, Tischkau SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine,
Springfield, Illinois 62974-9629, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a period-aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
transporter-simple minded domain transcription factor that shares structural
similarity with circadian clock genes and readily interacts with components of
the molecular clock. Activation of AhR by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) alters behavioral circadian rhythms and represses the Period1 (Per1) gene 
in murine hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Per1 expression is driven by
circadian locomotor activity cycles kaput-brain muscle ARNT-like
(CLOCK-BMAL1)-dependent activation of Eboxes in the Per1 promoter. We
hypothesized that the effects of AhR activation on the circadian clock are
mediated by disruption of CLOCK-BMAL1 function and subsequent Per1 gene
suppression. Effects of AhR activation on rhythmic Per1 transcripts were examined
in livers of mice after treatment with the AhR agonist, TCDD; the molecular
mechanisms of Per1 repression by AhR were determined in hepatoma cells using TCDD
and beta-napthoflavone as AhR activators. This study reports, for the first time,
that AhR activation by TCDD alters the Per1 rhythm in the mouse liver and that
Per1 gene suppression depends upon the presence of AhR. Furthermore, AhR
interaction with BMAL1 attenuates CLOCK-BMAL1 activity and decreases CLOCK
binding at Ebox1 and Ebox3 in the Per1 promoter. Taken together, these data
suggest that AhR activation represses Per1 through disrupting CLOCK-BMAL1
activity, producing dysregulation of rhythmic Per1 gene expression. These data
define alteration of the Per1 rhythm as novel signaling events downstream of AhR 
activation. Downregulation of Per1 could contribute to metabolic disease, cancer,
and other detrimental effects resulting from exposure to certain environmental
pollutants.

PMCID: PMC2855348
PMID: 20106950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Steroids. 2010 Mar;75(3):203-12. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2010.01.007. Epub 2010
Jan 22.

Influence of the estrous cycle on clock gene expression in reproductive tissues: 
effects of fluctuating ovarian steroid hormone levels.

Nakamura TJ(1), Sellix MT, Kudo T, Nakao N, Yoshimura T, Ebihara S, Colwell CS,
Block GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90024, USA. tnakamura@mednet.ucla.edu

Circadian rhythms in physiology and behavior are known to be influenced by the
estrous cycle in female rodents. The clock genes responsible for the generation
of circadian oscillations are widely expressed both within the central nervous
system and peripheral tissues, including those that comprise the reproductive
system. To address whether the estrous cycle affects rhythms of clock gene
expression in peripheral tissues, we first examined rhythms of clock gene
expression (Per1, Per2, Bmal1) in reproductive (uterus, ovary) and
non-reproductive (liver) tissues of cycling rats using quantitative real-time PCR
(in vivo) and luminescent recording methods to measure circadian rhythms of PER2 
expression in tissue explant cultures from cycling PER2::LUCIFERASE (PER2::LUC)
knockin mice (ex vivo). We found significant estrous variations of clock gene
expression in all three tissues in vivo, and in the uterus ex vivo. We also found
that exogenous application of estrogen and progesterone altered rhythms of
PER2::LUC expression in the uterus. In addition, we measured the effects of
ovarian steroids on clock gene expression in a human breast cancer cell line
(MCF-7 cells) as a model for endocrine cells that contain both the steroid
hormone receptors and clock genes. We found that progesterone, but not estrogen, 
acutely up-regulated Per1, Per2, and Bmal1 expression in MCF-7 cells. Together,
our findings demonstrate that the timing of the circadian clock in reproductive
tissues is influenced by the estrous cycle and suggest that fluctuating steroid
hormone levels may be responsible, in part, through direct effects on the timing 
of clock gene expression.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2835461
PMID: 20096720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2010 Feb;17(1):73-83. Epub 2010 Jan 21.

A promoter in the novel exon of hPPARgamma directs the circadian expression of
PPARgamma.

Takahashi S(1), Inoue I, Nakajima Y, Seo M, Nakano T, Yang F, Kumagai M, Komoda
T, Awata T, Ikeda M, Katayama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Saitama Medical University, Saitama 
350-0495, Japan. se_takah@saitama-med.ac.jp

AIM: PPARgamma (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma) is a member of 
the nuclear receptor superfamily of ligand-activated transcription factors that
regulate the expression of genes associated with lipid metabolism. Herein, we
show that expression levels of the novel PPARgamma transcript exhibit circadian
oscillation. To study the mechanisms controlling PPARgamma expression, a novel
PPARgamma gene promoter was cloned and characterized.
METHODS: We analyzed the novel PPARgamma promoter by luciferase reporter assays
and gel shift analysis.
RESULTS: Surprisingly, it was not an intron but rather the novel first exon of
PPARgamma that was found to have functional minimal promoter activity. Luciferase
reporter assays and gel shift assays revealed that the novel first exon is
essential for novel PPARgamma promoter activation and that DBP (albumin gene
D-site binding protein) and E4BP4 (E4 promoter A binding protein 4) bind directly
to D-sites in the novel first exon.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that the PAR-bZIP (bZIP, basic leucine
zipper) family and E4BP4 are the main regulatory factors involved in oscillation 
of novel PPARgamma expression. This regulatory mechanism clearly differs from
that of the circadian expression of PPARalpha.

PMID: 20093779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Science. 2010 Jan 22;327(5964):463-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1180067.

Identification of RACK1 and protein kinase Calpha as integral components of the
mammalian circadian clock.

Robles MS(1), Boyault C, Knutti D, Padmanabhan K, Weitz CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

At the core of the mammalian circadian clock is a negative feedback loop in which
the dimeric transcription factor CLOCK-BMAL1 drives processes that in turn
suppress its transcriptional activity. To gain insight into the mechanisms of
circadian feedback, we analyzed mouse protein complexes containing BMAL1.
Receptor for activated C kinase-1 (RACK1) and protein kinase C-alpha (PKCalpha)
were recruited in a circadian manner into a nuclear BMAL1 complex during the
negative feedback phase of the cycle. Overexpression of RACK1 and PKCalpha
suppressed CLOCK-BMAL1 transcriptional activity, and RACK1 stimulated
phosphorylation of BMAL1 by PKCalpha in vitro. Depletion of endogenous RACK1 or
PKCalpha from fibroblasts shortened the circadian period, demonstrating that both
molecules function in the clock oscillatory mechanism. Thus, the classical PKC
signaling pathway is not limited to relaying external stimuli but is rhythmically
activated by internal processes, forming an integral part of the circadian
feedback loop.

PMID: 20093473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010 May;35(6):1279-89. doi: 10.1038/npp.2009.230. Epub 
2010 Jan 13.

Differential association of circadian genes with mood disorders: CRY1 and NPAS2
are associated with unipolar major depression and CLOCK and VIP with bipolar
disorder.

Soria V(1), Martínez-Amorós E, Escaramís G, Valero J, Pérez-Egea R, García C,
Gutiérrez-Zotes A, Puigdemont D, Bayés M, Crespo JM, Martorell L, Vilella E,
Labad A, Vallejo J, Pérez V, Menchón JM, Estivill X, Gratacòs M, Urretavizcaya M.

Author information: 
(1)CIBERSAM (CIBER en Salud Mental), Mood Disorders Clinical and Research Unit,
Psychiatry Department, Bellvitge University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.

Disruptions in circadian rhythms have been described in mood disorders (MD), but 
the involvement of genetic variation in genes pertaining to the molecular
circadian machinery in the susceptibility to MD has not been conclusively
determined. We examined 209 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) covering 19
circadian genes (ADCYAP1, ARNTL, ARNTL2, BHLHB2, BHLHB3, CLOCK, CRY1, CRY2,
CSNK1E, DBP, NPAS2, NR1D1, PER1, PER2, PER3, RORA, TIMELESS, VIP, and VIPR2) in a
sample of 534 MD patients (335 with unipolar major mood depression (MDD) and 199 
with bipolar disorder (BD)) and 440 community-based screened controls. Nominally,
statistically significant associations were found in 15 circadian genes. The
gene-wide test, corrected for the number of SNPs analyzed in each gene,
identified significant associations in CRY1 (rs2287161), NPAS2 (rs11123857), and 
VIPR2 (rs885861) genes with the combined MD sample. In the MDD subsample, the
same SNPs in CRY1 and NPAS2 of the combined sample remained associated, whereas
in the BD subsample CLOCK (rs10462028) and VIP (rs17083008) were specifically
associated. The association with an SNP located 3' near CRY1 gene in MDD remained
statistically significant after permutation correction at experiment level
(p=0.007). Significant additive effects were found between the SNPs that were
statistically significant at the gene-wide level. We also found evidence of
associations between two-marker haplotypes in CRY1 and NPAS2 genes and MD. Our
data support the contribution of the circadian system to the genetic
susceptibility to MD and suggest that different circadian genes may have specific
effects on MD polarity.

PMCID: PMC3055337
PMID: 20072116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010 Apr;298(4):R959-71. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00561.2009. Epub 2010 Jan 13.

Different mechanisms of adjustment to a change of the photoperiod in the
suprachiasmatic and liver circadian clocks.

Sosniyenko S(1), Parkanová D, Illnerová H, Sládek M, Sumová A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Videnska
1083, 14220 Prague 4, Czech Republic.

Changes in photoperiod modulate the circadian system, affecting the function of
the central clock located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the
hypothalamus. The aim of the present study was to elucidate the dynamics of
adjustment to a change of a long photoperiod with 18 h of light to a short
photoperiod with 6 h of light of clock gene expression rhythms in the mouse SCN
and in the peripheral clock in the liver, as well as of the locomotor activity
rhythm. Three, five, and thirteen days after the photoperiod change, daily
profiles of Per1, Per2, and Rev-erbalpha expression in the rostral, middle, and
caudal parts of the SCN and of Per2 and Rev-erbalpha in the liver were determined
by in situ hybridization and real-time RT-PCR, respectively. The clock gene
expression rhythms in the different SCN regions, desynchronized under the long
photoperiod, attained synchrony gradually following the transition from long to
short days, mostly via advancing the expression decline. The photoperiodic
modulation of the SCN was due not only to the degree of synchrony among the SCN
regions but also to different waveforms of the rhythms in the individual SCN
parts. The locomotor activity rhythm adjusted gradually to short days by
advancing the activity onset, and the liver rhythms adjusted by advancing the
Rev-erbalpha expression rise and Per2 decline. These data indicate different
mechanisms of adjustment to a change of the photoperiod in the central SCN clock 
and the peripheral liver clock.

PMID: 20071612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Genes Cells. 2010 Feb;15(2):111-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01371.x. Epub
2010 Jan 13.

Transcriptional repressor TIEG1 regulates Bmal1 gene through GC box and controls 
circadian clockwork.

Hirota T(1), Kon N, Itagaki T, Hoshina N, Okano T, Fukada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The circadian clock controls daily rhythms in many physiologic processes, and the
clock oscillation is regulated by external time cues such as light, temperature, 
and feeding. In mammals, the transcriptional regulation of clock genes underlies 
the clock oscillatory mechanism, which is operative even in cultured fibroblasts.
We previously demonstrated that glucose treatment of rat-1 fibroblasts evokes
circadian expression of clock genes with a rapid induction of Tieg1 transcript
encoding a transcriptional repressor. Here, we found diurnal variation of both
Tieg1 mRNA and nuclear TIEG1 protein levels in the mouse liver with their peaks
at day/night transition and midnight, respectively. In vitro experiments showed
that TIEG1 bound to Bmal1 gene promoter and repressed its transcriptional
activity through two juxtaposed GC boxes near the transcription initiation site. 
The GC box/TIEG1-mediated repression of Bmal1 promoter was additive to
RORE-dependent repression by REV-ERBalpha, a well-known repressor of Bmal1 gene. 
In cell-based real-time assay, siRNA-mediated knock-down of TIEG1 caused period
shortening of cellular bioluminescence rhythms driven by Bmal1-luciferase and
Per2-luciferase reporters. These findings highlight an active role of TIEG1 in
the normal clock oscillation and GC box-mediated regulation of Bmal1
transcription.

PMID: 20070857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cell Cycle. 2010 Jan 15;9(2):231-2. Epub 2010 Jan 15.

Circadian rhythms: phosphorylating the CLOCK.

Baker CL, Dunlap JC.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2009 Dec 15;8(24):4138-46.

PMCID: PMC3675321
PMID: 20061797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2010;50:187-214. doi:
10.1146/annurev.pharmtox.010909.105621.

The role of clock genes in pharmacology.

Paschos GK(1), Baggs JE, Hogenesch JB, FitzGerald GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute for Translational Medicine and
Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, 19104,
USA. gpaschos@mail.med.upenn.edu

The physiology of a wide variety of organisms is organized according to periodic 
environmental changes imposed by the earth's rotation. This way, a large number
of physiological processes present diurnal rhythms regulated by an internal
timing system called the circadian clock. As part of the rhythmicity in
physiology, drug efficacy and toxicity can vary with time. Studies over the past 
four decades present diurnal oscillations in drug absorption, distribution,
metabolism, and excretion. On the other hand, diurnal variations in the
availability and sensitivity of drug targets have been correlated with
time-dependent changes in drug effectiveness. In this review, we provide evidence
supporting the regulation of drug kinetics and dynamics by the circadian clock.
We also use the examples of hypertension and cancer to show current achievements 
and challenges in chronopharmacology.

PMID: 20055702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010 Mar;298(3):R635-41. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00578.2009. Epub 2010 Jan 6.

Regulation of circadian gene expression in the kidney by light and food cues in
rats.

Wu T(1), Ni Y, Dong Y, Xu J, Song X, Kato H, Fu Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of Biological and Environmental Engineering, Zhejiang Univ. of
Technology, Zhaohui, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310032, China.

Although studies involving the circadian response to external time cues indicate 
that the peripheral clocks are dominated mainly by food cues, whether and how
changes in the light and food cues affect the circadian rhythm of the renal clock
is still largely unknown. In the present study, we found that the circadian
phases of Bmal1, Clock, Cry1, Per1, and Per2 were altered differently by the
stimuli of food and light cues in the kidney. After the individual reversal of
the light-dark (LD) cycle for 7 days, Per1 displayed a 4-h phase delay, whereas
the peak phases of Bmal1, Clock, Cry1 and Per2 almost remained the same as those 
in the control condition. With regard to the feeding-induced circadian resetting 
of the renal clock, we found that the resetting processes of clock genes could
not be completed within 7 days, suggesting a weak synchronization effect of the
food cue on the renal circadian clock. Moreover, the reentrainment of the clock
genes was greatly enhanced after the reversal of both the feeding schedule and
the LD cycle. Noticeably, the phases of Per1 and Clock were shifted most rapidly 
by 12 h within 3 days after the simultaneous reversal of the feeding schedule and
the LD cycle, whereas their peak phases were only shifted by 4 h and 8 h,
respectively, on the 7th day after the individual reversal of the feeding
schedule. Thus Per1 and Clock may play important roles in the light-induced
resetting of the circadian rhythms in the kidney.

PMID: 20053963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 1;5(1):e8561. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008561.

Regulation of BMAL1 protein stability and circadian function by GSK3beta-mediated
phosphorylation.

Sahar S(1), Zocchi L, Kinoshita C, Borrelli E, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California Irvine, Irvine,
California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Circadian rhythms govern a large array of physiological and metabolic
functions. To achieve plasticity in circadian regulation, proteins constituting
the molecular clock machinery undergo various post-translational modifications
(PTMs), which influence their activity and intracellular localization. The core
clock protein BMAL1 undergoes several PTMs. Here we report that the Akt-GSK3beta 
signaling pathway regulates BMAL1 protein stability and activity.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: GSK3beta phosphorylates BMAL1 specifically on Ser 17 and Thr 
21 and primes it for ubiquitylation. In the absence of GSK3beta-mediated
phosphorylation, BMAL1 becomes stabilized and BMAL1 dependent circadian gene
expression is dampened. Dopamine D2 receptor mediated signaling, known to control
the Akt-GSK3beta pathway, influences BMAL1 stability and in vivo circadian gene
expression in striatal neurons.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings uncover a previously unknown mechanism of circadian
clock control. The GSK3beta kinase phosphorylates BMAL1, an event that controls
the stability of the protein and the amplitude of circadian oscillation. BMAL1
phosphorylation appears to be an important regulatory step in maintaining the
robustness of the circadian clock.

PMCID: PMC2797305
PMID: 20049328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Circ Res. 2010 Feb 19;106(3):546-50. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.209346. Epub
2009 Dec 10.

Short communication: ischemia/reperfusion tolerance is time-of-day-dependent:
mediation by the cardiomyocyte circadian clock.

Durgan DJ(1), Pulinilkunnil T, Villegas-Montoya C, Garvey ME, Frangogiannis NG,
Michael LH, Chow CW, Dyck JR, Young ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, 703 19th St S, ZRB 308, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2010 Feb 19;106(3):430-1.

RATIONALE: Cardiovascular physiology and pathophysiology vary dramatically over
the course of the day. For example, myocardial infarction onset occurs with
greater incidence during the early morning hours in humans. However, whether
myocardial infarction tolerance exhibits a time-of-day dependence is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether time of day of an ischemic insult influences
clinically relevant outcomes in mice.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Wild-type mice were subjected to ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) 
(45 minutes of ischemia followed by 1 day or 1 month of reperfusion) at distinct 
times of the day, using the closed-chest left anterior descending coronary artery
occlusion model. Following 1 day of reperfusion, hearts subjected to ischemia at 
the sleep-to-wake transition (zeitgeber time [ZT]12) resulted in 3.5-fold
increases in infarct size compared to hearts subjected to ischemia at the
wake-to-sleep transition (ZT0). Following 1 month of reperfusion, prior ischemic 
event at ZT12 versus ZT0 resulted in significantly greater infarct volume,
fibrosis, and adverse remodeling, as well as greater depression of contractile
function. Genetic ablation of the cardiomyocyte circadian clock (termed
cardiomyocyte-specific circadian clock mutant [CCM] mice) attenuated/abolished
time-of-day variations in I/R outcomes observed in wild-type hearts.
Investigation of Akt and glycogen synthase kinase-3beta in wild-type and CCM
hearts identified these kinases as potential mechanistic ties between the
cardiomyocyte circadian clock and I/R tolerance.
CONCLUSIONS: We expose a profound time-of-day dependence for I/R tolerance, which
is mediated by the cardiomyocyte circadian clock. Further understanding of I/R
tolerance rhythms will potentially provide novel insight regarding the etiology
and treatment of ischemia-induced cardiac dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC3021132
PMID: 20007913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cell Cycle. 2009 Dec 15;8(24):4138-46. Epub 2009 Dec 8.

A serine cluster mediates BMAL1-dependent CLOCK phosphorylation and degradation.

Spengler ML(1), Kuropatwinski KK, Schumer M, Antoch MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Jan 15;9(2):231-2.

The circadian clock regulates biological processes from gene expression to
organism behavior in a precise, sustained rhythm that is generated at the
unicellular level by coordinated function of interlocked transcriptional feedback
loops and post-translational modifications of core clock proteins. CLOCK
phosphorylation regulates transcriptional activity, cellular localization and
stability; however little is known about the specific residues and enzymes
involved. We have identified a conserved cluster of serines that include, Ser431,
which is a prerequisite phosphorylation site for the generation of BMAL dependent
phospho-primed CLOCK and for the potential GSK-3 phosphorylation at Ser427.
Mutational analysis and protein stability assays indicate that this serine
cluster functions as a phospho-degron. Through the use of GSK-3
activators/inhibitors and kinase assays, we demonstrate that GSK-3beta regulates 
the degron site by increasing CLOCK phosphorylation/degradation, which correlates
with an increase in the expression of CLOCK responsive promoters. Stabilization
of phospho-deficient CLOCK delays the phase of oscillation in synchronized
fibroblasts. This investigation begins the characterization of a complex
phospho-regulatory site that controls the activity and degradation of CLOCK, a
core transcription factor that is essential for circadian behavior.

PMCID: PMC4073639
PMID: 19946213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Cancer Res. 2009 Dec 15;69(24):9315-22. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0648.

Testing the circadian gene hypothesis in prostate cancer: a population-based
case-control study.

Zhu Y(1), Stevens RG, Hoffman AE, Fitzgerald LM, Kwon EM, Ostrander EA, Davis S, 
Zheng T, Stanford JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA. yong.zhu@yale.edu

Circadian genes are responsible for maintaining the ancient adaptation of a
24-hour circadian rhythm and influence a variety of cancer-related biological
pathways, including the regulation of sex hormone levels. However, few studies
have been undertaken to investigate the role of circadian genes in the
development of prostate cancer, the most common cancer type among men (excluding 
nonmelanoma skin cancer). The current genetic association study tested the
circadian gene hypothesis in relation to prostate cancer by genotyping a total of
41 tagging and amino acid-altering single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in 10
circadian-related genes in a population-based case-control study of Caucasian men
(n = 1,308 cases and 1,266 controls). Our results showed that at least one SNP in
nine core circadian genes (rs885747 and rs2289591 in PER1; rs7602358 in PER2;
rs1012477 in PER3; rs1534891 in CSNK1E; rs12315175 in CRY1; rs2292912 in CRY2;
rs7950226 in ARNTL; rs11133373 in CLOCK; and rs1369481, rs895521, and rs17024926 
in NPAS2) was significantly associated with susceptibility to prostate cancer
(either overall risk or risk of aggressive disease), and the risk estimate for
four SNPs in three genes (rs885747 and rs2289591 in PER1, rs1012477 in PER3, and 
rs11133373 in CLOCK) varied by disease aggressiveness. Further analyses of
haplotypes were consistent with these genotyping results. Findings from this
candidate gene association study support the hypothesis of a link between genetic
variants in circadian genes and prostate cancer risk, warranting further
confirmation and mechanistic investigation of circadian biomarkers in prostate
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2955869
PMID: 19934327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Physiol Res. 2010;59(4):581-90. Epub 2009 Nov 20.

Resetting process of peripheral circadian gene expression after the combined
reversal of feeding schedule and light/dark cycle via a 24-h light period
transition in rats.

Wu T(1), Ni Y, Zhuge F, Fu Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of Biological and Environmental Engineering, Zhejiang University of
Technology, Zhejiang, China.

To investigate the effect of light cue on the resetting of the peripheral clocks,
we examined the resetting processes of clock genes (Per1, Per2, Bmal1, Cry1,
Dec1, and Rev-erbalpha) in the liver and heart of rats after the feeding and
light-dark (LD) reversal via a 24-h light period transition. The liver clock was 
reset quickly within 3 days, while the heart clock needed a longer time course of
5-7 days to be completely re-entrained. Moreover, the re-entrainment of Per1 and 
Per2 in the liver clock was more rapid than that of the other four clock genes,
suggesting the important role of these two clock genes in initiating the
circadian resetting of the hepatic clock. However, the resetting rates of these
two clock genes were as similar as the others in the heart clock. Therefore, the 
resetting mechanisms underlining these two peripheral clocks may be totally
distinct. Furthermore, the re-entrainment of the liver and heart clocks were
relatively lengthened after the feeding and LD reversal via a light period
transition compared to a dark period transition, suggesting a simultaneous shift 
of feeding schedule and the LD cycle may facilitate the circadian resetting in
rats.

PMID: 19929146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Brain. 2009 Nov 19;2:34. doi: 10.1186/1756-6606-2-34.

CBP/p300 is a cell type-specific modulator of CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated transcription.

Hosoda H(1), Kato K, Asano H, Ito M, Kato H, Iwamoto T, Suzuki A, Masushige S,
Kida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, Faculty of Applied Bioscience, Tokyo University of
Agriculture, 1-1-1 Sakuragaoka, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-8502, Japan.
hhosoda@juntendo.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have demonstrated tissue-specific regulation of the 
rhythm of circadian transcription, suggesting that transcription factor complex
CLOCK/BMAL1, essential for maintaining circadian rhythm, regulates transcription 
in a tissue-specific manner. To further elucidate the mechanism of the cell
type-specific regulation of transcription by CLOCK/BMAL1 at the molecular level, 
we investigated roles of CBP/p300 and tissue-specific cofactors in
CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated transcription.
RESULTS: As shown previously, CBP/p300 stimulates CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated
transcription in COS-1 cells. However, CBP/p300 repressed CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated
transcription in NIH3T3 cells and knockdown of CBP or p300 expression by siRNA
enhanced this transcription. Studies using GAL4-fusion proteins suggested that
CBP represses CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated transcription by targeting CLOCK. We further
investigated mechanisms of this cell type-specific modulation of
CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated transcription by CBP by examining roles of co-repressor
HDAC3 and co-activator pCAF, which are highly expressed in NIH3T3 and COS cells, 
respectively. CBP repressed CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated transcription in COS-1 cells
when HDAC3 was overexpressed, but activated it in NIH3T3 cells when pCAF was
overexpressed. CBP forms a complex with CLOCK by interacting with HDAC3 or pCAF; 
however, direct interaction of CBP with CLOCK was not observed.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate possible mechanisms by which CBP/p300
tissue-specifically acts cooperatively with pCAF and HDAC3 either as a
co-activator or co-repressor, respectively, for CLOCK/BMAL1.

PMCID: PMC2785803
PMID: 19922678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Eur J Neurol. 2010 Apr;17(4):519-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2009.02852.x. Epub 
2009 Nov 18.

New Vistas on Parkinson's disease.

Willis GL, Armstrong SM.

Comment on
    Eur J Neurol. 2010 Apr;17(4):550-4.

PMID: 19922453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Cell. 2009 Nov 13;36(3):417-30. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.10.012.

Rhythmic PER abundance defines a critical nodal point for negative feedback
within the circadian clock mechanism.

Chen R(1), Schirmer A, Lee Y, Lee H, Kumar V, Yoo SH, Takahashi JS, Lee C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Florida State
University, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA.

Circadian rhythms in mammals are generated by a transcriptional negative feedback
loop that is driven primarily by oscillations of PER and CRY, which inhibit their
own transcriptional activators, CLOCK and BMAL1. Current models posit that CRY is
the dominant repressor, while PER may play an accessory role. In this study,
however, constitutive expression of PER, and not CRY1, severely disrupted the
clock in fibroblasts and liver. Furthermore, constitutive expression of PER2 in
the brain and SCN of transgenic mice caused a complete loss of behavioral
circadian rhythms in a conditional and reversible manner. These results
demonstrate that rhythmic levels of PER2, rather than CRY1, are critical for
circadian oscillations in cells and in the intact organism. Our biochemical
evidence supports an elegant mechanism for the disparity: PER2 directly and
rhythmically binds to CLOCK:BMAL1, while CRY only interacts indirectly; PER2
bridges CRY and CLOCK:BMAL1 to drive the circadian negative feedback loop.

PMCID: PMC3625733
PMID: 19917250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Eur J Neurol. 2010 Apr;17(4):550-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2009.02848.x. Epub
2009 Nov 12.

Expression of clock genes Per1 and Bmal1 in total leukocytes in health and
Parkinson's disease.

Cai Y(1), Liu S, Sothern RB, Xu S, Chan P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology, Capital Medical University, Key
Laboratory of Neurodegenerative Diseases Capital Medical University, Ministry of 
Education, Beijing, China.

Comment in
    Eur J Neurol. 2010 Apr;17(4):519-20.

BACKGROUND: There is a growing number of clinical studies that revealed a variety
of behavioral and physiological desynchronies in patients with Parkinson's
disease (PD). However, these desynchronies have not been defined at the molecular
level.
METHODS: Using real-time RT-PCR assay, we analyzed the expression profiles of two
principle clock genes, PER1 and BMAL1, in total leukocytes for 12 h during the
evening, overnight and morning in subjects with PD and age/sex-matched healthy
controls.
RESULTS: A difference in the expression pattern of BMAL1 but not PER1 was
apparent during the dark span, where the relative abundance of BMAL1 was
significantly lower in PD patients versus control subjects at 21:00, 00:00 and
06:00 h. Furthermore, expression levels of BMAL1 in PD patients correlated with
their United Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale score at 06:00, 09:00 h, and with
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index score at 06:00 h.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that a peripheral molecular clock, as reflected
in the dampened expression of the clock genes BMAL1 in total leukocytes, is
altered in PD patients. In addition, the relative BMAL1 levels correlate
positively with PD severity, which could provide a molecular basis to help
monitor disease progression and response to investigational drugs.

PMID: 19912323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Aug;1804(8):1584-90. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2009.10.024. Epub 2009 Nov 6.

"Clocks" in the NAD World: NAD as a metabolic oscillator for the regulation of
metabolism and aging.

Imai S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Imaishin@wustl.edu

SIR2 (silent information regulator 2) proteins, now called "sirtuins," are an
evolutionarily conserved family of NAD-dependent protein
deacetylases/ADP-ribosyltransferases. Sirtuins have recently attracted major
attention in the field of aging research, and it has been demonstrated that SIR2 
and its orthologs regulate aging and longevity in yeast, worms, and flies. In
mammals, the SIR2 ortholog SIRT1 coordinates important metabolic responses to
nutritional availability in multiple tissues. Most recently, it has been
demonstrated that SIRT1 regulates the amplitude and the duration of circadian
gene expression through the interaction and the deacetylation of key circadian
clock regulators, such as BMAL1 and PER2. More strikingly, we and others have
discovered a novel circadian clock feedback loop in which both the rate-limiting 
enzyme in mammalian NAD biosynthesis, nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase
(NAMPT), and NAD levels display circadian oscillations and modulate
CLOCK:BMAL1-mediated circadian transcriptional regulation through SIRT1,
demonstrating a new function of NAD as a "metabolic oscillator." These findings
reveal a novel system dynamics of a recently proposed systemic regulatory network
regulated by NAMPT-mediated NAD biosynthesis and SIRT1, namely, the NAD World. In
the light of this concept, a new connection between physiological rhythmicity,
metabolism, and aging will be discussed.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2886185
PMID: 19897060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2010 Jan;65(1):9-13. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glp160.
Epub 2009 Oct 27.

Influence of age on clock gene expression in peripheral blood cells of healthy
women.

Ando H(1), Ushijima K, Kumazaki M, Takamura T, Yokota N, Saito T, Irie S, Kaneko 
S, Fujimura A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Jichi Medical University,
3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

Recent studies have demonstrated a close relationship between circadian clock
function and the development of obesity and various age-related diseases. In this
study, we investigated whether messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of clock genes are
associated with age, body mass index, blood pressures, fasting plasma glucose, or
shift work. Peripheral blood cells were obtained from 70 healthy women, including
25 shift workers, at approximately 9:00 AM. Transcript levels of clock genes
(CLOCK, BMAL1, PER1, and PER3) were determined by real-time quantitative
polymerase chain reaction. Stepwise multiple regression analysis demonstrated
that BMAL1 mRNA levels were correlated only with age (beta = -.50, p < .001). In 
contrast, PER3 levels were correlated with fasting plasma glucose (beta = -.29, p
< .05) and shift work (beta = .31, p < .05). These results suggest that increased
age, glucose intolerance, and irregular hours independently affect the
intracellular clock in humans.

PMID: 19861640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cancer Res. 2009 Nov 1;69(21):8447-54. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0551. Epub
2009 Oct 27.

Epigenetic inactivation of the circadian clock gene BMAL1 in hematologic
malignancies.

Taniguchi H(1), Fernández AF, Setién F, Ropero S, Ballestar E, Villanueva A,
Yamamoto H, Imai K, Shinomura Y, Esteller M.

Author information: 
(1)Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute, l'Hospitalet, and Institució Catalana
de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Catalonia, Spain.

Disruption of circadian rhythms, daily oscillations in biological processes that 
are regulated by an endogenous clock, has been linked to tumorigenesis. Normal
and malignant tissues often show asynchronies in cell proliferation and metabolic
rhythms. Cancer chronotherapy takes biological time into account to improve the
therapy. However, alterations of the circadian clock machinery genes have rarely 
been reported in human cancer. Herein, we show that the BMAL1 gene, a core
component of the circadian clock, is transcriptionally silenced by promoter CpG
island hypermethylation in hematologic malignancies, such as diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma and acute lymphocytic and myeloid leukemias. We also describe how BMAL1 
reintroduction in hypermethylated leukemia/lymphoma cells causes growth
inhibition in colony assays and nude mice, whereas BMAL1 depletion by RNA
interference in unmethylated cells enhances tumor growth. We also show that BMAL1
epigenetic inactivation impairs the characteristic circadian clock expression
pattern of genes such as C-MYC, catalase, and p300 in association with a loss of 
BMAL1 occupancy in their respective promoters. Furthermore, the DNA
hypermethylation-associated loss of BMAL1 also prevents the recruitment of its
natural partner, the CLOCK protein, to their common targets, further enhancing
the perturbed circadian rhythm of the malignant cells. These findings suggest
that BMAL1 epigenetic inactivation contributes to the development of hematologic 
malignancies by disrupting the cellular circadian clock.

PMID: 19861541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Anesthesiology. 2009 Nov;111(5):1052-64. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e3181bbcb2a.

Age-associated changes in cardiac gene expression after preconditioning.

Liu L(1), Zhu J, Glass PS, Brink PR, Rampil IJ, Rebecchi MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Stony Brook University School of Medicine, New
York 11794, USA. lixliu@notes.cc.sunysb.edu

BACKGROUND: Cardiac protection afforded by ischemic preconditioning (IPC) and
anesthetic preconditioning (APC) are significantly reduced in the senescent
myocardium. The authors hypothesized that age would differentially modulate gene 
expression induced by IPC and APC in vivo.
METHODS: Affymetrix RAT EXON ST 1.0 gene chips (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) were
used to explore the transcriptional response to IPC and APC in Fisher 344 male
rats (young, 3-5 months, and old, 20-24 months, respectively). Both cohorts,
young and old, were divided into three groups: (1) sham control, (2) IPC, and (3)
APC. After a total of 90 min, the heart was removed, and the total RNA and
protein were extracted.
RESULTS: Thirty-one transcripts were increased in the young animals subjected to 
IPC, particularly transcriptional regulators (Atf3, Egr-1, Btg2, Egr2), cytokines
(interleukin 6, CSF1, Myd88), chemokines (Cxcl10, Ccl2, Ccl7), regulators of
growth and inflammation (Reg3g, Hamp), remodeling and cell adhesion migration
(Cyr61, Tfpi2, Timp1), regulators of apoptosis/cell death (Birc3, Arntl, Hamp,
Phlda1), and cell cycle control/DNA repairs (Rrad, Gadd45b, Gadd45g). In
contrast, only one transcript increased (Atf3) in the old animals subjected to
IPC. No changes in gene expression were found in the young or the old animals
subjected to APC.
CONCLUSIONS: Early-phase IPC and APC induced different genomic responses. The
absence of detectable changes associated with early-phase APC suggests a
posttranscriptional or posttranslational mechanism. The absence of a genomic
response in the senescent myocardium (except for IPC-induced Atf3) could underlie
the failure of IPC to provide any cardiac protective benefit to older animals.

PMID: 19858872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Bipolar Disord. 2009 Nov;11(7):701-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5618.2009.00756.x.

Association study of 21 circadian genes with bipolar I disorder, schizoaffective 
disorder, and schizophrenia.

Mansour HA(1), Talkowski ME, Wood J, Chowdari KV, McClain L, Prasad K, Montrose
D, Fagiolini A, Friedman ES, Allen MH, Bowden CL, Calabrese J, El-Mallakh RS,
Escamilla M, Faraone SV, Fossey MD, Gyulai L, Loftis JM, Hauser P, Ketter TA,
Marangell LB, Miklowitz DJ, Nierenberg AA, Patel J, Sachs GS, Sklar P, Smoller
JW, Laird N, Keshavan M, Thase ME, Axelson D, Birmaher B, Lewis D, Monk T, Frank 
E, Kupfer DJ, Devlin B, Nimgaonkar VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Western
Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Comment in
    Bipolar Disord. 2010 Dec;12(8):875-6.

OBJECTIVE: Published studies suggest associations between circadian gene
polymorphisms and bipolar I disorder (BPI), as well as schizoaffective disorder
(SZA) and schizophrenia (SZ). The results are plausible, based on prior studies
of circadian abnormalities. As replications have not been attempted uniformly, we
evaluated representative, common polymorphisms in all three disorders.
METHODS: We assayed 276 publicly available 'tag' single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) at 21 circadian genes among 523 patients with BPI, 527 patients with
SZ/SZA, and 477 screened adult controls. Detected associations were evaluated in 
relation to two published genome-wide association studies (GWAS).
RESULTS: Using gene-based tests, suggestive associations were noted between EGR3 
and BPI (p = 0.017), and between NPAS2 and SZ/SZA (p = 0.034). Three SNPs were
associated with both sets of disorders (NPAS2: rs13025524 and rs11123857; RORB:
rs10491929; p < 0.05). None of the associations remained significant following
corrections for multiple comparisons. Approximately 15% of the analyzed SNPs
overlapped with an independent study that conducted GWAS for BPI; suggestive
overlap between the GWAS analyses and ours was noted at ARNTL.
CONCLUSIONS: Several suggestive, novel associations were detected with circadian 
genes and BPI and SZ/SZA, but the present analyses do not support associations
with common polymorphisms that confer risk with odds ratios greater than 1.5.
Additional analyses using adequately powered samples are warranted to further
evaluate these results.

PMCID: PMC3401899
PMID: 19839995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Science. 2009 Oct 16;326(5951):437-40. doi: 10.1126/science.1172156.

AMPK regulates the circadian clock by cryptochrome phosphorylation and
degradation.

Lamia KA(1), Sachdeva UM, DiTacchio L, Williams EC, Alvarez JG, Egan DF, Vasquez 
DS, Juguilon H, Panda S, Shaw RJ, Thompson CB, Evans RM.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, the Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2009 Oct 16;326(5951):378-9.

Circadian clocks coordinate behavioral and physiological processes with daily
light-dark cycles by driving rhythmic transcription of thousands of genes.
Whereas the master clock in the brain is set by light, pacemakers in peripheral
organs, such as the liver, are reset by food availability, although the setting, 
or "entrainment," mechanisms remain mysterious. Studying mouse fibroblasts, we
demonstrated that the nutrient-responsive adenosine monophosphate-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) phosphorylates and destabilizes the clock component
cryptochrome 1 (CRY1). In mouse livers, AMPK activity and nuclear localization
were rhythmic and inversely correlated with CRY1 nuclear protein abundance.
Stimulation of AMPK destabilized cryptochromes and altered circadian rhythms, and
mice in which the AMPK pathway was genetically disrupted showed alterations in
peripheral clocks. Thus, phosphorylation by AMPK enables cryptochrome to
transduce nutrient signals to circadian clocks in mammalian peripheral organs.

PMCID: PMC2819106
PMID: 19833968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 9;4(10):e7395. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007395.

Molecular signatures reveal circadian clocks may orchestrate the homeorhetic
response to lactation.

Casey T(1), Patel O, Dykema K, Dover H, Furge K, Plaut K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
Michigan, USA. ande1218@msu.edu

Genes associated with lactation evolved more slowly than other genes in the
mammalian genome. Higher conservation of milk and mammary genes suggest that
species variation in milk composition is due in part to the environment and that 
we must look deeper into the genome for regulation of lactation. At the onset of 
lactation, metabolic changes are coordinated among multiple tissues through the
endocrine system to accommodate the increased demand for nutrients and energy
while allowing the animal to remain in homeostasis. This process is known as
homeorhesis. Homeorhetic adaptation to lactation has been extensively described; 
however how these adaptations are orchestrated among multiple tissues remains
elusive. To develop a clearer picture of how gene expression is coordinated
across multiple tissues during the pregnancy to lactation transition, total RNA
was isolated from mammary, liver and adipose tissues collected from rat dams (n =
5) on day 20 of pregnancy and day 1 of lactation, and gene expression was
measured using Affymetrix GeneChips. Two types of gene expression analysis were
performed. Genes that were differentially expressed between days within a tissue 
were identified with linear regression, and univariate regression was used to
identify genes commonly up-regulated and down-regulated across all tissues. Gene 
set enrichment analysis showed genes commonly up regulated among the three
tissues enriched gene ontologies primary metabolic processes, macromolecular
complex assembly and negative regulation of apoptosis ontologies. Genes enriched 
in transcription regulator activity showed the common up regulation of 2 core
molecular clock genes, ARNTL and CLOCK. Commonly down regulated genes enriched
Rhythmic process and included: NR1D1, DBP, BHLHB2, OPN4, and HTR7, which regulate
intracellular circadian rhythms. Changes in mammary, liver and adipose
transcriptomes at the onset of lactation illustrate the complexity of homeorhetic
adaptations and suggest that these changes are coordinated through molecular
clocks.

PMCID: PMC2754660
PMID: 19816599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Neuroendocrinology. 2010;91(1):110-20. doi: 10.1159/000243163. Epub 2009 Sep 26.

In vivo circadian rhythms in gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons.

Hickok JR(1), Tischkau SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Ill 62794-9629, USA.

Although it is generally accepted that the circadian clock provides a timing
signal for the luteinizing hormone (LH) surge, mechanistic explanations of this
phenomenon remain underexplored. It is known, for example, that circadian
locomotor output cycles kaput (clock) mutant mice have severely dampened LH
surges, but whether this phenotype derives from a loss of circadian rhythmicity
in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) or altered circadian function in
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons has not been resolved. GnRH neurons
can be stimulated to cycle with a circadian period in vitro and disruption of
that cycle disturbs secretion of the GnRH decapeptide. We show that both period-2
(PER2) and brain muscle Arnt-like-1 (BMAL1) proteins cycle with a circadian
period in the GnRH population in vivo. PER2 and BMAL1 expression both oscillate
with a 24-hour period, with PER2 peaking during the night and BMAL1 peaking
during the day. The population, however, is not as homogeneous as other
oscillatory tissues with only about 50% of the population sharing peak expression
levels of BMAL1 at zeitgeber time 4 (ZT4) and PER2 at ZT16. Further, a light
pulse that induced a phase delay in the activity rhythm of the GnRH-eGFP mice
caused a similar delay in peak expression levels of BMAL1 and PER2. These studies
provide direct evidence for a functional circadian clock in native GnRH neurons
with a phase that closely follows that of the SCN.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19786732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Neurosci. 2009 Sep 23;29(38):11717-9. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3820-09.2009.

Ryanodine receptors are regulated by the circadian clock and implicated in gating
photic entrainment.

Gamble KL(1), Ciarleglio CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee
37235-1634, USA. karen.gamble@vanderbilt.edu

Comment on
    J Neurosci. 2009 May 13;29(19):6114-23.

PMCID: PMC3652594
PMID: 19776257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Nov 20;517(3):397-404. doi: 10.1002/cne.22165.

Localization of circadian clock protein BMAL1 in the photoperiodic signal
transduction machinery in Japanese quail.

Ikegami K(1), Katou Y, Higashi K, Yoshimura T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Physiology, Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, 
Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.

The circadian clock is a fundamental property of living organisms and is involved
in seasonal (photoperiodic) time measurement. Among vertebrates, birds have
multiple circadian pacemakers in the eye, the pineal gland, and the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), and have highly sophisticated photoperiodic
mechanisms. However, because the removal of these circadian pacemakers fails to
abolish the photoperiodic response, the existence of another "photoperiodic
clock" has been suggested. Recent studies have revealed that the mediobasal
hypothalamus (MBH) and the adjacent pars tuberalis (PT) of the pituitary gland
constitute key components of the photoperiodic signal transduction machinery. In 
the present study, we generated a polyclonal antibody against the chicken
circadian clock protein BMAL1 to examine BMAL1 distribution in the Japanese quail
brain by using immunohistochemistry. BMAL1-like immunoreactivity (lir) was
confirmed in the pineal gland and the medial SCN, which are critical circadian
pacemakers. We also observed strong immunoreactivity in the MBH, including the
ependymal cells (ECs), the infundibular nucleus (IN), the median eminence (ME),
and the adjacent PT. Furthermore, semiquantitative analysis suggested that
BMAL1-lir shows daily fluctuation in these regions. It is possible that circadian
clocks in the photoperiodic signal transduction machinery such as the PT and the 
EC may be involved in the regulation of photoperiodism.

PMID: 19760601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Biol Rhythms. 2009 Oct;24(5):368-78. doi: 10.1177/0748730409343761.

Genetic analysis of ectopic circadian clock induction in Drosophila.

Kilman VL(1), Allada R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Physiology, Center for Sleep and Circadian
Biology, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.
v-kilman@northwestern.edu

Cell-autonomous feedback loops underlie the molecular oscillations that define
circadian clocks. In Drosophila the transcription factor Clk activates multiple
clock components of feedback loops many of which feed back and regulate Clk
expression or activity. Previously the authors evoked similar molecular
oscillations in putatively naïve neurons in Drosophila by ectopic expression of a
single gene, Clk, suggesting a master regulator function. Using molecular
oscillations of the core clock component PERIOD (PER), the authors observed
dramatic and widespread molecular oscillations throughout the brain in flies
expressing ectopic Clk. Consistent with the master regulator hypothesis, they
found that Clk is uniquely capable of inducing ectopic clocks as ectopic
induction of other clock components fails to induce circadian rhythms. Clk also
induces oscillations even when expression is adult restricted, suggesting that
ectopic clocks can even be induced in differentiated cells. However, if transgene
expression is discontinued, PER expression disappears, indicating that Clk must
be continually active to sustain ectopic clock function. In some cases
Clk-mediated PER induction was observed without apparent synchronous cycling,
perhaps due to desynchronization of rhythms between clocks or truly cell
autonomous arrhythmic PER expression, indicating that additional factors may be
necessary for coherent rhythms in cells ectopically expressing Clk. To determine 
minimal requirements for circadian clock induction by Clk, the authors determined
the genetic requirements of ectopic clocks. No ectopic clocks are induced in
mutants of Clk's heterodimeric partner cyc. In addition, noncycling PER is
observed when ectopic Clk is induced in a cryb mutant background. While other
factors may contribute, these results indicate that persistent Clock induction is
uniquely capable of broadly inducing ectopic rhythms even in adults, consistent
with a special role at the top of a clock gene hierarchy.

PMCID: PMC3033121
PMID: 19755582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2010 Mar 5;153B(2):570-81. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.31021.

PER2 variantion is associated with depression vulnerability.

Lavebratt C(1), Sjöholm LK, Partonen T, Schalling M, Forsell Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet at
Karolinska University Hospital Solna, Stockholm, Sweden.
catharina.lavebratt@ki.se

The circadian clock is driven by transcription-translation feedback loops and
regulates rhythms that approximate the 24-hr day-night cycle or light-dark
transitions. Disruptions of the circadian rhythms are common in depressed
patients, expressed for example as sleep disturbances. Genetic variations in core
circadian genes may in part explain these abnormalities. To investigate whether
genetic variation in core circadian genes associates with vulnerability to
depression, we genotyped 18 genes in a Swedish population based sample. Genetic
variations indicative of association with depression, or with winter depression
in our previous study, were tested for association to depression in a second
Swedish depression-control sample set. PER2 genetic variation was associated with
depression vulnerability, and this genetic risk did not seem to require exposure 
to potential sleep disturbance factors such as negative life event or financial
strain that are known to increase the risk for depression. Polymorphisms in the
circadian genes NPAS2, ARNTL, and RORA were also suggested to contribute to
depression vulnerability. The findings we report for PER2, ARNTL, and RORA are
supported by at least two of the three sample sets. In conclusion, genetic
variation in PER2 is associated with depression vulnerability a Swedish
population-based sample. More studies are needed to determine if this is the case
also for NPAS2, ARNTL, and RORA.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19693801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS Genet. 2009 Jul;5(7):e1000573. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000573. Epub 2009 
Jul 24.

Circadian clock genes contribute to the regulation of hair follicle cycling.

Lin KK(1), Kumar V, Geyfman M, Chudova D, Ihler AT, Smyth P, Paus R, Takahashi
JS, Andersen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California Irvine, Irvine,
California, United States of America.

Hair follicles undergo recurrent cycling of controlled growth (anagen),
regression (catagen), and relative quiescence (telogen) with a defined
periodicity. Taking a genomics approach to study gene expression during
synchronized mouse hair follicle cycling, we discovered that, in addition to
circadian fluctuation, CLOCK-regulated genes are also modulated in phase with the
hair growth cycle. During telogen and early anagen, circadian clock genes are
prominently expressed in the secondary hair germ, which contains precursor cells 
for the growing follicle. Analysis of Clock and Bmal1 mutant mice reveals a delay
in anagen progression, and the secondary hair germ cells show decreased levels of
phosphorylated Rb and lack mitotic cells, suggesting that circadian clock genes
regulate anagen progression via their effect on the cell cycle. Consistent with a
block at the G1 phase of the cell cycle, we show a significant upregulation of
p21 in Bmal1 mutant skin. While circadian clock mechanisms have been implicated
in a variety of diurnal biological processes, our findings indicate that
circadian clock genes may be utilized to modulate the progression of non-diurnal 
cyclic processes.

PMCID: PMC2705795
PMID: 19629164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 11;284(37):25149-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.040758. Epub
2009 Jul 15.

Preferential inhibition of BMAL2-CLOCK activity by PER2 reemphasizes its negative
role and a positive role of BMAL2 in the circadian transcription.

Sasaki M(1), Yoshitane H, Du NH, Okano T, Fukada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-Ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

In the molecular oscillatory mechanism governing circadian rhythms, positive
regulators, including CLOCK and BMAL1, transactivate Per and Cry genes through
E-box elements, and translated PER and CRY proteins negatively regulate their own
transactivation. Like BMAL1, its paralog BMAL2 dimerizes with CLOCK to activate
the E-box-dependent transcription, but the role of BMAL2 in the circadian
clockwork is still elusive. Here we characterized BMAL2 function in NIH3T3 cells 
and found that the cellular rhythms monitored by Bmal1 promoter-driven
bioluminescence signals were blunted by RNA interference-mediated suppression of 
Bmal2 as well as that of Bmal1. Transcription assays with a 2.1-kb mPer1 promoter
revealed that CRY2 inhibited the transactivation mediated by BMAL1-CLOCK more
strongly than that by BMAL2-CLOCK. In contrast, PER2 showed a stronger inhibitory
effect on BMAL2-CLOCK than on BMAL1-CLOCK. The molecular link between BMAL2 and
PER2 was further strengthened by the fact that PER2 exhibited a greater affinity 
for BMAL2 than for BMAL1 in co-immunoprecipitation experiments. These results
indicate a functional partnership between BMAL2 and PER2 and reemphasize the
negative role of PER2 in the circadian transcription. As a broad spectrum
function, BMAL2-CLOCK activated transcription from a variety of SV40-driven
reporters harboring various E/E'-box-containing sequences present in the upstream
regions of clock and clock-controlled genes. Importantly, the efficiencies of
BMAL2-CLOCK-mediated transactivation relative to that achieved by BMAL1-CLOCK
were dependent heavily on the E-box-containing sequences, supporting
distinguishable roles of the two BMALs. Collectively, it is strongly suggested
that BMAL2 plays an active role in the circadian transcription.

PMCID: PMC2757218
PMID: 19605937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Biol Pharm Bull. 2009 Jul;32(7):1183-7.

CLOCK:BMAL-independent circadian oscillation of zebrafish Cryptochrome1a gene.

Miyamura N(1), Hirayama J, Sawanobori K, Tamaru T, Asaoka Y, Honda R, Yamamoto T,
Uno H, Takamatsu K, Nishina H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University.

In the vertebrate circadian feedback loop, CLOCK:BMAL heterodimers induce the
expression of Cry genes. The CRY proteins in turn inhibit CLOCK:BMAL-mediated
transcription closing the negative feedback loop. Four CRYs, which all inhibit
CLOCK:BMAL-mediated transcription, exist in zebrafish. Although these zebrafish
Crys (zCry1a, 1b, 2a, and 2b) show a circadian pattern of expression, previous
studies have indicated that the circadian oscillation of zCry1a could be
CLOCK:BMAL-independent. Here we show that abrogation of CLOCK:BMAL-dependent
transcription in zebrafish cells by the dominant negative zCLOCK3-DeltaC does not
affect the circadian oscillation of zCry1a. Moreover, we provide several lines of
evidence indicating that the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
signaling cascade modulates the circadian expression of zCry1a gene in constant
darkness. Taken together, our data strongly support the notion that circadian
oscillation of zCry1a is CLOCK:BMAL-independent and further indicate that
mechanisms involving non-canonical clock genes could contribute to the circadian 
expression of zCry1a gene in a cell autonomous manner.

PMID: 19571382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jul 7;106(27):11107-12. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0904837106. Epub 2009 Jun 19.

A model of the cell-autonomous mammalian circadian clock.

Mirsky HP(1), Liu AC, Welsh DK, Kay SA, Doyle FJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Biomolecular Science and Engineering, University of California,
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9611, USA.

Circadian timekeeping by intracellular molecular clocks is evident widely in
prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The clockworks are driven by autoregulatory feedback 
loops that lead to oscillating levels of components whose maxima are in fixed
phase relationships with one another. These phase relationships are the key
metric characterizing the operation of the clocks. In this study, we built a
mathematical model from the regulatory structure of the intracellular circadian
clock in mice and identified its parameters using an iterative evolutionary
strategy, with minimum cost achieved through conformance to phase separations
seen in cell-autonomous oscillators. The model was evaluated against the
experimentally observed cell-autonomous circadian phenotypes of gene knockouts,
particularly retention of rhythmicity and changes in expression level of
molecular clock components. These tests reveal excellent de novo predictive
ability of the model. Furthermore, sensitivity analysis shows that these knockout
phenotypes are robust to parameter perturbation.

PMCID: PMC2699375
PMID: 19549830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Eur J Neurosci. 2009 Apr;29(7):1447-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2009.06697.x.
Epub 2009 Mar 23.

The dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus is not necessary for food-anticipatory
circadian rhythms of behavior, temperature or clock gene expression in mice.

Moriya T(1), Aida R, Kudo T, Akiyama M, Doi M, Hayasaka N, Nakahata N,
Mistlberger R, Okamura H, Shibata S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Brain Science, School of Human Sciences, Waseda
University, Tokorozawa, Saitama, Japan.

Circadian rhythms in mammals are regulated by a light-entrainable circadian
pacemaker in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus and food-entrainable
oscillators located elsewhere in the brain and body. The dorsomedial hypothalamic
nucleus (DMH) has been proposed to be the site of oscillators driving
food-anticipatory circadian rhythms, but this is controversial. To further
evaluate this hypothesis, we measured clock gene, temperature and activity
rhythms in intact and DMH-ablated mice. A single 4-h midday feeding after an
overnight fast induced mPer1 and mPer2 mRNA expression in the DMH, arcuate
nucleus, nucleus of the solitary tract and area postrema, and reset daily rhythms
of mPer1, mPer2 and mBMAL1 in the DMH, arcuate and neocortex. These rhythms
persisted during 2 days of food deprivation after 12 days of scheduled daytime
feeding. Acute induction of DMH mPer1 and mPer2 was N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptor-dependent, whereas rhythmic expression after 6 days of restricted
feeding was not. Thermal DMH lesions did not affect acute induction or rhythmic
expression of clock genes in other brain regions in response to scheduled daytime
feeding. DMH lesions attenuated mean daily activity levels and nocturnality but
did not affect food-anticipatory rhythms of activity and body temperature in
either light-dark or constant darkness. These results confirm that the DMH and
other brain regions express circadian clock gene rhythms sensitive to daytime
feeding schedules, but do not support the hypothesis that DMH oscillations drive 
food-anticipatory behavioral or temperature rhythms.

PMID: 19519629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2009 Sep;117(8):438-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1216376.
Epub 2009 May 26.

Down regulation of angiotensin II receptor AT1 expression in the pancreas of
diabetic rat.

Monosíková J(1), Zeman M, Veselá A, Herichová I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Physiology and Ethology, Faculty of Natural Sciences,
Comenius University Bratislava, Mlynská Dolina B-2, Bratislava, Slovak Republic.

The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) is altered in diabetes. The aim of our study
was to investigate whether streptozotocin-induced diabetes was associated with a 
change in angiotensin II receptors AT (1) and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
mRNA expression in the pancreas in vivo. Rats were synchronized to a 12:12
light:dark cycle. Pancreas tissue sampling was done at 4 h intervals during 24 h 
cycle starting 17 days after streptozotocin (STZ) treatment (65 mg/kg of body
weight). Real time PCR showed decreased expression of ACE in the pancreas after
STZ administration during the dark phase. Expression of AT (1) was decreased in
diabetic rats during the light and the dark phase of 24 h cycle. Our data show
down-regulation of the pancreatic RAS during early stage of diabetes development.

J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart.New York.

PMID: 19472100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Biol Rhythms. 2009 Jun;24(3):193-202. doi: 10.1177/0748730409334748.

A phylogenetically conserved DNA damage response resets the circadian clock.

Gamsby JJ(1), Loros JJ, Dunlap JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire
03755-3844, USA.

The mammalian circadian clock influences the timing of many biological processes 
such as the sleep/wake cycle, metabolism, and cell division. Environmental cues
such as light exposure can influence the timing of this system through the
posttranslational modification of key components of the core molecular
oscillator. We have previously shown that DNA damage can reset the circadian
clock in a time-of-day-dependent manner in the filamentous fungus Neurospora
crassa through the modulation of negative regulator FREQUENCY levels by PRD-4
(homologue of mammalian Chk2). We show that DNA damage, generated with either the
radiomimetic drug methyl methane sulfonate or UV irradiation, in mouse embryonic 
fibroblasts isolated from PER2::LUC transgenic mice or in the NIH3T3 cell line,
elicits similar responses. In addition to induction of phase advances, DNA damage
caused a decrease in luciferase signal in PER2::LUC mouse embryonic fibroblast
cells that is indicative of PER2 degradation. Finally, we show that the activity 
of the BMAL1 promoter is enhanced during DNA damage. These findings provide
further evidence that the DNA damage-mediated response of the clock is conserved 
from lower eukaryotes to mammals.

PMCID: PMC3683861
PMID: 19465696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Genome Res. 2009 Aug;19(8):1497-505. doi: 10.1101/gr.090480.108. Epub 2009 May
22.

Automated identification of conserved synteny after whole-genome duplication.

Catchen JM(1), Conery JS, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Oregon, Eugene, 
Oregon 97403, USA.

An important objective for inferring the evolutionary history of gene families is
the determination of orthologies and paralogies. Lineage-specific paralog loss
following whole-genome duplication events can cause anciently related homologs to
appear in some assays as orthologs. Conserved synteny-the tendency of neighboring
genes to retain their relative positions and orders on chromosomes over
evolutionary time-can help resolve such errors. Several previous studies examined
genome-wide syntenic conservation to infer the contents of ancestral chromosomes 
and provided insights into the architecture of ancestral genomes, but did not
provide methods or tools applicable to the study of the evolution of individual
gene families. We developed an automated system to identify conserved syntenic
regions in a primary genome using as outgroup a genome that diverged from the
investigated lineage before a whole-genome duplication event. The product of this
automated analysis, the Synteny Database, allows a user to examine fully or
partially assembled genomes. The Synteny Database is optimized for the
investigation of individual gene families in multiple lineages and can detect
chromosomal inversions and translocations as well as ohnologs (paralogs derived
by whole-genome duplication) gone missing. To demonstrate the utility of the
system, we present a case study of gene family evolution, investigating the ARNTL
gene family in the genomes of Ciona intestinalis, amphioxus, zebrafish, and
human.

PMCID: PMC2720179
PMID: 19465509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Eur J Neurosci. 2009 May;29(10):2009-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2009.06742.x.
Epub 2009 May 9.

Endogenous rhythmicity of Bmal1 and Rev-erb alpha in the hamster pineal gland is 
not driven by norepinephrine.

Wongchitrat P(1), Felder-Schmittbuhl MP, Phansuwan-Pujito P, Pévet P, Simonneaux 
V.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Neurobiologie des Rythmes, Institut des Neurosciences
Cellulaires et Intégratives, UPR CNRS 3212, Université de Strasbourg, 5 rue
Blaise Pascal, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France.

Pineal melatonin is synthesized with daily and seasonal rhythms following the
hypothalamic clock-driven release of norepinephrine (NE). The pineal gland of
rats and mice, like the biological clock, expresses a number of clock genes.
However, the role of pineal clock elements in pineal physiology is still unknown.
We examined the expression and regulation of several clock genes (Per1, Cry2,
Bmal1 and Rev-erb alpha) under different lighting conditions or following
adrenergic treatments in the Syrian hamster, a seasonal rodent. We found that
Per1 and Cry2 genes were similarly regulated by the nocturnal release of NE:
levels of Per1 and Cry2 mRNA displayed a nocturnal increase that was maintained
after 2 days in constant darkness (DD) but abolished after 2 days under constant 
light (LL), a condition that suppresses endogenous NE release, or after an early 
night administration of the adrenergic antagonist propranolol. In contrast, Bmal1
and Rev-erb alpha exhibited a different pattern of expression and regulation.
mRNA levels of both clock genes displayed a marked daily variation, maintained in
DD, with higher values at midday for Bmal1 and at day/night transition for
Rev-erb alpha. Remarkably, the daily variation of both Bmal1 and Rev-erb alpha
mRNA was maintained in LL conditions and was not affected by propranolol. This
study confirms the daily regulation of Per1 and Cry2 gene expression by NE in the
pineal gland of rodents and shows for the first time that a second set of clock
genes, Bmal1 and Rev-erb alpha are expressed with a circadian rhythm independent 
of the hypothalamic clock-driven noradrenergic signal.

PMID: 19453634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Encephale. 2009 Jan;35 Suppl 2:S53-7. doi: 10.1016/S0013-7006(09)75534-4.

[Biology and genetics of circadian rhythm].

[Article in French]

Bellivier F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pôle de Psychiatrie, CHU de Créteil, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Université Paris
12. rank.bellivier@inserm.fr

In recent decades our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms of biological clocks 
has grown expontentially. This has helped to guide the choice of genes studied to
explain inter-individual variations seen in circadian rhythms. In recent years
analysis of circadian rhythms has advanced considerably into the study of
pathological circadian rhythms in human beings. These findings, combined with
those obtained from studying mice whose circadian genes have been rendered
incapable, have revealed the role of genetic factors in circadian rhythms. This
literature review presents an overview of these findings. Beyond our
understanding of the functioning of these biological clocks, this knowledge will 
be extremely useful to analyse genetic factors involved in morbid conditions
involving circadian rhythm abnormalities.

PMID: 19268171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Mol Evol. 2009 Jun;68(6):629-40. doi: 10.1007/s00239-009-9232-7. Epub 2009 May 
16.

Phylogenetic analysis of zebrafish basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors.

Wang Y(1), Chen K, Yao Q, Zheng X, Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Food and Biological Engineering,
Jiangsu University, 301 Xuefu Road, Zhenjiang, 212013, People's Republic of
China. ywang@ujs.edu.cn

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins play important regulatory roles in
eukaryotic developmental processes including neurogenesis, myogenesis,
hematopoiesis, sex determination, and gut development. Zebrafish is a good model 
organism for developmental biology. In this study, we identified 139 bHLH genes
encoded in the zebrafish genome. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that zebrafish
has 58, 29, 21, 5, 19, and 5 bHLH members in groups A, B, C, D, E, and F,
respectively, while 2 members were classified as "orphan." A comparison between
zebrafish and human bHLH repertoires suggested that both organisms have a certain
number of specific bHLH members. Eight zebrafish bHLH genes were found to have
multiple coding regions in the genome. Two of these, Bmal1 and MITF, are good
anchor genes for identification of fish-specific whole-genome duplication events 
in comparison with mouse and chicken genomes. The present study provides useful
information for future studies on gene family evolution and vertebrate
development.

PMID: 19449054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2009 Sep;154(1):78-83. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpa.2009.05.005. Epub 2009 May 15.

Ontogeny of circadian oscillations in the heart and liver in chicken.

Zeman M(1), Szántóová K, Herichová I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Physiology and Ethology, Comenius University Bratislava, 
Mlynská dolina B2, 842 15 Bratislava, Slovak Republic.

The circadian system drives postnatally rhythmic processes in the peripheral
tissues. To extend information about embryonic stages, ontogeny of the circadian 
oscillations in chicken (Gallus gallus) heart and liver was analyzed. Nineteen
day old embryos and 4-day old chicks were synchronized to a light:dark cycle and 
then the effects of light pulses applied during the dark and subjective light
phases of the 24 h cycle were tested. Expression of Per2 and Bmal1 was measured
by RT-PCR. The effects of light pulses on plasma glucose and melatonin levels
were also analyzed. The expression of Per2 and Bmal1 was rhythmic in the heart
and liver of 4-day old chicks, however, more pronounced rhythmic expression was
observed in the liver. The light pulse induced a significant increase in Per2
expression in the liver. Plasma glucose was up- and melatonin down-regulated
after the light pulse postnatally. Expression of Per2 did not show a rhythmic
pattern and the light pulse did not cause changes in Per2 expression in the liver
and heart of the embryos. The absence of the rhythmic expression of the clock
genes in the embryonic heart and liver may reflect missing rhythmic cues since
early after hatching peripheral oscillators function in a mature-like manner.

PMID: 19447189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Chronobiol Int. 2009 May;26(4):621-36. doi: 10.1080/07420520902924939.

Clock genes display rhythmic expression in human hearts.

Leibetseder V(1), Humpeler S, Svoboda M, Schmid D, Thalhammer T, Zuckermann A,
Marktl W, Ekmekcioglu C.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Physiology and Pharmacology, University Vienna, Austria.
valentin.leibetseder@meduniwien.ac.at

Thus far, clock genes in the heart have been described only in rodents, and
alterations of these genes have been associated with various myocardial
malfunctions. In this study, we analyzed the expression of clock genes in human
hearts. Left papillary muscles of 16 patients with coronary heart disease, 39
subjects with cardiomyopathy, and 9 healthy donors (52 males and 12 females, mean
age 55.7+/-11.2; 16-70 yrs) were obtained during orthotopic heart
transplantation. We assessed the mRNA levels of PER1, PER2, BMAL1, and CRY1 by
real time PCR and analyzed their rhythmic expression by sliding means and Cosinor
functions. Furthermore, we sought for differences between the three groups (by
ANOVAs) for both the total 24 h period and separate time bins. All four clock
genes were expressed in human hearts. The acrophases (circadian rhythm peak time)
of the PER mRNAs occurred in the morning (PER1: 07:44 h [peak level 187% higher
than trough, p = .008]; PER2: 09:42 h [peak 254% higher than trough, p < .0001], 
and BMAL1 mRNA in the evening at 21:44 h [peak 438% higher than trough; p <
.0001]. No differences were found in the rhythmic patterns between the three
groups. No circadian rhythm was detected in CRY1 mRNA in any group. PER1, PER2,
and BMAL1 mRNAs revealed clear circadian rhythms in the human heart, with their
staging being in antiphase to those in rodents. The circadian amplitudes of the
mRNA clock gene levels in heart tissue are more distinct than in any other human 
tissue so far investigated. The acrophase of the myocardial PER mRNAs and the
trough of the myocardial BMAL1 coincide to the time of day of most frequent
myocardial incidents.

PMID: 19444745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Neurosci. 2009 May 13;29(19):6114-23. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0275-09.2009.

The mammalian molecular clockwork controls rhythmic expression of its own input
pathway components.

Pfeffer M(1), Müller CM, Mordel J, Meissl H, Ansari N, Deller T, Korf HW, von
Gall C.

Author information: 
(1)Emmy Noether Nachwuchsgruppe, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universität, 60590
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Comment in
    J Neurosci. 2009 Sep 23;29(38):11717-9.

The core molecular clockwork in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) is based on
autoregulatory feedback loops of transcriptional activators (CLOCK/NPAS2 and
BMAL1) and inhibitors (mPER1-2 and mCRY1-2). To synchronize the phase of the
molecular clockwork to the environmental day and night condition, light at dusk
and dawn increases mPer expression. However, the signal transduction pathways
differ remarkably between the day/night and the night/day transition. Light
during early night leads to intracellular Ca(2+) release by neuronal ryanodine
receptors (RyRs), resulting in phase delays. Light during late night triggers an 
increase in guanylyl cyclase activity, resulting in phase advances. To date, it
is still unknown how the core molecular clockwork regulates the availability of
the respective input pathway components. Therefore, we examined light resetting
mechanisms in mice with an impaired molecular clockwork (BMAL1(-/-)) and the
corresponding wild type (BMAL1(+/+)) using in situ hybridization, real-time PCR, 
immunohistochemistry, and a luciferase reporter system. In addition,
intracellular calcium concentrations (Ca(2+)(i)) were measured in SCN slices
using two-photon microscopy. In the SCN of BMAL1(-/-) mice Ryr mRNA and RyR
protein levels were reduced, and light-induced mPer expression was selectively
impaired during early night. Transcription assays with NIH3T3 fibroblasts showed 
that Ryr expression was activated by CLOCK::BMAL1 and inhibited by mCRY1. The
Ca(2+)(i) response of SCN cells to the RyR agonist caffeine was reduced in
BMAL1(-/-) compared with BMAL1(+/+) mice. Our findings provide the first evidence
that the mammalian molecular clockwork influences Ryr expression and thus
controls its own photic input pathway components.

PMID: 19439589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Hippocampus. 2010 Mar;20(3):377-88. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20637.

Temporal dynamics of mouse hippocampal clock gene expression support memory
processing.

Jilg A(1), Lesny S, Peruzki N, Schwegler H, Selbach O, Dehghani F, Stehle JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Molecular Anatomy, Dr. Senckenbergische Anatomie,
Goethe-University, Frankfurt, Germany.

Hippocampal plasticity and mnemonic processing exhibit a striking time-of-day
dependence and likely implicate a temporally structured replay of memory traces. 
Molecular mechanisms fulfilling the requirements of sensing time and capturing
time-related information are coded in dynamics of so-called clock genes and their
protein products, first discovered and described in the hypothalamic
suprachiasmatic nucleus. Using real-time PCR and immunohistochemical analyses, we
show that in wildtype mice core clock components (mPer1/PER1, mPer2/PER2,
mCry1/CRY1, mCry2/CRY2, mClock/CLOCK, mBmal1/BMAL1) are expressed in neurons of
all subregions of the hippocampus in a time-locked fashion over a 24-h (diurnal) 
day/night cycle. Temporal profiling of these transcriptional regulators reveals
distinct and parallel peaks, at times when memory traces are usually formed
and/or consolidated. The coordinated rhythmic expression of hippocampal clock
gene expression is greatly disordered in mice deficient for the clock gene mPer1,
a key player implicated in both, maintenance and adaptative plasticity of
circadian clocks. Moreover, Per1-knockout animals are severely handicapped in a
hippocampus-dependent long-term spatial learning paradigm. We propose that the
dynamics of hippocampal clock gene expression imprint a temporal structure on
memory processing and shape at the same time the efficacy of behavioral learning.

PMID: 19437502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jul;29(13):3675-86. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01864-08. Epub 2009 May 
4.

Roles of CLOCK phosphorylation in suppression of E-box-dependent transcription.

Yoshitane H(1), Takao T, Satomi Y, Du NH, Okano T, Fukada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

In mammalian circadian clockwork, the CLOCK-BMAL1 heterodimer activates
E-box-dependent transcription, while its activity is suppressed by circadian
binding with negative regulators, such as CRYs. Here, we found that the CLOCK
protein is kept mostly in the phosphorylated form throughout the day and is
partly hyperphosphorylated in the suppression phase of E-box-dependent
transcription in the mouse liver and NIH 3T3 cells. Coexpression of CRY2 in NIH
3T3 cells inhibited the phosphorylation of CLOCK, whereas CIPC coexpression
markedly stimulated phosphorylation, indicating that CLOCK phosphorylation is
regulated by a combination of the negative regulators in the suppression phase.
CLOCK-BMAL1 purified from the mouse liver was subjected to tandem mass
spectrometry analysis, which identified Ser38, Ser42, and Ser427 as in vivo
phosphorylation sites of CLOCK. Ser38Asp and Ser42Asp mutations of CLOCK
additively and markedly weakened the transactivation activity of CLOCK-BMAL1,
with downregulation of the nuclear amount of CLOCK and the DNA-binding activity. 
On the other hand, CLOCK Delta 19, lacking the CIPC-binding domain, was far less 
phosphorylated and much more stabilized than wild-type CLOCK in vivo. Calyculin A
treatment of cultured NIH 3T3 cells promoted CLOCK phosphorylation and
facilitated its proteasomal degradation. Together, these results show that CLOCK 
phosphorylation contributes to the suppression of CLOCK-BMAL1-mediated
transactivation through dual regulation: inhibition of CLOCK activity and
promotion of its degradation.

PMCID: PMC2698759
PMID: 19414601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jun 1;8(11):1665-7. Epub 2009 Jun 9.

Circadian regulation of DNA excision repair: implications for
chrono-chemotherapy.

Kang TH(1), Sancar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina School
of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

The mammalian circadian system synchronizes organisms' daily cyclical physiology 
from gene expression to gross behavioral patterns. A new study from our group
suggests that DNA repair is also intimately linked to circadian rhythm. Since the
repair of DNA lesions contributes to the resistance of chemotherapy with DNA
damaging agents such as cisplatin, understanding the fundamental molecular
mechanism regulating DNA repair pathways is important for cancer therapy. Here we
review the significance of the connection linking the circadian clock with
nucleotide excision repair and discuss potential implications for chemotherapy.

PMID: 19411851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Science. 2009 May 1;324(5927):598-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1174132.

Circadian rhythms. A circadian loop asSIRTs itself.

Wijnen H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA.
hw9u@virginai.edu

Comment on
    Science. 2009 May 1;324(5927):651-4.
    Science. 2009 May 1;324(5927):654-7.

PMID: 19407188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Brain Res. 2009 Mar 31;1263:58-68. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.12.071. Epub 2009
Jan 15.

Obesity alters circadian expressions of molecular clock genes in the brainstem.

Kaneko K(1), Yamada T, Tsukita S, Takahashi K, Ishigaki Y, Oka Y, Katagiri H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Metabolism and Diabetes, Tohoku University Graduate
School of Medicine, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.

Major components of energy homeostasis, including feeding behavior and glucose
and lipid metabolism, are subject to circadian rhythms. Recent studies have
suggested that dysfunctions of molecular clock genes are involved in the
development of obesity and diabetes. To examine whether metabolic states per se
alter the circadian clock in the central nervous system (CNS), we analyzed the
daily mRNA expression profiles of core clock genes in the caudal brainstem
nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS). In lean C57BL/6 mice, transcript levels of
the core clock genes (Npas2, Bmal1, Per1, Per2 and Rev-erbalpha) clearly showed
24-h rhythmicity. On the other hand, the expression profiles of Bmal1 and
Rev-erbalpha were attenuated in mice with high fat diet-induced obesity as well
as genetically obese KK-A(y) and ob/ob mice. Clock expression levels were
increased in mice with high fat diet-induced obesity and Cry1 expression levels
were decreased in KK-A(y) and ob/ob mice. In addition, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha), which reportedly increases the
BMAL1 transcriptional level, was up-regulated in the NTS of these murine models
of obesity and insulin resistance, suggesting involvement of PPARalpha in the
attenuation of circadian rhythms in the NTS in obese states. Furthermore, a
circadian expression profile of a downstream target of clock genes, the large
conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+)channel, was disturbed in the NTS of these
murine obesity models. These perturbations might contribute to neuronal
dysfunction in obese states. This is the first report showing that obesity
perturbs the circadian expressions of core clock genes in the CNS.

PMID: 19401184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2009 May;31(3):208-19. doi: 10.1080/10641960902822468.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and the circadian clock in metabolic disorders.

Oishi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clock Cell Biology Research Group, Institute for Biological Resources and
Functions, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology,
Central 6, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. k-ooishi@aist.go.jp

Plasma PAI-1 levels robustly fluctuate in a circadian manner and consequently
contribute to hypofibrinolysis during the early morning. The circadian expression
of PAI-1 gene is thought to be directly regulated by the circadian clock proteins
such as CLOCK and BMAL1/BMAL2 which drive the endogenous biological clock. Plasma
PAI-1 levels are increased in the beginning of the active phase in both diurnal
humans and in nocturnal rodents, suggesting that the rhythmic PAI-1 expression is
commonly indispensable for organisms. A series of our recent studies revealed
that circadian clock proteins are important for hypofibrinolysis induced by
metabolic disorders such as obesity and diabetes.

PMID: 19387897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2009 May;31(3):201-7. doi: 10.1080/10641960902822450.

Clock gene expression in the liver and adipose tissues of non-obese type 2
diabetic Goto-Kakizaki rats.

Ando H(1), Ushijima K, Yanagihara H, Hayashi Y, Takamura T, Kaneko S, Fujimura A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology, School of
Medicine, Jichi Medical University, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan.

Recent studies have revealed a close relationship between the pathophysiology of 
metabolic syndrome, which is characterized by obesity and hyperglycemia, and the 
functioning of internal molecular clocks. In this study, we show that the
rhythmic mRNA expression of clock genes (Clock, Bmal1, Cry1, and Dbp) is not
attenuated in the liver and visceral adipose tissues of Goto-Kakizaki rats, a
model of nonobese, type 2 diabetes, as compared to control Wistar rats. Our
results suggest that molecular clock impairment in peripheral tissues of obese
diabetic animals may be either caused by obesity-related factor(s), but not
hyperglycemia, or be a cause, but not a consequence, of hyperglycemia.

PMID: 19387896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Electrophoresis. 2009 Apr;30(8):1259-75. doi: 10.1002/elps.200900045.

Omic analyses unravels global molecular changes in the brain and liver of a rat
model for chronic Sake (Japanese alcoholic beverage) intake.

Masuo Y(1), Imai T, Shibato J, Hirano M, Jones OA, Maguire ML, Satoh K, Kikuchi
S, Rakwal R.

Author information: 
(1)Health Technology Research Center (HTRC), National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba, Japan.

The effects of chronic administration of Sake (Japanese alcoholic beverage,
Nihonshu) on brain and liver of female F334 (Fisher) rats were surveyed via
global omic analyses using DNA microarray, 2-DE, and proton nuclear magnetic
resonance. Rats weaned at 4 wk of age were given free access to Sake (15%
alcohol), instead of water. At 13 months of age, and 24 h after withdrawal of
Sake supply, rats were sacrificed, and the whole brain and liver tissues
dissected for analyses. In general, molecular changes in brain were found to be
less than those in liver. Transcriptomics data revealed 36 and 9, and 80 and 62
up- and down-regulated genes, in the brain and liver, respectively, with binding 
and catalytic activity gene categories the most prominently changed. Results
suggested Sake-induced fragility of brain and liver toxicity/damage, though no
significant abnormalities in growth were seen. At protein level, a striking
decrease was found in the expression of NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) Fe-S
protein 1 in brain, suggesting attenuation of mitochondrial metabolism. In liver,
results again suggested an attenuation of mitochondrial function and, in
addition, glycoproteins with unknown function were induced at protein and gene
levels, suggesting possible changes in glycoprotein binding in that organ.
Metabolomic analysis of brain revealed significant increases in valine,
arginine/ornithine, alanine, glutamine, and choline with decreases in isoleucine,
N-acetyl aspartate, taurine, glutamate, and gamma aminobutyric acid. Our results 
provide a detailed inventory of molecular components of both brain and liver
after Sake intake, and may help to better understand effects of chronic Sake
drinking.

PMID: 19382137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. FEBS Lett. 2009 May 19;583(10):1561-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.04.013. Epub
2009 Apr 17.

Cytoplasmic interaction with CYCLE promotes the post-translational processing of 
the circadian CLOCK protein.

Maurer C(1), Hung HC, Weber F.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Center Heidelberg, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 
328, Heidelberg, Germany.

Post-translational regulation of the transcription factor CLOCK (CLK) is crucial 
for circadian clock function. The contribution of the hetero-dimerization partner
CYCLE (CYC) to the post-translational regulation of CLK is largely unknown. Here 
we report that Drosophila CLK and CYC proteins not only interact in the nucleus, 
where they activate circadian transcription, but also in the cytoplasm of
Drosophila S2R+ cells. Cytoplasmic CLK accumulates in a hypo-phosphorylated
state. Impairment of CYC-binding caused a further reduction in CLK
phosphorylation, while over-expression of CYC enhanced the phosphorylation of
cytoplasmic CLK towards a hypo-phosphorylated state. CYC also promotes nuclear
import of CLK, which is required for hyper-phosphorylation of the CLK protein.
Our results indicate a role of CYC in the post-translational regulation of the
CLK protein.

PMID: 19376119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Curr Biol. 2009 Apr 14;19(7):R298-300. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.02.016.

Circadian biology: an unexpected invitee to new time zones.

Masubuchi S(1), Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Comment on
    Curr Biol. 2009 Feb 24;19(4):297-304.

Adaptation to changing light conditions is a hallmark of the circadian clock. A
new study points to the critical role played by a transcriptional repressor
previously implicated in cell differentiation, highlighting unappreciated links
between the clock and the control of development and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 19368876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Apr 21;106(16):6808-13. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0902063106. Epub 2009 Apr 6.

Daily rhythms of food-anticipatory behavioral activity do not require the known
circadian clock.

Storch KF(1), Weitz CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

When food availability is restricted to a particular time each day, mammals
exhibit food-anticipatory activity (FAA), a daily increase in locomotor activity 
preceding the presentation of food. Considerable historical evidence suggests
that FAA is driven by a food-entrainable circadian clock distinct from the master
clock of the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Multiple food-entrainable circadian clocks 
have been discovered in the brain and periphery, raising strong expectations that
one or more underlie FAA. We report here that mutant mice lacking known circadian
clock function in all tissues exhibit normal FAA both in a light-dark cycle and
in constant darkness, regardless of whether the mutation disables the positive or
negative limb of the clock feedback mechanism. FAA is thus independent of the
known circadian clock. Our results indicate either that FAA is not the output of 
an oscillator or that it is the output of a circadian oscillator different from
known circadian clocks.

PMCID: PMC2666092
PMID: 19366674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Chronobiol Int. 2009 Apr;26(3):379-95. doi: 10.1080/07420520902820947.

Seasonal variations in clock-gene expression in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar).

Davie A(1), Minghetti M, Migaud H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling, Stirling, UK.
andrew.davie@stir.ac.uk

In homeothermic vertebrates inhabiting temperate latitudes, it is clear that the 
seasonal changes in daylength are decoded by the master circadian clock, which
through secondary messengers (like pineal melatonin secretion) entrains rhythmic 
physiology to local conditions. In contrast, the entrainment and neuroendocrine
regulation of rhythmic physiology in temperate teleosts is not as clear,
primarily due to the lack of understanding of the clock gene system in these
species. In this study, we analyzed the diel expression of the clock-genes in
brains of Atlantic salmon, a species that is both highly photoperiodic and
displays robust clock-controlled behavior. Atlantic salmon parr were acclimated
to either long-day (LD) or short-day (SD) photoperiods for one month and
thereafter sampled at 4 h intervals over a 24 h cycle. Clock, Bmal1, Per2, and
Cry2 were all actively expressed in salmon brain homogenates and, with the
exception of Per2, all displayed rhythmic expression under SD photoperiods that
parallels that reported in zebrafish. Interestingly, daylength significantly
altered the mRNA expression of all clock genes studied, with Clock, Bmal1, and
Per2 all becoming arrhythmic under the LD compared to SD photoperiod, while Cry2 
expression was phase delayed under LD. It is thus proposed that the clock-gene
system is actively expressed in Atlantic salmon, and, furthermore, as has been
reported in homeothermic vertebrates, it appears that clock expression is
daylength-dependent.

PMID: 19360485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. BMC Genomics. 2009 Apr 7;10:150. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-150.

Chromosome Y variants from different inbred mouse strains are linked to
differences in the morphologic and molecular responses of cardiac cells to
postpubertal testosterone.

Llamas B(1), Verdugo RA, Churchill GA, Deschepper CF.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Cardiovascular Biology Research Unit, Institut de recherches
cliniques de Montréal (IRCM) and Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.
bastien.llamas@adelaide.edu.au

BACKGROUND: We have reported previously that when chromosome Y (chrY) from the
mouse strain C57BL/6J (ChrYC57) was substituted for that of A/J mice (ChrYA),
cardiomyocytes from the resulting "chromosome substitution" C57BL/6J-chrYA strain
were smaller than that of their C57BL/6J counterparts. In reverse, when chrYA
from A/J mice was substituted for that of chrYC57, cardiomyocytes from the
resulting A/J-chrYC57 strain were larger than in their A/J counterparts. We
further used these strains to test whether: 1) the origin of chrY could also be
linked to differences in the profile of gene expression in the hearts of adult
male mice, and 2) post-pubertal testosterone could play a role in the
differential morphologic and/or molecular effects of chrYC57 and chrYA.
RESULTS: The increased size of cardiomyocytes from adult male C57BL/6J mice
compared to C57BL/6J-chrYA resulted from the absence of hypertrophic effects of
post-pubertal testosterone on cells from the latter strain. However, gene
profiling revealed that the latter effect could not be explained on the basis of 
an insensitivity of cells from C57BL/6J-chrYA to androgens, since even more
cardiac genes were affected by post-pubertal testosterone in C57BL/6J-chrYA
hearts than in C57BL/6J. By testing for interaction between the effects of
surgery and strain, we identified 249 "interaction genes" whose expression was
affected by post-pubertal testosterone differentially according to the genetic
origin of chrY. These interaction genes were found to be enriched within a
limited number of signaling pathways, including: 1) p53 signaling, which
comprises the interacting genes Ccnd1, Pten and Cdkn1a that are also potential
co-regulators of the androgen receptors, and 2) circadian rhythm, which comprises
Arntl/Bmal1, which may in turn regulate cell growth via the control of Cdkn1a.
CONCLUSION: Although post-pubertal testosterone increased the size of
cardiomyocytes from male C56BL/6J mice but not that from their C57BL/6J-chrYA
counterparts, it affected gene expression in the hearts from both strains.
However, several cardiac genes responded to post-pubertal testosterone in a
strict strain-selective manner, which provides possible mechanisms explaining how
chrY may, in part via interference with androgen regulatory events, be linked to 
morphologic differences of cardiac cells of adult male mice.

PMCID: PMC2679052
PMID: 19351403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2009 Apr;16(4):446-8. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1578. Epub 2009 Mar 
29.

CK2alpha phosphorylates BMAL1 to regulate the mammalian clock.

Tamaru T(1), Hirayama J, Isojima Y, Nagai K, Norioka S, Takamatsu K,
Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Clock proteins govern circadian physiology and their function is regulated by
various mechanisms. Here we demonstrate that Casein kinase (CK)-2alpha
phosphorylates the core circadian regulator BMAL1. Gene silencing of CK2alpha or 
mutation of the highly conserved CK2-phosphorylation site in BMAL1, Ser90, result
in impaired nuclear BMAL1 accumulation and disruption of clock function. Notably,
phosphorylation at Ser90 follows a rhythmic pattern. These findings reveal that
CK2 is an essential regulator of the mammalian circadian system.

PMID: 19330005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Hippocampus. 2009 Sep;19(9):869-80. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20571.

Temporal patterns of lipoperoxidation and antioxidant enzymes are modified in the
hippocampus of vitamin A-deficient rats.

Fonzo LS(1), Golini RS, Delgado SM, Ponce IT, Bonomi MR, Rezza IG, Gimenez MS,
Anzulovich AC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chronobiology, Multidisciplinary Institute of Biological
Research (IMIBIO-SL), National Council of Science and Technology (CONICET),
National University of San Luis (UNSL), Chacabuco y Pedernera, D5700HHW, San
Luis, Argentina.

Animals can adapt their behavior to predictable temporal fluctuations in the
environment through both, memory-and-learning processes and an endogenous
time-keeping mechanism. Hippocampus plays a key role in memory and learning and
is especially susceptible to oxidative stress. In compensation, antioxidant
enzymes activity, such as Catalase (CAT) and Glutathione peroxidase (GPx), has
been detected in this brain region. Daily rhythms of antioxidant enzymes
activity, as well as of glutathione and lipid peroxides levels, have been
described in brain. Here, we investigate day/night variations in
lipoperoxidation, CAT, and GPx expression and activity, as well as the temporal
fluctuations of two key components of the endogenous clock, BMAL1 and PER1, in
the rat hippocampus and evaluate to which extent vitamin A deficiency may affect 
their amplitude or phase. Holtzman male rats from control, vitamin A-deficient,
and vitamin A-refed groups were sacrificed throughout a 24-h period. Daily levels
of clock proteins, lipoperoxidation, CAT and GPx mRNA, protein, and activity,
were determined in the rat hippocampus obtained every 4 or 5 h. Gene expression
of RARalpha and RXRbeta was also quantified in the hippocampus of the three
groups of rats. Our results show significant daily variations of BMAL1 and PER1
protein expression. Rhythmic lipoperoxidation, CAT, and GPx, expression and
activity, were also observed in the rat hippocampus. Vitamin A deficiency reduced
RXRbeta mRNA level, as well as the amplitude of BMAL1 and PER1 daily oscillation,
phase-shifted the daily peak of lipoperoxidation, and had a differential effect
on the oscillating CAT and GPx mRNA, protein, and activity. Learning how vitamin 
A deficiency affects the circadian gene expression in the hippocampus may have an
impact on the neurobiology, nutritional and chronobiology fields, emphasizing for
the first time the importance of nutritional factors, such as dietary
micronutrients, in the regulation of circadian parameters in this brain
memory-and-learning-related region.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3217053
PMID: 19308957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Seikagaku. 2009 Feb;81(2):75-83.

[Molecular mechanism of rhythmic clock gene transcription, lipid metabolism and
torpor].

[Article in Japanese]

Ishida N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clock Cell Biology Research Group, Institute for Biological Resources and
Functions, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
(AIST), Central 6-5, Higashi 1-1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan.

PMID: 19306652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4860. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004860. Epub 2009 Mar 20.

Robust food anticipatory activity in BMAL1-deficient mice.

Pendergast JS(1), Nakamura W, Friday RC, Hatanaka F, Takumi T, Yamazaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America.

Food availability is a potent environmental cue that directs circadian locomotor 
activity in rodents. Even though nocturnal rodents prefer to forage at night,
daytime food anticipatory activity (FAA) is observed prior to short meals
presented at a scheduled time of day. Under this restricted feeding regimen,
rodents exhibit two distinct bouts of activity, a nocturnal activity rhythm that 
is entrained to the light-dark cycle and controlled by the master clock in the
suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) and a daytime bout of activity that is phase-locked 
to mealtime. FAA also occurs during food deprivation, suggesting that a
food-entrainable oscillator (FEO) keeps time in the absence of scheduled feeding.
Previous studies have demonstrated that the FEO is anatomically distinct from the
SCN and that FAA is observed in mice lacking some circadian genes essential for
timekeeping in the SCN. In the current study, we optimized the conditions for
examining FAA during restricted feeding and food deprivation in mice lacking
functional BMAL1, which is critical for circadian rhythm generation in the SCN.
We found that BMAL1-deficient mice displayed FAA during restricted feeding in
12hr light:12hr dark (12L:12D) and 18L:6D lighting cycles, but distinct activity 
during food deprivation was observed only in 18L:6D. While BMAL1-deficient mice
also exhibited robust FAA during restricted feeding in constant darkness, mice
were hyperactive during food deprivation so it was not clear that FAA
consistently occurred at the time of previously scheduled food availability.
Taken together, our findings suggest that optimization of experimental conditions
such as photoperiod may be necessary to visualize FAA in genetically modified
mice. Furthermore, the expression of FAA may be possible without a circadian
oscillator that depends on BMAL1.

PMCID: PMC2654093
PMID: 19300505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Science. 2009 May 1;324(5927):651-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1171641. Epub 2009 Mar 
19.

Circadian clock feedback cycle through NAMPT-mediated NAD+ biosynthesis.

Ramsey KM(1), Yoshino J, Brace CS, Abrassart D, Kobayashi Y, Marcheva B, Hong HK,
Chong JL, Buhr ED, Lee C, Takahashi JS, Imai S, Bass J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
2200 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208-3500, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2009 May 1;324(5927):598-9.

The circadian clock is encoded by a transcription-translation feedback loop that 
synchronizes behavior and metabolism with the light-dark cycle. Here we report
that both the rate-limiting enzyme in mammalian nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD+) biosynthesis, nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT), and levels
of NAD+ display circadian oscillations that are regulated by the core clock
machinery in mice. Inhibition of NAMPT promotes oscillation of the clock gene
Per2 by releasing CLOCK:BMAL1 from suppression by SIRT1. In turn, the circadian
transcription factor CLOCK binds to and up-regulates Nampt, thus completing a
feedback loop involving NAMPT/NAD+ and SIRT1/CLOCK:BMAL1.

PMCID: PMC2738420
PMID: 19299583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Virchows Arch. 2009 Apr;454(4):467-74. doi: 10.1007/s00428-009-0761-7. Epub 2009 
Mar 19.

Disturbance of circadian gene expression in breast cancer.

Kuo SJ(1), Chen ST, Yeh KT, Hou MF, Chang YS, Hsu NC, Chang JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

To explore the mechanism of the disruption of circadian rhythm in breast cancer, 
we examined the expression of nine circadian genes in 53 newly diagnosed breast
cancers by immunohistochemical staining, mutational analysis, and methylation
analysis of the promoter of circadian genes. Our results showed that 37 of the 53
breast cancer tissues had hypermethylation on the promoters of PER1, PER2, CRY1, 
or BMAL1. Twenty-five out of 53 paired noncancerous (normal) tissues had
methylation on the promoter of PER1 or CRY1. Our results indicated a higher
frequency of concurrent methylation of PER1 and CRY1 promoters in cancerous and
normal tissues. Promoter methylation of the PER1 correlates with c-erbB2
immunohistochemical reaction of > or = 2+ (p = 0.012) and has a strong inverse
correlation with estrogen receptor positivity (p = 0.016). We further analyzed
the patterns of circadian gene expression by immunohistochemical methods and
found that homogeneous expression of PER2 or BMAL1 is significantly associated
with lymph node metastasis and poor prognosis. PER2 heterogeneous expression
correlates with <2+ c-erbB2 immunohistochemical reaction. Heterogeneous
expression of CLOCK is associated significantly with 3-year survival. In
conclusion, the expression pattern of circadian genes might be a biomarker for
the prognosis of breast cancer.

PMID: 19296127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Science. 2009 May 1;324(5927):654-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1170803. Epub 2009 Mar 
12.

Circadian control of the NAD+ salvage pathway by CLOCK-SIRT1.

Nakahata Y(1), Sahar S, Astarita G, Kaluzova M, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2009 May 1;324(5927):598-9.

Many metabolic and physiological processes display circadian oscillations. We
have shown that the core circadian regulator, CLOCK, is a histone
acetyltransferase whose activity is counterbalanced by the nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NAD+)-dependent histone deacetylase SIRT1. Here we show that
intracellular NAD+ levels cycle with a 24-hour rhythm, an oscillation driven by
the circadian clock. CLOCK:BMAL1 regulates the circadian expression of NAMPT
(nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase), an enzyme that provides a rate-limiting
step in the NAD+ salvage pathway. SIRT1 is recruited to the Nampt promoter and
contributes to the circadian synthesis of its own coenzyme. Using the specific
inhibitor FK866, we demonstrated that NAMPT is required to modulate circadian
gene expression. Our findings in mouse embryo fibroblasts reveal an interlocked
transcriptional-enzymatic feedback loop that governs the molecular interplay
between cellular metabolism and circadian rhythms.

PMID: 19286518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4798. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004798. Epub 2009 Mar 11.

A large scale shRNA barcode screen identifies the circadian clock component ARNTL
as putative regulator of the p53 tumor suppressor pathway.

Mullenders J(1), Fabius AW, Madiredjo M, Bernards R, Beijersbergen RL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Centre for Biomedical Genetics and
Cancer Genomics Centre, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The p53 tumor suppressor gene is mutated in about half of human
cancers, but the p53 pathway is thought to be functionally inactivated in the
vast majority of cancer. Understanding how tumor cells can become insensitive to 
p53 activation is therefore of major importance. Using an RNAi-based genetic
screen, we have identified three novel genes that regulate p53 function.
RESULTS: We have screened the NKI shRNA library targeting 8,000 human genes to
identify modulators of p53 function. Using the shRNA barcode technique we were
able to quickly identify active shRNA vectors from a complex mixture. Validation 
of the screening results indicates that the shRNA barcode technique can reliable 
identify active shRNA vectors from a complex pool. Using this approach we have
identified three genes, ARNTL, RBCK1 and TNIP1, previously unknown to regulate
p53 function. Importantly, ARNTL (BMAL1) is an established component of the
circadian regulatory network. The latter finding adds to recent observations that
link circadian rhythm to the cell cycle and cancer. We show that cells having
suppressed ARNTL are unable to arrest upon p53 activation associated with an
inability to activate the p53 target gene p21(CIP1).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified three new regulators of the p53 pathway through a
functional genetic screen. The identification of the circadian core component
ARNTL strengthens the link between circadian rhythm and cancer.

PMCID: PMC2653142
PMID: 19277210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Circulation. 2009 Mar 24;119(11):1510-7. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.827477. 
Epub 2009 Mar 9.

Vascular disease in mice with a dysfunctional circadian clock.

Anea CB(1), Zhang M, Stepp DW, Simkins GB, Reed G, Fulton DJ, Rudic RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2009 Mar 24;119(11):1463-6.

BACKGROUND: Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death for both men and
women in the United States and the world. A profound pattern exists in the time
of day at which the death occurs; it is in the morning, when the endothelium is
most vulnerable and blood pressure surges, that stroke and heart attack most
frequently happen. Although the molecular components of circadian rhythms
rhythmically oscillate in blood vessels, evidence of a direct function for the
"circadian clock" in the progression to vascular disease is lacking.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In the present study, we found increased pathological
remodeling and vascular injury in mice with aberrant circadian rhythms,
Bmal1-knockout and Clock mutant. In addition, naive aortas from Bmal1-knockout
and Clock mutant mice exhibit endothelial dysfunction. Akt and subsequent nitric 
oxide signaling, a pathway critical to vascular function, was significantly
attenuated in arteries from Bmal1-knockout mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data reveal a new role for the circadian clock during chronic
vascular responses that may be of significance in the progression of vascular
disease.

PMCID: PMC2761686
PMID: 19273720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mol Biol Rep. 2009 Nov;36(8):2423-30. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9473-y. Epub 2009
Feb 27.

Molecular characterization and chromosomal mapping of porcine brain and muscle
Arnt-like protein-1 gene.

Xing J(1), Xu Q, Li K, Wang J, Wu Y, Jiang Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Agricultural
University, Taian 271018, People's Republic of China.

As a transcription factor regulating circadian rhythm, brain and muscle Arnt-like
protein-1 (BMAL1) plays an important role in lipid homeostasis. The Chinese
indigenous and western pig breeds show marked difference in fat deposition, the
structure and function of porcine BMAL1 (pBMAL1) between them might be different.
In present study, the molecular characteristics and chromosomal location of
pBMAL1 were analyzed. The results indicated that pBMAL1 cDNA had a coding region 
of 1,878 bp and shared 94.36, 89.85 and 89.79% identity with human, mouse and rat
BMAL1, respectively, and the pBMAL1 protein had 99.20, 98.24 and 97.92% identity 
to those of human BMAL1b, mouse BMAL1b and rat BMAL1b, respectively. Compared
with other mammals, pBMAL1 was more closely related to human BMAL1. The
expression of pBMAL1 was detected in kidney, stomach, spleen, bladder,
gallbladder, lumbar spinal cord, medulla oblongata, heart, longissimus dorsi
muscle, liver, small intestine, large intestine, lung and backfat tissues. In
adipose tissues, it was detected in mesentery fat, leaf fat, caul fat, backfat
and cardiac fat, however, the expression level was not significantly different.
Alternative usage of exon 2 was revealed to result in two pBMAL1 transcripts.
Finally, by using a whole genome porcine radiation hybrid (RH) panel (IMpRH), the
pBMAL1 gene was mapped to SSC 2p11-q21.

PMID: 19247803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Endocrinology. 2009 Jun;150(6):2717-22. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1683. Epub 2009 Feb 
26.

Cryptochrome 2 expression level is critical for adrenocorticotropin stimulation
of cortisol production in the capuchin monkey adrenal.

Torres-Farfan C(1), Abarzua-Catalan L, Valenzuela FJ, Mendez N, Richter HG,
Valenzuela GJ, Serón-Ferré M.

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Medicina, Programa de Fisiopatología, Instituto de Ciencias
Biomédicas, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2009 Jun;150(6):2509-11.

Timely production of glucocorticoid hormones in response to ACTH is essential for
survival by coordinating energy intake and expenditure and acting as homeostatic 
regulators against stress. Adrenal cortisol response to ACTH is clock time
dependent, suggesting that an intrinsic circadian oscillator in the adrenal
cortex contributes to modulate the response to ACTH. Circadian clock gene
expression has been reported in the adrenal cortex of several species. However,
there are no reports accounting for potential involvement of adrenal clock
proteins on cortisol response to ACTH. Here we explored whether the clock protein
cryptochrome 2 (CRY2) knockdown modifies the adrenal response to ACTH in a
primate. Adrenal gland explants from adult capuchin monkey (n = 5) were
preincubated for 6 h with transfection vehicle (control) or with two different
Cry2 antisense and sense probes followed by 48 h incubation in medium alone (no
ACTH) or with 100 nm ACTH. Under control and sense conditions, ACTH increased
cortisol production, whereas CRY2 suppression inhibited ACTH-stimulated cortisol 
production. Expression of the steroidogenic enzymes steroidogenic acute
regulatory protein and 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase at 48 h of incubation
was increased by ACTH in control explants and suppressed by Cry2 knockdown.
Additionally, we found that Cry2 knockdown decreased the expression of the clock 
gene brain and muscle aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like protein
(Bmal1) at the mRNA and protein levels. Altogether these results strongly support
that the clock protein CRY2 is involved in the mechanism by which ACTH increases 
the expression of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein and 3beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase. Thus, adequate expression levels of components of the adrenal
circadian clock are required for an appropriate cortisol response to ACTH.

PMID: 19246533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Eur J Neurosci. 2009 Feb;29(3):477-89. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06605.x.

Differential maturation of circadian rhythms in clock gene proteins in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus and the pars tuberalis during mouse ontogeny.

Ansari N(1), Agathagelidis M, Lee C, Korf HW, von Gall C.

Author information: 
(1)Dr Senckenbergische Anatomie, Emmy Noether Research Group, Goethe University, 
Frankfurt, Germany.

Circadian rhythms of many body functions in mammals are controlled by a master
pacemaker, residing in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), which
synchronises peripheral oscillators. The SCN and peripheral oscillators share
several components of the molecular clockwork and comprise transcriptional
activators (BMAL1 and CLOCK/NPAS2) and inhibitors (mPER1/2 and mCRY1/2). Here we 
compared the ontogenetic maturation of the clockwork in the SCN and pars
tuberalis (PT). The PT is a peripheral oscillator that strongly depends on
rhythmic melatonin signals. Immunoreactions for clock gene proteins were
determined in the SCN and PT at four different timepoints during four
differential stages of mouse ontogeny: foetal (embryonic day 18), newborn
(2-day-old), infantile (10-day-old), and adult. In the foetal SCN, levels of
immunoreactions of all clock proteins were significantly lower than adult levels 
except for BMAL1. In the newborn SCN the clock protein immunoreactions had not
yet reached adult levels, but the infantile SCN showed similar levels of
immunoreactions as the adult. In contrast, immunoreactions for all clock gene
proteins in the foetal PT were as intense as in newborn, infantile and adult, and
showed the same phase. As the foetal pineal gland is not yet capable of rhythmic 
melatonin production, the rhythms in clock gene proteins in the foetal PT are
presumably dependent on the maternal melatonin signal. Thus, our data provide the
first evidence that maternal melatonin is important for establishing and
maintaining circadian rhythms in a foetal peripheral oscillator.

PMCID: PMC2651153
PMID: 19222558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Curr Biol. 2009 Feb 24;19(4):297-304. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.12.052. Epub 2009
Feb 12.

A role for Id2 in regulating photic entrainment of the mammalian circadian
system.

Duffield GE(1), Watson NP, Mantani A, Peirson SN, Robles-Murguia M, Loros JJ,
Israel MA, Dunlap JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.
duffield.2@nd.edu

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2009 Apr 14;19(7):R298-300.

Inhibitor of DNA binding genes (Id1-Id4) encode helix-loop-helix (HLH)
transcriptional repressors associated with development and tumorigenesis [1, 2], 
but little is known concerning the function(s) of these genes in normal adult
animals. Id2 was identified in DNA microarray screens for rhythmically expressed 
genes [3-5], and further analysis revealed a circadian pattern of expression of
all four Id genes in multiple tissues including the suprachiasmatic nucleus. To
explore an in vivo function, we generated and characterized deletion mutations of
Id2 and of Id4. Id2(-/-) mice exhibit abnormally rapid entrainment and an
increase in the magnitude of the phase shift of the pacemaker. A significant
proportion of mice also exhibit disrupted rhythms when maintained under constant 
darkness. Conversely, Id4(-/-) mice did not exhibit a noticeable circadian
phenotype. In vitro studies using an mPer1 and an AVP promoter reporter revealed 
the potential for ID1, ID2, and ID3 proteins to interact with the canonical basic
HLH clock proteins BMAL1 and CLOCK. These data suggest that the Id genes may be
important for entrainment and operation of the mammalian circadian system,
potentially acting through BMAL1 and CLOCK targets.

PMCID: PMC2648875
PMID: 19217292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Chronobiol Int. 2009 Feb;26(2):151-66. doi: 10.1080/07420520902747124.

The nocturnal activity of fruit flies exposed to artificial moonlight is partly
caused by direct light effects on the activity level that bypass the endogenous
clock.

Kempinger L(1), Dittmann R, Rieger D, Helfrich-Forster C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

Artificial moonlight was recently shown to shift the endogenous clock of fruit
flies and make them nocturnal. To test whether this nocturnal activity is partly 
due to masking effects of light, we exposed the clock-mutants per(01), tim(01),
per(01);tim(01), cyc(01), and Clk(JRK) to light/dark and light/dim-light cycles
and determined the activity level during the day and night. We found that under
moonlit nights, all clock mutants shifted their activity significantly into the
night, suggesting that this effect is independent of the clock. We also recorded 
the flies under continuous artificial moonlight and darkness to judge the effect 
of dim constant light on the activity level. All mutants, except Clk(JRK) flies, 
were significantly more active under artificial moonlight conditions than under
complete darkness. Unexpectedly, we found residual rhythmicity of per(01) and
especially tim(01) mutants under these conditions, suggesting that TIM and
especially PER retained some activity in the absence of its respective partner.
Nevertheless, as even the double mutants and the cyc(01) and Clk(JRK) mutants
shifted their activity into the night, we conclude that dim light stimulates the 
activity of fruit flies in a clock-independent manner. Thus, nocturnal light has 
a twofold influence on flies: it shifts the circadian clock, and it increases
nocturnal activity independently of the clock. The latter was also observed in
some primates by others and might therefore be of a more general validity.

PMID: 19212834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Brain Res. 2009 Apr 6;1264:33-8. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.01.003. Epub 2009
Jan 10.

Postnatal ontogenesis of molecular clock in mouse striatum.

Cai Y(1), Liu S, Li N, Xu S, Zhang Y, Chan P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical
University, Key Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Ministry of
Education, 45 Changchun Street, Beijing 100053, PR China.

Striatum is an important brain area whose function is related to motor, emotion
and motivation. Interestingly, biological and physiological circadian rhythms
have been found in the striatum extensively, suggesting molecular clock machinery
works efficiently therein. However, the striatal expression profiles of clock
genes have not been characterized systematically. In addition, little is known
about when the expression rhythms start during postnatal ontogenesis. In the
present study, 24 h mRNA oscillations of 6 principle clock genes (Bmal1, Clock,
Npas2, Cry1, Per1 and Rev-erb alpha) were examined in mouse striatum, at early
postnatal stage (postnatal day 3), pre-weaning stage (postnatal day 14) and in
adult (postnatal day 60). At P3, no daily oscillation was found for all clock
genes. At P14, a significant time effect was identified only for Rev-erb alpha
and Npas2. At P60, the daily oscillations of these clock genes were at least
borderline significant, with peak time at Circadian time (CT) 01 for Bmal1,
Clock, Npas2 and Cry1; at CT 13 for Per1; and at CT 07 for Rev-erb alpha. In
addition, the overall mean mRNA levels of these clock genes also underwent a
dynamic change postnatally. For Bmal1, Clock, Npas2, Per1 and Rev-erb alpha, the 
expression level increased throughout the postnatal ontogenesis from P3, P14 to
P60. For Cry1, however, the abundance at P3 and P60 were similar while that at
P14 was much lower. In conclusion, the striatal molecular clock machinery,
although works efficiently in adult, develops gradually after birth in mice.

PMID: 19171124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009 Apr;46(4):545-52. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.01.001. Epub
2009 Jan 10.

PERIOD2 is a circadian negative regulator of PAI-1 gene expression in mice.

Oishi K(1), Miyazaki K, Uchida D, Ohkura N, Wakabayashi M, Doi R, Matsuda J,
Ishida N.

Author information: 
(1)Clock Cell Biology Research Group, Institute for Biological Resources and
Functions, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

An increased level of obesity-induced plasma plasminogen activator inhibitor-1
(PAI-1) is considered a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. To determine
whether the circadian clock component PERIOD2 (PER2) is involved in the
regulation of PAI-1 gene expression, we performed transient transfection assays
in vitro, and generated transgenic (Tg) mice overexpressing PER2. We then
compared PAI-1 expression in Tg and wild-type (WT) mice with or without obesity
induced by a high-fat/high-sucrose diet. PER2 suppressed CLOCK:BMAL1- and
CLOCK:BMAL2-dependent transactivation of the PAI-1 promoter in vitro.
Furthermore, nuclear translocation is dispensable for PER2 to suppress
CLOCK:BMAL1-dependent transactivation of the PAI-1 promoter, because functional
loss of the nuclear localization domain did not affect either the interaction
with BMAL1 or the suppressive role of PER2. The diurnal expression of clock and
clock-controlled genes was disrupted in a gene-specific manner, whereas that of
PAI-1 mRNA was significantly damped in the hearts of PER2 Tg mice fed with a
normal diet. Obesity-induced plasma PAI-1 increase was significantly suppressed
in Tg mice in accordance with cardiac PAI-1 mRNA levels, whereas body weight gain
and changes in metabolic parameters were identical between WT and Tg mice.
Endogenous PAI-1 gene expression induced by transforming growth factor-beta1 was 
significantly attenuated in embryonic fibroblasts derived from Tg mice compared
with those from WT mice. Our results demonstrated that PER2 represses PAI-1 gene 
transcription in a BMAL1/2-dependent manner. The present findings also suggest
that PER2 attenuates obesity-induced hypofibrinolysis by downregulating PAI-1
expression independently of metabolic disorders.

PMID: 19168071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. FASEB J. 2009 May;23(5):1572-83. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-117697. Epub 2009 Jan 13.

Circadian rhythm transcription factor CLOCK regulates the transcriptional
activity of the glucocorticoid receptor by acetylating its hinge region lysine
cluster: potential physiological implications.

Nader N(1), Chrousos GP, Kino T.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Pediatric Endocrinology, Program in Reproductive and Adult
Endocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1109, USA.

Glucocorticoids, end products of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,
influence functions of virtually all organs and tissues through the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Circulating levels of glucocorticoids fluctuate
naturally in a circadian fashion and regulate the transcriptional activity of GR 
in target tissues. The basic helix-loop-helix protein CLOCK, a histone
acetyltransferase (HAT), and its heterodimer partner BMAL1 are self-oscillating
transcription factors that generate circadian rhythms in both the central nervous
system and periphery. We found that CLOCK/BMAL1 repressed GR-induced
transcriptional activity in a HAT-activity- dependent fashion. In
serum-shock-synchronized cells, transactivational activity of GR, accessed by
mRNA expression of an endogenous-responsive gene, fluctuated spontaneously in a
circadian fashion in reverse phase with CLOCK/BMAL1 mRNA expression. CLOCK and GR
interacted with each other physically, and CLOCK suppressed binding of GR to its 
DNA recognition sequences by acetylating multiple lysine residues located in its 
hinge region. These findings indicate that CLOCK/BMAL1 functions as a
reverse-phase negative regulator of glucocorticoid action in target tissues,
possibly by antagonizing biological actions of diurnally fluctuating circulating 
glucocorticoids. Further, these results suggest that a peripheral target tissue
circadian rhythm indirectly influences the functions of every organ and tissue
inside the body through modulation of the ubiquitous and diverse actions of
glucocorticoids.

PMCID: PMC2669420
PMID: 19141540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Feb 27;380(1):22-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.12.186. Epub 2009 Jan 10.

The molecular mechanism regulating the autonomous circadian expression of
Topoisomerase I in NIH3T3 cells.

Yang F(1), Nakajima Y, Kumagai M, Ohmiya Y, Ikeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Saitama Medical University, 38 Morohongo, Moroyama, 
Iruma-gun, Saitama 350-0495, Japan.

To identify whether Topoisomerase I (TopoI) has autonomous circadian rhythms
regulated by clock genes, we tested mouse TopoI (mTopoI) promoter oscillation in 
NIH3T3 cells using a real-time monitoring assay and TopoI mRNA oscillations using
real-time RT-PCR. Analysis of the mTopoI promoter region with Matlnspector
software revealed two putative E-box (E1 and E2) and one DBP/E4BP4-binding
element (D-box). Luciferase assays indicated that mTopoI gene expression was
directly regulated by clock genes. The real-time monitoring assay showed that
E-box and D-box response elements participate in the regulation of the circadian 
expression of mTopoI. Furthermore, a gel-shift assay showed that E2 is a direct
target of the BMAL1/CLOCK heterodimer and DBP binds to the putative D-site. These
results indicate that TopoI is expressed in an autonomous circadian rhythm in
NIH3T3 cells.

PMID: 19138663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Neurochem Int. 2009 May-Jun;54(5-6):277-85. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2008.12.005.
Epub 2008 Dec 11.

Clock genes regulate neurogenic transcription factors, including NeuroD1, and the
neuronal differentiation of adult neural stem/progenitor cells.

Kimiwada T(1), Sakurai M, Ohashi H, Aoki S, Tominaga T, Wada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Degenerative Neurological Diseases, National Institute of
Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan.

The circadian clock system plays multiple roles in our bodies, and clock genes
are expressed in various brain regions, including the lateral subventricular zone
(SVZ) where neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) persist and postnatal
neurogenesis continues. However, the functions of clock genes in adult NSPCs are 
not well understood. Here, we first investigated the expression patterns of Clock
and Bmal1 in the SVZ by immunohistochemistry and then verified how the expression
levels of 17 clock and clock-related genes changed during differentiation of
cultured adult NSPCs using quantitative RT-PCR. Finally, we used RNAi to observe 
the effects of Clock and Bmal1 on neuronal differentiation. Our results revealed 
that Clock and Bmal1 were expressed in the SVZ and double-stained with the neural
progenitor marker Nestin and neural stem marker GFAP. In cultured adult NSPCs,
the clock genes changed their expression patterns during differentiation, and
interestingly, Bmal1 started endogenous oscillation. Moreover, gene silencing of 
Clock or Bmal1 by RNAi decreased the percentages of neuronal marker Map2-positive
cells and expression levels of NeuroD1 mRNA. These findings suggest that clock
genes are involved in the neuronal differentiation of adult NSPCs and may extend 
our understanding of various neurological/psychological disorders linked to adult
neurogenesis and circadian rhythm.

PMID: 19121353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 30;105(52):20970-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0806962106. Epub 2008 Dec 17.

Adrenal peripheral clock controls the autonomous circadian rhythm of
glucocorticoid by causing rhythmic steroid production.

Son GH(1), Chung S, Choe HK, Kim HD, Baik SM, Lee H, Lee HW, Choi S, Sun W, Kim
H, Cho S, Lee KH, Kim K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742,
Korea.

Glucocorticoid (GC) is an adrenal steroid with diverse physiological effects. It 
undergoes a robust daily oscillation, which has been thought to be driven by the 
master circadian clock in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus via the
hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis. However, we show that the adrenal gland has 
its own clock and that the peripheral clockwork is tightly linked to
steroidogenesis by the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein. Examination of
mice with adrenal-specific knockdown of the canonical clock protein BMAL1 reveals
that the adrenal clock machinery is required for circadian GC production.
Furthermore, behavioral rhythmicity is drastically affected in these animals,
together with altered expression of Period1, but not Period2, in several
peripheral organs. We conclude that the adrenal peripheral clock plays an
essential role in harmonizing the mammalian circadian timing system by generating
a robust circadian GC rhythm.

PMCID: PMC2634940
PMID: 19091946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Eur J Neurosci. 2008 Dec;28(12):2443-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06541.x.

Rhythmic expression of clock genes in the ependymal cell layer of the third
ventricle of rodents is independent of melatonin signaling.

Yasuo S(1), von Gall C, Weaver DR, Korf HW.

Author information: 
(1)Dr Senckenbergische Anatomie, Institut f. Anatomie II, Goethe-Universität
Frankfurt am Main, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Reproductive physiology is regulated by the photoperiod in many mammals. Decoding
of the photoperiod involves circadian clock mechanisms, although the molecular
basis remains unclear. Recent studies have shown that the ependymal cell layer
lining the infundibular recess of the third ventricle (EC) is a key structure for
the photoperiodic gonadal response. The EC exhibits daylength-dependent changes
in the expression of photoperiodic output genes, including the type 2 deiodinase 
gene (Dio2 ). Here we investigated whether clock genes (Per1 and Bmal1) and the
albumin D-binding protein gene (Dbp) are expressed in the EC of Syrian hamsters, 
and whether their expression differs under long-day and short-day conditions.
Expression of all three genes followed a diurnal rhythm; expression of Per1 and
Dbp in the EC peaked around lights-off, and expression of Bmal1 peaked in the
early light phase. The amplitude of Per1 and Dbp expression was higher in
hamsters kept under long-day conditions than in those kept under short-day
conditions. Notably, the expression of these genes was not modified by exogenous 
melatonin within 25 h after injection, whereas Dio2 expression was inhibited 19 h
after injection. Targeted melatonin receptor (MT1, MT2, and both MT1 and MT2)
disruption in melatonin-proficient C3H mice did not affect the rhythmic
expression of Per1 in the EC. These data show the existence of a molecular clock 
in the rodent EC. In the hamster, this clock responds to long-term changes in the
photoperiod, but is independent of acute melatonin signals. In mice, the EC clock
is not affected by deletion of melatonin receptors.

PMID: 19087172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Genes Cells. 2008 Dec;13(12):1197-210. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01237.x.

Clock-dependent and independent transcriptional control of the two isoforms from 
the mouse Rorgamma gene.

Mongrain V(1), Ruan X, Dardente H, Fortier EE, Cermakian N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Chronobiology, Douglas Mental Health University
Institute, Montréal, QC, Canada.

Accumulating evidence indicate that molecular mechanisms generating circadian
rhythms display some degree of tissue-specificity. More specifically, distinct
patterns of expression for nuclear receptors of the ROR family indicate that the 
transcriptional control of the clock gene Bmal1 differs among tissues. This study
aims to investigate the expression of Rorgammaisoforms (Rorgamma and Rorgammat)
and characterize the molecular mechanisms underlying their tissue-specific
expression. The expression of Rorgamma isoforms was assessed in mouse liver,
muscle, thymus and testis throughout 24 h using quantitative RT-PCR. Although the
expression of Rorgamma was rhythmic in the liver and thymus, it was
constitutively expressed in muscle and testis. In contrast, the expression of
Rorgammat was constitutive in all four tissues. Furthermore, rhythmic expression 
of Rorgamma was impaired in Clock mutant mice whereas the mutation had no effect 
on Rorgammat expression. In line with these findings, luciferase assays revealed 
that transcription of the Rorgamma promoter is clock-controlled whereas that of
Rorgammat promoter is essentially clock-independent. Our results provide insights
into the molecular mechanisms that lead to differential expression of Rorgamma
and Rorgammat and are suggestive of a framework that might account for
tissue-specific circadian regulation.

PMID: 19076641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Endocrinology. 2009 Apr;150(4):1879-85. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1021. Epub 2008 Dec 
4.

Impaired steroidogenesis and implantation failure in Bmal1-/- mice.

Ratajczak CK(1), Boehle KL, Muglia LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA.

Evidence in humans and rodents suggests that normal circadian rhythmicity is
important for supporting reproductive function. A molecular clock underlies
circadian rhythmicity. Impaired fertility is observed in some genetically altered
mice with deficiencies in genes of the molecular clock, suggesting a critical
role for these genes in reproduction. Here we systematically characterize the
reproductive phenotype of females deficient in the clock gene Bmal1. Bmal1(-/-)
females are infertile. They exhibit progression through the estrous cycle,
although these cycles are prolonged. Normal follicular development occurs in
Bmal1(-/-) females, and healthy embryos of the expected developmental stage are
found in the reproductive tract of Bmal1(-/-) females 3.5 d after mating to
wild-type males. However, serum progesterone levels are significantly lower in
Bmal1(-/-) vs. Bmal1(+/+/-) females on d 3.5 of gestation. Low progesterone
levels in Bmal1(-/-) females are accompanied by decreased expression of
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein in corpora lutea of Bmal1(-/-) vs.
Bmal1(+/+/-) females. Whereas implantation of embryos is not observed in
untreated or vehicle-treated Bmal1(-/-) females, exogenous administration of
progesterone to Bmal1(-/-) females is able to reinstitute implantation. These
data suggest that implantation failure due to impaired steroidogenesis causes
infertility of Bmal1(-/-) females.

PMID: 19056819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Cell Metab. 2008 Dec;8(6):482-91. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2008.10.009.

Vascular PPARgamma controls circadian variation in blood pressure and heart rate 
through Bmal1.

Wang N(1), Yang G, Jia Z, Zhang H, Aoyagi T, Soodvilai S, Symons JD, Schnermann
JB, Gonzalez FJ, Litwin SE, Yang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132,
USA.

Thiazolidinediones (TZDs) are PPARgamma activators that exhibit vasculoprotective
properties. To determine the vascular function of PPARgamma, we analyzed
Tie2Cre/flox and SM22Cre/flox mice. Unexpectedly, both knockout strains exhibited
a significant reduction of circadian variations in blood pressure and heart rate 
in parallel with diminished variations in urinary norepinephrine/epinephrine
excretion and impaired rhythmicity of the canonical clock genes, including Bmal1.
PPARgamma expression in the aorta exhibited a robust rhythmicity with a more than
20-fold change during the light/dark cycle. Rosiglitazone treatment induced
aortic expression of Bmal1 mRNA, and ChIP and promoter assays revealed that Bmal1
is a direct PPARgamma target gene. These studies have uncovered a role for
vascular PPARgamma as a peripheral factor participating in regulation of
cardiovascular rhythms.

PMID: 19041764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mech Ageing Dev. 2009 Mar;130(3):154-60. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2008.10.006. Epub
2008 Nov 8.

Effect of intermittent fasting on circadian rhythms in mice depends on feeding
time.

Froy O(1), Chapnik N, Miskin R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Food Science and Nutrition, Faculty of
Agricultural, Food and Environmental Quality, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
P.O. Box 12, Rehovot 76100, Israel. froy@agri.huji.ac.il

Calorie restriction (CR) resets circadian rhythms and extends life span.
Intermittent fasting (IF) also extends life span, but its affect on circadian
rhythms has not been studied. To study the effect of IF alongside CR, we imposed 
IF in FVB/N mice or IF combined with CR using the transgenic FVB/N alphaMUPA mice
that, when fed ad libitum, exhibit spontaneously reduced eating and extended life
span. Our results show that when food was introduced during the light period,
body temperature peak was not disrupted. In contrast, IF caused almost
arrhythmicity in clock gene expression in the liver and advanced mPer2 and mClock
expression. However, IF restored the amplitudes of clock gene expression under
disruptive light condition regardless whether the animals were calorically
restricted or not. Unlike daytime feeding, nighttime feeding yielded rhythms
similar to those generated during ad libitum feeding. Taken together, our results
show that IF can affect circadian rhythms differently depending on the timing of 
food availability, and suggest that this regimen induces a metabolic state that
affects the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) clock.

PMID: 19041664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Nature. 2008 Dec 18;456(7224):997-1000. doi: 10.1038/nature07541. Epub 2008 Nov
26.

Nuclear receptor corepressor and histone deacetylase 3 govern circadian metabolic
physiology.

Alenghat T(1), Meyers K, Mullican SE, Leitner K, Adeniji-Adele A, Avila J, Bucan 
M, Ahima RS, Kaestner KH, Lazar MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, 
USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2008 Dec 18;456(7224):881-3.

Rhythmic changes in histone acetylation at circadian clock genes suggest that
temporal modulation of gene expression is regulated by chromatin modifications.
Furthermore, recent studies demonstrate a critical relationship between circadian
and metabolic physiology. The nuclear receptor corepressor 1 (Ncor1) functions as
an activating subunit for the chromatin modifying enzyme histone deacetylase 3
(Hdac3). Lack of Ncor1 is incompatible with life, and hence it is unknown whether
Ncor1, and particularly its regulation of Hdac3, is critical for adult mammalian 
physiology. Here we show that specific, genetic disruption of the Ncor1-Hdac3
interaction in mice causes aberrant regulation of clock genes and results in
abnormal circadian behaviour. These mice are also leaner and more
insulin-sensitive owing to increased energy expenditure. Unexpectedly, loss of a 
functional Ncor1-Hdac3 complex in vivo does not lead to sustained increases in
known catabolic genes, but instead significantly alters the oscillatory patterns 
of several metabolic genes, demonstrating that circadian regulation of metabolism
is critical for normal energy balance. These findings indicate that activation of
Hdac3 by Ncor1 is a nodal point in the epigenetic regulation of circadian and
metabolic physiology.

PMCID: PMC2742159
PMID: 19037247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Neurosci. 2008 Nov 26;28(48):12946-55. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3615-08.2008.

The melanocortin-3 receptor is required for entrainment to meal intake.

Sutton GM(1), Perez-Tilve D, Nogueiras R, Fang J, Kim JK, Cone RD, Gimble JM,
Tschöp MH, Butler AA.

Author information: 
(1)Neuropeptides Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Louisiana
State University System, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70808, USA.

Entrainment of anticipatory activity and wakefulness to nutrient availability is 
a poorly understood component of energy homeostasis. Restricted feeding (RF)
paradigms with a periodicity of 24 h rapidly induce entrainment of rhythms
anticipating food presentation that are independent of master clocks in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) but do require other hypothalamic structures. Here,
we report that the melanocortin system, which resides in hypothalamic structures 
required for food entrainment, is required for expression of food entrainable
rhythms. Food anticipatory activity was assessed in wild-type (WT) and
melanocortin-3 receptor-deficient (Mc3r-/-) C57BL/J mice by wheel running,
spontaneous locomotory movement, and measurement of wakefulness. WT mice housed
in wheel cages subject to RF exhibited increased wheel activity during the 2 h
preceding meal presentation, which corresponded with an increase in wakefulness
around meal time and reduced wakefulness during the dark. WT mice also exhibited 
increased x- and z-movements centered around food initiation. The activity-based 
responses to RF were significantly impaired in mice lacking Mc3r. RF also failed 
to increase wakefulness in the 2 h before food presentation in Mc3r-/- mice. Food
entrainment requires expression of Neuronal PAS domain 2 (Npas2) and Period2
(Per2) genes, components of the transcriptional machinery maintaining a clock
rhythm. Analysis of cortical gene expression revealed severe abnormalities in
rhythmic expression of clock genes (Bmal1, Npas2, Per2) under ad libitum and RF
conditions. In summary, Mc3r are required for expression of anticipatory patterns
of activity and wakefulness during periods of limited nutrient availability and
for normal regulation of cortical clock function.

PMCID: PMC2613653
PMID: 19036988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2009 Mar 5;150B(2):155-81. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30887.

Convergent functional genomics of genome-wide association data for bipolar
disorder: comprehensive identification of candidate genes, pathways and
mechanisms.

Le-Niculescu H(1), Patel SD, Bhat M, Kuczenski R, Faraone SV, Tsuang MT, McMahon 
FJ, Schork NJ, Nurnberger JI Jr, Niculescu AB 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
USA.

Given the mounting convergent evidence implicating many more genes in complex
disorders such as bipolar disorder than the small number identified unambiguously
by the first-generation Genome-Wide Association studies (GWAS) to date, there is 
a strong need for improvements in methodology. One strategy is to include in the 
next generation GWAS larger numbers of subjects, and/or to pool independent
studies into meta-analyses. We propose and provide proof of principle for the use
of a complementary approach, convergent functional genomics (CFG), as a way of
mining the existing GWAS datasets for signals that are there already, but did not
reach significance using a genetics-only approach. With the CFG approach, the
integration of genetics with genomics, of human and animal model data, and of
multiple independent lines of evidence converging on the same genes offers a way 
of extracting signal from noise and prioritizing candidates. In essence our
analysis is the most comprehensive integration of genetics and functional
genomics to date in the field of bipolar disorder, yielding a series of novel
(such as Klf12, Aldh1a1, A2bp1, Ak3l1, Rorb, Rora) and previously known (such as 
Bdnf, Arntl, Gsk3b, Disc1, Nrg1, Htr2a) candidate genes, blood biomarkers, as
well as a comprehensive identification of pathways and mechanisms. These become
prime targets for hypothesis driven follow-up studies, new drug development and
personalized medicine approaches.

2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19025758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Dev Neurobiol. 2009 Jan;69(1):47-59. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20687.

Endogenous clock gene expression in the suprachiasmatic nuclei of previsual
newborn rabbits is entrained by nursing.

Caldelas I(1), González B, Montúfar-Chaveznava R, Hudson R.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Distrito Federal, México.

The rabbit is particularly suitable for investigating the development of
mammalian circadian function. Blind at birth, the pups are only visited by the
mother to be nursed once every 24 h for about 3 min and so can be studied largely
without maternal interference. They anticipate the mother's visit with increased 
behavioral arousal and with a rise in body temperature, both of which represent
endogenous circadian rhythms. We now report that in newborn pups the
suprachiasmatic nuclei of the hypothalamus (SCN; the main circadian pacemaker in 
mammals) show endogenous 24-h rhythmicity in the expression of the clock genes
Per1, Per2, and Bmal1. Pups nursed from postnatal days 1 to 7 and fasted to day 9
showed the same rhythms of clock gene expression as normally nursed controls. We 
also report that these rhythms are entrained by nursing. Pups killed on postnatal
days 3-4 showed the same rhythms in gene expression as pups in the previous
experiment, whereas littermates subsequently nursed from postnatal days 4 to 7
with nursing delayed 6 h showed a corresponding shift in the diurnal pattern of
clock gene expression. Consistent with this, two groups of pups implanted with
telemetric thermal sensors and nursed 6 h apart had daily patterns in body
temperature synchronized with the two different nursing times. We conclude that
the expression of clock genes associated with the newborn rabbit's circadian
system is entrained by nonphotic cues accompanying nursing, the exact nature of
which now needs to be clarified.

Copyright 2008 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 19023860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Biol Reprod. 2009 Mar;80(3):473-83. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.069542. Epub 2008
Nov 19.

Expression and functional analyses of circadian genes in mouse oocytes and
preimplantation embryos: Cry1 is involved in the meiotic process independently of
circadian clock regulation.

Amano T(1), Matsushita A, Hatanaka Y, Watanabe T, Oishi K, Ishida N, Anzai M,
Mitani T, Kato H, Kishigami S, Saeki K, Hosoi Y, Iritani A, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, College of Biology-Oriented Science and
Technology, Kinki University, Kinokawa City, Wakayama, Japan.
amano@waka.kindai.ac.jp

In mammals, circadian genes, Clock, Arntl (also known as Bmal1), Cry1, Cry2,
Per1, Per2, and Per3, are rhythmically transcribed every 24 h in almost all
organs and tissues to tick the circadian clock. However, their expression and
function in oocytes and preimplantation embryos have not been investigated. In
this study we found that the circadian clock may stop in mouse oocytes and
preimplantation embryos. Real-time PCR analysis revealed the presence of
transcripts of these genes in both oocytes and preimplantation embryos; however, 
their amounts did not oscillate every 24 h in one- to four-cell and
blastocyst-stage embryos. Moreover, immunofluorescence analyses revealed that
CLOCK, ARNTL, and CRY1 were localized similarly in the nuclei of germinal vesicle
(GV) oocytes and one-cell- to four-cell-stage embryos. Because CRY1 is known to
interact with the CLOCK-ARNTL complex to suppress transcription-promoting
activity of the complex for genes such as Wee1, Cry2, Per1, Per2, and Per3 in
cells having the ticking circadian clock, we hypothesized that if the circadian
clock functions in GV oocytes and one-cell- to four-cell-stage embryos, CLOCK,
ARNTL, and CRY1 might suppress the transcription of these genes in GV oocytes and
one-cell- to 4-cell-stage embryos as well. As a result, knockdown of CRY1 in GV
oocytes by RNA interference did not affect the transcription levels of Wee1,
Cry2, Per1, Per2, and Per3, but it reduced maturation ability. Thus, it seems
that circadian genes are not involved in circadian clock regulation in mouse
oocytes and preimplantation embryos but are involved in physiologies, such as
meiosis.

PMID: 19020302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Diabetologia. 2009 Feb;52(2):329-35. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1194-6. Epub 2008
Oct 31.

Clock gene expression in peripheral leucocytes of patients with type 2 diabetes.

Ando H(1), Takamura T, Matsuzawa-Nagata N, Shima KR, Eto T, Misu H, Shiramoto M, 
Tsuru T, Irie S, Fujimura A, Kaneko S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology, School of
Medicine, Jichi Medical University, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi
329-0498, Japan. h-ando@jichi.ac.jp

AIM/HYPOTHESIS: Recent studies have demonstrated relationships between circadian 
clock function and the development of metabolic diseases such as type 2 diabetes.
We investigated whether the peripheral circadian clock is impaired in patients
with type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: Peripheral leucocytes were obtained from eight patients with diabetes
and six comparatively young non-diabetic volunteers at 09:00, 15:00, 21:00 and
03:00 hours (study 1) and from 12 male patients with diabetes and 14 age-matched 
men at 09:00 hours (study 2). Transcript levels of clock genes (CLOCK, BMAL1
[also known as ARNTL], PER1, PER2, PER3 and CRY1) were determined by real-time
quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: In study 1, mRNA expression patterns of BMAL1, PER1, PER2 and PER3
exhibited 24 h rhythmicity in the leucocytes of all 14 individuals. The
expression levels of these mRNAs were significantly (p < 0.05) lower in patients 
with diabetes than in non-diabetic individuals at one or more time points.
Moreover, the amplitudes of mRNA expression rhythms of PER1 and PER3 genes tended
to diminish in patients with diabetes. In study 2, leucocytes obtained from
patients with diabetes expressed significantly (p < 0.05) lower transcript levels
of BMAL1, PER1 and PER3 compared with leucocytes from control individuals, and
transcript expression was inversely correlated with HbA(1c) levels (rho = -0.47
to -0.55, p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These results suggest that rhythmic mRNA expression
of clock genes is dampened in peripheral leucocytes of patients with type 2
diabetes. The impairment of the circadian clock appears to be closely associated 
with the pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes in humans.

PMID: 18974966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Science. 2008 Oct 31;322(5902):675; author reply 675. doi:
10.1126/science.1161284.

Comment on "Differential rescue of light- and food-entrainable circadian
rhythms".

Mistlberger RE(1), Yamazaki S, Pendergast JS, Landry GJ, Takumi T, Nakamura W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia
V5A 1S6, Canada. mistlber@sfu.ca

Comment on
    Science. 2008 May 23;320(5879):1074-7.

Fuller et al. (Reports, 23 May 2008, p. 1074) reported that the dorsomedial
hypothalamus contains a Bmal1-based oscillator that can drive food-entrained
circadian rhythms. We report that mice bearing a null mutation of Bmal1 exhibit
normal food-anticipatory circadian rhythms. Lack of food anticipation in Bmal1-/-
mice reported by Fuller et al. may reflect morbidity due to weight loss, thus
raising questions about their conclusions.

PMCID: PMC2583785
PMID: 18974333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Cell Sci. 2008 Nov 1;121(Pt 21):3629-35. doi: 10.1242/jcs.035048.

Ligand modulation of REV-ERBalpha function resets the peripheral circadian clock 
in a phasic manner.

Meng QJ(1), McMaster A, Beesley S, Lu WQ, Gibbs J, Parks D, Collins J, Farrow S, 
Donn R, Ray D, Loudon A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, A. V. Hill Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13
9PT, UK.

The nuclear receptor REV-ERBalpha is a key negative-feedback regulator of the
biological clock. REV-ERBalpha binds to ROR elements of the Bmal1 (Arntl)
promoter and represses Bmal1 transcription. This stabilizing negative loop is
important for precise control of the circadian pacemaker. In the present study,
we identified a novel synthetic REV-ERBalpha ligand, which enhances the
recruitment of nuclear receptor co-repressor (NCoR) to REV-ERBalpha. In order to 
explore REV-ERBalpha action on resetting responses of the molecular clock, we
first established the rhythmic transcription profile and expression level of
REV-ERBalpha in Rat-1 fibroblasts. When applied at different phases of the
circadian oscillation to cell models containing stably transfected Bmal1::Luc or 
Per2::Luc, the REV-ERBalpha ligand induced phase-dependent bi-directional phase
shifts. When the phase changes were plotted against time, a clear phase response 
curve was revealed, with a significant peak-to-trough amplitude of ca. 5 hours.
The phase-resetting effect was also observed when the compound was applied to
primary lung fibroblasts and ectopic lung slices from transgenic PER2::Luc mice. 
Therefore, similar regulation of REV-ERBalpha function by endogenous ligands,
such as heme, is likely to be an important mechanism for clock resetting. In
addition, we identify a new means to generate phasic shifts in the clock.

PMCID: PMC3069549
PMID: 18946026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Oct 9;3(4):364-6. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.09.004.

Mobilized hematopoietic stem cell yield depends on species-specific circadian
timing.

Lucas D, Battista M, Shi PA, Isola L, Frenette PS.

Endogenous rhythmicity likely evolved as a mechanism allowing organisms to
anticipate predictable daily changes in the environment (Rutter et al., 2002).
Under homeostasis, murine hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) egress is orchestrated by
rhythmic beta 3 adrenergic signals delivered by the sympathetic nervous system
(SNS) that regulate Cxcl12 expression in stromal cells (Mendez-Ferrer et al.,
2008). Here, we show that CXCR4 is also regulated under circadian control whose
rhythm is synchronized with its ligand, CXCL12, to optimize HSC trafficking.
These circadian oscillations are inverted in humans compared to the mouse and
continue to influence the yield even when stem cell mobilization is enforced. Our
results suggest that the human HSC yield for clinical transplantation might be
significantly greater if patients were harvested during the evening compared to
the morning.

PMCID: PMC4089094
PMID: 18940728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Cell Metab. 2008 Oct;8(4):289-300. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2008.09.006.

Regulation of feeding and metabolism by neuronal and peripheral clocks in
Drosophila.

Xu K(1), Zheng X, Sehgal A.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Neuroscience, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2008 Oct;8(4):279-80.

Studies in mammals have indicated a connection between circadian clocks and
feeding behavior, but the nature of the interaction and its relationship to
nutrient metabolism are not understood. In Drosophila, clock proteins are
expressed in many metabolically important tissues but have not been linked to
metabolic processes. Here we demonstrate that Drosophila feeding behavior
displays a 24 hr circadian rhythm that is regulated by clocks in
digestive/metabolic tissues. Flies lacking clocks in these tissues, in particular
in the fat body, also display increased food consumption but have decreased
levels of glycogen and a higher sensitivity to starvation. Interestingly,
glycogen levels and starvation sensitivity are also affected by clocks in
neuronal cells, but the effects of neuronal clocks generally oppose those of the 
fat body. We propose that the input of neuronal clocks and clocks in metabolic
tissues is coordinated to provide effective energy homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2703740
PMID: 18840359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 30;105(39):14946-51. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0802636105. Epub 2008 Sep 24.

Analysis and synthesis of high-amplitude Cis-elements in the mammalian circadian 
clock.

Kumaki Y(1), Ukai-Tadenuma M, Uno KD, Nishio J, Masumoto KH, Nagano M, Komori T, 
Shigeyoshi Y, Hogenesch JB, Ueda HR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Systems Biology, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN, 2-2-3
Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.

Mammalian circadian clocks consist of regulatory loops mediated by
Clock/Bmal1-binding elements, DBP/E4BP4 binding elements, and RevErbA/ROR binding
elements. As a step toward system-level understanding of the dynamic
transcriptional regulation of the oscillator, we constructed and used a mammalian
promoter/enhancer database (http://promoter.cdb.riken.jp/) with computational
models of the Clock/Bmal1-binding elements, DBP/E4BP4 binding elements, and
RevErbA/ROR binding elements to predict new targets of the clock and subsequently
validated these targets at the level of the cell and organism. We further
demonstrated the predictive nature of these models by generating and testing
synthetic regulatory elements that do not occur in nature and showed that these
elements produced high-amplitude circadian gene regulation. Biochemical
experiments to characterize these synthetic elements revealed the importance of
the affinity balance between transactivators and transrepressors in generating
high-amplitude circadian transcriptional output. These results highlight the
power of comparative genomics approaches for system-level identification and
knowledge-based design of dynamic regulatory circuits.

PMCID: PMC2553039
PMID: 18815372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 30;105(39):14753-4. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0807861105. Epub 2008 Sep 23.

Circadian glucose homeostasis requires compensatory interference between brain
and liver clocks.

Gatfield D(1), Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and National Center for Competence in Research
Frontiers in Genetics, Sciences III, University of Geneva, 30, Quai Ernest
Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva-4, Switzerland.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 30;105(39):15172-7.

PMCID: PMC2567439
PMID: 18812506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Neurosci Lett. 2008 Nov 28;446(1):40-4. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.08.091. Epub
2008 Sep 17.

Establishment of human cell lines showing circadian rhythms of bioluminescence.

Yoshikawa A(1), Shimada H, Numazawa K, Sasaki T, Ikeda M, Kawashima M, Kato N,
Tokunaga K, Ebisawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

We have established human retinal pigment epithelial cell lines stably expressing
the luciferase gene, driven by the human Bmal1 promoter, to obtain human-derived 
cells that show circadian rhythms of bioluminescence after dexamethasone
treatment. The average circadian period of bioluminescence for the obtained
clones was 24.07+/-0.48 h. Lithium (10 mM) in the medium significantly lengthened
the circadian period of bioluminescence, which is consistent with previous
reports, while 2 mM or 5 mM lithium had no effect. This is the first report on
the establishment of human-derived cell lines that proliferate infinitely and
show circadian rhythms of bioluminescence, and also the first to investigate the 
effects of low-dose lithium on the circadian rhythms of human-derived cells in
vitro. The established cells will be useful for various in vitro studies of human
circadian rhythms and for the development of new therapies for human disorders
related to circadian rhythm disturbances.

PMID: 18809466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. EMBO J. 2008 Oct 22;27(20):2757-65. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.183. Epub 2008 Sep
18.

Autonomous onset of the circadian clock in the zebrafish embryo.

Dekens MP(1), Whitmore D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London,
London, UK. marcus.dekens@gmail.com

On the first day of development a circadian clock becomes functional in the
zebrafish embryo. How this oscillator is set in motion remains unclear. We
demonstrate that zygotic period1 transcription begins independent of light
exposure. Pooled embryos maintained in darkness and under constant temperature
show elevated non-oscillating levels of period1 expression. Consequently, there
is no maternal effect or developmental event that sets the phase of the circadian
clock. Analysis of period1 transcription, at the cellular level in the absence of
environmental stimuli, reveals oscillations in cells that are asynchronous within
the embryo. Demonstrating an autonomous onset to rhythmic period1 expression.
Transcription of clock1 and bmal1 is rhythmic in the adult, but constant during
development in light-entrained embryos. Transient expression of dominant-negative
DeltaCLOCK blocks period1 transcription, thus showing that endogenous CLOCK is
essential for the transcriptional regulation of period1 in the embryo. We
demonstrate a default mechanism in the embryo that initiates the autonomous onset
of the circadian clock. This embryonic clock is differentially regulated from
that in the adult, the transition coinciding with the appearance of several clock
output processes.

PMCID: PMC2572168
PMID: 18800057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Ann Acad Med Singapore. 2008 Aug;37(8):662-8.

Basic science review on circadian rhythm biology and circadian sleep disorders.

Toh KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National University Hospital, Singapore.
Kong_Leong_TOH@nuh.com.sg

The sleep-wake cycle displays a characteristic 24-hour periodicity, providing an 
opportunity to dissect the endogenous circadian clock through the study of
aberrant behaviour. This article surveys the properties of circadian clocks, with
emphasis on mammals. Information was obtained from searches of peer-reviewed
literature in the PUBMED database. Features that are highlighted include the
known molecular components of clocks, their entrainment by external time cues and
the output pathways used by clocks to regulate metabolism and behaviour. A review
of human circadian rhythm sleep disorders follows, including recent discoveries
of their genetic basis. The article concludes with a discussion of future
approaches to the study of human circadian biology and sleep-wake behaviour.

PMID: 18797559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 30;105(39):15172-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0806717105. Epub 2008 Sep 8.

Physiological significance of a peripheral tissue circadian clock.

Lamia KA(1), Storch KF, Weitz CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 30;105(39):14753-4.

Mammals have circadian clocks in peripheral tissues, but there is no direct
evidence of their physiological importance. Unlike the suprachiasmatic nucleus
clock that is set by light and drives rest-activity and fasting-feeding cycles,
peripheral clocks are set by daily feeding, suggesting that at least some
contribute metabolic regulation. The liver plays a well known role in glucose
homeostasis, and we report here that mice with a liver-specific deletion of
Bmal1, an essential clock component, exhibited hypoglycemia restricted to the
fasting phase of the daily feeding cycle, exaggerated glucose clearance, and loss
of rhythmic expression of hepatic glucose regulatory genes. We conclude that the 
liver clock is important for buffering circulating glucose in a
time-of-day-dependent manner. Our findings suggest that the liver clock
contributes to homeostasis by driving a daily rhythm of hepatic glucose export
that counterbalances the daily cycle of glucose ingestion resulting from the
fasting-feeding cycle.

PMCID: PMC2532700
PMID: 18779586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Nov;295(5):E1032-7. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.90510.2008. Epub 2008 Aug 26.

Relationship between AMPK and the transcriptional balance of clock-related genes 
in skeletal muscle.

Vieira E(1), Nilsson EC, Nerstedt A, Ormestad M, Long YC, Garcia-Roves PM,
Zierath JR, Mahlapuu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Circadian clocks coordinate physiological, behavioral, and biochemical events
with predictable daily environmental changes by a self-sustained transcriptional 
feedback loop. CLOCK and ARNTL are transcriptional activators that regulate Per
and Cry gene expression. PER and CRY inhibit their own transcription, and their
turnover allows this cycle to restart. The transcription factors BHLHB2 and
BHLHB3 repress Per activation, whereas orphan nuclear receptors of the NR1D and
ROR families control Arntl expression. Here we show the AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK)gamma(3) subunit is involved in the regulation of peripheral
circadian clock function. AMPKgamma3 knockout (Prkag3(-/-)) mice or wild-type
littermates were injected with saline or an AMPK activator,
5-amino-4-imidazole-carboxamide riboside (AICAR), and white glycolytic
gastrocnemius muscle was removed for gene expression analysis. Genes involved in 
the regulation of circadian rhythms (Cry2, Nr1d1, and Bhlhb2) were differentially
regulated in response to AICAR in wild-type mice but remained unaltered in
Prkag3(-/-) mice. Basal expression of Per1 was higher in Prkag3(-/-) mice
compared with wild-type mice. Distinct diurnal changes in the respiratory
exchange ratio (RER) between the light and dark phase of the day were observed in
wild-type mice but not Prkag3(-/-) mice. In summary, the expression profile of
clock-related genes in skeletal muscle in response to AICAR, as well as the
diurnal shift in energy utilization, is impaired in AMPKgamma(3) subunit knockout
mice. Our results indicate AMPK heterotrimeric complexes containing the
AMPKgamma(3) subunit may play a specific role in linking circadian oscillators
and energy metabolism in skeletal muscle.

PMID: 18728219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. PLoS One. 2008 Jul 23;3(7):e2749. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002749.

Circadian genes are expressed during early development in Xenopus laevis.

Curran KL(1), LaRue S, Bronson B, Solis J, Trow A, Sarver N, Zhu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater,
Wisconsin, USA. currank@uww.edu

BACKGROUND: Circadian oscillators are endogenous time-keeping mechanisms that
drive twenty four hour rhythmic changes in gene expression, metabolism, hormone
levels, and physical activity. We have examined the developmental expression of
genes known to regulate circadian rhythms in order to better understand the
ontogeny of the circadian clock in a vertebrate.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, genes known to function together
in part of the core circadian oscillator mechanism (xPeriod1, xPeriod2, and
xBmal1) as well as a rhythmic, clock-controlled gene (xNocturnin) were analyzed
using in situ hybridization in embryos from neurula to late tailbud stages. Each 
transcript was present in the developing nervous system in the brain, eye,
olfactory pit, otic vesicle and at lower levels in the spinal cord. These genes
were also expressed in the developing somites and heart, but at different
developmental times in peripheral tissues (pronephros, cement gland, and
posterior mesoderm). No difference was observed in transcript levels or
localization when similarly staged embryos maintained in cyclic light were
compared at two times of day (dawn and dusk) by in situ hybridization.
Quantitation of xBmal1 expression in embryonic eyes was also performed using
qRT-PCR. Eyes were isolated at dawn, midday, dusk, and midnight (cylic light). No
difference in expression level between time-points was found in stage 31 eyes (p 
= 0.176) but stage 40 eyes showed significantly increased levels of xBmal1
expression at midnight (RQ = 1.98+/-0.094) when compared to dawn (RQ = 1+/-0.133;
p = 0.0004).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We hypothesize that when circadian genes are not
co-expressed in the same tissue during development that it may indicate
pleiotropic functions of these genes that are separate from the timing of
circadian rhythm. Our results show that all circadian genes analyzed thus far are
present during early brain and eye development, but rhythmic gene expression in
the eye is not observed until after stage 31 of development.

PMCID: PMC2518526
PMID: 18716681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2008 Oct;295(4):H1634-41. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00257.2008. Epub 2008 Aug 15.

Hypertension and disrupted blood pressure circadian rhythm in type 2 diabetic
db/db mice.

Su W(1), Guo Z, Randall DC, Cassis L, Brown DR, Gong MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Graduate Center for Nutritional Sciences,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

Human Type 2 diabetes is associated with increased incidence of hypertension and 
disrupted blood pressure (BP) circadian rhythm. Db/db mice have been used
extensively as a model of Type 2 diabetes, but their BP is not well
characterized. In this study, we used radiotelemetry to define BP and the
circadian rhythm in db/db mice. We found that the systolic, diastolic, and mean
arterial pressures were each significantly increased by 11, 8, and 9 mmHg in
db/db mice compared with controls. In contrast, no difference was observed in
pulse pressure or heart rate. Interestingly, both the length of time db/db mice
were active (locomotor) and the intensity of locomotor activity were
significantly decreased in db/db mice. In contrast to controls, the 12-h light
period average BP in db/db mice did not dip significantly from the 12-h dark
period. A partial Fourier analysis of the continuous 72-h BP data revealed that
the power and the amplitude of the 24-h period length rhythm were significantly
decreased in db/db mice compared with the controls. The acrophase was centered at
0141 in control mice, but became scattered from 1805 to 0236 in db/db mice. In
addition to BP, the circadian rhythms of heart rate and locomotor activity were
also disrupted in db/db mice. The mean arterial pressure during the light period 
correlates with plasma glucose, insulin, and body weight. Moreover, the
oscillations of the clock genes DBP and Bmal1 but not Per1 were significantly
dampened in db/db mouse aorta compared with controls. In summary, our data show
that db/db mice are hypertensive with a disrupted BP, heart rate, and locomotor
circadian rhythm. Such changes are associated with dampened oscillations of clock
genes DBP and Bmal1 in vasculature.

PMCID: PMC2593501
PMID: 18708447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Biol Rhythms. 2008 Aug;23(4):330-40. doi: 10.1177/0748730408320284.

Genetic differences in human circadian clock genes among worldwide populations.

Ciarleglio CM(1), Ryckman KK, Servick SV, Hida A, Robbins S, Wells N, Hicks J,
Larson SA, Wiedermann JP, Carver K, Hamilton N, Kidd KK, Kidd JR, Smith JR,
Friedlaender J, McMahon DG, Williams SM, Summar ML, Johnson CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Neuroscience Graduate Program, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, TN, USA.

The daily biological clock regulates the timing of sleep and physiological
processes that are of fundamental importance to human health, performance, and
well-being. Environmental parameters of relevance to biological clocks include
(1) daily fluctuations in light intensity and temperature, and (2) seasonal
changes in photoperiod (day length) and temperature; these parameters vary
dramatically as a function of latitude and locale. In wide-ranging species other 
than humans, natural selection has genetically optimized adaptiveness along
latitudinal clines. Is there evidence for selection of clock gene alleles along
latitudinal/photoperiod clines in humans? A number of polymorphisms in the human 
clock genes Per2, Per3, Clock, and AANAT have been reported as alleles that could
be subject to selection. In addition, this investigation discovered several novel
polymorphisms in the human Arntl and Arntl2 genes that may have functional impact
upon the expression of these clock transcriptional factors. The frequency
distribution of these clock gene polymorphisms is reported for diverse
populations of African Americans, European Americans, Ghanaians, Han Chinese, and
Papua New Guineans (including 5 subpopulations within Papua New Guinea). There
are significant differences in the frequency distribution of clock gene alleles
among these populations. Population genetic analyses indicate that these
differences are likely to arise from genetic drift rather than from natural
selection.

PMCID: PMC2579796
PMID: 18663240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cell. 2008 Jul 25;134(2):329-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.07.002.

The NAD+-dependent deacetylase SIRT1 modulates CLOCK-mediated chromatin
remodeling and circadian control.

Nakahata Y(1), Kaluzova M, Grimaldi B, Sahar S, Hirayama J, Chen D, Guarente LP, 
Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2008 Sep;9(9):653.
    Cell. 2008 Jul 25;134(2):212-4.

Circadian rhythms govern a large array of metabolic and physiological functions. 
The central clock protein CLOCK has HAT properties. It directs acetylation of
histone H3 and of its dimerization partner BMAL1 at Lys537, an event essential
for circadian function. We show that the HDAC activity of the NAD(+)-dependent
SIRT1 enzyme is regulated in a circadian manner, correlating with rhythmic
acetylation of BMAL1 and H3 Lys9/Lys14 at circadian promoters. SIRT1 associates
with CLOCK and is recruited to the CLOCK:BMAL1 chromatin complex at circadian
promoters. Genetic ablation of the Sirt1 gene or pharmacological inhibition of
SIRT1 activity lead to disturbances in the circadian cycle and in the acetylation
of H3 and BMAL1. Finally, using liver-specific SIRT1 mutant mice we show that
SIRT1 contributes to circadian control in vivo. We propose that SIRT1 functions
as an enzymatic rheostat of circadian function, transducing signals originated by
cellular metabolites to the circadian clock.

PMCID: PMC3526943
PMID: 18662547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Cell. 2008 Jul 25;134(2):317-28. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.06.050.

SIRT1 regulates circadian clock gene expression through PER2 deacetylation.

Asher G(1), Gatfield D, Stratmann M, Reinke H, Dibner C, Kreppel F, Mostoslavsky 
R, Alt FW, Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Sciences III, University of Geneva, 30, Quai 
Ernest Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva-4, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2008 Sep;9(9):653.
    Cell. 2008 Jul 25;134(2):212-4.

The mammalian circadian timing system is composed of a central pacemaker in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus of the brain that synchronizes countless subsidiary
oscillators in peripheral tissues. The rhythm-generating mechanism is thought to 
rely on a feedback loop involving positively and negatively acting transcription 
factors. BMAL1 and CLOCK activate the expression of Period (Per) and Cryptochrome
(Cry) genes, and once PER and CRY proteins accumulate to a critical level they
form complexes with BMAL1-CLOCK heterodimers and thereby repress the
transcription of their own genes. Here, we show that SIRT1, an NAD(+)-dependent
protein deacetylase, is required for high-magnitude circadian transcription of
several core clock genes, including Bmal1, Rorgamma, Per2, and Cry1. SIRT1 binds 
CLOCK-BMAL1 in a circadian manner and promotes the deacetylation and degradation 
of PER2. Given the NAD(+) dependence of SIRT1 deacetylase activity, it is likely 
that SIRT1 connects cellular metabolism to the circadian core clockwork
circuitry.

PMID: 18662546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Oct;28(19):6056-65. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00583-08. Epub 2008 Jul 
21.

Dual modification of BMAL1 by SUMO2/3 and ubiquitin promotes circadian activation
of the CLOCK/BMAL1 complex.

Lee J(1), Lee Y, Lee MJ, Park E, Kang SH, Chung CH, Lee KH, Kim K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742,
Republic of Korea.

Heterodimers of BMAL1 and CLOCK drive rhythmic expression of clock-controlled
genes, thereby generating circadian physiology and behavior. Posttranslational
modifications of BMAL1 play a key role in modulating the transcriptional activity
of the CLOCK/BMAL1 complex during the circadian cycle. Recently, we demonstrated 
that circadian activation of the heterodimeric transcription factor is
accompanied by ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis of BMAL1. Here we show that
modification by SUMO localizes BMAL1 exclusively to the promyelocytic leukemia
nuclear body (NB) and simultaneously promotes its transactivation and
ubiquitin-dependent degradation. Under physiological conditions, BMAL1 was
predominantly conjugated to poly-SUMO2/3 rather than SUMO1, and the level of
these conjugates underwent rhythmic variation, peaking at times of maximum
E-box-mediated circadian transcription. Interestingly, mutation of the
sumoylation site (Lys(259)) of BMAL1 markedly inhibited both its ubiquitination
and its proteasome-mediated proteolysis, and these effects were reversed by
covalent attachment of SUMO3 to the C terminus of the mutant BMAL1. Consistent
with this, SUSP1, a SUMO protease highly specific for SUMO2/3, abolished
ubiquitination, as well as sumoylation of BMAL1, while the ubiquitin protease
UBP41 blocked BMAL1 ubiquitination but induced accumulation of polysumoylated
BMAL1 and its localization to the NB. Furthermore, inhibition of proteasome with 
MG132 elicited robust nuclear accumulation of SUMO2/3- and ubiquitin-modified
BMAL1 that was restricted to the transcriptionally active stage of the circadian 
cycle. These results indicate that dual modification of BMAL1 by SUMO2/3 and
ubiquitin is essential for circadian activation and degradation of the
CLOCK/BMAL1 complex.

PMCID: PMC2546997
PMID: 18644859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Pineal Res. 2008 Nov;45(4):439-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2008.00612.x. Epub 
2008 Jul 1.

Increased melatonin synthesis in pineal glands of rats in streptozotocin induced 
type 1 diabetes.

Peschke E(1), Wolgast S, Bazwinsky I, Pönicke K, Muhlbauer E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Martin Luther University,
Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany. elmar.peschke@medizin.uni-halle.de

It is well-documented that melatonin influences insulin secretion. The effects
are mediated by specific, high-affinity, pertussis-toxin-sensitive, G
protein-coupled membrane receptors (MT(1) as well MT(2)), which are present in
both the pancreatic tissue and islets of rats and humans, as well as in rat
insulinoma cells (INS1). Via the Gi-protein-adenylatecyclase-3',5'-cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and, possibly, the guanylatecyclase-cGMP pathways,
melatonin decreases insulin secretion, whereas, by activating the
Gq-protein-phospholipase C-IP(3) pathway, it has the opposite effect. For further
analysis of the interactions between melatonin and insulin, diabetic rats were
investigated with respect to melatonin synthesis in the pineal gland and plasma
insulin levels. In this context, recent investigations have proven that type 2
diabetic rats and humans display decreased melatonin levels, whereas type 1
diabetic IDDM rats or those with diabetes induced by streptozotocin (STZ) of the 
present study show increased plasma melatonin levels and elevated AA-NAT-mRNA.
Furthermore, the mRNA of pineal insulin receptors and beta1-adrenoceptors,
including the clock genes Per1 and Bmal1 and the clock-controlled output gene
Dbp, increases in both young and middle-aged STZ rats. The results therefore
indicate that the decreased insulin levels in STZ-induced type 1 diabetes are
associated with higher melatonin plasma levels. In good agreement with earlier
investigations, it was shown that the elevated insulin levels observed in type 2 
diabetes, are associated with decreased melatonin levels. The results thus prove 
that a melatonin-insulin antagonism exists. Astonishingly, notwithstanding the
drastic metabolic disturbances in STZ-diabetic rats, the diurnal rhythms of the
parameters investigated are maintained.

PMID: 18624957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Neurobiol Aging. 2010 Apr;31(4):696-705. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.05.024. Epub 2008 Jul 9.

Effects of age on clock gene expression in the rhesus macaque pituitary gland.

Sitzmann BD(1), Lemos DR, Ottinger MA, Urbanski HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon
Health and Science University, Beaverton, OR 97006, USA.

Recent studies have shown that circadian clock genes are expressed in various
peripheral tissues, raising the possibility that multiple clocks regulate
circadian physiology. To study clock gene expression in the rhesus macaque
pituitary gland we used gene microarray data and found that the pituitary glands 
of young and old adult males express several components of the circadian clock
(Per1, Per2, Cry1, Bmal1, Clock, Rev-erbalpha and Csnk1varepsilon).
Semi-quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (sqRT-PCR)
confirmed the presence of these core-clock genes and detected significant
age-related differences in the expression of Per2. sqRT-PCR also showed
differential expression of core-clock genes at two opposing time-points over the 
24-h day, with greater expression of Per2 and Bmal1 (P<0.05) at 1300h as compared
to 0100h. Immunohistochemistry revealed rhythmic expression of REV-ERBalpha in
the pituitary glands of female macaques. These data provide evidence that the
rhesus macaque pituitary gland expresses core-clock genes and their associated
protein products in a 24-h rhythmic pattern, and that their expression is
moderately impacted by aging processes.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC2823945
PMID: 18614257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Jul;83(1):43-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.06.003. Epub 2008 
Jun 26.

Fragile X-related proteins regulate mammalian circadian behavioral rhythms.

Zhang J(1), Fang Z, Jud C, Vansteensel MJ, Kaasik K, Lee CC, Albrecht U, Tamanini
F, Meijer JH, Oostra BA, Nelson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Fragile X syndrome results from the absence of the fragile X mental retardation 1
(FMR1) gene product (FMRP). FMR1 has two paralogs in vertebrates: fragile X
related gene 1 and 2 (FXR1 and FXR2). Here we show that Fmr1/Fxr2 double knockout
(KO) and Fmr1 KO/Fxr2 heterozygous animals exhibit a loss of rhythmic activity in
a light:dark (LD) cycle, and that Fmr1 or Fxr2 KO mice display a shorter
free-running period of locomotor activity in total darkness (DD). Molecular
analysis and in vitro electrophysiological studies suggest essentially normal
function of cells in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) in Fmr1/Fxr2 double KO
mice. However, the cyclical patterns of abundance of several core clock component
messenger (m) RNAs are altered in the livers of double KO mice. Furthermore,
FXR2P alone or FMRP and FXR2P together can increase PER1- or PER2-mediated
BMAL1-Neuronal PAS2 (NPAS2) transcriptional activity in a dose-dependent manner. 
These data collectively demonstrate that FMR1 and FXR2 are required for the
presence of rhythmic circadian behavior in mammals and suggest that this role may
be relevant to sleep and other behavioral alterations observed in fragile X
patients.

PMCID: PMC2443847
PMID: 18589395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mol Cell Biochem. 2008 Oct;317(1-2):169-77. doi: 10.1007/s11010-008-9846-x. Epub 
2008 Jun 28.

CLOCK/BMAL1 regulates human nocturnin transcription through binding to the E-box 
of nocturnin promoter.

Li R(1), Yue J, Zhang Y, Zhou L, Hao W, Yuan J, Qiang B, Ding JM, Peng X, Cao JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical
College, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Beijing, 100005, China.

Nocturnin has been identified as a clock-controlled gene based on its rhythmic
expression and night-time peak of transcript level in Xenopus retina. Further
studies show that the widespread expression and rhythmicity of nocturnin mRNA
level parallel the expression of clock genes. In Xenopus, nocturnin transcription
is regulated by cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) binding the
nocturnin element (NE). However, mechanism(s) underlying the regulation of
nocturnin transcription in human cells is unknown at present. In this study, we
demonstrated that the transcription of human nocturnin gene displayed circadian
oscillations in Huh7 cells (a human hepatoma cell line) and was regulated by
CLOCK/BMAL1 heterodimer via the E-box of nocturnin promoter. In addition, E-box2 
is more efficient than E-box1 in the regulation of CLOCK/BMAL1 on nocturnin
transcription in vitro.

PMID: 18587630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Gene. 2008 Aug 1;419(1-2):27-34. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2008.04.010. Epub 2008 Apr
27.

Effects of light cues on re-entrainment of the food-dominated peripheral clocks
in mammals.

Wu T(1), Jin Y, Ni Y, Zhang D, Kato H, Fu Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of Biological and Environmental Engineering, Zhejiang University of
Technology, China.

Although the light/dark (LD) cycle is a weak Zeitgeber in peripheral clocks
compared with food stimuli, whether the effect of light cues on the
re-entrainment of peripheral clocks can be masked by that of the dominating food 
cue remains unknown. In the present study, the individual reversal of LD cycle
for 7 days could not obviously affect circadian patterns of core clock genes
(Bmal1, Cry1, Per1, and Dec1) in the liver and heart of restricted-fed rats. In
contrast, reversing the feeding schedule together with the LD cycle markedly
enhanced the re-entrainment of peripheral clocks compared with reversal of the
feeding regimen alone. In addition, LD reversal alone for 7 days contrarily
regulated the expression levels of Cry1, Per1, and Dec1 in the liver and heart.
Moreover, daytime restricted feeding not only induced different phase shift rates
of the four examined clock genes but also led to reversed phase shift direction
in their resetting processes in these two peripheral clocks. Furthermore, the
resetting sequences of these genes were also disparate between these two
peripheral clocks. These observations suggest that the mechanisms underlying the 
liver and heart clocks are distinct, which may distinguish them from each other
in the SCN-synchronized peripheral system.

PMID: 18538509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Eur J Neurosci. 2008 May;27(10):2686-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06231.x.
Epub 2008 May 29.

The circadian pacemaker in the cultured suprachiasmatic nucleus from pup mice is 
highly sensitive to external perturbation.

Nishide SY(1), Honma S, Honma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
N-15, W-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

The circadian clock in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus (SCN)
entrains to non-photic maternal rhythms in the fetal and neonatal periods of
rodents but this capacity disappears in later life. In order to understand the
mechanism behind the non-photic entrainment in the early postnatal period, the
phase response of the clock gene (Bmal1) expression rhythm to external stimuli
was examined in cultured SCN harvested at postnatal day 6. The SCN was obtained
from transgenic mice carrying a bioluminescence reporter for Bmal1 expression.
Phase-dependent phase shifts of circadian rhythm were detected in the pup as well
as in the adult for culture medium exchange but the amount of phase shift was
significantly larger in the pup than in the adult SCN. Half of the pup SCNs did
not show integrated circadian rhythmicities in the first few days in culture. In 
pups, the circadian period of Bmal1 expression rhythm was shorter and the
amplitude of circadian rhythm was much lower than in adults. It is concluded that
the responsiveness of cultured SCN to medium exchange is much larger in pups than
in adult mice. Immaturity of the structural organization in the circadian system 
seems to underlie the high responsiveness of the pup SCN.

PMID: 18513319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Science. 2008 May 23;320(5879):1074-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1153277.

Differential rescue of light- and food-entrainable circadian rhythms.

Fuller PM(1), Lu J, Saper CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Division of Sleep Medicine, and Program in
Neuroscience, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2008 Oct 31;322(5902):675; author reply 675.

When food is plentiful, circadian rhythms of animals are powerfully entrained by 
the light-dark cycle. However, if animals have access to food only during their
normal sleep cycle, they will shift most of their circadian rhythms to match the 
food availability. We studied the basis for entrainment of circadian rhythms by
food and light in mice with targeted disruption of the clock gene Bmal1, which
lack circadian rhythmicity. Injection of a viral vector containing the Bmal1 gene
into the suprachiasmatic nuclei of the hypothalamus restored light-entrainable,
but not food-entrainable, circadian rhythms. In contrast, restoration of the
Bmal1 gene only in the dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus restored the ability of
animals to entrain to food but not to light. These results demonstrate that the
dorsomedial hypothalamus contains a Bmal1-based oscillator that can drive food
entrainment of circadian rhythms.

PMCID: PMC3489954
PMID: 18497298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS Biol. 2008 May 20;6(5):e119. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060119.

Circadian transcription contributes to core period determination in Drosophila.

Kadener S(1), Menet JS, Schoer R, Rosbash M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts, United
States of America.

The Clock-Cycle (CLK-CYC) heterodimer constitutes a key circadian transcription
complex in Drosophila. CYC has a DNA-binding domain but lacks an activation
domain. Previous experiments also indicate that most of the transcriptional
activity of CLK-CYC derives from the glutamine-rich region of its partner CLK. To
address the role of transcription in core circadian timekeeping, we have analyzed
the effects of a CYC-viral protein 16 (VP16) fusion protein in the Drosophila
system. The addition of this potent and well-studied viral transcriptional
activator (VP16) to CYC imparts to the CLK-CYC-VP16 complex strongly enhanced
transcriptional activity relative to that of CLK-CYC. This increase is manifested
in flies expressing CYC-VP16 as well as in S2 cells. These flies also have
increased levels of CLK-CYC direct target gene mRNAs as well as a short period,
implicating circadian transcription in period determination. A more detailed
examination of reporter gene expression in CYC-VP16-expressing flies suggests
that the short period is due at least in part to a more rapid transcriptional
phase. Importantly, the behavioral effects require a period (per) promoter and
are therefore unlikely to be merely a consequence of generally higher PER levels.
This indicates that the CLK-CYC-VP16 behavioral effects are a consequence of
increased per transcription. All of this also suggests that the timing of
transcriptional activation and not the activation itself is the key event
responsible for the behavioral effects observed in CYC-VP16-expressing flies. The
results taken together indicate that circadian transcription contributes to core 
circadian function in Drosophila.

PMCID: PMC2386838
PMID: 18494558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jul;28(14):4642-52. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01612-07. Epub 2008 May 
12.

Rhythmic E-box binding by CLK-CYC controls daily cycles in per and tim
transcription and chromatin modifications.

Taylor P(1), Hardin PE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Biological Clocks, Department of Biology, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas 77845-3258, USA.

The Drosophila melanogaster circadian oscillator comprises interlocked per/tim
and Clk transcriptional feedback loops. In the per/tim loop, CLK-CYC-dependent
transcriptional activation is rhythmically repressed by PER or PER-TIM to control
circadian gene expression that peaks around dusk. Here we show that rhythmic
transcription of per and tim involves time-of-day-specific binding of CLK-CYC and
associated cycles in chromatin modifications. Activation of per and tim
transcription occurs in concert with CLK-CYC binding to upstream and/or intronic 
E-boxes, acetylation of histone H3-K9, and trimethylation of histone H3-K4. These
events are associated with RNA polymerase II (Pol II) binding to the tim promoter
and transcriptional elongation by Pol II that is constitutively bound to the per 
promoter. Repression of per and tim transcription is associated with
PER-dependent reversal of these events. Rhythms in H3-K9 acetylation and H3-K4
trimethylation are also associated with CLOCK-BMAL1-dependent transcription in
mammals, indicating that the mechanism that controls rhythmic transcription is a 
conserved feature of the circadian clock even though feedback repression is
mediated by different proteins.

PMCID: PMC2447118
PMID: 18474612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. PLoS Genet. 2008 Feb 29;4(2):e1000023. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000023.

Redundant function of REV-ERBalpha and beta and non-essential role for Bmal1
cycling in transcriptional regulation of intracellular circadian rhythms.

Liu AC(1), Tran HG, Zhang EE, Priest AA, Welsh DK, Kay SA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, Division of Biological Sciences,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of
America.

The mammalian circadian clockwork is composed of a core PER/CRY feedback loop and
additional interlocking loops. In particular, the ROR/REV/Bmal1 loop, consisting 
of ROR activators and REV-ERB repressors that regulate Bmal1 expression, is
thought to "stabilize" core clock function. However, due to functional redundancy
and pleiotropic effects of gene deletions, the role of the ROR/REV/Bmal1 loop has
not been accurately defined. In this study, we examined cell-autonomous circadian
oscillations using combined gene knockout and RNA interference and demonstrated
that REV-ERBalpha and beta are functionally redundant and are required for
rhythmic Bmal1 expression. In contrast, the RORs contribute to Bmal1 amplitude
but are dispensable for Bmal1 rhythm. We provide direct in vivo genetic evidence 
that the REV-ERBs also participate in combinatorial regulation of Cry1 and Rorc
expression, leading to their phase-delay relative to Rev-erbalpha. Thus, the
REV-ERBs play a more prominent role than the RORs in the basic clock mechanism.
The cellular genetic approach permitted testing of the robustness of the
intracellular core clock function. We showed that cells deficient in both
REV-ERBalpha and beta function, or those expressing constitutive BMAL1, were
still able to generate and maintain normal Per2 rhythmicity. Our findings thus
underscore the resilience of the intracellular clock mechanism and provide
important insights into the transcriptional topologies underlying the circadian
clock. Since REV-ERB function and Bmal1 mRNA/protein cycling are not necessary
for basic clock function, we propose that the major role of the ROR/REV/Bmal1
loop and its constituents is to control rhythmic transcription of clock output
genes.

PMCID: PMC2265523
PMID: 18454201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Neurosci. 2008 Apr 30;28(18):4619-23. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3410-07.2008.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase is a functional component of the autonomous
circadian system in the suprachiasmatic nucleus.

Akashi M(1), Hayasaka N, Yamazaki S, Node K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Failure Research, Faculty of Medicine, Saga University,
Saga 849-8501, Japan. akashima@med.saga-u.ac.jp

The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) is the master circadian pacemaker driving
behavioral and physiological rhythms in mammals. Circadian activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase [MAPK; also known as ERK (extracellular
signal-regulated kinase)] is observed in vivo in the SCN under constant darkness,
although the biological significance of this remains unclear. To elucidate this
question, we first examined whether MAPK was autonomously activated in ex vivo
SCN slices. Moreover, we investigated the effect of MAPK inhibition on circadian 
clock gene expression and neuronal firing rhythms using SCN-slice culture
systems. We show herein that MAPK is autonomously activated in the SCN, and our
data demonstrate that inhibition of the MAPK activity results in dampened rhythms
and reduced basal levels in circadian clock gene expression at the SCN
single-neuron level. Furthermore, MAPK inhibition attenuates autonomous circadian
neuronal firing rhythms in the SCN. Thus, our data suggest that light-independent
MAPK activity contributes to the robustness of the SCN autonomous circadian
system.

PMCID: PMC2440636
PMID: 18448638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mol Immunol. 2008 Jun;45(11):3163-7. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.03.004. Epub 2008
Apr 22.

Expression of human beta-defensin 1 is regulated via c-Myc and the biological
clock.

Sherman H(1), Froy O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Food Science and Nutrition, Faculty of
Agricultural, Food and Environmental Quality, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
P.O. Box 12, Rehovot 76100, Israel.

Human beta-defensin 1 (hBD-1) is an important antibacterial polypeptide whose
expression is not induced by infection or inflammation. Our objective was to
study the regulation of hBD-1 expression. Recently, we found that albumin
up-regulated hBD-1 as well as c-Myc expression, suggesting that c-Myc may
regulate hBD-1 expression via a non-inflammatory pathway. Direct evidence for the
involvement of c-Myc was achieved by the inhibition of hBD-1 expression in the
presence of a specific c-Myc inhibitor. Since both c-Myc and CLOCK:BMAL1
heterodimer, the complex of the core clock mechanism, bind to E-box
(5'-CACGTG-3') and E-box-like sequences to activate transcription, we studied
whether hBD-1 expression was also regulated by the biological clock.
Synchronization of HCT-116 cells by dexamethasone showed oscillation of hBD-1 and
c-myc mRNA indicating that both are clock-controlled output genes. Using
transfections and luciferase reporter assays in human embryonic kidney (HEK-293) 
cells, we found that hBD-1 promoter was induced by CLOCK:BMAL1 co-expression.
hBD-1 promoter truncation and mutagenesis analyses revealed that the distal
E-box-like binding sequence was the target of both CLOCK:BMAL1 and c-Myc for
hBD-1 expression. This activation was abolished when CRY1 was co-expressed in
these cells. Thus, hBD-1 expression is mediated by c-Myc and the CLOCK:BMAL1
heterodimer, whereas CRY1 expression represses this complex. These changes in
hBD-1 levels lead to its circadian oscillation.

PMID: 18433872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. BMC Mol Biol. 2008 Apr 22;9:41. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-9-41.

Interaction of circadian clock proteins PER2 and CRY with BMAL1 and CLOCK.

Langmesser S(1), Tallone T, Bordon A, Rusconi S, Albrecht U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Biochemistry, University of Fribourg, Rue 
du Musée 5, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland. sonja.langmesser@unifr.ch

BACKGROUND: Circadian oscillation of clock-controlled gene expression is mainly
regulated at the transcriptional level. Heterodimers of CLOCK and BMAL1 act as
activators of target gene transcription; however, interactions of PER and CRY
proteins with the heterodimer abolish its transcriptional activation capacity.
PER and CRY are therefore referred to as negative regulators of the circadian
clock. To further elucidate the mechanism how positive and negative components of
the clock interplay, we characterized the interactions of PER2, CRY1 and CRY2
with BMAL1 and CLOCK using a mammalian two-hybrid system and
co-immunoprecipitation assays.
RESULTS: Both PER2 and the CRY proteins were found to interact with BMAL1 whereas
only PER2 interacts with CLOCK. CRY proteins seem to have a higher affinity to
BMAL1 than PER2. Moreover, we provide evidence that PER2, CRY1 and CRY2 bind to
different domains in the BMAL1 protein.
CONCLUSION: The regulators of clock-controlled transcription PER2, CRY1 and CRY2 
differ in their capacity to interact with each single component of the
BMAL1-CLOCK heterodimer and, in the case of BMAL1, also in their interaction
sites. Our data supports the hypothesis that CRY proteins, especially CRY1, are
stronger repressors than PER proteins.

PMCID: PMC2383916
PMID: 18430226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Thromb Haemost. 2008 Jul;6(7):1144-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2008.02978.x.
Epub 2008 Jul 1.

Food-entrained rhythmic expression of PER2 and BMAL1 in murine megakaryocytes
does not correlate with circadian rhythms in megakaryopoiesis.

Hartley PS(1), John Sheward W, French K, Horn JM, Holmes MC, Harmar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Queens Medical Research Institute, The
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. p.s.hartley@ed.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Circadian rhythms control a vast array of biological processes in a
broad spectrum of organisms. The contribution of circadian rhythms to the
development of megakaryocytes and the regulation of platelet biology has not been
defined.
OBJECTIVES: This study tested the hypothesis that murine megakaryocytes exhibit
hallmarks of circadian control.
METHODS: Mice expressing a PER2::LUCIFERASE circadian reporter protein and
C57BI/6 mice were used to establish if megakaryocytes expressed circadian genes
in vitro and in vivo. Mice were also subjected to 3 weeks on a restricted feeding
regime to separate food-entrained from light-entrained circadian rhythms.
Quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), flow cytometry and
imunohistochemistry were employed to analyse gene expression, DNA content and
cell-cycle behavior in megakaryocytes collected from mice over a 24-h period.
RESULTS: Megakaryocytes exhibited rhythmic expression of the clock genes mPer2
and mBmal1 and circadian rhythms in megakaryopoiesis. mPer2 and mBmal1 expression
phase advanced 8 h to coincide with the availability of food; however, food
availability had a more complex effect on megakaryopoiesis, leading to a
significant overall increase in megakaryocyte ploidy levels and cell-cycle
activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Normal megakaryopoiesis requires synchrony between food- and
light-entrained circadian oscillators.

PMID: 18419744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2007;72:637-44. doi: 10.1101/sqb.2007.72.031.

Role for the Clock gene in bipolar disorder.

McClung CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9070, USA.

Nearly all patients with bipolar disorder have severely disrupted circadian
rhythms. Treatment with mood stabilizers can restore these daily rhythms, and
this is correlated with patient recovery. However, it is still uncertain whether 
clock abnormalities are the cause of bipolar disorder or if these rhythm
disruptions are secondary to alterations in other circuits. Furthermore, the
mechanism by which the circadian clock might influence mood is still unclear.
With cloning and characterization of the circadian genes and recent advances in
molecular biology, we are starting to understand this strong association between 
circadian rhythms and bipolar disorder. Recent human genetic and mouse behavioral
studies indicate that the Clock gene is particularly relevant in the mood
disruptions associated with this disorder. Furthermore, it appears that Clock
expression outside of the central pacemaker of the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) 
is involved in mood regulation. In this chapter, the evidence linking circadian
rhythms, the Clock gene, and bipolar disorder is discussed, along with the
possible biology that underlies this connection.

PMID: 18419323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2007;72:477-82. doi: 10.1101/sqb.2007.72.050.

The clock proteins, aging, and tumorigenesis.

Kondratov RV(1), Antoch MP.

Author information: 
(1)BGES Department, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio 44115, USA.

Many aspects of mammalian physiology and behavior are driven by an intrinsic
timekeeping system that has an important role in synchronizing various biological
processes within an organism and coordinating them with the environment. It is
believed that deregulation of this coordination may cause the development of
various pathologies. However, recent studies using mice deficient in individual
components of the circadian system clearly demonstrated more complex interaction 
of the circadian system with various biological processes. The growing amount of 
evidence suggests that in addition to their roles in the core clock mechanism,
some of the components of the molecular oscillator are involved in modulation of 
such diverse physiological processes as response to genotoxic stress, regulation 
of the cell cycle, aging, and carcinogenesis. These new data provide a
mechanistic link between deregulation of the circadian system and/or some of its 
core components and the development of various pathologies, suggesting novel
strategies for the disease treatment and prevention.

PMID: 18419307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2007;72:307-18. doi: 10.1101/sqb.2007.72.053.

Physiological importance of a circadian clock outside the suprachiasmatic
nucleus.

Storch KF(1), Paz C, Signorovitch J, Raviola E, Pawlyk B, Li T, Weitz CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Circadian clocks are widely distributed in mammalian tissues, but little is known
about the physiological functions of clocks outside the suprachiasmatic nucleus
of the brain. The retina has an intrinsic circadian clock, but its importance for
vision is unknown. Here, we show that mice lacking Bmal1, a gene required for
clock function, had abnormal retinal transcriptional responses to light and
defective inner retinal electrical responses to light, but normal photoreceptor
responses to light and retinas that appeared structurally normal as observed by
light and electron microscopy. We generated mice with a retina-specific genetic
deletion of Bmal1, and they had defects of retinal visual physiology essentially 
identical to those of mice lacking Bmal1 in all tissues and lacked a circadian
rhythm of inner retinal electrical responses to light. Our findings indicate that
the intrinsic circadian clock of the retina regulates retinal visual processing
in vivo.

PMID: 18419288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2007;72:251-9. doi: 10.1101/sqb.2007.72.052.

Genetics and neurobiology of circadian clocks in mammals.

Siepka SM(1), Yoo SH, Park J, Lee C, Takahashi JS.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois
60208, USA.

In animals, circadian behavior can be analyzed as an integrated system, beginning
with genes and leading ultimately to behavioral outputs. In the last decade, the 
molecular mechanism of circadian clocks has been unraveled primarily by the use
of phenotype-driven (forward) genetic analysis in a number of model systems.
Circadian oscillations are generated by a set of genes forming a transcriptional 
autoregulatory feedback loop. In mammals, there is a "core" set of circadian
genes that form the primary negative feedback loop of the clock mechanism
(Clock/Npas2, Bmal1, Per1, Per2, Cry1, Cry2, and CK1epsilon). A further dozen
candidate genes have been identified and have additional roles in the circadian
gene network such as the feedback loop involving Rev-erbalpha. Despite this
remarkable progress, it is clear that a significant number of genes that strongly
influence and regulate circadian rhythms in mammals remain to be discovered and
identified. As part of a large-scale N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea mutagenesis screen
using a wide range of nervous system and behavioral phenotypes, we have
identified a number of new circadian mutants in mice. Here, we describe a new
short-period circadian mutant, part-time (prtm), which is caused by a
loss-of-function mutation in the Cryptochrome1 (Cry1) gene. We also describe a
long-period circadian mutant named Overtime (Ovtm). Positional cloning and
genetic complementation reveal that Ovtm is encoded by the F-box protein FBXL3, a
component of the SKP1-CUL1-F-box protein (SCF) E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. The
Ovtm mutation causes an isoleucine to threonine (I364T) substitution leading to a
loss of function in FBXL3 that interacts specifically with the CRYPTOCHROME (CRY)
proteins. In Ovtm mice, expression of the PERIOD proteins PER1 and PER2 is
reduced; however, the CRY proteins CRY1 and CRY2 are unchanged. The loss of FBXL3
function leads to a stabilization of the CRY proteins, which in turn leads to a
global transcriptional repression of the Per and Cry genes. Thus, Fbxl3(Ovtm)
defines a molecular link between CRY turnover and CLOCK/BMAL1-dependent circadian
transcription to modulate circadian period.

PMCID: PMC3749845
PMID: 18419282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2007;72:243-50. doi: 10.1101/sqb.2007.72.038.

What is there left to learn about the Drosophila clock?

Blau J(1), Blanchard F, Collins B, Dahdal D, Knowles A, Mizrak D, Ruben M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, New York University, New York, New York 10003, USA.

Circadian rhythms offer probably the best understanding of how genes control
behavior, and much of this understanding has come from studies in Drosophila.
More recently, genetic manipulation of clock neurons in Drosophila has helped
identify how daily patterns of activity are programmed by different clock neuron 
groups. Here, we review some of the more recent findings on the fly molecular
clock and ask what more the fly model can offer to circadian biologists.

PMCID: PMC2637790
PMID: 18419281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2007;72:105-12. doi: 10.1101/sqb.2007.72.049.

Chromatin remodeling and circadian control: master regulator CLOCK is an enzyme.

Grimaldi B(1), Nakahata Y, Sahar S, Kaluzova M, Gauthier D, Pham K, Patel N,
Hirayama J, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California,
Irvine, California 92697, USA.

The molecular machinery that governs circadian rhythmicity is based on clock gene
products organized in regulatory feedback loops. Recently, we have shown that
CLOCK, a master circadian regulator, has histone acetyltransferase activity
essential for clock gene expression. The Lys-14 residue of histone H3 is a
preferential target of CLOCK-mediated acetylation. As the role of chromatin
remodeling in eukaryotic transcription is well recognized, this finding
identified unforeseen links between histone acetylation and cellular physiology. 
Indeed, we have shown that the enzymatic function of CLOCK drives circadian
control. We reasoned that CLOCK's acetyltransferase activity could also target
nonhistone proteins, a feature displayed by other HATs. Indeed, CLOCK also
acetylates a nonhistone substrate: its own partner, BMAL1. This protein undergoes
rhythmic acetylation in the mouse liver, with a timing that parallels the
down-regulation of circadian transcription of clock-controlled genes. BMAL1 is
specifically acetylated on a unique, highly conserved Lys-537 residue. This
acetylation facilitates recruitment of the repressor CRY1 to BMAL1, indicating
that CLOCK may intervene in negative circadian regulation. Our findings reveal
that the enzymatic interplay between two clock core components is crucial for the
circadian machinery.

PMID: 18419267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Circulation. 2008 Apr 22;117(16):2087-95. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.739227.
Epub 2008 Apr 14.

Genetic components of the circadian clock regulate thrombogenesis in vivo.

Westgate EJ(1), Cheng Y, Reilly DF, Price TS, Walisser JA, Bradfield CA,
FitzGerald GA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.

BACKGROUND: Myocardial infarction, stroke, and sudden death undergo diurnal
variation. Although genes relevant to hemostasis and vascular integrity undergo
circadian oscillation, the role of the molecular clock in thrombotic events
remains to be established.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A diurnal variation in the time to thrombotic vascular
occlusion (TTVO) subsequent to a photochemical injury was observed in wild-type
mice: TTVO varied from 24.6+/-2.7 minutes at zeitgeber time (ZT) 2 to 40.3+/-4.3 
minutes at ZT8, 24.3+/-2.3 minutes at ZT14, and 31.0+/-4.4 minutes at ZT20. This 
pattern was disrupted or altered when core clock genes-BMAL1, CLOCK, and
NPAS2-were mutated or deleted. Mutation of CLOCK abolished the diurnal variation 
in TTVO, whereas deletion of NPAS2 altered its temporal pattern. NPAS2 deletion
prolonged TTVO and reduced blood pressure irrespective of clock time. Global
BMAL1 deletion shortened TTVO at ZT8, and the diurnal variation in TTVO, but not 
in systemic blood pressure, was disrupted in mice in which BMAL1 had been
selectively deleted in endothelium.
CONCLUSIONS: Key components of the molecular clock regulate the response to a
thrombogenic stimulus in vivo. Such a phenomenon may interact with environmental 
variables, and together with the influence of these genes on blood pressure may
contribute to the diurnal variation in cardiovascular events observed in humans.

PMID: 18413500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;28(12):4080-92. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02168-07. Epub 2008 Apr 
14.

DEC1 modulates the circadian phase of clock gene expression.

Nakashima A(1), Kawamoto T, Honda KK, Ueshima T, Noshiro M, Iwata T, Fujimoto K, 
Kubo H, Honma S, Yorioka N, Kohno N, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

DEC1 suppresses CLOCK/BMAL1-enhanced promoter activity, but its role in the
circadian system of mammals remains unclear. Here we examined the effect of Dec1 
overexpression or deficiency on circadian gene expression triggered with 50%
serum. Overexpression of Dec1 delayed the phase of clock genes such as Dec1,
Dec2, Per1, and Dbp that contain E boxes in their regulatory regions, whereas it 
had little effect on the circadian phase of Per2 and Cry1 carrying CACGTT E'
boxes. In contrast, Dec1 deficiency advanced the phase of the E-box-containing
clock genes but not that of the E'-box-containing clock genes. Accordingly, DEC1 
showed strong binding and transrepression on the E box, but not on the E' box, in
chromatin immunoprecipitation, electrophoretic mobility shift, and luciferase
reporter assays. Dec1-/- mice showed behavioral rhythms with slightly but
significantly longer circadian periods under conditions of constant darkness and 
faster reentrainment to a 6-h phase-advanced shift of a light-dark cycle.
Knockdown of Dec2 with small interfering RNA advanced the phase of Dec1 and Dbp
expression, and double knockdown of Dec1 and Dec2 had much stronger effects on
the expression of the E-box-containing clock genes. These findings suggest that
DEC1, along with DEC2, plays a role in the finer regulation and robustness of the
molecular clock.

PMCID: PMC2423136
PMID: 18411297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Biol Rhythms. 2008 Apr;23(2):140-9. doi: 10.1177/0748730408314572.

Reorganization of the suprachiasmatic nucleus coding for day length.

Naito E(1), Watanabe T, Tei H, Yoshimura T, Ebihara S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomodeling, Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya
University, Nagoya, Japan.

In mammals, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the circadian pacemaker, receives 
light information via the retina and functions in the entrainment of circadian
rhythms and in phasing the seasonal responses of behavioral and physiological
functions. To better understand photoperiod-related alterations in the SCN
physiology, we analyzed the clock gene expression in the mouse SCN by performing 
in situ hybridization and real-time monitoring of the mPer1::luc bioluminescence.
Under long photoperiod (LP) conditions, the expression rhythms of mPer1 and Bmal1
in the caudal SCN phase-led those in the rostral SCN; further, within the middle 
SCN, the rhythms in the ventrolateral (VL)-like subdivision advanced compared
with those in the dorsomedial (DM)-like subdivision. The mPer1::luc rhythms in
the entire coronal slice obtained from the middle SCN exhibited 2 peaks with a
wide peak width under LP conditions. Imaging analysis of the mPer1::luc rhythms
in several subdivisions of the rostral, middle, caudal, and horizontal SCN
revealed wide regional variations in the peak time in the rostral half of the SCN
under LP conditions. These variations were not due to alterations in the waveform
of a single SCN neuronal rhythm. Our results indicate that LP conditions induce
phase changes in the rhythms in multiple regions in the rostral half of the SCN; 
this leads to different circadian waveforms in the entire SCN, coding for day
length.

PMID: 18375863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biol Rhythms. 2008 Apr;23(2):103-16. doi: 10.1177/0748730407313817.

The clockwork orange Drosophila protein functions as both an activator and a
repressor of clock gene expression.

Richier B(1), Michard-Vanhée C, Lamouroux A, Papin C, Rouyer F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

The Drosophila clock relies on transcriptional feedback loops that generate daily
oscillations of the clock gene expression at mRNA and protein levels. In the
evening, the CLOCK (CLK) and CYCLE (CYC) basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) PAS-domain
transcription factors activate the expression of the period (per) and timeless
(tim) genes. Posttranslational modifications delay the accumulation of PER and
TIM, which inhibit CLK/CYC activity in the late night. We show here that a null
mutant of the clockwork orange (cwo) gene encoding a bHLH orange-domain putative 
transcription factor displays long-period activity rhythms. cwo loss of function 
increases cwo mRNA levels but reduces mRNA peak levels of the 4 described CLK/CYC
targets, inducing an almost complete loss of their cycling. In addition, the
absence of CWO induces alterations of PER and CLK phosphorylation cycles. Our
results indicate that, in vivo, CWO modulates clock gene expression through both 
repressor and activator transcriptional functions.

PMID: 18375860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 16;369(4):1184-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.03.009. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

Altered Stra13 and Dec2 circadian gene expression in hypoxic cells.

Guillaumond F(1), Lacoche S, Dulong S, Grechez-Cassiau A, Filipski E, Li XM, Lévi
F, Berra E, Delaunay F, Teboul M.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, CNRS FRE3094, 28 Av. Valrose, 06108 Nice,
France.

The circadian system regulates rhythmically most of the mammalian physiology in
synchrony with the environmental light/dark cycle. Alteration of circadian clock 
gene expression has been associated with tumour progression but the molecular
links between the two mechanisms remain poorly defined. Here we show that Stra13 
and Dec2, two circadian transcriptional regulators which play a crucial role in
cell proliferation and apoptosis are overexpressed and no longer rhythmic in
serum shocked fibroblasts treated with CoCl(2,) a substitute of hypoxia. This
effect is associated with a loss of circadian expression of the clock genes
Rev-erbalpha and Bmal1, and the clock-controlled gene Dbp. Consistently,
cotransfection assays demonstrate that STRA13 and DEC2 both antagonize
CLOCK:BMAL1 dependent transactivation of the Rev-erbalpha and Dbp promoters.
Using a transplantable osteosarcoma tumour model, we show that hypoxia is
associated with altered circadian expression of Stra13, Dec2, Rev-erbalpha, Bmal1
and Dbp in vivo. These observations collectively support the notion that
overexpression of Stra13 and Dec2 links hypoxia signalling to altered circadian
clock gene expression.

PMID: 18342625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Med Sci (Paris). 2008 Mar;24(3):270-6. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2008243270.

[Synchronization and genetic redundancy in circadian clocks].

[Article in French]

Dardente H(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Zoology Building, Tillydrone Avenue, Aberdeen
AB24 2TZ, Ecosse, Royaume-Uni. h.dardente@abdn.ac.uk

A network of feedback loops constitutes the basis for circadian timing in
mammals. Complex transcriptional, post-transcriptional and post-translational
events are also involved in the ticking of circadian clocks, allowing them to run
autonomously with their characteristic, near-24h period. Central to the molecular
mechanism is the CLOCK/BMAL1 heterodimer of transcription factors. Recent data
using Clock knock-out mice however suggest that CLOCK may not be as mandatory as 
initially suggested from data gathered in the Clock mutant mouse model. Indeed,
it appears that the Clock homolog Npas2 is able to functionally compensate for
Clock genetic ablation. Furthermore, real-time imaging techniques using different
clock genes knock-out lines established on a PER2 ::Luc knock-in background now
demonstrate that persistent rhythmicity in the suprachiasmatic nuclei likely
arises as a consequence of combined genetic redundancy and strong intercellular
coupling, the latter characteristic being likely weakened in peripheral tissues
such as liver or lung. The present review aims at summarizing current knowledge
of the molecular basis of circadian clocks and possible differences between
central and peripheral clocks in light of recent findings in Clock knock-out
mice.

PMID: 18334175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 May;28(10):3477-88. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02227-07. Epub 2008 Mar 
10.

Rhythmic SAF-A binding underlies circadian transcription of the Bmal1 gene.

Onishi Y(1), Hanai S, Ohno T, Hara Y, Ishida N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biological Resources and Functions, National Institute of
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan. y-onishi@aist.go.jp

Although Bmal1 is a key component of the mammalian clock system, little is
understood about the actual mechanism of circadian Bmal1 gene transcription,
particularly at the chromatin level. Here we discovered a unique chromatin
structure within the Bmal1 promoter. The RORE region, which is a critical cis
element for the circadian regulation of the Bmal1 gene, is comprised of GC-rich
open chromatin. The 3'-flanking region of the promoter inhibited rhythmic
transcription in the reporter gene assay in vitro even in the presence of
RORalpha and REV-ERBalpha. We also found that the nuclear matrix protein SAF-A
binds to the 3'-flanking region with circadian timing, which was correlated with 
Bmal1 expression by footprinting in vivo. These results suggest that the unique
chromatin structure containing SAF-A is required for the circadian
transcriptional regulation of the Bmal1 gene in cells.

PMCID: PMC2423175
PMID: 18332112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Bone. 2008 May;42(5):861-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2007.12.226. Epub 2008 Jan 26.

Circadian mechanisms in murine and human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
following dexamethasone exposure.

Wu X(1), Yu G, Parks H, Hebert T, Goh BC, Dietrich MA, Pelled G, Izadpanah R,
Gazit D, Bunnell BA, Gimble JM.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, LA, 
USA.

A core group of regulatory factors control circadian rhythms in mammalian cells. 
While the suprachiasmatic nucleus in the brain serves as the central core
circadian oscillator, circadian clocks also exist within peripheral tissues and
cells. A growing body of evidence has demonstrated that >20% of expressed mRNAs
in bone and adipose tissues oscillate in a circadian manner. The current
manuscript reports evidence of the core circadian transcriptional apparatus
within primary cultures of murine and human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem 
cells (BMSCs). Exposure of confluent, quiescent BMSCs to dexamethasone
synchronized the oscillating expression of the mRNAs encoding the albumin D
binding protein (dbp), brain-muscle arnt-like 1 (bmal1), period 3 (per3), rev-erb
alpha (Rev A), and rev-erb beta (Rev B). The genes displayed a mean oscillatory
period of 22.2 to 24.3 h. The acrophase or peak expression of mRNAs encoding
"positive" (bmal1) and "negative" (per3) components of the circadian regulatory
apparatus were out of phase with each other by approximately 8-12 h, consistent
with in vivo observations. In vivo, phosphyrylation by glycogen synthase kinase
3beta (GSK3beta) is known to regulate the turnover of per3 and components of the 
core circadian regulatory apparatus. In vitro addition of lithium chloride, a
GSK3beta inhibitor, significantly shifted the acrophase of all genes by 4.2-4.7 h
oscillation in BMSCs; however, only the male murine BMSCs displayed a significant
increase in the length of the period of oscillation. We conclude that human and
murine BMSCs represent a valid in vitro model for the analysis of circadian
mechanisms in bone metabolism and stem cell biology.

PMCID: PMC2423188
PMID: 18302991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. PLoS Comput Biol. 2008 Feb;4(2):e38. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0040038.

Modeling an evolutionary conserved circadian cis-element.

Paquet ER(1), Rey G, Naef F.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland.

Circadian oscillator networks rely on a transcriptional activator called
CLOCK/CYCLE (CLK/CYC) in insects and CLOCK/BMAL1 or NPAS2/BMAL1 in mammals.
Identifying the targets of this heterodimeric basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factor poses challenges and it has been difficult to decipher its
specific sequence affinity beyond a canonical E-box motif, except perhaps for
some flanking bases contributing weakly to the binding energy. Thus, no good
computational model presently exists for predicting CLK/CYC, CLOCK/BMAL1, or
NPAS2/BMAL1 targets. Here, we use a comparative genomics approach and first study
the conservation properties of the best-known circadian enhancer: a 69-bp element
upstream of the Drosophila melanogaster period gene. This fragment shows a signal
involving the presence of two closely spaced E-box-like motifs, a configuration
that we can also detect in the other four prominent CLK/CYC target genes in
flies: timeless, vrille, Pdp1, and cwo. This allows for the training of a
probabilistic sequence model that we test using functional genomics datasets. We 
find that the predicted sequences are overrepresented in promoters of genes
induced in a recent study by a glucocorticoid receptor-CLK fusion protein. We
then scanned the mouse genome with the fly model and found that many known
CLOCK/BMAL1 targets harbor sequences matching our consensus. Moreover, the phase 
of predicted cyclers in liver agreed with known CLOCK/BMAL1 regulation. Taken
together, we built a predictive model for CLK/CYC or CLOCK/BMAL1-bound
cis-enhancers through the integration of comparative and functional genomics
data. Finally, a deeper phylogenetic analysis reveals that the link between the
CLOCK/BMAL1 complex and the circadian cis-element dates back to before insects
and vertebrates diverged.

PMCID: PMC2242825
PMID: 18282089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Apr 18;368(4):955-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.031. Epub 2008 Feb 15.

Relationship between circadian oscillations of Rev-erbalpha expression and
intracellular levels of its ligand, heme.

Rogers PM(1), Ying L, Burris TP.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Receptor Biology Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center,
Louisiana State University System, 6400 Perkins Road, LA 70808, USA.

The nuclear hormone receptors, REV-ERBalpha [NR1D1] and REV-ERBbeta [NR1D1], were
recently demonstrated to be receptors for the porphyrin, heme. Heme regulates the
ability of these receptors to repress transcription of their target genes via
modulation of the affinity of the receptor's ligand binding domain for the
corepressor, NCoR. The REV-ERBs function as critical components of the mammalian 
clock and their expression oscillates in a circadian manner. Here, we show that
in NIH3T3 cells intracellular heme levels also oscillate in a circadian fashion. 
These data are the first to show the temporal relationship of intracellular heme 
levels to the expression of its receptor, Rev-erbalpha, and suggest that the
rapid oscillations in heme levels may an important component regulating REV-ERB
transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC2746331
PMID: 18280802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Biol Rhythms. 2008 Feb;23(1):26-36. doi: 10.1177/0748730407311254.

The circadian clock protein BMAL1 is necessary for fertility and proper
testosterone production in mice.

Alvarez JD(1), Hansen A, Ord T, Bebas P, Chappell PE, Giebultowicz JM, Williams
C, Moss S, Sehgal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Although it is well established that the circadian clock regulates mammalian
reproductive physiology, the molecular mechanisms by which this regulation occurs
are not clear. The authors investigated the reproductive capacity of mice lacking
Bmal1 (Arntl, Mop3), one of the central circadian clock genes. They found that
both male and female Bmal1 knockout (KO) mice are infertile. Gross and
microscopic inspection of the reproductive anatomy of both sexes suggested
deficiencies in steroidogenesis. Male Bmal1 KO mice had low testosterone and high
luteinizing hormone serum concentrations, suggesting a defect in testicular
Leydig cells. Importantly, Leydig cells rhythmically express BMAL1 protein,
suggesting peripheral control of testosterone production by this clock protein.
Expression of steroidogenic genes was reduced in testes and other steroidogenic
tissues of Bmal1 KO mice. In particular, expression of the steroidogenic acute
regulatory protein (StAR) gene and protein, which regulates the rate-limiting
step of steroidogenesis, was decreased in testes from Bmal1 KO mice. A direct
effect of BMAL1 on StAR expression in Leydig cells was indicated by in vitro
experiments showing enhancement of StAR transcription by BMAL1. Other hormonal
defects in male Bmal1 KO mice suggest that BMAL1 also has functions in
reproductive physiology outside of the testis. These results enhance
understanding of how the circadian clock regulates reproduction.

PMCID: PMC2862364
PMID: 18258755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Mar;36(4):e23. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn018. Epub 2008 Feb 5.

Detection of a circadian enhancer in the mDbp promoter using prokaryotic
transposon vector-based strategy.

Kiyohara YB(1), Nishii K, Ukai-Tadenuma M, Ueda HR, Uchiyama Y, Yagita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Osaka University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Yamadaoka 2-2, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

In mammals, the expression of 5-10% of genes occurs with circadian fluctuation in
various organs and tissues. This cyclic transcription is thought to be directly
or indirectly regulated through circadian transcriptional/translational feedback 
loops consisting of a set of clock genes. Among the clock genes in mammals,
expression of the Dbp mRNA robustly oscillates both in vivo and in culture cells.
Here, we present circadian enhancer detection strategy using prokaryotic
transposon system. The mDbp promoter drives reporter gene expression in robust
circadian cycles in rat-1 fibroblasts. To identify the circadian enhancer
generating this robust rhythm, we developed a prokaryotic transposon-based
enhancer detecting vector for in vitro transposition. Using this system, we
identified a strong circadian enhancer region containing the CATGTG sequence in
the 5' flanking region of the mDbp gene; this enhancer region is critical for the
ability of the mDbp promoter to drive robust oscillation in living cells. This
enhancer is classified as a CANNTG type non-canonical E-box. These findings
strongly suggest that CANNTG-type non-canonical E-boxes may contribute, at least 
in part, to the regulation of robust circadian gene expression. Furthermore,
these data may help explain the wider effects of the CLOCK/BMAL1 complex in
control of clock output genes.

PMCID: PMC2275109
PMID: 18252768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Oct 5;147B(7):1047-55. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30714.

Clock genes may influence bipolar disorder susceptibility and dysfunctional
circadian rhythm.

Shi J(1), Wittke-Thompson JK, Badner JA, Hattori E, Potash JB, Willour VL,
McMahon FJ, Gershon ES, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Several previous studies suggest that dysfunction of circadian rhythms may
increase susceptibility to bipolar disorder (BP). We conducted an association
study of five circadian genes (CRY2, PER1-3, and TIMELESS) in a family collection
of 36 trios and 79 quads (Sample I), and 10 circadian genes (ARNTL, ARNTL2,
BHLHB2, BHLHB3, CLOCK, CRY1, CSNK1D, CSNK1E, DBP, and NR1D1) in an extended
family collection of 70 trios and 237 quads (Sample II), which includes the same 
114 families but not necessarily the same individuals as Sample I. In Sample II, 
the Sibling-Transmission Disequilibrium Test (sib-tdt) analysis showed nominally 
significant association of BP with three SNPs within or near the CLOCK gene
(rs534654, P = 0.0097; rs6850524, P = 0.012; rs4340844, P = 0.015). In addition, 
SNPs in the ARNTL2, CLOCK, DBP, and TIMELESS genes and haplotypes in the ARNTL,
CLOCK, CSNK1E, and TIMELESS genes showed suggestive evidence of association with 
several circadian phenotypes identified in BP patients. However, none of these
associations reached gene-wide or experiment-wide significance after correction
for multiple-testing. A multi-locus interaction between rs6442925 in the 5'
upstream of BHLHB2, rs1534891 in CSNK1E, and rs534654 near the 3' end of the
CLOCK gene, however, is significantly associated with BP (P = 0.00000172). It
remains significant after correcting for multiple testing using the False
Discovery Rate method. Our results indicate an interaction between three
circadian genes in susceptibility to bipolar disorder.

PMCID: PMC2574897
PMID: 18228528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(7):2213-20. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01608-07. Epub 2008 Jan
28.

Bifunctional role of Rev-erbalpha in adipocyte differentiation.

Wang J(1), Lazar MA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 700 CRB, 415 Curie Blvd.,
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6149, USA.

The nuclear receptor Rev-erbalpha is a potent transcriptional repressor that
regulates circadian rhythm and metabolism. Here we demonstrate a dissociation
between Rev-erbalpha mRNA and protein levels that profoundly influences adipocyte
differentiation. During adipogenesis, Rev-erbalpha gene expression initially
declines and subsequently increases. Remarkably, Rev-erbalpha protein levels are 
nearly the opposite, increasing early in adipogenesis and then markedly
decreasing in adipocytes. The Rev-erbalpha protein is necessary for the early
mitotic events that are required for adipogenesis. The subsequent reduction in
Rev-erbalpha protein, due to increased degradation via the 26S proteasome, is
also required for adipocyte differentiation because Rev-erbalpha represses the
expression of PPARgamma2, the master transcriptional regulator of adipogenesis.
Thus, opposite to what might be predicted from Rev-erbalpha gene expression,
Rev-erbalpha protein levels must rise and then fall for adipocyte differentiation
to occur.

PMCID: PMC2268425
PMID: 18227153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Neuroendocrinol. 2008 Mar;20(3):323-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.2008.01651.x.
Epub 2008 Jan 16.

Diurnal rhythmicity of the canonical clock genes Per1, Per2 and Bmal1 in the rat 
adrenal gland is unaltered after hypophysectomy.

Fahrenkrug J(1), Hannibal J, Georg B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Bispebjerg Hospital, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. bbhjanf@inet.uni2.dk

Circadian rhythms are generated by endogenous clocks in the central brain
oscillator, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), and peripheral tissues. The
molecular basis for the circadian clock consists of a number of genes and
proteins that form transcriptional/translational feedback loops. Rhythmic
expression of clock genes in the adrenal glands has previously been reported.
Since the central clock in the SCN communicates with the adrenal glands via
circadian release of adrenocorticotrophic hormone, we quantified the mRNAs for
the canonical clock genes, Per1, Per2 and Bmal1 in the adrenal glands by
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction during a 24-h-cycle in 
normal and hypophysectomised rats. The mRNAs for all the three clock genes
disclosed rhythmic oscillations with a period of 24 h and the phase did not
differ between the hypophysectomised and intact rats. The expression pattern of
Per1 and Bmal1 was in antiphase in both groups of animals. In situ hybridisation 
histochemistry using antisense RNA probes demonstrated that, at times of peak
expression, mRNAs for all the three clock genes were expressed in the adrenal
cortex with a particularly strong labelling in the zona reticularis. In
accordance with the mRNA localisation, immunostaining for PER1 protein was
visualised in cells of the adrenal cortex, being most intense in the inner zone. 
The immunostaining also demonstrated a translocation of PER1 protein from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus during the daily cycle, supporting the existence of a
core oscillator in the individual adrenal gland cells. Our findings support the
existence of a circadian core oscillator in cells of the rat adrenal cortex and
indicate that the activity of the oscillator is independent of SCN signalling via
the pituitary gland. The adrenal cortical clock could be involved in rhythmic
transcriptional activation of genes associated with hormonal biosynthesis,
involved in gating of the response of the adrenal cortex to external cues or
involved in apoptosis of adrenal cortical cells.

PMID: 18208549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Endocrinology. 2008 Apr;149(4):1454-61. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-1518. Epub 2008 Jan 
10.

Clock gene expression in adult primate suprachiasmatic nuclei and adrenal: is the
adrenal a peripheral clock responsive to melatonin?

Valenzuela FJ(1), Torres-Farfan C, Richter HG, Mendez N, Campino C, Torrealba F, 
Valenzuela GJ, Serón-Ferré M.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Fisiopatología, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de Chile, Casilla, Santiago 9, Chile.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2008 Apr;149(4):1451-3.

The circadian production of glucocorticoids involves the concerted action of
several factors that eventually allow an adequate adaptation to the environment. 
Circadian rhythms are controlled by the circadian timing system that comprises
peripheral oscillators and a central rhythm generator located in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus, driven by the self-regulatory 
interaction of a set of proteins encoded by genes named clock genes. Here we
describe the phase relationship between the SCN and adrenal gland for the
expression of selected core clock transcripts (Per-2, Bmal-1) in the adult
capuchin monkey, a New World, diurnal nonhuman primate. In the SCN we found a
higher expression of Bmal-1 during the h of darkness (2000-0200 h) and Per-2
during daytime h (1400 h). The adrenal gland expressed clock genes in oscillatory
fashion, with higher values for Bmal-1 during the day (1400-2000 h), whereas
Per-2 was higher at nighttime (about 0200 h), resulting in a 9- to 12-h antiphase
pattern. In the adrenal gland, the oscillation of clock genes was accompanied by 
rhythmic expression of a functional output, the steroidogenic enzyme
3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. Furthermore, we show that adrenal explants
maintained oscillatory expression of Per-2 and Bmal-1 for at least 36 h in
culture. The acrophase of both transcripts, but not its overall expression along 
the incubation, was blunted by 100 nm melatonin. Altogether, these results
demonstrate oscillation of clock genes in the SCN and adrenal gland of a diurnal 
primate and support an oscillation of clock genes in the adrenal gland that may
be modulated by the neurohormone melatonin.

PMID: 18187542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. BMC Mol Biol. 2008 Jan 4;9:1. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-9-1.

A direct repeat of E-box-like elements is required for cell-autonomous circadian 
rhythm of clock genes.

Nakahata Y(1), Yoshida M, Takano A, Soma H, Yamamoto T, Yasuda A, Nakatsu T,
Takumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Osaka Bioscience Institute, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan.
yasu_nakahata@yahoo.co.jp

BACKGROUND: The circadian expression of the mammalian clock genes is based on
transcriptional feedback loops. Two basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) PAS (for
Period-Arnt-Sim) domain-containing transcriptional activators, CLOCK and BMAL1,
are known to regulate gene expression by interacting with a promoter element
termed the E-box (CACGTG). The non-canonical E-boxes or E-box-like sequences have
also been reported to be necessary for circadian oscillation.
RESULTS: We report a new cis-element required for cell-autonomous circadian
transcription of clock genes. This new element consists of a canonical E-box or a
non-canonical E-box and an E-box-like sequence in tandem with the latter with a
short interval, 6 base pairs, between them. We demonstrate that both E-box or
E-box-like sequences are needed to generate cell-autonomous oscillation. We also 
verify that the spacing nucleotides with constant length between these 2
E-elements are crucial for robust oscillation. Furthermore, by in silico analysis
we conclude that several clock and clock-controlled genes possess a direct repeat
of the E-box-like elements in their promoter region.
CONCLUSION: We propose a novel possible mechanism regulated by double E-box-like 
elements, not to a single E-box, for circadian transcriptional oscillation. The
direct repeat of the E-box-like elements identified in this study is the minimal 
required element for the generation of cell-autonomous transcriptional
oscillation of clock and clock-controlled genes.

PMCID: PMC2254435
PMID: 18177499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2007 Dec;62(12):1357-60.

Central and peripheral mechanisms of aging and frailty: a report on the 8th
Longevity Consortium Symposium, Santa Fe, New Mexico, May 16-18, 2007.

Kahn AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco
Coordinating Center, San Francisco, CA 94107, USA. arnold.kahn@ucsf.edu

PMID: 18166686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 22;283(8):4535-42. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

The circadian clock component BMAL1 is a critical regulator of p21WAF1/CIP1
expression and hepatocyte proliferation.

Gréchez-Cassiau A(1), Rayet B, Guillaumond F, Teboul M, Delaunay F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie et Physiopathologie des Systèmes Intégrés, Université 
de Nice-Sophia-Antipolis, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 06108
Nice cedex 2, France.

Most living organisms show circadian (approximately 24 h) rhythms in physiology
and behavior. These oscillations are generated by endogenous circadian clocks,
present in virtually all cells where they control key biological processes.
Although circadian gating of mitosis has been reported for many years in some
peripheral tissues, the underlying molecular mechanisms have remained poorly
understood. Here we show that the cell cycle inhibitor p21WAF1/CIP1 is
rhythmically expressed in mouse peripheral organs. This rhythmic pattern of mRNA 
and protein expression was recapitulated in vitro in serum-shocked differentiated
skeletal muscle cells. p21WAF1/CIP1 circadian expression is dramatically
increased and no longer rhythmic in clock-deficient Bmal1-/- knock-out mice.
Biochemical and genetic data show that oscillation of p21WAF1/CIP1 gene
transcription is regulated by the antagonistic activities of the orphan nuclear
receptors REV-ERBalpha/beta and RORalpha4/gamma, which are core clock regulators.
Importantly, p21WAF1/CIP1 overexpressing Bmal1-/- primary hepatocytes exhibit a
decreased proliferation rate. This phenotype could be reversed using small
interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of p21WAF1/CIP1. These data establish a novel 
molecular link between clock and cell cycle genes and suggest that the G1
progression phase is a target of the circadian clock during liver cell
proliferation.

PMID: 18086663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Nature. 2007 Dec 13;450(7172):1086-90.

CLOCK-mediated acetylation of BMAL1 controls circadian function.

Hirayama J(1), Sahar S, Grimaldi B, Tamaru T, Takamatsu K, Nakahata Y,
Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California
Irvine, Irvine 92697-4625, California, USA.

Regulation of circadian physiology relies on the interplay of interconnected
transcriptional-translational feedback loops. The CLOCK-BMAL1 complex activates
clock-controlled genes, including cryptochromes (Crys), the products of which act
as repressors by interacting directly with CLOCK-BMAL1. We have demonstrated that
CLOCK possesses intrinsic histone acetyltransferase activity and that this
enzymatic function contributes to chromatin-remodelling events implicated in
circadian control of gene expression. Here we show that CLOCK also acetylates a
non-histone substrate: its own partner, BMAL1, is specifically acetylated on a
unique, highly conserved Lys 537 residue. BMAL1 undergoes rhythmic acetylation in
mouse liver, with a timing that parallels the downregulation of circadian
transcription of clock-controlled genes. BMAL1 acetylation facilitates
recruitment of CRY1 to CLOCK-BMAL1, thereby promoting transcriptional repression.
Importantly, ectopic expression of a K537R-mutated BMAL1 is not able to rescue
circadian rhythmicity in a cellular model of peripheral clock. These findings
reveal that the enzymatic interplay between two clock core components is crucial 
for the circadian machinery.

PMID: 18075593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2007 Nov;15(11):2560-70.

Induction of circadian gene expression in human subcutaneous adipose-derived stem
cells.

Wu X(1), Zvonic S, Floyd ZE, Kilroy G, Goh BC, Hernandez TL, Eckel RH, Mynatt RL,
Gimble JM.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana 70808, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Genes encoding the circadian transcriptional apparatus exhibit robust 
oscillatory expression in murine adipose tissues. This study tests the hypothesis
that human subcutaneous adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) provide an in vitro
model in which to monitor the activity of the core circadian transcriptional
apparatus.
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: Primary cultures of undifferentiated or
adipocyte-differentiated ASCs were treated with dexamethasone, rosiglitazone, or 
30% fetal bovine serum. The response of undifferentiated ASCs to dexamethasone
was further evaluated in the presence of lithium chloride. Lithium inhibits
glycogen synthase kinase 3, a key component of the circadian apparatus. Total RNA
was harvested at 4-hour intervals over 48 hours and examined by real-time reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Adipocyte-differentiated cells responded more rapidly to treatments than
their donor-matched undifferentiated controls; however, the period of the
circadian gene oscillation was longer in the adipocyte-differentiated cells.
Dexamethasone generated circadian gene expression patterns with mean periods of
25.4 and 26.7 hours in undifferentiated and adipocyte-differentiated ASCs,
respectively. Both rosiglitazone and serum shock generated a significantly longer
period in adipocyte-differentiated ASCs relative to undifferentiated ASCs. The
Bmal1 profile was phase-shifted by approximately 8 to 12 hours relative to Per1, 
Per3, and Cry2, consistent with their expression in vivo. Lithium chloride
inhibited adipogenesis and significantly lengthened the period of Per3 and
Rev-erbalpha gene expression profiles by >5 hours in dexamethasone-activated
undifferentiated ASCs.
DISCUSSION: These results support the initial hypothesis and validate ASCs as an 
in vitro model for the analysis of circadian biology in human adipose tissue.

PMID: 18070747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jan;28(2):784-93. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Expression levels of estrogen receptor beta are modulated by components of the
molecular clock.

Cai W(1), Rambaud J, Teboul M, Masse I, Benoit G, Gustafsson JA, Delaunay F,
Laudet V, Pongratz I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, S-141 57
Huddinge, Sweden.

Circadian regulation of gene expression plays a major role in health and disease.
The precise role of the circadian system remains to be clarified, but it is known
that circadian proteins generate physiological rhythms in organisms by regulating
clock-controlled target genes. The estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta) is, together
with ERalpha, a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily and a key mediator of 
estrogen action. Interestingly, recent studies show that disturbed circadian
rhythmicity in humans can increase the risk of reproductive malfunctions,
suggesting a link between the circadian system and ER-mediated transcription
pathways. Here, we identify a novel level of regulation of estrogen signaling
where ERbeta, but not ERalpha, is controlled by circadian clock proteins. We show
that ERbeta mRNA levels fluctuate in different peripheral tissues following a
robust circadian pattern, with a peak at the light-dark transition, which is
maintained under free-running conditions. Interestingly, this oscillation is
abolished in clock-deficient BMAL1 knockout mice. Circadian control of ERbeta
expression is exerted through a conserved E-box element in the ERbeta promoter
region that recruits circadian regulatory factors. Furthermore, using small
interfering RNA-mediated knockdown assays, we show that the expression levels of 
the circadian regulatory factors directly influence estrogen signaling by
regulating the intracellular levels of endogenous ERbeta.

PMCID: PMC2223432
PMID: 18039858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Mar;20(3):573-83. Epub 2005 Nov 3.

Chronic treatment with prednisolone represses the circadian oscillation of clock 
gene expression in mouse peripheral tissues.

Koyanagi S(1), Okazawa S, Kuramoto Y, Ushijima K, Shimeno H, Soeda S, Okamura H, 
Ohdo S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacy, Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi Higashi-ku, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan.

Although altered homeostatic regulation, including disturbance of 24-h rhythms,
is often observed in the patients undergoing glucocorticoid therapy, the
mechanisms underlying the disturbance remains poorly understood. We report here
that chronic treatment with a synthetic glucocorticoid, prednisolone (PSL), can
cause alteration of circadian clock function at molecular level. Treatment of
cultured hepatic cells (HepG2) with PSL induced expression of Period1 (Per1), and
the PSL treatment also attenuated the serum-induced oscillations in the
expression of Period2 (Per2), Rev-erbalpha, and Bmal1 mRNA in HepG2 cells.
Because the attenuation of clock gene oscillations was blocked by pretreating the
cells with a Per1 antisense phosphothioate oligodeoxynucleotide, the extensive
expression of Per1 induced by PSL may have resulted in the reduced amplitude of
other clock gene oscillations. Continuous administration of PSL into mice
constitutively increased the Per1 mRNA levels in liver and skeletal muscle, which
seems to attenuate the oscillation in the expressions of Per2, Rev-erbalpha, and 
Bmal1. However, a single daily administration of PSL at the time of day
corresponding to acrophase of endogenous glucocorticoid levels had little effect 
on the rhythmic expression of clock genes. These results suggest a possible
pharmacological action by PSL on the core circadian oscillation mechanism and
indicate the possibility that the alteration of clock function induced by PSL can
be avoided by optimizing the dosing schedule.

PMID: 16269518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Biol Rhythms. 2005 Oct;20(5):391-403.

Differential control of Bmal1 circadian transcription by REV-ERB and ROR nuclear 
receptors.

Guillaumond F(1), Dardente H, Giguère V, Cermakian N.

Author information: 
(1)Douglas Hospital Research Centre, McGill University, 6875 LaSalle Blvd,
Montreal, QC, Canada.

Circadian rhythms result from feedback loops involving clock genes and their
protein products. In mammals, 2 orphan nuclear receptors, REV-ERBalpha and
RORalpha, play important roles in the transcription of the clock gene Bmal1. The 
authors now considerably extend these findings with the demonstration that all
members of the REV-ERB (alpha and beta) and ROR (alpha, beta, and gamma) families
repress and activate Bmal1 transcription, respectively. The authors further show 
that transcription of Bmal1 is the result of competition between REV-ERBs and
RORs at their specific response elements (RORE). Moreover, they demonstrate that 
Reverb genes are similarly expressed in the thymus, skeletal muscle, and kidney, 
whereas Ror genes present distinct expression patterns. Thus, the results
indicate that all members of the REV-ERB and ROR families are crucial components 
of the molecular circadian clock. Furthermore, their strikingly different
patterns of expression in nervous and peripheral tissues provide important
insights into functional differences between circadian clocks within the
organism.

PMID: 16267379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Nihon Shokakibyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2005 Oct;102(10):1267-74.

[Circadian rhythm in cancer: target for cancer?].

[Article in Japanese]

Takebayashi Y(1), Takenoshita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Fukusahima Medical University School of Medicine.

PMID: 16262157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Proteins. 2005 Dec 1;61(4):699-703.

Weighing in on a Timeless controversy.

Perry J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla, California 92093, USA. jmperry@biomail.ucsd.edu

Timeless (Tim) and Period (Per) are coordinately synthesized interacting proteins
that in response to positional/environmental cues comigrate to the nucleus as
obligate heterodimers where they act to suppress their own gene expression as
part of the circadian rhythm network in Drosophila. There has been considerable
controversy about the structural nature of Tim because of somewhat conflicting
results generated by the automated threading algorithm 3D-PSSM. With use of a
computer-assisted but largely manual approach, it is shown here that Tim is
composed of repetitive structural elements and that those elements comprise two
ARM repeat domains, validating the essence of the original 3D-PSSM prediction.
Eleven individual ARM structural units are assigned, and a phylogenetic analysis 
showing their relatedness to one another is performed. In addition, there appears
to be a small domain of prenyltransferase-like repeats C-terminal to the second
ARM domain, which went undetected in previous analyses. Although we cannot know
the precise conformation it adopts until a structure is solved, Tim emerges here 
as clearly a member of the helical repeat protein superfamily. Given its role in 
periodic nuclear translocation, Tim may, therefore, have a functional analogy
with the photoperiod-responsive protein Phor1 and other karyopherin-like
molecules.

Proteins 2005. 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16231302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Neurosci. 2005 Oct 5;25(40):9304-8.

Circadian regulation and function of voltage-dependent calcium channels in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus.

Nahm SS(1), Farnell YZ, Griffith W, Earnest DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Medical Neurobiology, College of Medicine,
Texas A&M University Health Science Center, College Station, Texas 77843-1114,
USA.

Individual neurons within the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCNs) are capable of
functioning as autonomous clocks and generating circadian rhythms in the
expression of genes that form the molecular clockworks. Limited information is
available on how these molecular oscillations in individual clock cells are
coordinated to provide for the ensemble rhythmicity that is normally observed
from the entire SCN. Because calcium influx via voltage-dependent calcium
channels (VDCCs) has been implicated in the regulation of gene expression and
synchronization of rhythmicity across the population of SCN clock cells, we first
examined the rat SCN and an immortalized line of SCN cells (SCN2.2) for
expression and circadian regulation of different VDCC alpha1 subunits. The rat
SCN and SCN2.2 cells exhibited mRNA expression for all major types of VDCC alpha1
subunits. Relative levels of VDCC expression in the rat SCN and SCN2.2 cells were
greatest for L-type channels, moderate for P/Q- and T-type channels, and minimal 
for R- and N-type channels. Interestingly, both rat SCN and SCN2.2 cells showed
rhythmic expression of P/Q- and T-type channels. VDCC involvement in the
regulation of molecular rhythmicity in SCN2.2 cells was then examined using the
nonselective antagonist, cadmium. The oscillatory patterns of rPer2 and rBmal1
expression were abolished in cadmium-treated SCN2.2 cells without affecting
cellular morphology and viability. These findings raise the possibility that the 
circadian regulation of VDCC activity may play an important role in maintaining
rhythmic clock gene expression across an ensemble of SCN oscillators.

PMID: 16207890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. BMC Bioinformatics. 2005 Sep 28;6:237.

Measuring similarities between transcription factor binding sites.

Kielbasa SM(1), Gonze D, Herzel H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Theoretical Biology, Humboldt University, Invalidenstrasse 43,
D-10115 Berlin, Germany. s.kielbasa@biologie.hu-berlin.de

BACKGROUND: Collections of transcription factor binding profiles (Transfac,
Jaspar) are essential to identify regulatory elements in DNA sequences. Subsets
of highly similar profiles complicate large scale analysis of transcription
factor binding sites.
RESULTS: We propose to identify and group similar profiles using two independent 
similarity measures: chi2 distances between position frequency matrices (PFMs)
and correlation coefficients between position weight matrices (PWMs) scores.
CONCLUSION: We show that these measures complement each other and allow to
associate Jaspar and Transfac matrices. Clusters of highly similar matrices are
identified and can be used to optimise the search for regulatory elements.
Moreover, the application of the measures is illustrated by assigning E-box
matrices of a SELEX experiment and of experimentally characterised binding sites 
of circadian clock genes to the Myc-Max cluster.

PMCID: PMC1261160
PMID: 16191190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Sleep. 2005 Apr;28(4):395-409.

Deletion of the mammalian circadian clock gene BMAL1/Mop3 alters baseline sleep
architecture and the response to sleep deprivation.

Laposky A(1), Easton A, Dugovic C, Walisser J, Bradfield C, Turek F.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology and Physiology, Northwestern University, 2205 Tech Drive Hogan
2-160, Evanston, IL 60208-3520, USA. a-laposky@northwestern.edu

Comment in
    Sleep. 2005 Apr;28(4):389-91.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: The finding that deletion or mutation of core circadian clock
genes in both mice and flies induce unexpected alterations in sleep amount, sleep
architecture and the recovery response to sleep deprivation, has led to new
insights into functions of the circadian system that extend beyond its role as a 
regulator of the timing of the sleep-wake cycle. A key transcription factor in
the transcriptional/translational feedback loop of mammalian circadian genes is
BMAL1/Mop3, a heterodimeric partner to CLOCK. It was previously shown that mice
deficient in the BMAL1/Mop3 gene become immediately arrhythmic in constant
darkness and have reduced locomotor activity levels under entrained and constant 
conditions. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that the mammalian BMAL1/Mop3
gene would have regulatory effects on sleep-wake patterns.
DESIGN: In mice with targeted deletion of the BMAL1/Mop3 gene, EEG/EMG sleep-wake
patterns were recorded under entrained and free-running conditions as well as
following acute (6-hrs) sleep deprivation.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Mice homozygous for the BMAL1/Mop3 deletion showed an
attenuated rhythm of sleep and wakefulness distribution across the 24-hr period. 
In addition, these mice showed increases in total sleep time, sleep fragmentation
and EEG delta power under baseline conditions, and an attenuated compensatory
response to acute sleep deprivation.
CONCLUSIONS: These new data strengthen the hypothesis that molecular components
of the circadian system play a central role in the generation of sleep and
wakefulness beyond just the timing of these behavioral vigilance states.

PMID: 16171284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Sleep. 2005 Apr;28(4):389-91.

Mining the mouse mutant goldmine for sleep phenotypes.

Hendricks JC.

Comment on
    Sleep. 2005 Apr;28(4):395-409.

PMID: 16171282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Curr Biol. 2005 Sep 6;15(17):R714-22.

The circadian timekeeping system of Drosophila.

Hardin PE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, 4800 Calhoun
Road, Houston, Texas 77204-5001, USA. phardin@uh.edu

Daily rhythms in behavior, physiology and metabolism are controlled by endogenous
circadian clocks. At the heart of these clocks is a circadian oscillator that
keeps circadian time, is entrained by environmental cues such as light and
activates rhythmic outputs at the appropriate time of day. Genetic and molecular 
analyses in Drosophila have revealed important insights into the molecules and
mechanisms underlying circadian oscillator function in all organisms. In this
review I will describe the intracellular feedback loops that form the core of the
Drosophila circadian oscillator and consider how they are entrained by
environmental light cycles, where they operate within the fly and how they are
thought to control overt rhythms in physiology and behavior. I will also discuss 
where work remains to be done to give a comprehensive picture of the circadian
clock in Drosophila and likely many other organisms.

PMID: 16139204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Science. 2005 Aug 26;309(5739):1390-4. Epub 2005 Aug 18.

Circadian clock control by SUMOylation of BMAL1.

Cardone L(1), Hirayama J, Giordano F, Tamaru T, Palvimo JJ, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 1 rue Laurent 
Fries, 67404 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

The molecular machinery that governs circadian rhythmicity is based on clock
proteins organized in regulatory feedback loops. Although posttranslational
modification of clock proteins is likely to finely control their circadian
functions, only limited information is available to date. Here, we show that
BMAL1, an essential transcription factor component of the clock mechanism, is
SUMOylated on a highly conserved lysine residue (Lys259) in vivo. BMAL1 shows a
circadian pattern of SUMOylation that parallels its activation in the mouse
liver. SUMOylation of BMAL1 requires and is induced by CLOCK, the
heterodimerization partner of BMAL1. Ectopic expression of a SUMO-deficient BMAL1
demonstrates that SUMOylation plays an important role in BMAL1 circadian
expression and clock rhythmicity. This reveals an additional level of regulation 
within the core mechanism of the circadian clock.

PMID: 16109848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Mol Med (Berl). 2005 Sep;83(9):693-9. Epub 2005 Aug 12.

Atypical patterns of circadian clock gene expression in human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells.

Teboul M(1), Barrat-Petit MA, Li XM, Claustrat B, Formento JL, Delaunay F, Lévi
F, Milano G.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, CNRS FRE 2721, Parc Valrose, 06108 Nice
Cedex 2, France. teboulm@unice.fr

Comment in
    J Mol Med (Berl). 2005 Sep;83(9):655-6.

Circadian ( approximately 24 h) rhythms in physiology and behaviour are observed 
in all mammals, including humans. These rhythms are generated by circadian clocks
located in the hypothalamus and also in most peripheral tissues. Clock genes are 
essential components of circadian clocks, and mutations or polymorphisms within
several of them have been associated with circadian disorders in humans. However,
information about human clock gene expression has remained very limited.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) represent an ideal material to
investigate non-invasively the human clock at the molecular level. In the present
study, we analysed the expression of three key clock genes, PER2, BMAL1 and
REV-ERBalpha in PBMCs from ten healthy humans over a 24-h cycle. PER2 and BMAL1
were found to oscillate throughout the light-dark cycle in all subjects.
Interestingly, despite normal melatonin and cortisol secretion patterns, two
groups of subjects could be distinguished with significantly different mean PER2 
and BMAL1 acrophases. BMAL1 oscillated with approximately the same phase as PER2,
instead of being anti-phasic as anticipated from data previously obtained in
other peripheral tissues. Furthermore, this unusual phase relationship of PER2
and BMAL1 in human PBMCs was associated with a constant expression of
REV-ERBalpha, a crucial regulator of BMAL1, which is highly rhythmic in many
other systems. These results reveal the existence of different chronotypes of
clock gene expression patterns and suggest specific regulatory mechanisms in
human PBMCs.

PMID: 16096739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Aug 23;102(34):12071-6. Epub 2005 Aug 10.

Brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1), a component of the molecular clock,
regulates adipogenesis.

Shimba S(1), Ishii N, Ohta Y, Ohno T, Watabe Y, Hayashi M, Wada T, Aoyagi T,
Tezuka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Science, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University, 7-7-1
Narashinodai, Funabashi, Chiba 274-8555, Japan. shimba@pha.nihon-u.ac.jp

Brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1; also known as MOP3 or Arnt3) is a
transcription factor known to regulate circadian rhythm. Here, we established its
involvement in the control of adipogenesis and lipid metabolism activity in
mature adipocytes. During adipose differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells, the level of
BMAL1 mRNA began to increase 4 days after induction and was highly expressed in
differentiated cells. In white adipose tissues isolated from C57BL/6J mice, BMAL1
was predominantly expressed in a fraction containing adipocytes, as compared with
the stromal-vascular fraction. BMAL1 knockout mice embryonic fibroblast cells
failed to be differentiated into adipocytes. Importantly, adding BMAL1 back by
adenovirus gene transfer restored the ability of BMAL1 knockout mice embryonic
fibroblast cells to differentiate. Knock-down of BMAL1 expression in 3T3-L1 cells
by an RNA interference technique allowed the cells to accumulate only minimum
amounts of lipid droplets in the cells. Adenovirus-mediated expression of BMAL1
in 3T3-L1 adipocytes resulted in induction of several factors involved in
lipogenesis. The promoter activity of these genes was stimulated in a
BMAL1-dependent manner. Interestingly, expression of these factors showed clear
circadian rhythm in mice adipose tissue. Furthermore, overexpression of BMAL1 in 
adipocytes increased lipid synthesis activity. These results indicate that BMAL1,
a master regulator of circadian rhythm, also plays important roles in the
regulation of adipose differentiation and lipogenesis in mature adipocytes.

PMCID: PMC1189312
PMID: 16093318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Cancer Res. 2005 Aug 1;65(15):6828-34.

Cryptochrome, circadian cycle, cell cycle checkpoints, and cancer.

Gauger MA(1), Sancar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina School
of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

It has been reported that disruption of the circadian clock may lead to increased
risk of breast cancer in humans and to a high rate or ionizing radiation-induced 
tumors and mortality in mice. Cryptochrome 1 and cryptochrome 2 proteins are core
components of the mammalian circadian clock and mice mutated in both genes are
arrhythmic. We tested Cry1-/- Cry2-/- mice and fibroblasts derived from these
mice for radiation-induced cancer and killing and DNA damage checkpoints and
killing, respectively. We find that the mutant mice are indistinguishable from
the wild-type controls with respect to radiation-induced morbidity and mortality.
Similarly, the Cry1-/- Cry2-/-mutant fibroblasts are indistinguishable from the
wild-type controls with respect to their sensitivity to ionizing radiation and UV
radiation and ionizing radiation-induced DNA damage checkpoint response. Our data
suggest that disruption of the circadian clock in itself does not compromise
mammalian DNA repair and DNA damage checkpoints and does not predispose mice to
spontaneous and ionizing radiation-induced cancers. We conclude that the effect
of circadian clock disruption on cellular response to DNA damage and cancer
predisposition in mice may depend on the mechanism by which the clock is
disrupted.

PMID: 16061665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2005;12(3):169-74.

CLOCK/BMAL1 is involved in lipid metabolism via transactivation of the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) response element.

Inoue I(1), Shinoda Y, Ikeda M, Hayashi K, Kanazawa K, Nomura M, Matsunaga T, Xu 
H, Kawai S, Awata T, Komoda T, Katayama S.

Author information: 
(1)Fourth Department of Medicine, Research Center for Genomic Medicine, Saitama
Medical School, Saitama, Japan. i1901018@saitama-med.ac.jp

Lipid absorption and metabolism are regulated by feeding and by the circadian
system. It has been suggested that the expression of enzymes involved in lipid
metabolism is directly controlled by the clock system. This study was designed to
examine whether or not the CLOCK/BMAL1 heterodimer has transcriptional activity
for genes via the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor response element
(PPRE). Male mice 8-12 weeks old were maintained under a 12:12 hour light-dark
cycle for at least two weeks before the day of the experiment. The mRNA profiles 
of BMAL1 and of the PPAR target genes acyl-CoA oxidase (AOX),
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) synthase and cellular retinol
binding protein II (CRBPII) were measured in intestine. The direct effects of
CLOCK/BMAL1 on the promoter activities of those three enzymes were assessed in
vitro by luciferase assay. The expression of PPAR target genes changed in a
cyclical manner that followed expression of BMAL1. The promoter activities of the
three enzymes were increased by CLOCK/BMAL1 expression. After deletion of the
PPRE from the CRBPII construct, CLOCK/BMAL1 did not affect transactivation.
CLOCK/BMAL1 transactivates PPAR target genes via the PPRE.

PMID: 16020918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Ann Med. 2005;37(3):196-205.

Circadian genes and bipolar disorder.

Mansour HA(1), Monk TH, Nimgaonkar VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Western
Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, PA 15213, USA.

Bipolar disorder (BD) is a chronic, potentially disabling illness with a lifetime
morbid risk of approximately 1%. There is substantial evidence for a significant 
genetic etiology, but gene-mapping efforts have been hampered by the complex mode
of inheritance and the likelihood of multiple genes of small effect. In view of
the complexity, it may be instructive to understand the biological bases for
pathogenesis. Extensive disruption in circadian function is known to occur among 
patients in relapse. Therefore, it is plausible that circadian dysfunction
underlies pathogenesis. Evidence for such a hypothesis is mounting and is
reviewed here. If circadian dysfunction can be established as an 'endophenotype' 
for BD, this may not only enable identification of more homogenous sub-groups,
but may also facilitate genetic analyses. For example, it would be logical to
investigate polymorphisms of genes encoding key proteins that mediate circadian
rhythms. Association studies that analyzed circadian genes in BD have been
initiated and are reviewed. Other avenues for research are also discussed.

PMID: 16019718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2005 Aug 8;158(1-2):31-40.

Developmental expression of clock genes in the Syrian hamster.

Li X(1), Davis FC.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, WuHan University, WuHan City, Hubei Province,
430072, People's Republic of China.

Transcription/translation feedback loops consisting of multiple clock genes are
thought to be essential for circadian oscillations at cellular, tissue and
organismal levels. We examined the developmental expressions of three clock genes
(Bmal1, Cry1 and Per1) in the Syrian hamster to probe the oscillatory properties 
of the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) over the first 4 days after the completion
of SCN neurogenesis. Samples were taken at the dam's circadian times 6, 12, and
18 daily over 4 days in constant dim light and processed for in situ
hybridization using 35S-labeled RNA probes. Collection times were based on the
phases of Bmal1 and Per1 rhythms in adult SCN and on an observed difference in
Per1 mRNA at CT6 and 18 on postnatal day 2. For the developmental study, sections
from each brain were processed in parallel for the three genes. Bmal1 was
prominently expressed in the fetal SCN while Per1 and Cry1 were only weakly
expressed. Transcripts of all three genes showed higher abundance just after
birth. At subsequent ages, Bmal1 showed a significant decrease, while Per1
continued to be greater than prenatal levels. Significant variation was detected 
across circadian times for Cry1, but no circadian variation was detected for Per1
and Bmal1. Molecular oscillations equivalent to those observed in adults were not
present in the fetal SCN despite evidence for an entrainable pacemaker at that
time. An absence of robust oscillations during early SCN development may in part 
explain the strong phase-setting effects of pharmacological agents on the
fetal/neonatal clock.

PMID: 15987658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 19;280(33):29397-402. Epub 2005 Jun 22.

A role for glycogen synthase kinase-3beta in the mammalian circadian clock.

Iitaka C(1), Miyazaki K, Akaike T, Ishida N.

Author information: 
(1)Clock Cell Biology Research Group, Institute for Biological Resource and
Function, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology,
Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

The Drosophila shaggy gene product is a mammalian glycogen synthase kinase-3beta 
(GSK-3beta) homologue that contributes to the circadian clock of the Drosophila
through TIMELESS phosphorylation, and it regulates nuclear translocation of the
PERIOD/TIMELESS heterodimer. We found that mammalian GSK-3beta is expressed in
the suprachiasmatic nucleus and liver of mice and that GSK-3beta phosphorylation 
exhibits robust circadian oscillation. Rhythmic GSK-3beta phosphorylation is also
observed in serum-shocked NIH3T3 cells. Exposing serum-shocked NIH3T3 cells to
lithium chloride, a specific inhibitor of GSK-3beta, increases GSK-3beta
phosphorylation and delays the phase of rhythmic clock gene expression. On the
other hand, GSK-3beta overexpression advances the phase of clock gene expression.
We also found that GSK-3beta interacts with PERIOD2 (PER2) in vitro and in vivo. 
Recombinant GSK-3beta can phosphorylate PER2 in vitro. GSK-3beta promotes the
nuclear translocation of PER2 in COS1 cells. The present data suggest that
GSK-3beta plays important roles in mammalian circadian clock.

PMID: 15972822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2005 Nov;289(5):R1273-9. Epub 2005 Jun
16.

Daily expression of clock genes in whole blood cells in healthy subjects and a
patient with circadian rhythm sleep disorder.

Takimoto M(1), Hamada A, Tomoda A, Ohdo S, Ohmura T, Sakato H, Kawatani J, Jodoi 
T, Nakagawa H, Terazono H, Koyanagi S, Higuchi S, Kimura M, Tukikawa H, Irie S,
Saito H, Miike T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Kumamoto University Hospital, 1-1-1 Honjo, Kumamoto
860-8556, Japan.

In recent years, circadian rhythm sleep disorders in humans have been increasing.
Clinical features characteristic of this disorder are well known, but the
specific causes remain unknown. However, various derangements of circadian
expression of the clock gene are a probable cause of this disease. We have
attempted to elucidate the relationship between the expression of the clock genes
in whole blood cells and the clinical features characteristic of this disorder.
In this study, we indicate the daily expression of clock genes period (Per) 1, 2,
3, Bmal1, and Clock in whole blood cells in 12 healthy male subjects. The peak
phase of Per1, Per2, and Per3 appeared in the early morning, whereas that of
Bmal1 and Clock appeared in the midnight hours. Furthermore, in one patient case 
with circadian rhythm sleep disorder, we observed variations of the peak phase in
clock genes by treatments such as light therapy, exercise therapy, and medicinal 
therapy. This study suggested that the monitoring of human clock genes in whole
blood cells, which may be functionally important for the molecular control of the
circadian pacemaker as well as in suprachiasmatic nucleus, might be useful to
evaluate internal synchronization.

PMID: 15961535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Neuroscience. 2005;134(1):335-43.

Rapid damping of food-entrained circadian rhythm of clock gene expression in
clock-defective peripheral tissues under fasting conditions.

Horikawa K(1), Minami Y, Iijima M, Akiyama M, Shibata S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Science and Engineering, Waseda
University, Higashifushimi 2-7-5, Nishitokyo-Shi, Tokyo 202-0021, Japan.

Restricted feeding-induced free-running oscillation of clock genes in the liver
was studied in homozygous Clock-mutant (Clock/Clock) mice. Similar to wild-type
mice, Clock/Clock mice showed robust food-anticipatory behavioral activity in
accordance with a restricted feeding schedule. Also, the peak of all clock gene
mRNAs tested was phase-advanced in the liver of Clock/Clock mice as well as
wild-type mice, although the amplitude of clock gene expression was low in
Clock/Clock mice. The food-anticipatory behavioral rhythm in Clock/Clock mice
maintained a period similar to wild-type mice during 2-day fasting after the
cessation of restricted feeding. However, during the fasting days after temporal 
feeding cues were removed, the oscillation of clock genes in the liver and heart,
excluding the suprachiasmatic nuclei, appeared to result in arrhythmicity in
Clock/Clock mice. Thus, although the CLOCK-based molecular mechanism is not
required for the expression of food-anticipatory activity, intact CLOCK protein
might be involved in sustaining several cycles of peripheral circadian
oscillations after restricted feeding-induced resetting.

PMID: 15961241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Immunol. 2005 Jun 15;174(12):7618-24.

Circadian oscillations of clock genes, cytolytic factors, and cytokines in rat NK
cells.

Arjona A(1), Sarkar DK.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Program, Center of Alcohol Studies and Department of Animal
Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ 08901,
USA.

A growing body of knowledge is revealing the critical role of circadian
physiology in the development of specific pathological entities such as cancer.
NK cell function participates in the immune response against infection and
malignancy. We have reported previously the existence of a physiological
circadian rhythm of NK cell cytolytic activity in rats, suggesting the existence 
of circadian mechanisms subjacent to NK cell function. At the cellular level,
circadian rhythms are originated by the sustained transcriptional-translational
oscillation of clock genes that form the cellular clock apparatus. Our aim in
this study was to investigate the presence of molecular clock mechanisms in NK
cells as well as the circadian expression of critical factors involved in NK cell
function. For that purpose, we measured the circadian changes in the expression
of clock genes (Per1, Per2, Bmal1, Clock), Dbp (a clock-controlled output gene), 
CREB (involved in clock signaling), cytolytic factors (granzyme B and perforin), 
and cytokines (IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha) in NK cells enriched from the rat spleen.
The results obtained from this study demonstrate for the first time the existence
of functional molecular clock mechanisms in NK cells. Moreover, the circadian
expression of cytolytic factors and cytokines in NK cells reported in this study 
emphasizes the circadian nature of NK cell function.

PMID: 15944262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2005 Oct;289(4):H1530-41. Epub 2005 Jun 3.

The intrinsic circadian clock within the cardiomyocyte.

Durgan DJ(1), Hotze MA, Tomlin TM, Egbejimi O, Graveleau C, Abel ED, Shaw CA,
Bray MS, Hardin PE, Young ME.

Author information: 
(1)Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health
Science Ctr. at Houston, 2121 W. Holcombe Blvd., IBT 1011, Houston, TX 77030,
USA.

Circadian clocks are intracellular molecular mechanisms that allow the cell to
anticipate the time of day. We have previously reported that the intact rat heart
expresses the major components of the circadian clock, of which its rhythmic
expression in vivo is consistent with the operation of a fully functional clock
mechanism. The present study exposes oscillations of circadian clock genes [brain
and arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like protein 1 (bmal1), reverse
strand of the c-erbaalpha gene (rev-erbaalpha), period 2 (per2), albumin
D-element binding protein (dbp)] for isolated adult rat cardiomyocytes in
culture. Acute (2 h) and/or chronic (continuous) treatment of cardiomyocytes with
FCS (50% and 2.5%, respectively) results in rhythmic expression of circadian
clock genes with periodicities of 20-24 h. In contrast, cardiomyocytes cultured
in the absence of serum exhibit dramatically dampened oscillations in bmal1 and
dbp only. Zeitgebers (timekeepers) are factors that influence the timing of the
circadian clock. Glucose, which has been previously shown to reactivate circadian
clock gene oscillations in fibroblasts, has no effect on the expression of
circadian clock genes in adult rat cardiomyocytes, either in the absence or
presence of serum. Exposure of adult rat cardiomyocytes to the sympathetic
neurotransmitter norephinephrine (10 microM) for 2 h reinitiates rhythmic
expression of circadian clock genes in a serum-independent manner. Oscillations
in circadian clock genes were associated with 24-h oscillations in the metabolic 
genes pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (pdk4) and uncoupling protein 3 (ucp3). In 
conclusion, these data suggest that the circadian clock operates within the
myocytes of the heart and that this molecular mechanism persists under standard
cell culture conditions (i.e., 2.5% serum). Furthermore, our data suggest that
norepinephrine, unlike glucose, influences the timing of the circadian clock
within the heart and that the circadian clock may be a novel mechanism regulating
myocardial metabolism.

PMID: 15937094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2005 Jul;142(3):357-63. Epub 2005 Mar 17.

Photoperiod regulates clock gene rhythms in the ovine liver.

Andersson H(1), Johnston JD, Messager S, Hazlerigg D, Lincoln G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council, Human Reproductive Sciences Unit, Centre for
Reproductive Biology, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.

To investigate the photoperiodic entrainment of peripheral rhythms in ruminants, 
we studied the expression of clock genes in the liver in the highly seasonal Soay
sheep. Animals were kept under long (LD 16:8) or short photoperiod (LD 8:16).
Daily rhythms in locomotor activity were recorded, and blood concentrations of
melatonin and cortisol were measured by RIA. Per2, Bmal1, and Cry1 gene
expression was determined by Northern blot analyses using ovine RNA probes in
liver collected every 4h for 24h. Liver Per2 and Bmal1, but not Cry1, expression 
was rhythmic in all treatments. Under long days, peak Per2 expression occurred at
end of the night with a similar timing to Bmal1, whereas, under short days the
Per2 maximum was in the early night with an inverse pattern to Bmal1. There was a
photoperiodxtime interaction for only Per2 (P < 0.001). The 24-h pattern in
plasma cortisol matched the observed phasing of Per2 expression, suggesting that 
it may act as an endocrine entraining factor. The clock gene rhythms in the
peripheral tissues were different in timing compared with the ovine
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN, central pacemaker) and pars tuberalis (melatonin
target tissue), and the hepatic rhythms were of lower amplitude compared with
photoperiodic rodents. Thus, there are likely to be important species differences
in the way the central and peripheral clockwork encodes external photoperiod.

PMID: 15935162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Neurosci. 2005 Jun 1;25(22):5430-7.

The double-time protein kinase regulates the subcellular localization of the
Drosophila clock protein period.

Cyran SA(1), Yiannoulos G, Buchsbaum AM, Saez L, Young MW, Blau J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, New York University, New York, New York 10003, USA.

The Period (PER), Timeless (TIM), and Double-Time (DBT) proteins are essential
components of one feedback loop in the Drosophila circadian molecular clock. PER 
and TIM physically interact. Coexpression of PER and TIM promotes their nuclear
accumulation and influences the activity of DBT: although DBT phosphorylates and 
destabilizes PER, this is suppressed by TIM. Experiments using Drosophila cells
in culture have indicated that PER can translocate to the nucleus without TIM and
will repress transcription in a DBT-potentiated manner. In this study, we
examined the control of PER subcellular localization in Drosophila clock cells in
vivo. We found that PER can translocate to the nucleus in tim(01) null mutants
but only if DBT kinase activity is inhibited. We also found that nuclear PER is a
potent transcriptional repressor in dbt mutants in vivo without TIM. Thus, in
vivo, DBT regulates PER subcellular localization, in addition to its previously
documented role as a mediator of PER stability. However, DBT does not seem
essential for transcriptional repression by PER. It was reported previously that 
overexpression of a second kinase, Shaggy (SGG)/Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3,
accelerates PER nuclear accumulation. Here, we show that these effects of SGG on 
PER nuclear accumulation require TIM. We propose a revised clock model that
incorporates this tight kinase regulation of PER and TIM nuclear entry.

PMCID: PMC1361277
PMID: 15930393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Endocrinology. 2005 Sep;146(9):3782-90. Epub 2005 May 26.

Photorefractoriness in mammals: dissociating a seasonal timer from the
circadian-based photoperiod response.

Lincoln GA(1), Johnston JD, Andersson H, Wagner G, Hazlerigg DG.

Author information: 
(1)The Queen's Medical Research Instiute, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh
EH16 4TJ, Scotland, United Kingdom. g.lincoln@hrsu.mrc.ac.uk

In seasonal animals, prolonged exposure to constant photoperiod induces
photorefractoriness, causing spontaneous reversion in physiology to that of the
previous photoperiodic state. This study tested the hypothesis that the onset of 
photorefractoriness is correlated with a change in circadian expression of clock 
genes in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (circadian pacemaker) and the pars tuberalis
(PT, a melatonin target tissue). Soay sheep were exposed to summer photoperiod
(16-h light) for either 6 or 30 wk to produce a photostimulated and
photorefractory physiology, and seasonal changes were tracked by measuring the
long-term prolactin cycles. Animals were killed at 4-h intervals throughout 24 h.
Contrary to the hypothesis, the 24-h rhythmic expression of clock genes
(Rev-erbalpha, Per1, Per2, Bmal1, Cry1) in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and PT
reflected the ambient photoperiod/melatonin signal and not the changing
physiology. Contrastingly, the PT expression of alpha-glycoprotein hormone
subunit (alphaGSU) and betaTSH declined in photorefractory animals toward a short
day-like endocrinology. We conclude that the generation of long-term endocrine
cycles depends on the interaction between a circadian-based, melatonin-dependent 
timer that drives the initial photoperiodic response and a non-circadian-based
timer that drives circannual rhythmicity in long-lived species. Under constant
photoperiod the two timers can dissociate, leading to the apparent refractory
state.

PMID: 15919753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Apr;63(4):643-56.

[Hyperlipidemia and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)--regulation
of the PPARalpha gene by CLOCK: BMAL1].

[Article in Japanese]

Inoue I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fourth Department of Medicine, Saitama Medical School.

The main pathological findings in atherosclerosis include abnormal reactions of
neutrophils, lymphocytes and monocytes/macrophages, vascular smooth muscle cells 
and vascular endothelial cells, and the accumulation of cholesterol ester in the 
arterial wall. Therefore, investigating the effects of these abnormal reactions
on the arterial wall may improve understanding of the mechanisms underlying
atherosclerosis. Three types of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors
(PPARs): PPARalpha, PPARbeta/delta, and PPARgamma are expressed in endothelial
cells. In endothelial cells, the ligands/activators for PPARalpha and PPARgamma
increase Cu2+, Zn2+ -superoxide dismutase. In addition, the phorbol myristate
acetate (PMA)-stimulated 22 kDa-subunit (p22phox) protein levels and 47
kDa-subunit (p47phox) protein levels in NADPH (superoxide generating enzyme
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (reduced form)) oxidase were
decreased by treatment with PPARalpha and PPARgamma ligands/activators. Recently,
we showed that the CLOCK: BMAL1 heterodimer regulates the PPARalpha gene via
promoter of PPARalpha. Moreover, we report a patient with severe
hypertriglyceridemia associated with anemia and hypoalbuminemia, in which the
former may have caused the latter two conditions. This is the first reported case
of abrupt onset of severe hypertriglyceridemia resulting in suppression of bone
marrow and liver function. Here, based on recent studies including our own, we
describe the relationships between risk factors for atherosclerosis, especially
hyperlipidemia and PPARs and the molecular mechanisms that govern lipid
metabolism in the arteries.

PMID: 15828232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2005 May;12(5):441-8. Epub 2005 Apr 10.

The orphan nuclear receptor RORalpha regulates circadian transcription of the
mammalian core-clock Bmal1.

Akashi M(1), Takumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Osaka Bioscience Institute, 6-2-4 Furuedai, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan.

The PAS (PER-ARNT-SIM) helix-loop-helix transcription factor BMAL1 (also known as
MOP3) is an essential component of the circadian pacemaker in mammals. Here we
show that the retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor RORalpha (NR1F1)
directly activates transcription of Bmal1 through two conserved RORalpha response
elements that are required for cell-autonomous transcriptional oscillation of
Bmal1 mRNA. Positive involvement of RORalpha in generation of the Bmal1 circadian
oscillation was verified by behavioral analyses of RORalpha-deficient staggerer
mice that showed aberrant locomotor activity and unstable rhythmicity. In
cultured cells, loss of endogenous RORalpha protein resulted in a dampened
circadian rhythm of Bmal1 transcription, further indicating that RORalpha is a
functional component of the cell-autonomous core circadian clock. These results
indicate that RORalpha acts to promote Bmal1 transcription, thereby maintaining a
robust circadian rhythm.

PMID: 15821743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Methods Enzymol. 2005;393:610-22.

Assaying the Drosophila negative feedback loop with RNA interference in S2 cells.

Nawathean P(1), Menet JS, Rosbash M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Brandeis University,
Waltham, Massachusetts 02454, USA.

Transcriptional negative feedback loops play a critical role in the molecular
oscillations of circadian genes and contribute to robust behavioral rhythms. In
one key Drosophila loop, CLOCK and CYCLE (CLK/CYC) positively regulate
transcription of period (per). The period protein (PER) then represses this
transcriptional activation, giving rise to the molecular oscillations of per RNA 
and protein. There is evidence that links molecular oscillations with behavioral 
rhythms, suggesting that PER also regulates the expression of downstream genes,
ultimately resulting in proper behavior rhythmicity. Phosphorylation of PER has
also been shown to be critical for rhythms. Doubletime (DBT) and casein kinase II
(CKII) have been implicated in the phosphorylation of PER, which affects its
stability as well as nuclear localization. We investigated the role of these
kinases on PER transcriptional repression using the Drosophila S2 cell line in
combination with RNA interference (RNAi) to knock down specific gene expression. 
This article describes the methods used to study PER repression activity in the
S2 cell system as well as to exploit RNAi in this system. We also include
protocols for immunocytochemistry and the application of leptomycin to
differentiate direct effects on repression from indirect effects on subcellular
localization. Finally, we discuss the generation of stable cell lines in the S2
cell system; these will be useful for experiments requiring homogeneous cell
populations.

PMID: 15817315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Methods Enzymol. 2005;393:524-39.

Peripheral clocks and the regulation of cardiovascular and metabolic function.

Rudic RD(1), Curtis AM, Cheng Y, FitzGerald G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Circadian rhythms generated by cell autonomous biological clocks allow for the
appropriate temporal synchronization of physiology and behavior, optimizing the
efficiency of biological systems. Circadian oscillators and functions have been
uncovered in both central and peripheral tissues. This article describes
methodology, experimental design, and technical challenges pertaining to studies 
of circadian rhythms in the periphery. Experimental approaches are focused upon
revealing the role of peripheral clocks in cardiovascular and metabolic function 
using in vitro and in vivo techniques.

PMID: 15817310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Seikagaku. 2005 Feb;77(2):125-9.

[Protein phosphorylation-dependent regulation of circadian timekeeping].

[Article in Japanese]

Doi M(1), Okano T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS,
Illkirch, France.

PMID: 15786737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Endocrinology. 2005 Jun;146(6):2782-90. Epub 2005 Mar 17.

Pulses of prolactin promoter activity depend on a noncanonical E-box that can
bind the circadian proteins CLOCK and BMAL1.

Leclerc GM(1), Boockfor FR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Dynamics, Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy,
Medical University of South Carolina, 173 Ashley Avenue, Charleston, South
Carolina 29425, USA.

Recent findings from our laboratory and those of others demonstrated that
prolactin gene expression (PRL-GE) oscillates in single living mammotropes, but
little information is available on the molecular processes that contribute to
this phenomenon. To elucidate the source of this activity, we generated a series 
of constructs containing decreasing lengths of the PRL promoter fused to a
luciferase reporter gene. These constructs were injected into single cells and
assayed for photonic activity. We found pulse activity with all plasmids tested, 
even with the smallest promoter fragment of 331 bp. Sequence analysis of this
fragment identified two potential E-boxes (elements known to bind CLOCK and BMAL1
circadian proteins). Furthermore, RT-PCR of PRL cells (pituitary, MMQ, and GH(3))
revealed expression of clock and bmal1 as well as five other clock genes (per1,
per2, cry1, cry2, and tim), suggesting that the circadian system may function in 
PRL cells. Next, we mutated the core sequences of both E-boxes within the 2.5-kb 
PRL promoter and found that only mutation of the E-box133 completely abolished
PRL-GE pulses. EMSAs revealed that CLOCK and BMAL1 were able to bind to the
E-box133 site in vitro. Our results demonstrate that PRL-GE pulses are dependent 
on a specific E-box binding site in the PRL promoter. Moreover, the indication
that CLOCK/BMAL1 can bind to this site suggests that these circadian proteins,
either alone or in conjunction with other factors, may regulate intermittent PRL 
promoter activity in mammotropes, perhaps by acting as a temporal switch for the 
on/off expression of PRL.

PMID: 15774559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Jun;19(6):1452-9. Epub 2005 Mar 10.

The orphan nuclear receptor Rev-erbalpha recruits the N-CoR/histone deacetylase 3
corepressor to regulate the circadian Bmal1 gene.

Yin L(1), Lazar MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Medicine
and The Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia 19104-6149, USA.

Transcriptional regulation plays a fundamental role in controlling circadian
oscillation of clock gene expression. The orphan nuclear receptor Rev-erbalpha
has recently been implicated as a major regulator of the circadian clock.
Expression of Bmal1, the master regulator of circadian rhythm in mammals, is
negatively correlated with Rev-erbalpha mRNA level, but the molecular mechanism
underlying this regulation is largely unknown. Here we show that Rev-erbalpha
dramatically represses the basal activity of the mouse Bmal1 gene promoter via
two monomeric binding sites, both of which are required for repression and are
conserved between mouse and human. Rev-erbalpha directly binds to the mouse Bmal1
promoter and recruits the endogenous nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR)/histone
deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) complex, in association with a decrease in histone
acetylation. The endogenous N-CoR/HDAC3 complex is also associated with the
endogenous Bmal1 promoter in human HepG2 liver cells, where a reduction in
cellular HDAC3 level markedly increases the expression of Bmal1 mRNA. These data 
demonstrate a new function for the N-CoR/HDAC3 complex in regulating the
expression of genes involved in circadian rhythm by functioning as corepressor
for Rev-erbalpha.

PMID: 15761026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Genesis. 2005 Mar;41(3):122-32.

Progressive arthropathy in mice with a targeted disruption of the Mop3/Bmal-1
locus.

Bunger MK(1), Walisser JA, Sullivan R, Manley PA, Moran SM, Kalscheur VL, Colman 
RJ, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Disruption of the murine Mop3 (also known as Bmal1 or Arntl) locus results in a
loss of behavioral and molecular circadian rhythms. Although Mop3 null mice do
not display anomalies in early development, they do display reduced activity as
they age. In an effort to explain this decreased activity, we characterized the
physiological and anatomical changes that occurred with age. We observed that
Mop3 null mice display an increased mortality after 26 weeks of age and a
phenotype best described as a progressive noninflammatory arthropathy. Although
little pathology is observed prior to 11 weeks of age, by 35 weeks of age
essentially all Mop3 null animals develop joint ankylosis due to flowing
ossification of ligaments and tendons and almost complete immobilization of
weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing joints. This pathology appears to explain
the decreased activity of Mop3 null mice and suggests that MOP3 is an inhibitor
of ligament and tendon ossification.

PMID: 15739187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Mar 8;102(10):3529-30. Epub 2005 Feb 28.

Time for chronotherapy? Clock genes dictate sensitivity to cyclophosphamide.

Green CB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, P.O. Box 400328, 275 Gilmer
Hall, Charlottesville, VA 22904-4328, USA. cbg8b@virginia.edu

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Mar 1;102(9):3407-12.

PMCID: PMC553324
PMID: 15738390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Neurosci. 2005 Feb 9;25(6):1514-22.

Feeding cues alter clock gene oscillations and photic responses in the
suprachiasmatic nuclei of mice exposed to a light/dark cycle.

Mendoza J(1), Graff C, Dardente H, Pevet P, Challet E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurobiology of Rhythms, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7518, Department of Neuroscience, Institut
Fédératif de Recherche 37, University Louis Pasteur, F-67084 Strasbourg, France.

The suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the hypothalamus contain the master mammalian
circadian clock, which is mainly reset by light. Temporal restricted feeding, a
potent synchronizer of peripheral oscillators, has only weak influence on
light-entrained rhythms via the SCN, unless restricted feeding is coupled with
calorie restriction, thereby altering phase angle of photic synchronization.
Effects of daytime restricted feeding were investigated on the mouse circadian
system. Normocaloric feeding at midday led to a predominantly diurnal (60%) food 
intake and decreased blood glucose in the afternoon, but it did not affect the
phase of locomotor activity rhythm or vasopressin expression in the SCN. In
contrast, hypocaloric feeding at midday led to 2-4 h phase advances of three
circadian outputs, locomotor activity rhythm, pineal melatonin, and vasopressin
mRNA cycle in the SCN, and it decreased daily levels of blood glucose.
Furthermore, Per1 and Cry2 oscillations in the SCN were phase advanced by 1 and 3
h, respectively, in hypocalorie- but not in normocalorie-fed mice. The phase of
Per2 and Bmal1 expression remained unchanged regardless of feeding condition.
Moreover, the shape of behavioral phase-response curve to light and light-induced
expression of Per1 in the SCN were markedly modified in hypocalorie-fed mice
compared with animals fed ad libitum. The present study shows that diurnal
hypocaloric feeding affects not only the temporal organization of the SCN
clockwork and circadian outputs in mice under light/dark cycle but also photic
responses of the circadian system, thus indicating that energy metabolism
modulates circadian rhythmicity and gating of photic inputs in mammals.

PMID: 15703405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Feb 15;102(7):2608-13. Epub 2005 Feb 7.

A noncanonical E-box enhancer drives mouse Period2 circadian oscillations in
vivo.

Yoo SH(1), Ko CH, Lowrey PL, Buhr ED, Song EJ, Chang S, Yoo OJ, Yamazaki S, Lee
C, Takahashi JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Physiology, Northwestern University, 2205 Tech 
Drive, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

The mouse Period2 (mPer2) locus is an essential negative-feedback element of the 
mammalian circadian-clock mechanism. Recent work has shown that mPer2 circadian
gene expression persists in both central and peripheral tissues. Here, we analyze
the mouse mPer2 promoter and identify a circadian enhancer (E2) with a
noncanonical 5'-CACGTT-3' E-box located 20 bp upstream of the mPer2 transcription
start site. The E2 enhancer accounts for most circadian transcriptional drive of 
the mPer2 locus by CLOCK:BMAL1, is a major site of DNaseI hypersensitivity in
this region, and is constitutively bound by a transcriptional complex containing 
the CLOCK protein. Importantly, the E2 enhancer is sufficient to drive
self-sustained circadian rhythms of luciferase activity in central and peripheral
tissues from mPer2-E2::Luciferase transgenic mice with tissue-specific phase and 
period characteristics. Last, genetic analysis with mutations in Clock and Bmal1 
shows that the E2 enhancer is a target of CLOCK and BMAL1 in vivo.

PMCID: PMC548324
PMID: 15699353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Mar 1;102(9):3407-12. Epub 2005 Feb 2.

Circadian sensitivity to the chemotherapeutic agent cyclophosphamide depends on
the functional status of the CLOCK/BMAL1 transactivation complex.

Gorbacheva VY(1), Kondratov RV, Zhang R, Cherukuri S, Gudkov AV, Takahashi JS,
Antoch MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Mar 8;102(10):3529-30.

The circadian clock controls many aspects of mammalian physiology, including
responses to cancer therapy. We find that wild-type and circadian mutant mice
demonstrate striking differences in their response to the anticancer drug
cyclophosphamide (CY). While the sensitivity of wild-type mice varies greatly,
depending on the time of drug administration, Clock mutant and Bmal1 knockout
mice are highly sensitive to treatment at all times tested. On the contrary, mice
with loss-of-function mutations in Cryptochrome (Cry1-/-Cry2-/- double knockouts)
were more resistant to CY compared with their wild-type littermates. Thus, both
time-of-day and allelic-dependent variations in response to chemotherapy
correlate with the functional status of the circadian CLOCK/BMAL1 transactivation
complex. Pharmacokinetic analysis of plasma concentration of different CY
metabolites shows that, in contrast to the traditional view, circadian variations
in drug sensitivity cannot be attributed to the changes in the rates of CY
metabolic activation and/or detoxification. At the same time, mice of different
circadian genotypes demonstrate significant differences in B cell responses to
toxic CY metabolites: B cell survival/recovery rate was directly correlated with 
the in vivo drug sensitivity. Based on these results, we propose that the
CLOCK/BMAL1 transcriptional complex affects the lethality of chemotherapeutic
agents by modulating the survival of the target cells necessary for the viability
of the organism.

PMCID: PMC546637
PMID: 15689397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Exp Hematol. 2005 Jan;33(1):100-7.

Clock gene expression in purified mouse hematopoietic stem cells.

Tsinkalovsky O(1), Rosenlund B, Laerum OD, Eiken HG.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Group, Department of Pathology, the Gade Institute,
Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. oleg.tsinkalovsky@gades.uib.no

OBJECTIVE: Circadian genes have recently been characterized in many tissues, but 
not in hematopoietic stem cells. These cells are rare in the bone marrow (BM),
which makes it difficult to collect enough cells for detailed molecular analysis 
in a short period of time without reduced RNA quality. The aim was to improve
methodology and reliability of clock gene expression analysis in purified mouse
hematopoietic stem cells.
METHODS: Stem cells were highly enriched by high-speed flow cytometric cell
sorting of the side population (SP) cells from Hoechst 33342 (Hoechst)-stained
mouse BM. Total RNA was isolated from sorted SP and whole BM cells and exposed to
DNase treatment. The relative mRNA levels of major clock genes mPer1, mPer2,
mBmal1, mCry1, mClock, and mRev-erb alpha were measured with real-time
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (Q-RT-PCR) and
normalized to m36B4, used as a reference gene. The clonogenity of sorted SP cells
and whole BM; cells taken before and after sorting, were tested in
colony-formation assay.
RESULTS: Clock gene activity in sorted SP cells showed pronounced relative
differences compared with whole BM for mPer1 and mCry1. The high-speed sorting
procedure did not influence clock gene expression or cell clonogenity, even when 
this was performed with a delay period up to 24 hours.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated expression of six clock genes in mouse hematopoietic
stem cells. A combination of high-speed flow cytometric sorting and Q-RT-PCR was 
shown to be useful and reliable for analysis of clock gene activity in small stem
cell fractions.

PMID: 15661403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Dec;33(3):585-608.

The orphan receptor Rev-erbalpha gene is a target of the circadian clock
pacemaker.

Triqueneaux G(1), Thenot S, Kakizawa T, Antoch MP, Safi R, Takahashi JS, Delaunay
F, Laudet V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 5161, Ecole
Normale Supérieur de Lyon, 46 allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon cedex, France.

Rev-erbalpha is a ubiquitously expressed orphan nuclear receptor which functions 
as a constitutive transcriptional repressor and is expressed in vertebrates
according to a robust circadian rhythm. We report here that two Rev-erbalpha mRNA
isoforms, namely Rev-erbalpha1 and Rev-erbalpha 2, are generated through
alternative promoter usage and that both show a circadian expression pattern in
an in vitro system using serum-shocked fibroblasts. Both promoter regions P1
(Rev-erbalpha1) and P2 (Rev-erbalpha2) contain several E-box DNA sequences which 
function as response elements for the core circadian-clock components: CLOCK and 
BMAL1. The CLOCK-BMAL1 heterodimer stimulates the activity of both P1 and P2
promoters in transient transfection assay by 3-6-fold. This activation was
inhibited by the overexpression of CRY1, a component of the negative limb of the 
circadian transcriptional loop. Critical E-box elements were mapped within both
promoters. This regulation is conserved in vertebrates since we found that the
CLOCK-BMAL1 heterodimer also regulates the zebrafish Rev-erbalpha gene. In line
with these data Rev-erbalpha circadian expression was strongly impaired in the
livers of Clock mutant mice and in the pineal glands of zebrafish embryos treated
with Clock and Bmal1 antisense oligonucleotides. Together these data demonstrate 
that CLOCK is a critical regulator of Rev-erbalpha circadian gene expression in
evolutionarily distant vertebrates and suggest a role for Rev-erbalpha in the
circadian clock output.

PMCID: PMC3770723
PMID: 15591021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Eur J Neurosci. 2004 Dec;20(11):3054-62.

Reduced food anticipatory activity in genetically orexin (hypocretin)
neuron-ablated mice.

Akiyama M(1), Yuasa T, Hayasaka N, Horikawa K, Sakurai T, Shibata S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Science and Engineering, Waseda
University, 2-7-5 Higashifushimi, Nishitokyo, 202-0021, Japan.

Daily restricted feeding (RF) produces an anticipatory locomotor activity rhythm 
and entrains the peripheral molecular oscillator independently of the central
pacemaker located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). As orexins (hypocretins) 
are neuropeptides that coordinate sleep/wake patterns and motivated behaviours,
such as food seeking, we studied the involvement of orexin in the food
anticipatory activity (FAA) induced by RF. Daily RF shifted the mRNA rhythm of a 
clock-controlled gene mDbp in the cerebral cortex and caudate putamen but not in 
the SCN. Under these experimental conditions, prepro-orexin mRNA and orexin A
immunoreactivity in the lateral hypothalamic area (LHA) did not show daily
variation. Fasting increased the number of orexin A-ir cells, while RF did not.
However, RF shifted the peak of Fos expression of the orexin neurons from night
to day. Genetic ablation of orexin neurons in orexin/ataxin-3 transgenic mice
severely reduced the formation of FAA under RF conditions. The expression of
mNpas2 mRNA, a transcription factor thought to be involved in regulation of the
food entrainable oscillator as well as mPer1 and mBmal1 mRNA, was reduced in the 
forebrain of orexin/ataxin-3 mice. Based on these results, we suggest that
activity of the orexin neuron in the LHA contributes to the promotion and
maintenance of FAA.

PMID: 15579160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Nov;271(22):4409-19.

Functional analysis of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor DEC1 in
circadian regulation. Interaction with BMAL1.

Sato F(1), Kawamoto T, Fujimoto K, Noshiro M, Honda KK, Honma S, Honma K, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor DEC1 is expressed in a circadian 
manner in the suprachiasmatic nucleus where it seems to play a role in regulating
the mammalian circadian rhythm by suppressing the CLOCK/BMAL1-activated promoter.
The interaction of DEC1 with BMAL1 has been suggested as one of the molecular
mechanisms of the suppression [Honma, S., Kawamoto, T., Takagi, Y., Fujimoto, K.,
Sato, F., Noshiro, M., Kato, Y. & Honma, K. (2002) Nature 419, 841-844]. Deletion
analysis of DEC1 demonstrated that its N-terminal region, which includes the
basic helix-loop-helix domain, was essential for both the suppressive activity
and the interaction with BMAL1, as DEC1 lacking the basic region did not show any
suppression or interaction. Furthermore, we found that Arg65 in the basic region,
which is conserved among group B basic helix-loop-helix proteins, was responsible
for the suppression, for the interaction with BMAL1 and for its binding to CACGTG
E-boxes. However, substitution of His57 for Ala significantly reduced the E-box
binding activity of DEC1, although it did not affect the interaction with BMAL1
or suppression of CLOCK/BMAL1-induced transcription. On the other hand, the basic
region-deleted DEC1 acted in a dominant-negative manner for DEC1 activity,
indicating that the basic region was not required for homodimer formation of
DEC1. Moreover, mutant DEC1 also counteracted DEC2-mediated suppressive activity 
in a dominant-negative manner. The heterodimer formation of DEC1 and DEC2 was
confirmed by pull-down assay. These findings suggest that the basic region of
DEC1 participates in the transcriptional regulation through a protein-protein
interaction with BMAL1 and DNA binding to the E-box.

PMID: 15560782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. FASEB J. 2005 Feb;19(2):304-6. Epub 2004 Nov 15.

Circadian regulation of cell cycle and apoptosis proteins in mouse bone marrow
and tumor.

Granda TG(1), Liu XH, Smaaland R, Cermakian N, Filipski E, Sassone-Corsi P, Lévi 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Chronotherapeutics, INSERM E 0354 and Université Paris XI, Hôpital Paul
Brousse, Villejuif, France.

Proapoptotic drugs such as docetaxel displayed least toxicity and highest
antitumor efficacy following dosing during the circadian rest phase in mice,
suggesting that cell cycle and apoptotic processes could be regulated by the
circadian clock. In study 1, mouse bone marrow and/or tumor were obtained every 4
h for 24 h in C3H/HeN mice with or without MA13/C mammary adenocarcinoma in order
to determine the circadian patterns in cell-cycle phase distribution and BCL-2
anti-apoptotic protein expression. In study 2, mouse bone marrow from B6D2F1 mice
was sampled every 3 h for 24 h in order to confirm the BCL-2 rhythm and to study 
its relation with 24 h changes in the expression of proapoptotic BCL-2-associated
X protein (BAX) protein and clock genes mPer2, mBmal1, mClock, and mTim mRNAs.
The rhythms in G1-, S- or G2/M-phase cells were shifted in tumor compared with
bone marrow. In the tumor, the mean proportion of G2/M-phase cells increased by
75% from late rest to late activity span (P from cosinor = 0.001). No 24 h rhythm
was found for BCL-2 in tumors. In contrast to this, in the bone marrow, mean
BCL-2 expression varied 2.8-fold in B6D2F1 mice (P=0.025) and 3- or 4.5-fold in
tumor-bearing and nontumor-bearing C3H/HeN mice, with a peak during the early
rest span (P=0.024 and P<0.001, respectively). BAX varied fivefold during the 24 
h span with a major peak occurring near mid-activity (P=0.007). The mean mRNAs of
mPer2, mClock, and mBmal1 varied twofold to threefold over the 24 h, with high
values during the activity span (P<0.05). In the tumor, the circadian
organization in cell-cycle phase distribution was shifted and BCL2 rhythm was
ablated. Conversely, a molecular circadian clock likely regulated BCL-2 and BAX
expression in the bone marrow, increasing cellular protection against apoptosis
during the rest span.

PMID: 15545298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Biol Rhythms. 2004 Oct;19(5):445-58.

Clock gene evolution and functional divergence.

Tauber E(1), Last KS, Olive PJ, Kyriacou CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.

In considering the impact of the earth's changing geophysical conditions during
the history of life, it is surprising to learn that the earth's rotational period
may have been as short as 4 h, as recently as 1900 million years ago (or 1.9
billion years ago). The implications of such figures for the origin and evolution
of clocks are considerable, and the authors speculate on how this short
rotational period might have influenced the development of the "protoclock" in
early microorganisms, such as the Cyanobacteria, during the geological periodsin 
which they arose and flourished. They then discuss the subsequent duplication of 
clock genes that took place around and after the Cambrian period, 543 million
years ago, and its consequences. They compare the relative divergences of the
canonical clock genes, which reveal the Per family to be the most rapidly
evolving. In addition, the authors use a statistical test to predict which
residues within the PER and CRY families may have undergone functional
specialization.

PMID: 15534324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. PLoS Biol. 2004 Nov;2(11):e377. Epub 2004 Nov 2.

BMAL1 and CLOCK, two essential components of the circadian clock, are involved in
glucose homeostasis.

Rudic RD(1), McNamara P, Curtis AM, Boston RC, Panda S, Hogenesch JB, Fitzgerald 
GA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Circadian timing is generated through a unique series of autoregulatory
interactions termed the molecular clock. Behavioral rhythms subject to the
molecular clock are well characterized. We demonstrate a role for Bmal1 and Clock
in the regulation of glucose homeostasis. Inactivation of the known clock
components Bmal1 (Mop3) and Clock suppress the diurnal variation in glucose and
triglycerides. Gluconeogenesis is abolished by deletion of Bmal1 and is depressed
in Clock mutants, but the counterregulatory response of corticosterone and
glucagon to insulin-induced hypoglycaemia is retained. Furthermore, a high-fat
diet modulates carbohydrate metabolism by amplifying circadian variation in
glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity, and mutation of Clock restores the
chow-fed phenotype. Bmal1 and Clock, genes that function in the core molecular
clock, exert profound control over recovery from insulin-induced hypoglycaemia.
Furthermore, asynchronous dietary cues may modify glucose homeostasis via their
interactions with peripheral molecular clocks.

PMCID: PMC524471
PMID: 15523558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Biol Rhythms. 2004 Dec;19(6):466-82.

Distribution of circadian clock-related proteins in the cephalic nervous system
of the silkworm, Bombyx mori.

Sehadová H(1), Markova EP, Sehnal F, Takeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Science, Graduate School of Science and Technology, Kobe
University, Japan.

In the circadian timing systems, input pathways transmit information on the
diurnal environmental changes to a core oscillator that generates signals relayed
to the body periphery by output pathways. Cryptochrome (CRY) protein participates
in the light perception; period (PER), Cycle (CYC), and Doubletime (DBT) proteins
drive the core oscillator; and arylalkylamines are crucial for the clock output
in vertebrates. Using antibodies to CRY, PER, CYC, DBT, and arylalkylamine
N-acetyltransferase (aaNAT), the authors examined neuronal architecture of the
circadian system in the cephalic ganglia of adult silkworms. The antibodies
reacted in the cytoplasm, never in the nuclei, of specific neurons. A cluster of 
4 large Ia(1) neurons in each dorsolateral protocerebrum, a pair of cells in the 
frontal ganglion, and nerve fibers in the corpora cardiaca and corpora allata
were stained with all antibodies. The intensity of PER staining in the Ia(1)
cells and in 2 to 4 adjacent small cells oscillated, being maximal late in
subjective day and minimal in early night. No other oscillations were detected in
any cell and with any antibody. Six small cells in close vicinity to the Ia(1)
neurons coexpressed CYC-like and DBT-like, and 4 to 5 of them also coexpressed
aaNATlike immunoreactivity; the PER- and CRY-like antigens were each present in
separate groups of 4 cells. The CYC- and aaNAT-like antigens were further
colocalized in small groups of neurons in the pars intercerebralis, at the venter
of the optic tract, and in the subesophageal ganglion. Remaining antibodies
reacted with similarly positioned cells in the pars intercerebralis, and the DBT 
antibody also reacted with the cells in the subesophageal ganglion, but antigen
colocalizations were not proven. The results imply that key components of the
silkworm circadian system reside in the Ia(1) neurons and that additional,
hierarchically arranged oscillators contribute to overt pacemaking. The
retrocerebral neurohemal organs seem to serve as outlets transmitting central
neural oscillations to the hemolymph. The frontal ganglion may play an autonomous
function in circadian regulations. The colocalization of aaNAT- and CYC-like
antigens suggests that the enzyme is functionally linked to CYC as in vertebrates
and that arylalkylamines are involved in the insect output pathway.

PMID: 15523109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Biochem J. 2005 Mar 15;386(Pt 3):575-81.

CLOCK is involved in the circadian transactivation of
peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha) in mice.

Oishi K(1), Shirai H, Ishida N.

Author information: 
(1)Clock Cell Biology Research Group, Institute for Biological Resources and
Functions, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology,
Central 6, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan.

PPARalpha (peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor alpha) is a member of the
nuclear receptor superfamily of ligand-activated transcription factors that
regulate the expression of genes associated with lipid metabolism. In the present
study, we show that circadian expression of mouse PPARalpha mRNA requires the
basic helix-loop-helix PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) protein CLOCK, a core component of the 
negative-feedback loop that drives circadian oscillators in mammals. The
circadian expression of PPARalpha mRNA was abolished in the liver of homozygous
Clock mutant mice. Using wild-type and Clock-deficient fibroblasts derived from
homozygous Clock mutant mice, we showed that the circadian expression of
PPARalpha mRNA is regulated by the peripheral oscillators in a CLOCK-dependent
manner. Transient transfection and EMSAs (electrophoretic mobility-shift assays) 
revealed that the CLOCK-BMAL1 (brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1) heterodimer 
transactivates the PPARalpha gene via an E-box-rich region located in the second 
intron. This region contained two perfect E-boxes and four E-box-like motifs
within 90 bases. ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) also showed that CLOCK
associates with this E-box-rich region in vivo. Circadian expression of PPARalpha
mRNA was intact in the liver of insulin-dependent diabetic and of
adrenalectomized mice, suggesting that endogenous insulin and glucocorticoids are
not essential for the rhythmic expression of the PPARalpha gene. These results
suggested that CLOCK plays an important role in lipid homoeostasis by regulating 
the transcription of a key protein, PPARalpha.

PMCID: PMC1134877
PMID: 15500444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. BMC Mol Biol. 2004 Oct 9;5:18.

Transcriptional oscillation of canonical clock genes in mouse peripheral tissues.

Yamamoto T(1), Nakahata Y, Soma H, Akashi M, Mamine T, Takumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Osaka Bioscience Institute, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan.
Takuro.Yamamoto@jp.sony.com <Takuro.Yamamoto@jp.sony.com>

BACKGROUND: The circadian rhythm of about 24 hours is a fundamental physiological
function observed in almost all organisms from prokaryotes to humans.
Identification of clock genes has allowed us to study the molecular bases for
circadian behaviors and temporal physiological processes such as hormonal
secretion, and has prompted the idea that molecular clocks reside not only in a
central pacemaker, the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of hypothalamus in mammals,
but also in peripheral tissues, even in immortalized cells. Furthermore, previous
molecular dissection revealed that the mechanism of circadian oscillation at a
molecular level is based on transcriptional regulation of clock and
clock-controlled genes.
RESULTS: We systematically analyzed the mRNA expression of clock and
clock-controlled genes in mouse peripheral tissues. Eight genes (mBmal1, mNpas2, 
mRev-erbalpha, mDbp, mRev-erbbeta, mPer3, mPer1 and mPer2; given in the temporal 
order of the rhythm peak) showed robust circadian expressions of mRNAs in all
tissues except testis, suggesting that these genes are core molecules of the
molecular biological clock. The bioinformatics analysis revealed that these genes
have one or a combination of 3 transcriptional elements (RORE, DBPE, and E-box), 
which are conserved among human, mouse, and rat genome sequences, and indicated
that these 3 elements may be responsible for the biological timing of expression 
of canonical clock genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The observation of oscillatory profiles of canonical clock genes is 
not only useful for physiological and pathological examination of the circadian
clock in various organs but also important for systematic understanding of
transcriptional regulation on a genome-wide basis. Our finding of the oscillatory
expression of canonical clock genes with a temporal order provides us an
interesting hypothesis, that cyclic timing of all clock and clock-controlled
genes may be dependent on several transcriptional elements including 3 known
elements, E-box, RORE, and DBPE.

PMCID: PMC535906
PMID: 15473909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Theor Biol. 2004 Oct 21;230(4):541-62.

Modeling the mammalian circadian clock: sensitivity analysis and multiplicity of 
oscillatory mechanisms.

Leloup JC(1), Goldbeter A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Chronobiologie théorique, Faculté des Sciences, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Campus Plaine, C.P. 231, B-1050 Brussels, Belgium.

We extend the study of a computational model recently proposed for the mammalian 
circadian clock (Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100 (2003) 7051). The model, based on 
the intertwined positive and negative regulatory loops involving the Per, Cry,
Bmal1, and Clock genes, can give rise to sustained circadian oscillations in
conditions of continuous darkness. These limit cycle oscillations correspond to
circadian rhythms autonomously generated by suprachiasmatic nuclei and by some
peripheral tissues. By using different sets of parameter values producing
circadian oscillations, we compare the effect of the various parameters and show 
that both the occurrence and the period of the oscillations are generally most
sensitive to parameters related to synthesis or degradation of Bmal1 mRNA and
BMAL1 protein. The mechanism of circadian oscillations relies on the formation of
an inactive complex between PER and CRY and the activators CLOCK and BMAL1 that
enhance Per and Cry expression. Bifurcation diagrams and computer simulations
nevertheless indicate the possible existence of a second source of oscillatory
behavior. Thus, sustained oscillations might arise from the sole negative
autoregulation of Bmal1 expression. This second oscillatory mechanism may not be 
functional in physiological conditions, and its period need not necessarily be
circadian. When incorporating the light-induced expression of the Per gene, the
model accounts for entrainment of the oscillations by light-dark (LD) cycles.
Long-term suppression of circadian oscillations by a single light pulse can occur
in the model when a stable steady state coexists with a stable limit cycle. The
phase of the oscillations upon entrainment in LD critically depends on the
parameters that govern the level of CRY protein. Small changes in the parameters 
governing CRY levels can shift the peak in Per mRNA from the L to the D phase, or
can prevent entrainment. The results are discussed in relation to physiological
disorders of the sleep-wake cycle linked to perturbations of the human circadian 
clock, such as the familial advanced sleep phase syndrome or the non-24h
sleep-wake syndrome.

PMID: 15363675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Oct;287(4):E644-51.

Cholesterol diet enhances daily rhythm of Pai-1 mRNA in the mouse liver.

Kudo T(1), Nakayama E, Suzuki S, Akiyama M, Shibata S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Science and Engineering, Waseda
University, Higashifushimi 2-7-5, Nishitokyo-Shi, Tokyo 202-0021, Japan.

Myocardial infarction frequently occurs in the morning, a phenomenon in part
resulting from the downregulation of fibrinolytic activity. Plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is a key factor behind fibrinolytic activity, and its gene
expression is controlled under the circadian clock gene in the mouse heart and
liver. Hypercholesterolemia has been associated with impaired fibrinolysis due to
enhanced PAI-1 activity, which has also been implicated in atherosclerosis. The
aim of this study was to decipher whether the Pai-1 gene is still expressed daily
with hypercholesterolemia. Hypercholesterolemia (1% cholesterol diet) did not
significantly affect the daily expression of clock genes (Per2 and Bmal1) and
clock-controlled genes (Dbp and E4bp4) in the liver (P > 0.05); however, daily
expression of the Pai-1 gene and Pai-1 promoter regulating factor genes such as
Nr4a1 was significantly upregulated (P < 0.01). Daily restricted feeding for 4 h 
during the day reset the gene expression of Per2, Pai-1, Nr4a1, and Tnf-alpha.
Lesion of the suprachiasmatic nucleus, the location of the main clock system, led
to loss of Per2 and Pai-1 daily expression profiles. In the present experiments, 
we demonstrated that hypercholesterolemia enhanced daily expression of the Pai-1,
Tnf-alpha, and Nr4a1 genes in the mouse liver without affecting clock and
clock-controlled genes. Therefore, the risk or high frequency of acute
atherothrombotic events in the morning still seems to be a factor that may be
augmented under conditions of hypercholesterolemia.

PMID: 15361354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Curr Biol. 2004 Aug 24;14(16):1492-7.

Regulation of copulation duration by period and timeless in Drosophila
melanogaster.

Beaver LM(1), Giebultowicz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.

The circadian clock involves several clock genes encoding interacting
transcriptional regulators. Mutations in clock genes in Drosophila melanogaster, 
period (per), timeless (tim), Clock (Clk), and cycle (cyc), produce multiple
phenotypes associated with physiology, behavior, development, and morphology. It 
is not clear whether these genes always work as clock components or may also act 
in some unknown pleiotropic fashion. We report here that per and tim are involved
in a novel, male-specific phenotype that affects behavioral timing on the order
of minutes. Males lacking per or tim copulate significantly longer than males
with normal per or tim function, while females do not show this effect. No
correlation between fertility and extended copulation duration was found. Several
lines of evidence suggest that the time in copula (TIC) is not regulated by the
known clock mechanism. First, the period of free-running clock oscillations does 
not appear to affect this phenotype. Second, constant light, which abolishes the 
clock function, does not alter TIC. Finally, mutations in the positively acting
clock transcription factors, Clk and cyc, do not affect TIC. Our study extends
the repertoire of behavioral functions involving per and tim genes and uncovers
another time scale over which these genes may act.

PMID: 15324667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Gene. 2004 Sep 1;338(2):235-41.

A BMAL1 mutant with arginine 91 substituted with alanine acts as a dominant
negative inhibitor.

Hosoda H(1), Motohashi J, Kato H, Masushige S, Kida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Faculty of Applied Bioscience, Tokyo
University of Agriculture, 1-1-1 Sakuragaoka, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-8502, Japan.

Basic-Helix-Loop-Helix-Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS) transcription factor,
Brain-Muscle-Arnt-Like-protein 1 (BMAL1), forms a heterodimer with the CLOCK
protein. The BMAL1/CLOCK complex binds to a specific DNA sequence and plays an
essential role in the generation of the circadian rhythm. The basic region of
BMAL1 contains an E-R-X-R motif that is highly conserved among
basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors that bind to the E-box
transcription element, and is thus thought to constitute a structure required for
recognition of this DNA sequence. To understand the role of arginine 91 (E-K-R-R)
within the basic region of BMAL1, we examined the effect of mutation of this
residue on BMAL1 function. Co-immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays (EMSA) showed that a BMAL1 R91A mutant forms a heterodimer with
CLOCK, but is unable to support DNA binding in vitro. Consistent with these
observations, plasmids encoding the R91A and R91H mutants of BMAL1 were unable to
stimulate transcription from an E-box containing reporter construct in transient 
co-transfection analyses in NIH 3T3 cells. More importantly, these mutants
suppressed the activation of transcription from the reporter construct mediated
by wild-type BMAL1, indicating that they possess dominant negative activity in
this assay. These results document further the importance of the basic region of 
BMAL1 in binding to DNA and suggest that this new mutant might be a useful tool
for further analysis of BMAL1 function.

PMID: 15315827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Neuron. 2004 Aug 19;43(4):527-37.

A functional genomics strategy reveals Rora as a component of the mammalian
circadian clock.

Sato TK(1), Panda S, Miraglia LJ, Reyes TM, Rudic RD, McNamara P, Naik KA,
FitzGerald GA, Kay SA, Hogenesch JB.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation, 10675 John J. Hopkins 
Drive, San Diego, California 92121, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2004 Aug 19;43(4):443-6.

The mammalian circadian clock plays an integral role in timing rhythmic
physiology and behavior, such as locomotor activity, with anticipated daily
environmental changes. The master oscillator resides within the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN), which can maintain circadian rhythms in the absence of
synchronizing light input. Here, we describe a genomics-based approach to
identify circadian activators of Bmal1, itself a key transcriptional activator
that is necessary for core oscillator function. Using cell-based functional
assays, as well as behavioral and molecular analyses, we identified Rora as an
activator of Bmal1 transcription within the SCN. Rora is required for normal
Bmal1 expression and consolidation of daily locomotor activity and is regulated
by the core clock in the SCN. These results suggest that opposing activities of
the orphan nuclear receptors Rora and Rev-erb alpha, which represses Bmal1
expression, are important in the maintenance of circadian clock function.

PMID: 15312651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Neuron. 2004 Aug 19;43(4):443-6.

A rhythmic Ror.

Emery P(1), Reppert SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 364
Plantation Street, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Comment on
    Neuron. 2004 Aug 19;43(4):527-37.

The circadian clock mechanism in mammals involves two interlocking
transcriptional feedback loops. Rev-erb alpha, through its role as a
transcriptional repressor, was thought to be the primary determinant of the
feedback loop that regulates Bmal1 transcription. Results reported by Sato et al.
in this issue of Neuron now show that the transactivator Rora acts coordinately
with Rev-erb alpha and that their competing activities on the same promoter
element drive the rhythm in Bmal1 transcription. This finding defines the second 
feedback loop in mammals.

PMID: 15312644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Nature. 2004 Jul 22;430(6998):467-71.

Reciprocal regulation of haem biosynthesis and the circadian clock in mammals.

Kaasik K(1), Lee CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The circadian clock is the central timing system that controls numerous
physiological processes. In mammals, one such process is haem biosynthesis, which
the clock controls through regulation of the rate-limiting enzyme aminolevulinate
synthase 1 (Alas1). Several members of the core clock mechanism are PAS domain
proteins, one of which, neuronal PAS 2 (NPAS2), has a haem-binding motif. Indeed,
haem controls activity of the BMAL1-NPAS2 transcription complex in vitro by
inhibiting DNA binding in response to carbon monoxide. Here we show that haem
differentially modulates expression of the mammalian Period genes mPer1 and mPer2
in vivo by a mechanism involving NPAS2 and mPER2. Further experiments show that
mPER2 positively stimulates activity of the BMAL1-NPAS2 transcription complex
and, in turn, NPAS2 transcriptionally regulates Alas1. Vitamin B12 and haem
compete for binding to NPAS2 and mPER2, but they have opposite effects on mPer2
and mPer1 expression in vivo. Our data show that the circadian clock and haem
biosynthesis are reciprocally regulated and suggest that porphyrin-containing
molecules are potential targets for therapy of circadian disorders.

PMID: 15269772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2004 Jul 20;87(2):234-42.

Toward construction of a self-sustained clock-like expression system based on the
mammalian circadian clock.

Chilov D(1), Fussenegger M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, ETH
Hoenggerberg, HPT D74, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland.

Despite recent advances in circadian biology, detailed understanding of how a
biological pacemaker system is assembled, maintained, and regulated continues to 
be a significant challenge. We have assembled and characterized a
first-generation, regulatable, self-sustained clock-like expression system based 
on key components of the mammalian circadian clock. The molecular setup of the
clock-like oscillator was reduced to the core set of positive and negative
elements common to all known circadian pacemakers. Sophisticated
tetracycline-responsive multi-cistronic expression integrated with forefront
lentiviral transduction tools enabled autoregulated reporter transgene expression
in a human cell line. We characterized transgene expression kinetics of an
artificial oscillator and showed that its expression profiles could be modulated 
by a serum shock and administration of regulating tetracycline antibiotics.
Design of a generic mammalian clock-like expression system will offer novel
opportunities to study circadian biology and may provide a unique tool for
rhythmic expression of desired transgenes fostering advances in biopharmaceutical
manufacturing, gene therapy, and tissue engineering.

Copyright 2004 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 15236253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Brain Res. 2004 Jul 9;1013(2):204-11.

Signal transmission from the suprachiasmatic nucleus to the pineal gland via the 
paraventricular nucleus: analysed from arg-vasopressin peptide, rPer2 mRNA and
AVP mRNA changes and pineal AA-NAT mRNA after the melatonin injection during
light and dark periods.

Isobe Y(1), Nishino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuro-physiology and Brain Sciences, Nagoya City University,
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Mizuho, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan.
yisobe@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

Arg-vasopressin (AVP) containing neurons are one of the output paths from the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the center of the biological clock. AVP mRNA
transcription is controlled by a negative feedback loop of clock genes. Circadian
rhythm of melatonin release from the pineal gland is regulated by the SCN via the
paraventricular nucleus (PVN). To clarify the transduction system of circadian
signals from the SCN to the pineal gland, we determined the effects of melatonin 
injection (1 mg/kg, i.p.) during light and dark periods on Per2 and AVP mRNAs in 
the SCN and PVN, in addition to arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AA-NAT) and
inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) mRNAs in the pineal gland of rats using
RT-PCR. AVP peptide contents were also measured in the SCN and PVN. AVP content
in the SCN decreased during the light period, while no changes were observed in
the PVN. In the SCN, Per2 mRNA increased during both light and dark periods. In
the PVN, Per2 decreased during the light period and increased during the dark
period at 180 min after melatonin injection. In the pineal gland, Per2 mRNA
increased between 60 and 180 min after the melatonin injection during the light
period, while it did not significantly change during the dark period. The AA-NAT 
mRNA varied similar to the Per2 mRNA changes. These results might suggest that
the different responses to melatonin in the pineal gland during the light and
dark periods was originated in the changes of Per2 in the PVN via SCN.

PMID: 15193530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Biochem J. 2004 Sep 15;382(Pt 3):895-904.

DNA binding, but not interaction with Bmal1, is responsible for DEC1-mediated
transcription regulation of the circadian gene mPer1.

Li Y(1), Song X, Ma Y, Liu J, Yang D, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI
02881, USA.

DEC1 (differentially expressed in chondrocytes 1) and DEC2 are E-box-binding
transcription factors and exhibit a circadian expression pattern. Recently, both 
proteins were found to repress the Clock/Bmal1-activated E-box promoters (e.g.
mPer1). Yeast two-hybrid assay detected interactions between Bmal1 and DECs. It
was hypothesized that DEC-mediated repression on the mPer1 promoter is achieved
by binding to E-box elements and interacting with Bmal1. In the present study, we
report that E-box binding rather than Bmal1 interaction is responsible for the
observed repression. In the absence of Clock/Bmal1, both DEC1 and DEC2 markedly
repressed the mPer1 promoter reporter; however, DNA-binding mutants showed no
repressive activity. Similarly, DEC1, but not its DNA-binding mutants, repressed 
the Clock/Bmal1-induced activation. In addition, DEC1(R58P), a DNA-binding mutant
with Bmal1 interactivity, repressed neither the mPer1 reporter directly nor the
Clock/Bmal1-induced activation, providing direct evidence that DNA binding,
rather than Bmal1 interactions, is responsible for the repression on the mPer1
promoter. Furthermore, disruption of the Sp1 site in the proximal promoter of
mPer1 increased the repression of DEC1 proteins. Previous studies with mouse DEC2
showed that this factor interacts with Sp1. These findings suggest that DEC
proteins regulate the expression of mPer1 through E-box binding and Sp1
interaction. Alterations on circadian systems are increasingly recognized as
important risk factors for disease initiation and progression, and the expression
of Dec genes is rapidly induced by environmental stimuli and is highly increased 
in tumour tissues. Therefore de-regulated expression of DEC genes probably alters
normal circadian rhythms and contributes significantly to the pathogenesis of
many diseases including cancer.

PMCID: PMC1133965
PMID: 15193144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Biochem J. 2004 Aug 15;382(Pt 1):43-50.

Expression of the gene for Dec2, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor,
is regulated by a molecular clock system.

Hamaguchi H(1), Fujimoto K, Kawamoto T, Noshiro M, Maemura K, Takeda N, Nagai R, 
Furukawa M, Honma S, Honma K, Kurihara H, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553,
Japan.

Dec2, a member of the basic helix-loop-helix superfamily, is a recently confirmed
regulatory protein for the clockwork system. Transcripts of Dec2, as well as
those of its related gene Dec1, exhibit a striking circadian oscillation in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus, and Dec2 inhibits transcription from the Per1 promoter
induced by Clock/Bmal1 [Honma, Kawamoto, Takagi, Fujimoto, Sato, Noshiro, Kato
and Honma (2002) Nature (London) 419, 841-844]. It is known that mammalian
circadian rhythms are controlled by molecular clockwork systems based on
negative-feedback loop(s), but the molecular mechanisms for the circadian
regulation of Dec2 gene expression have not been clarified. We show here that
transcription of the Dec2 gene is regulated by several clock molecules and a
negative-feedback loop. Luciferase and gel retardation assays showed that
expression of Dec2 was negatively regulated by binding of Dec2 or Dec1 to two
CACGTG E-boxes in the Dec2 promoter. Forced expression of Clock/Bmal1 and
Clock/Bmal2 markedly increased Dec2 mRNA levels, and up-regulated the
transcription of the Dec2 gene through the CACGTG E-boxes. Like Dec, Cry and Per 
also suppressed Clock/Bmal-induced transcription from the Dec2 promoter.
Moreover, the circadian expression of Dec2 transcripts was abolished in the
kidney of Clock/Clock mutant mice. These findings suggest that the Clock/Bmal
heterodimer enhances Dec2 transcription via the CACGTG E-boxes, whereas the
induced transcription is suppressed by Dec2, which therefore must contribute to
its own rhythmic expression. In addition, Cry and Per may also modulate Dec2
transcription.

PMCID: PMC1133913
PMID: 15147242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2004 May 19;124(2):178-87.

Circadian rhythms in behavior and clock gene expressions in the brain of mice
lacking histidine decarboxylase.

Abe H(1), Honma S, Ohtsu H, Honma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. hiroabe@med.hokudai.ac.jp

To clarify functional roles of histamine in the circadian clock system, circadian
rhythms of behavior and clock gene expression in the brain were examined in the
mouse lacking histidine decarboxylase (HDC-/- mouse). Wheel-running and
spontaneous locomotion were recorded under light-dark cycle (LD) and constant
darkness (DD). mPer1, mPer2 and mBMAL1 mRNA expression rhythms under LD and DD
were measured in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), cerebral cortex and striatum 
by in situ hybridization. The activity levels under LD and DD in the HDC-/- mice 
were lower than that in the wild type regardless of activity types (wheel-running
and spontaneous locomotion). The free-running period under DD was significantly
longer in the HDC-/- mice than in the wild type. The 24-h profiles of mPer1,
mPer2 and mBMAL1 mRNA expressions in the SCN were not different between the two
genotypes. By contrast, the mPer1 and mPer2 mRNA rhythms in the other brain areas
such as the cortex and striatum were significantly disrupted in the HDC-/- mice. 
These results suggest that histamine is involved in the circadian system
especially in the output pathway or feedback route from behavior to the pacemaker
in the SCN, and that mPer genes in the brain areas outside the SCN play an
important role in the expression of behavioral rhythm.

PMID: 15135226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. FEBS Lett. 2004 May 7;565(1-3):122-6.

Bidirectional role of orphan nuclear receptor RORalpha in clock gene
transcriptions demonstrated by a novel reporter assay system.

Nakajima Y(1), Ikeda M, Kimura T, Honma S, Ohmiya Y, Honma K.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Dynamics Research Group, Research Institute for Cell Engineering,
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST),
Midorigaoka, Ikeda, Osaka 563-8577, Japan. y-nakajima@aist.go.jp

Circadian rhythms are generated by an extremely complicated
transcription-translation feedback loop. To precisely analyze the molecular
mechanisms of the circadian clock, it is critical to monitor multiple gene
expressions and/or interactions with their transcription factors simultaneously. 
We have developed a novel reporter assay system, the tricolor reporter in vitro
assay system, which consists of green- and red-emitting Phrixothrix luciferases
as dual reporters and blue-emitting Renilla luciferase as internal control. We
have successfully employed this system in analyzing the effects of clock gene
products on the enhancer elements of Per1 and Bmal1 promoters. The results
indicate that the orphan nuclear receptor RORalpha regulates bidirectionally
Bmal1 (positively) and Per1 (negatively) transcriptions simultaneously.

PMID: 15135064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Med Sci Monit. 2004 May;10(5):BR135-8. Epub 2004 Apr 28.

Expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT) mRNA expression in human spermatozoa.

Khorram O(1), Garthwaite M, Jones J, Golos T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Wisconsin, and
Wisconsin Regional Primate Research Center, Madison, WI, USA.
okhorram@obgyn.humc.edu

BACKGROUND: The objective of this study was to determine if human spermatozoa
express AHR (dioxin receptor) and ARNT and if mRNA levels for these transcription
factors correlate with sperm concentration, motility or morphology.
MATERIAL/METHODS: This was a case-controlled cohort study in which AHR and ARNT
mRNA levels in subjects with normal and abnormal semen analysis were compared.
Semen analysis was performed by CASA. AHR/ARNT mRNA levels were determined by
multiplex RT-PCR using Glyceryl aldehyde 3-phospho dehydrogenase (G3PDH) as an
internal control.
RESULTS: Human sperm expresses abundant amounts of AHR and ARNT mRNA. There were 
no differences in AHR and ARNT mRNA levels in subjects with normal and abnormal
semen analysis. AHR and ARNT levels did not correlate with sperm concentration,
morphology or motility. There was a trend (p=0.07) for lower AHR mRNA expression 
in sperm of men with severe oligospermia. There was a significant negative
correlation (r=-0.42, p<0.05) between sperm AHR and ARNT mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of AHR in sperm provides a mechanism by which
environmental dioxins, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and polyhalogenated
biphenyls could directly influence sperm function.

PMID: 15114261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. FEBS Lett. 2004 Apr 23;564(1-2):91-6.

Indication of circadian oscillations in the rat pancreas.

Mühlbauer E(1), Wolgast S, Finckh U, Peschke D, Peschke E.

Author information: 
(1)Saxon Academy of Sciences Leipzig, Karl-Tauchnitz-Str. 1, D-04107 Leipzig,
Germany. eckhard.muehlbauer@medizin.uni-halle.de

The central circadian oscillator of the suprachiasmatic nucleus controls diurnal 
rhythmicity of the body with light as its dominant zeitgeber. Recently,
peripheral oscillators have been detected in liver and heart, which follow as yet
unidentified cues. In this study real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) was used in analysis of the expression of the major clock genes
Per1, Per2, Bmal1, Cry1, Tim (timeless) and Clock, as well as of the output genes
Dbp and Rev-erbalpha in the pancreatic tissue of rats. The results presented here
indicate a robust circadian expression of clock genes (e.g. Per1 and Bmal1) and
the probable existence of a peripheral oscillator in the pancreas. Whether this
oscillator regulates the diverse functions of the islets of Langerhans remains to
be elucidated.

PMID: 15094047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Curr Biol. 2004 Apr 20;14(8):638-49.

Circadian clocks in antennal neurons are necessary and sufficient for olfaction
rhythms in Drosophila.

Tanoue S(1), Krishnan P, Krishnan B, Dryer SE, Hardin PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, 4800 Calhoun
Road, Houston, TX 77204 USA.

BACKGROUND: The Drosophila circadian clock is controlled by interlocked
transcriptional feedback loops that operate in many neuronal and nonneuronal
tissues. These clocks are roughly divided into a central clock, which resides in 
the brain and is known to control rhythms in locomotor activity, and peripheral
clocks, which comprise all other clock tissues and are thought to control other
rhythmic outputs. We previously showed that peripheral oscillators are required
to mediate rhythmic olfactory responses in the antenna, but the identity and
relative autonomy of these peripheral oscillators has not been defined.
RESULTS: Targeted ablation of lateral neurons by using apoptosis-promoting
factors and targeted clock disruption in antennal neurons with newly developed
dominant-negative versions of CLOCK and CYCLE show that antennal neurons, but not
central clock cells, are necessary for olfactory rhythms. Targeted rescue of
antennal neuron oscillators in cyc(01) flies through wild-type CYCLE shows that
these neurons are also sufficient for olfaction rhythms.
CONCLUSIONS: Antennal neurons are both necessary and sufficient for olfaction
rhythms, which demonstrates for the first time that a peripheral tissue can
function as an autonomous pacemaker in Drosophila. These results reveal
fundamental differences in the function and organization of circadian oscillators
in Drosophila and mammals and suggest that components of the olfactory signal
transduction cascade could be targets of circadian regulation.

PMID: 15084278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Apr 30;317(2):330-4.

Gene- and tissue-specific alterations of circadian clock gene expression in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice under restricted feeding.

Oishi K(1), Kasamatsu M, Ishida N.

Author information: 
(1)Clock Cell Biology Research Group, Institute for Biological Resources and
Functions, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology,
Central 6, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan.

Circadian clocks are located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the
hypothalamus as well as in the peripheral tissues of mammals. Recent molecular
studies have revealed that the phase of circadian gene expressions in peripheral 
clocks could entrain to time-imposed restricted feeding (RF) independently of the
SCN. To elucidate whether endogenous insulin is involved in the entraining
mechanisms of peripheral clocks to RF, we examined the expression profiles of
clock genes in peripheral tissues of mice with diabetes induced by streptozotocin
(STZ). The circadian expressing genes (mPer1, mPer2, and BMAL1) underwent a
phase-shift induced by RF in the heart, liver, and kidney of both diabetic and
normal animals. However, the expression phase of mPer1 in these tissues of the
diabetic mice significantly differed from those in the normal animals under RF.
The expression phase of the circadian output gene, albumin D-site binding protein
(DBP), was completely shifted by RF both in normal and in diabetic mice,
suggesting that the endogenous insulin is not essential for the entrainment of
peripheral clocks to feeding cycles in mice.

PMID: 15063761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Neurosci. 2004 Feb 25;24(8):1803-11.

Gating of the cAMP signaling cascade and melatonin synthesis by the circadian
clock in mammalian retina.

Fukuhara C(1), Liu C, Ivanova TN, Chan GC, Storm DR, Iuvone PM, Tosini G.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Institute and National Science Foundation Center for Behavioral
Neuroscience, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30310-1495, USA.

Melatonin is synthesized in retinal photoreceptor cells and acts as a
neuromodulator imparting photoperiodic information to the retina. The synthesis
of melatonin is controlled by an ocular circadian clock and by light in a finely 
tuned mechanism that ensures that melatonin is synthesized and acts only at night
in darkness. Here we report that the circadian clock gates melatonin synthesis in
part by regulating the expression of the type 1 adenylyl cyclase (AC1) and the
synthesis of cAMP in photoreceptor cells. This gating is effected through
E-box-mediated transcriptional activation of the AC1 gene, which undergoes robust
daily fluctuations that persist in constant illumination. The circadian control
of the cAMP signaling cascade indicates that the clock has a more general and
profound impact on retinal functions than previously thought. In addition,
rhythmic control of AC1 expression was observed in other parts of the central
circadian axis, the suprachiasmatic nucleus and pineal gland, but not in other
brain areas examined. Thus, clock control of the cAMP signaling cascade may play 
a central role in the integration of circadian signals that control physiology
and behavior.

PMID: 14985420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2004 Feb;49(3 Suppl):456-62.

[Genetic regulation of circadian rhythms].

[Article in Japanese]

Tei H(1).

Author information: 
(1)tei@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

PMID: 14976772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Genes Cells. 2003 Dec;8(12):973-83.

Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and phosphorylation of BMAL1 are regulated by
circadian clock in cultured fibroblasts.

Tamaru T(1), Isojima Y, van der Horst GT, Takei K, Nagai K, Takamatsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Toho University School of Medicine, 5-21-16
Ohmori-nishi Ohta-ku, Tokyo 143-8540, Japan. tetamaru@med.toho-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Recent discoveries of clock proteins have unveiled an important part 
of the mammalian circadian clock mechanism. However, the molecular clockwork that
cause these fundamental feedback loops to stably oscillate with a approximately
24 h-periodicity remain unclear.
RESULTS: Serum-shocked fibroblasts were used as a cellular clock model. Circadian
changes in the subcellular localization and phosphorylation of BMAL1 protein in
these cells were assessed by immunocytochemistry and immunoblotting. A
significant time lag between Bmal1 transcription and the cytoplasmic/nuclear
accumulation of BMAL1 was observed. After its nuclear accumulation, BMAL1
accumulated in the cytoplasm again, mainly by nucleoexport, before the increase
of Bmal1 transcripts. Nuclear accumulation of BMAL1 matched nuclear accumulation 
of CLOCK and the peak of Per1 transcription. Nuclear BMAL1 was gradually
phosphorylated and then dephosphorylated in a temporally regulated manner,
although cytoplasmic BMAL1 was not. In serum-shocked mCry1/mCry2 (CRY)-deficient 
fibroblasts, which lack a functional clock, both the cytoplasmic and nuclear
BMAL1 were only present as hyperphosphorylated forms and their circadian
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling was absent.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that the nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and phosphorylation 
states of BMAL1 are regulated by circadian clock, and that this temporally
regulated and time-delayed nuclear entry of BMAL1 is important in the maintenance
of a stably oscillating clock.

PMID: 14750952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Biochem J. 2004 May 15;380(Pt 1):95-103.

Phosphorylation of clock protein PER1 regulates its circadian degradation in
normal human fibroblasts.

Miyazaki K(1), Nagase T, Mesaki M, Narukawa J, Ohara O, Ishida N.

Author information: 
(1)Clock Cell Biology Group, IBRF (Institute for Biological Resource and
Function), National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
(AIST), Tsukuba central 6, 1-1-1, Higashi, Tsukuba, 305-8566, Japan.

Recent advances suggest that the molecular components of the circadian clock
generate a self-sustaining transcriptional-translational feedback loop with a
period of approx. 24 h. The precise expression profiles of human clock genes and 
their products have not been elucidated. We cloned human clock genes, including
per1, per2, per3, cry2 and clock, and evaluated their circadian mRNA expression
profiles in WI-38 fibroblasts stimulated with serum. Transcripts of hPer1, hPer2,
hPer3, hBMAL1 and hCry2 (where h is human) underwent circadian oscillation.
Serum-stimulation also caused daily oscillations of hPER1 protein and the
apparent molecular mass of hPER1 changed. Inhibitor studies indicated that the
CKI (casein kinase I) family, including CKIepsilon and CKIdelta, phosphorylated
hPER1 and increased the apparent molecular mass of hPER1. The inhibition of hPER1
phosphorylation by CKI-7 [ N
-(2-aminoethyl)-5-chloro-isoquinoline-8-sulphonamide], a CKI inhibitor, disturbed
hPER1 degradation, delayed the nuclear entry of hPER1 and allowed it to persist
for longer in the nucleus. Furthermore, proteasome inhibitors specifically
blocked hPER1 degradation. However leptomycin B, an inhibitor of nuclear export, 
did not alter the degradation state of hPER1 protein. These findings indicate
that circadian hPER1 degradation through a proteasomal pathway can be regulated
through phosphorylation by CKI, but not by subcellular localization.

PMCID: PMC1224138
PMID: 14750904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Novartis Found Symp. 2003;253:238-48; discussion 249.

The role of phosphorylation and degradation of hPER protein oscillation in normal
human fibroblasts.

Miyazaki K(1), Mezaki M, Ishida N.

Author information: 
(1)Clock Cell Biology, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and
Technology (AIST), IMCB 6-5, 1-1-1, Higashi, Tsukuba, 305-8566 Japan.

The circadian expression in Drosophila of clock gene products, such as PER and
TIM, is thought to be important for driving overt rhythms. The constitutive
expression of per by the heat-shock or rhodopsin promoters restores rhythmicity
of the null allele of per, suggesting that per mRNA cycling may not be required
for protein cycling or for locomotor rhythms. Furthermore, the constitutive
expression of tim mRNA also supports protein cycling and behavioural rhythms in
tim mutant flies. Other reports have also shown that eliminating the oscillations
of PER and TIM proteins by their over-expression abrogated circadian rhythmicity.
These data indicate that the circadian rhythmic expression of PER and TIM
proteins is also important like their rhythmic mRNA expression in Drosophila. To 
compare the molecular mechanism of circadian clocks in divergent species, we
report here cloning circadian mRNA and protein expression profiling of human
clock genes in normal human fibroblasts. Circadian oscillations of hPer1, hPer2, 
hPer3, hBMAL1 and hCry2 mRNA expression were observed in serum-stimulated normal 
human fibroblasts. The serum shock of human fibroblasts also caused daily
oscillations in the amount and size of human PER proteins as was shown using our 
novel antibodies. Inhibitor studies indicate that phosphorylation and degradation
of PER proteins is an important process in the human molecular clock.

PMID: 14712925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Novartis Found Symp. 2003;253:89-99; discussion 99-109.

Orphan nuclear receptors, molecular clockwork, and the entrainment of peripheral 
oscillators.

Preitner N(1), Brown S, Ripperger J, Le-Minh N, Damiola F, Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, NCCR Frontiers of Genetics, Sciences II,
University of Geneva, 30, Quai Ernest Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland.

Here we summarize our work on two aspects of circadian timing: the roles of
orphan nuclear receptors in the molecular clockwork, and phase entrainment of
peripheral oscillators. With reference to the former, studies on cis-acting
regulatory elements within the Bmal1 promoter revealed that REV-ERBalpha, an
orphan nuclear receptor provides a link between the positive and negative limbs
of the molecular oscillator. Specifically, REV-ERBalpha controls the cyclic
transcription of Bmal1 and Clock, the positive limb components. In turn, the
circadian expression of Rev-Erbalpha itself is driven directly by the molecular
oscillator: it is activated by BMAL1 and CLOCK, and repressed by PERIOD1/2 and
CRYPTOCHROME1/2 proteins (the negative limb members). With regard to phase
entrainment, it was initially believed that only the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN) was capable of generating circadian rhythms. However, circadian oscillators
have recently been discovered in many peripheral tissues. In the absence of a
functional SCN pacemaker, these peripheral clocks dampen after a few days. Hence,
the SCN must periodically synchronize these subsidiary timekeepers. It may
accomplish this task mostly through an indirect route: namely, by setting the
time of feeding. In addition to feeding cycles, body temperature rhythms and
cyclically secreted hormones might also serve as zeitgebers for peripheral
clocks.

PMID: 14712916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Neurosci. 2003 Dec 3;23(35):11202-13.

Circadian gene expression regulates pulsatile gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) secretory patterns in the hypothalamic GnRH-secreting GT1-7 cell line.

Chappell PE(1), White RS, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California, San Diego,
School of Medicine, La Jolla, California 92093-0674, USA.

Although it has long been established that episodic secretion of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus is required for
normal gonadotropin release, the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying the
synchronous release of GnRH are primarily unknown. We used the GT1-7 mouse
hypothalamic cell line as a model for GnRH secretion, because these cells release
GnRH in a pulsatile pattern similar to that observed in vivo. To explore possible
molecular mechanisms governing secretory timing, we investigated the role of the 
molecular circadian clock in regulation of GnRH secretion. GT1-7 cells express
many known core circadian clock genes, and we demonstrate that oscillations of
these components can be induced by stimuli such as serum and the adenylyl cyclase
activator forskolin, similar to effects observed in fibroblasts. Strikingly,
perturbation of circadian clock function in GT1-7 cells by transient expression
of the dominant-negative Clock-Delta19 gene disrupts normal ultradian patterns of
GnRH secretion, significantly decreasing mean pulse frequency. Additionally,
overexpression of the negative limb clock gene mCry1 in GT1-7 cells substantially
increases GnRH pulse amplitude without a commensurate change in pulse frequency, 
demonstrating that an endogenous biological clock is coupled to the mechanism of 
neurosecretion in these cells and can regulate multiple secretory parameters.
Finally, mice harboring a somatic mutation in the Clock gene are subfertile and
exhibit a substantial increase in estrous cycle duration as revealed by
examination of vaginal cytology. This effect persists in normal light/dark (LD)
cycles, suggesting that a suprachiasmatic nucleus-independent endogenous clock in
GnRH neurons is required for eliciting normal pulsatile patterns of GnRH
secretion.

PMCID: PMC2932475
PMID: 14657179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Science. 2003 Nov 21;302(5649):1408-12.

Synchronization of cellular clocks in the suprachiasmatic nucleus.

Yamaguchi S(1), Isejima H, Matsuo T, Okura R, Yagita K, Kobayashi M, Okamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Brain Science, Department of Brain Sciences, Kobe
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Individual cellular clocks in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the circadian
center, are integrated into a stable and robust pacemaker with a period length of
about 24 hours. We used real-time analysis of gene expression to show
synchronized rhythms of clock gene transcription across hundreds of neurons
within the mammalian SCN in organotypic slice culture. Differentially phased
neuronal clocks are topographically arranged across the SCN. A protein synthesis 
inhibitor set all cell clocks to the same initial phase and, after withdrawal,
intrinsic interactions among cell clocks reestablished the stable program of gene
expression across the assemblage. Na+-dependent action potentials contributed to 
establishing cellular synchrony and maintaining spontaneous oscillation across
the SCN.

PMID: 14631044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Science. 2003 Oct 10;302(5643):234-5.

Circadian rhythms. Liver regeneration clocks on.

Schibler U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland. ueli.schibler@molbio.unige.ch

Comment on
    Science. 2003 Oct 10;302(5643):255-9.

In some simple protozoans and unicellular algae, the cell cycle clock is strongly
influenced by the circadian clock, such that mitotic cell division takes place
only at certain times of the day. Now, as Schibler reports in his Perspective,
new work on regenerating liver cells in mice (Matsuo et al.) reveals that the
cell cycle clock of mammalian cells is also under the yoke of the master
circadian oscillator.

PMID: 14551421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J R Soc Med. 2003 Oct;96(10):486-9.

Clocks, genes and sleep.

von Schantz M(1), Archer SN.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Chronobiology, School of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences,
University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7XH, UK. m.von.schatz@surrey.ac.uk

PMCID: PMC544627
PMID: 14519724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2003 Sep;123(9):789-97.

[Optimization of the dosage schedule for sustaining intrinsic biological
rhythms].

[Article in Japanese]

Koyanagi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Fukuoka
University, 8-19-1 Nanakuma, Jonan-ku, Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan.
koyanagi@cis.fukuoka-u.ac.jp

One of the most indispensable biological functions for all living organisms is
the circadian clock, which acts like a multifunctional timer to regulate the
homeostatic system including sleep and wakefulness, hormonal secretions, and
various other body functions in a 24-hour cycle. Recent molecular dissections of 
the circadian biological clock system have revealed that oscillation in the
transcription of specific clock genes plays a central role in the generation of
circadian rhythms. Several drugs can affect the expression of clock genes,
resulting in alteration of the 24-hour rhythms in physiology and behavior. Here, 
we report the disruptive effect of interferon (IFN) on the core circadian
oscillation mechanism. Treatment of cultured hepatic cells with IFN-alpha caused 
a significant reduction in Clock and Bmal1 mRNA levels, which are positive
regulators of circadian output rhythm, leading to a decrease in their protein
levels. The continuous administration of IFN-alpha significantly decreased CLOCK 
and BMAL1 protein levels in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and liver of mice,
thereby preventing oscillations in the expression of clock and clock-controlled
output genes. These findings reveal a possible pharmacologic action of IFN-alpha 
on the core circadian oscillation mechanism and indicate that the disruptive
effect of IFN-alpha on circadian output function is the underlying cause of its
adverse effects on 24-hour rhythms in physiology and behavior. Furthermore, the
alteration of clock function, a new concept of adverse effects, can be avoided by
altering the dosage schedule of IFN-alpha to minimize the adverse drug effect on 
clock gene expression. One approach for increasing the efficacy of
pharmacotherapy is administering drugs at the time of day when they are best
tolerated. Attention should be paid to the alteration of clock gene expression,
and it should be considered an adverse effect when it leads to altered circadian 
organization of the molecular clockwork which is a serious problem affecting
basic function of living organisms.

PMID: 14513770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Endocrinology. 2003 Dec;144(12):5285-92. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

Expression of circadian rhythm genes in gonadotropin-releasing hormone-secreting 
GT1-7 neurons.

Gillespie JM(1), Chan BP, Roy D, Cai F, Belsham DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 
1A8.

The center for circadian rhythms in mammals is the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) 
of the hypothalamus, composed of single cell circadian oscillators driven by a
transcriptional/translational feedback loop where clock proteins drive clock gene
expression. These genes are expressed in peripheral tissues and several brain
areas outside the SCN. It is likely that some peripheral oscillators are
synchronized by the SCN. The pineal hormone melatonin plays an important role in 
the entrainment of circadian rhythms through feedback to the SCN. Melatonin also 
plays a role in reproduction, including direct effects on GnRH-secreting GT1-7
neurons. The intrinsic rhythmicity of GnRH neurons suggests that these neurons
may express the components of the circadian oscillator. Using the GT1-7 cell
line, we demonstrate expression of the circadian rhythm genes, clock,
BMAL1,timeless (tim), period1,period2, cryptochrome1, andcryptochrome2.
Furthermore, semiquantitative RT-PCR demonstrates that BMAL1, period1, andperiod2
as well as GnRH mRNAs are expressed with a circadian-like rhythm after
synchronization over 54 h. With available antibodies, we demonstrated CLOCK,
BMAL1, and PERIOD1 protein expression in these cells, with BMAL1 protein levels
showing a rhythmic expression pattern. In addition, receptors for melatonin, mt1 
and MT2, also show a circadian expression pattern in the GT1-7 cells, and their
expression is down-regulated by melatonin treatment. These findings suggest that 
the components of the clock machinery in mammals may play a role in GnRH neuronal
function.

PMID: 12960008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Neurosci. 2003 Aug 27;23(21):7810-9.

Novel insights into the regulation of the timeless protein.

Ashmore LJ(1), Sathyanarayanan S, Silvestre DW, Emerson MM, Schotland P, Sehgal
A.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Neuroscience, University of
Pennsylvania Medical School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

In the Drosophila circadian clock, period (per) and its partner, timeless (tim), 
play a central role in the negative limb of an autoregulatory feedback loop.
Unlike per, the dosage of which affects the frequency (tau) of the circadian
cycle, we found that increasing copies of the tim gene has no effect on clock
period length. The use of the tim promoter to express per results in a shortening
of circadian period, also indicating that the regulation of tim is different from
that of per. Drosophila TIM is similar to the mammalian circadian protein mPER2
in that it shuttles independently between the nucleus and cytoplasm both in vivo 
and in vitro. Contrary to the current model that PER and TIM heterodimerization
is a prerequisite for their nuclear entry, PER is not required to transport TIM
into nuclei, although it influences TIM localization and vice versa. Blocking
nuclear export led to increased nuclear expression of TIM in S2 cells and in
wild-type and per01 larvae, suggesting that PER may be required for nuclear
retention of TIM. Unlike PER, nuclear TIM alone has no ability to repress
transcription. We propose that TIM drives cycles of PER expression by regulating 
its stability, and in turn, PER retains TIM in the nucleus, either for the
regulation of its own stability or for a novel nuclear role of TIM.

PMID: 12944510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Science. 2003 Oct 10;302(5643):255-9. Epub 2003 Aug 21.

Control mechanism of the circadian clock for timing of cell division in vivo.

Matsuo T(1), Yamaguchi S, Mitsui S, Emi A, Shimoda F, Okamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Brain Science, Department of Brain Sciences, Kobe
University Graduate School of Medicine, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Comment in
    Science. 2003 Oct 10;302(5643):234-5.

Cell division in many mammalian tissues is associated with specific times of day,
but just how the circadian clock controls this timing has not been clear. Here,
we show in the regenerating liver (of mice) that the circadian clock controls the
expression of cell cycle-related genes that in turn modulate the expression of
active Cyclin B1-Cdc2 kinase, a key regulator of mitosis. Among these genes,
expression of wee1 was directly regulated by the molecular components of the
circadian clockwork. In contrast, the circadian clockwork oscillated
independently of the cell cycle in single cells. Thus, the intracellular
circadian clockwork can control the cell-division cycle directly and
unidirectionally in proliferating cells.

PMID: 12934012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Endocrinology. 2003 Sep;144(9):3742-8.

Circadian clock genes and photoperiodism: Comprehensive analysis of clock gene
expression in the mediobasal hypothalamus, the suprachiasmatic nucleus, and the
pineal gland of Japanese Quail under various light schedules.

Yasuo S(1), Watanabe M, Okabayashi N, Ebihara S, Yoshimura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomodeling, Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya
University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2003 Sep;144(9):3739-41.

In birds, the mediobasal hypothalamus (MBH) including the infundibular nucleus,
inferior hypothalamic nucleus, and median eminence is considered to be an
important center that controls the photoperiodic time measurement. Here we show
expression patterns of circadian clock genes in the MBH, putative suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN), and pineal gland, which constitute the circadian pacemaker under
various light schedules. Although expression patterns of clock genes were
different between long and short photoperiod in the SCN and pineal gland, the
results were not consistent with those under night interruption schedule, which
causes testicular growth. These results indicate that different expression
patterns of the circadian clock genes in the SCN and pineal gland are not an
absolute requirement for encoding and decoding of seasonal information. In
contrast, expression patterns of clock genes in the MBH were stable under various
light conditions, which enables animals to keep a steady-state photoinducible
phase.

PMID: 12933643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Oncogene. 2003 Aug 14;22(34):5306-14.

Antisense overexpression of BMAL2 enhances cell proliferation.

Yeh CT(1), Lu SC, Tseng IC, Lai HY, Tsao ML, Huang SF, Liaw YF.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Research Unit, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 199 Tung Hwa North Road,
Taipei, Taiwan. chauting@adm.cgmh.org.tw

To identify genes that are frequently downregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), a panel of putative underexpressed genes was first established by an
in-house cDNA macroarray method. Two different assays, semiquantitative RT-PCR
combined with Northern analysis and customized cDNA microarray analysis, were
used to screen through these genes and the results were compared. Several genes, 
some with unknown function, were confirmed to be downregulated by both the
methods. The effect of a downregulated gene, BMAL2, on cell proliferation was
examined. Overexpression of antisense BMAL2 RNA in 293EBNA cells resulted in
reduced cell cycle time, increased plating efficiency in soft agar, diminished
TNF-alpha-induced increment of CPP32/caspase-3 activity, and a reduced proportion
of cells in the G2 phase with a concomitantly increased proportion of cells in
the S phase. In conclusion, by combining three different methods, we have
obtained a panel of frequently down regulated genes in HCC, including BMAL2.
Antisense overexpression of BMAL2 enhances cell proliferation.

PMID: 12917632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Genes Dev. 2003 Aug 1;17(15):1921-32.

BMAL1-dependent circadian oscillation of nuclear CLOCK: posttranslational events 
induced by dimerization of transcriptional activators of the mammalian clock
system.

Kondratov RV(1), Chernov MV, Kondratova AA, Gorbacheva VY, Gudkov AV, Antoch MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland Clinic 
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

Mammalian CLOCK and BMAL1 are two members of bHLH-PAS-containing family of
transcription factors that represent the positive elements of circadian
autoregulatory feedback loop. In the form of a heterodimer, they drive
transcription from E-box enhancer elements in the promoters of responsive genes. 
We have examined abundance, posttranslational modifications, cellular
localization of endogenous and ectopically expressed CLOCK and BMAL1 proteins.
Nuclear/cytoplasm distribution of CLOCK was found to be under circadian
regulation. Analysis of subcellular localization of CLOCK in embryo fibroblasts
of mice carrying different germ-line circadian mutations showed that circadian
regulation of nuclear accumulation of CLOCK is BMAL1-dependent. Formation of
CLOCK/BMAL1 complex following ectopic coexpression of both proteins is followed
by their codependent phosphorylation, which is tightly coupled to CLOCK nuclear
translocation and degradation. This binding-dependent coregulation is specific
for CLOCK/BMAL1 interaction, as no other PAS domain protein that can form a
complex with either CLOCK or BMAL1 was able to induce similar effects.
Importantly, all posttranslational events described in our study are coupled with
active transactivation complex formation, which argues for their significant
functional role. Altogether, these results provide evidence for an additional
level of circadian system control, which is based on regulation of
transcriptional activity or/and availability of CLOCK/BMAL1 complex.

PMCID: PMC196247
PMID: 12897057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Neuroscience. 2003;120(3):745-55.

Contrary to other non-photic cues, acute melatonin injection does not induce
immediate changes of clock gene mRNA expression in the rat suprachiasmatic
nuclei.

Poirel VJ(1), Boggio V, Dardente H, Pevet P, Masson-Pevet M, Gauer F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie des Rythmes, UMR-CNRS 7518, Université Louis
Pasteur, 12 rue de l'Université, 67000 Strasbourg, France.

The suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) contain the main clock of the mammalian
circadian system. The endogenous oscillation machinery involves interactive
positive and negative transcriptional and posttranslational feedback loops
involving the clock genes Per1, Per2, Per3, Clock, Bmal1, Cry1 and Cry2. The SCN 
endogenous oscillation is entrained to 24 h by the light/dark cycle. Light
induced regulation of Per1 and Per2 mRNA expression have been suggested to take
part in the clock resetting. However, other factors have chronobiotic and
synchronizing effects on SCN activity. Especially, the nocturnal pineal gland
hormone, melatonin, which is involved in the regulation of both circadian and
seasonal rhythms, is known to feedback on the SCN. Melatonin applied on SCN
slices immediately phase-shifts their neuronal electrical activity, while daily
injections of melatonin to free running rodents resynchronize their locomotor
activity to 24 h. To determine whether melatonin feedback control on SCN activity
implicates transcriptional regulation of the clock genes, we monitored the
expression pattern of Per 1, 2, 3, Bmal1, Cry1 and AVP mRNAs after a single
melatonin injection at the end of the subjective day. Results showed that
melatonin injection affected none of the mRNA expression pattern during the first
circadian night. Per1, Per3, Bmal1 and AVP expression patterns were, however,
significantly but differentially affected, during the second subjective night
after the melatonin injection. The present results strongly suggest that the
immediate phase shifting effect of melatonin on the SCN molecular loop implicates
rather post-translational than transcriptional mechanisms.

PMID: 12895514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 3;278(40):38149-58. Epub 2003 Jul 17.

Constructing a feedback loop with circadian clock molecules from the silkmoth,
Antheraea pernyi.

Chang DC(1), McWatters HG, Williams JA, Gotter AL, Levine JD, Reppert SM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Chronobiology, MassGeneral Hospital for Children, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Circadian clocks are important regulators of behavior and physiology. The
circadian clock of Drosophila depends on an autoinhibitory feedback loop
involving dCLOCK, CYCLE (also called dBMAL, for Drosophila brain and muscle
ARNT-like protein), dPERIOD, and dTIMELESS. Recent studies suggest that the clock
mechanism in other insect species may differ strikingly from that of Drosophila. 
We cloned Clock, Bmal, and Timeless homologs (apClock, apBmal, and apTimeless)
from the silkmoth Antheraea pernyi, from which a Period homolog (apPeriod) has
already been cloned. In Schneider 2 (S2) cell culture assays, apCLOCK:apBMAL
activates transcription through an E-box enhancer element found in the 5' region 
of the apPeriod gene. Furthermore, apPERIOD can robustly inhibit apCLOCK:
apBMAL-mediated transactivation, and apTIMELESS can augment this inhibition.
Thus, a complete feedback loop, resembling that found in Drosophila, can be
constructed from silkmoth CLOCK, BMAL, PERIOD, and TIMELESS. Our results suggest 
that the circadian autoinhibitory feedback loop discovered in Drosophila is
likely to be widespread among insects. However, whereas the transactivation
domain in Drosophila lies in the C terminus of dCLOCK, in A. pernyi, it lies in
the C terminus of apBMAL, which is highly conserved with the C termini of BMALs
in other insects (except Drosophila) and in vertebrates. Our analysis sheds light
on the molecular function and evolution of clock genes in the animal kingdom.

PMID: 12869551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Eur J Neurosci. 2003 Jul;18(1):125-33.

Light does not degrade the constitutively expressed BMAL1 protein in the mouse
suprachiasmatic nucleus.

von Gall C(1), Noton E, Lee C, Weaver DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Aaron Lazare Medical Research Building, Room 723, 
University of Massachusetts Medical School, 364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 
01605-2324, USA.

Biological rhythms in mammals are driven by a central circadian clock located in 
the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). At the molecular level the biological clock is
based on the rhythmic expression of clock genes. Two basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH)/PAS-containing transcription factors, CLOCK and BMAL1 (MOP3), provide the 
basic drive to the system by activating transcription of negative regulators
through E box enhancer elements. A critical feature of circadian timing is the
ability of the clockwork to be entrained to the environmental light/dark cycle.
The light-resetting mechanism of the mammalian circadian clock is poorly
understood. Light-induced phase shifts are correlated with the induction of the
clock genes mPer1 and mPer2 and a subsequent increase in mPER1 protein levels. It
has previously been suggested that rapid degradation of BMAL1 protein in the rat 
SCN is part of the resetting mechanism of the central pacemaker. Our study shows 
that BMAL1 and CLOCK proteins are continuously expressed at high levels in the
mouse SCN, supporting the hypothesis that rhythmic negative feedback plays the
major role in rhythm generation in the mammalian pacemaker. Using both
immunocytochemistry and immunoblot analysis, our studies demonstrate that BMAL1
protein in the mouse SCN is not affected by a phase-resetting light pulse. These 
results indicate that rapid degradation of BMAL1 protein is not a consistent
feature of resetting mechanisms in rodents.

PMID: 12859345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Hypertension. 2003 Aug;42(2):189-94. Epub 2003 Jun 30.

Alterations of circadian expressions of clock genes in Dahl salt-sensitive rats
fed a high-salt diet.

Mohri T(1), Emoto N, Nonaka H, Fukuya H, Yagita K, Okamura H, Yokoyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular and Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1, Kusunoki, Chuo,
Kobe, 650-0017, Japan.

In mammals, behavioral and physiologic processes display 24-hour rhythms that are
regulated by a circadian system consisting of central and peripheral oscillators.
Because various cardiovascular functions show diurnal variations and abnormal
patterns of circadian blood pressure variation carry a high risk of
cardiovascular complications, we investigated whether the expression of clock
genes is altered in an animal model of hypertension. In Dahl salt-sensitive rats 
fed a high-salt (4% NaCl) diet for 6 weeks (DS-H), radiotelemetry monitoring
showed increased amplitude of circadian variations in blood pressure. The ratio
of heart weight to body weight and the ratio of kidney weight to body weight were
higher in DS-H. Echocardiographic data showed that the wall thickness of the left
ventricle was greater in DS-H. Northern blot analysis and single cosinor analysis
revealed that the amplitudes of circadian expression changes of the clock genes
(mPer2, Bmal1, and dbp) in the heart, liver, and kidney were significantly
decreased in DS-H rats compared with a normal-salt-diet group, except for Bmal1
in the liver. The circadian expression changes of plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1, a clock-regulated gene, were attenuated in the hearts of DS-H. The
present results demonstrate that DS-H show altered circadian expression of
peripheral clock genes. Detailed analyses of the relation between circadian
expression of clock genes and blood pressure regulation might reveal a role for
chronologic therapy of cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 12835331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Biol Chem. 2003 May;384(5):711-9.

Synchronization of the molecular clockwork by light- and food-related cues in
mammals.

Challet E(1), Caldelas I, Graff C, Pévet P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurobiology of Rhythms, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (UMR7518), University Louis Pasteur, Neuroscience Federation
(IFR37), 12 rue de l'université, F-67000 Strasbourg, France.

The molecular clockwork in mammals involves various clock genes with specific
temporal expression patterns. Synchronization of the master circadian clock
located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) is accomplished mainly via daily
resetting of the phase of the clock by light stimuli. Phase shifting responses to
light are correlated with induction of Per1, Per2 and Dec1 expression and a
possible reduction of Cry2 expression within SCN cells. The timing of peripheral 
oscillators is controlled by the SCN when food is available ad libitum. Time of
feeding, as modulated by temporal restricted feeding, is a potent 'Zeitgeber'
(synchronizer) for peripheral oscillators with only weak synchronizing influence 
on the SCN clockwork. When restricted feeding is coupled with caloric
restriction, however, timing of clock gene expression is altered within the SCN, 
indicating that the SCN function is sensitive to metabolic cues. The components
of the circadian timing system can be differentially synchronized according to
distinct, sometimes conflicting, temporal (time of light exposure and feeding)
and homeostatic (metabolic) cues.

PMID: 12817467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Science. 2003 Jun 6;300(5625):1534-5.

Circadian rhythms: in the loop at last.

Van Gelder RN(1), Herzog ED, Schwartz WJ, Taghert PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University, St.
Louis, MO 63110, USA. vangelder@vision.wustl.edu

The basic molecular mechanisms underlying circadian oscillators follow the same
general plan across the phylogenetic spectrum: oscillating feedback loops in
which clock gene products negatively regulate their own expression. The circadian
clocks of animals involve at least two interacting feedback loops. This Viewpoint
compares and contrasts the circadian clocks of mammals and of Drosophila,
emphasizing how different players are used to create the same basic script. Both 
the general script and the specific details of the murine and Drosophila
circadian pathways are available at Science's Signal Transduction Knowledge
Environment Connections Maps.

PMID: 12791982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Hypertens. 2003 Jun;21(6):1107-15.

Circadian gene expression of clock genes and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 in
heart and aorta of spontaneously hypertensive and Wistar-Kyoto rats.

Naito Y(1), Tsujino T, Kawasaki D, Okumura T, Morimoto S, Masai M, Sakoda T,
Fujioka Y, Ohyanagi M, Iwasaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardiovascular Division, Hyogo College of
Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Heart and aorta possess biologic clocks, but their involvement in
genetic hypertension has been unknown. Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) 
expression is directly regulated by clock genes, while angiotensin II modulates
both PAI-1 and clock gene expression. We therefore examined circadian expression 
of PAI-1 and clock genes, and effects of angiotensin type 1 (AT1) receptor
antagonism, in heart and aorta of spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) and
Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats.
METHODS: We examined cardiac and aortic mRNA expression for PAI-1 and clock genes
(Per2, Bmal1, Clock, and Dbp) every 4 h throughout the day by quantitative
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and intervention with the AT1
receptor antagonist candesartan and equihypotensive hydralazine.
RESULTS: Cardiac PAI-1 expression was high in the dark, while aortic PAI-1
expression was high in the light. Both cardiac and aortic PAI-1 expression were
greater in SHR than in WKY rats. Candesartan treatment decreased cardiac PAI-1
expression only in the dark in WKY rats but throughout the day in SHR.
Candesartan but not hydralazine strongly attenuated circadian fluctuation of
aortic PAI-1 mRNA in SHR and WKY rats. Clock genes oscillated synchronously in
heart and aorta of SHR and WKY rats. Clock gene expression was increased in heart
but not aorta of SHR. Candesartan did not affect clock gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Enhanced expression of clock genes may increase PAI-1 expression in 
concert with activated renin-angiotensin system in SHR heart. Rather than clock
genes, the renin-angiotensin system induces daily fluctuation and increased
expression of aortic PAI-1 mRNA in SHR.

PMID: 12777947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jun 10;100(12):7051-6. Epub 2003 May 29.

Toward a detailed computational model for the mammalian circadian clock.

Leloup JC(1), Goldbeter A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Chronobiologie Théorique, Faculté des Sciences, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Campus Plaine, C. P. 231, B-1050 Brussels, Belgium.

We present a computational model for the mammalian circadian clock based on the
intertwined positive and negative regulatory loops involving the Per, Cry, Bmal1,
Clock, and Rev-Erb alpha genes. In agreement with experimental observations, the 
model can give rise to sustained circadian oscillations in continuous darkness,
characterized by an antiphase relationship between Per/Cry/Rev-Erbalpha and Bmal1
mRNAs. Sustained oscillations correspond to the rhythms autonomously generated by
suprachiasmatic nuclei. For other parameter values, damped oscillations can also 
be obtained in the model. These oscillations, which transform into sustained
oscillations when coupled to a periodic signal, correspond to rhythms produced by
peripheral tissues. When incorporating the light-induced expression of the Per
gene, the model accounts for entrainment of the oscillations by light-dark
cycles. Simulations show that the phase of the oscillations can then vary by
several hours with relatively minor changes in parameter values. Such a lability 
of the phase could account for physiological disorders related to circadian
rhythms in humans, such as advanced or delayed sleep phase syndrome, whereas the 
lack of entrainment by light-dark cycles can be related to the non-24h sleep-wake
syndrome. The model uncovers the possible existence of multiple sources of
oscillatory behavior. Thus, in conditions where the indirect negative
autoregulation of Per and Cry expression is inoperative, the model indicates the 
possibility that sustained oscillations might still arise from the negative
autoregulation of Bmal1 expression.

PMCID: PMC165828
PMID: 12775757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2003 May;35(5):473-81.

Regulation of the PAI-1 promoter by circadian clock components: differential
activation by BMAL1 and BMAL2.

Schoenhard JA(1), Smith LH, Painter CA, Eren M, Johnson CH, Vaughan DE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, 2220 Pierce Avenue, 383 PRB, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Circadian variation in plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) production
likely contributes to increased risk of myocardial infarction and decreased
efficacy of thrombolytic therapy during the morning. In this study, we
characterize the abilities of fundamental molecular components of intrinsic
circadian clocks to regulate the human PAI-1 promoter in transfected endothelial 
cells. Both CLOCK:BMAL1 and CLOCK:BMAL2 heterodimers activate the PAI-1 promoter 
through requisite proximal (-565 to -560 bp) and distal (-680 to -675 bp) E-box
enhancers. Although the distal E-box overlaps the 4G/5G polymorphism of the PAI-1
promoter, allelic variation at this site does not influence CLOCK:BMAL1-and
CLOCK:BMAL2-mediated transactivation. Together, CLOCK:BMAL1 and CLOCK:BMAL2 make 
additive contributions to PAI-1 gene transcription. While the abilities of these 
heterodimers to activate gene expression differ by twofold, the susceptibilities 
of these circadian activators to inhibition by period and cryptochrome proteins
are equivalent and redox independent. Given that BMAL1 and BMAL2 differ in their 
spatiotemporal distributions, such distinctions may allow intrinsic circadian
clocks to modulate the amplitudes of their oscillators, while maintaining
circadian periodicity. In this way, fundamental circadian clock components may
drive circadian variation in PAI-1, which in turn influences the pathogenesis,
timing, and treatment of acute atherothrombotic events.

PMID: 12738229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Curr Biol. 2003 Apr 29;13(9):758-62.

A novel C-terminal domain of drosophila PERIOD inhibits dCLOCK:CYCLE-mediated
transcription.

Chang DC(1), Reppert SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center, 364
Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The essence of the Drosophila circadian clock involves an autoregulatory feedback
loop in which PERIOD (PER) and TIMELESS (TIM) inhibit their own transcription by 
association with the transcriptional activators dCLOCK (dCLK) and CYCLE (CYC).
Because PER, dCLK, and CYC each contain a PAS domain, it has been assumed that
these interaction domains are important for negative feedback. However, a
critical role for PAS-PAS interactions in Drosophila clock function has not been 
shown. Nuclear transport of PER is also believed to be an essential regulatory
step for negative feedback, but this has not been directly tested, and the
relevant nuclear localization sequence (NLS) has not been functionally mapped. We
evaluated these critical aspects of PER-mediated transcriptional inhibition in
Drosophila Schneider 2 (S2) cells. We mapped the dCLK:CYC inhibition domain
(CCID) of PER and discovered that it lies in the C terminus, downstream of the
PAS domain. Using deletion mutants and site-directed mutagenesis, we identified a
novel NLS in the CCID of PER that is a potent regulator of PER's nuclear
transport in S2 cells. We further found that nuclear transport, primarily through
this novel NLS, is essential for the inhibitory activity of PER. The data
indicate that nuclear PER inhibits dCLK:CYC-mediated transcription through a
novel domain that additionally contains a potent NLS.

PMID: 12725734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Neurochem. 2003 May;85(4):851-60.

Temporal-spatial characterization of chicken clock genes: circadian expression in
retina, pineal gland, and peripheral tissues.

Chong NW(1), Chaurasia SS, Haque R, Klein DC, Iuvone PM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Glenfield General Hospital,
Clinical Sciences Wing, University of Leicester, Leicester LE3 9QP, UK.
nc69@le.ac.uk

The molecular core of the vertebrate circadian clock is a set of clock genes,
whose products interact to control circadian changes in physiology. These clock
genes are expressed in all tissues known to possess an endogenous self-sustaining
clock, and many are also found in peripheral tissues. In the present study, the
expression patterns of two clock genes, cBmal1 and cMOP4, were examined in the
chicken, a useful model for analysis of the avian circadian system. In two
tissues which contain endogenous clocks--the pineal gland and retina--circadian
fluctuations of both cBmal1 and cMOP4 mRNAs were observed to be synchronous;
highest levels occurred at Zeitgeber time 12. Expression of these genes is also
rhythmic in several peripheral tissues; however, the phases of these rhythms
differ from those in the pineal gland and retina: in the liver the peaks of cMOP4
and cBmal1 mRNAs are delayed 4-8 h and in the heart they are advanced by 4 h,
relative to those in the pineal gland and retina. These results provide the first
temporal characterization of cBmal1 and cMOP4 mRNAs in avian tissues: their
presence in avian peripheral tissues indicates they may influence temporal
features of daily rhythms in biochemical, physiological, and behavioral functions
at these sites.

PMID: 12716417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2003 May 14;142(2):219-21.

Induction of photosensitivity in cultured rat pineal affects Aa-nat regulation.

Fukuhara C(1), Tosini G.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Institute and NSF Center for Behavioral Neuroscience, Morehouse
School of Medicine, 720 Westview Dr. SW, Atlanta, GA 30310-1495, USA.

In a previous investigation we have demonstrated that neonatal rat pineal may
become photosensitive if removed from the animal at post-natal day 1 and cultured
for 7 days. In the present study we demonstrated that Aa-nat mRNA, the key enzyme
in melatonin biosynthetic pathway, is affected by illumination in photosensitive 
pineal, and Aa-nat transcription in photosensitive pineal, but not in adult or
non photosensitive pineals, is up-regulated by BMAL1:CLOCK.

PMID: 12711374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Neuroscience. 2003;118(2):317-22.

Photoperiod differentially regulates clock genes' expression in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus of Syrian hamster.

Tournier BB(1), Menet JS, Dardente H, Poirel VJ, Malan A, Masson-Pévet M, Pévet
P, Vuillez P.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiologie des Rythmes, UMR 7518 CNRS/ULP, IFR Neurosciences 37, 12 rue de 
l'Université, 67000 Strasbourg, France.

The suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) contain the master circadian pacemaker in
mammals. Generation and maintenance of circadian oscillations involve clock genes
which interact to form transcriptional/translational loops and constitute the
molecular basis of the clock. There is some evidence that the SCN clock can
integrate variations in day length, i.e. photoperiod. However, the effects of
photoperiod on clock-gene expression remain largely unknown. We here report the
expression pattern of Period (Per) 1, Per2, Per3, Cryptochrome (Cry) 1, Cry2,
Bmal1 and Clock genes in the SCN of Syrian hamsters when kept under long (LP) and
short (SP) photoperiods. Our data show that photoperiod differentially affects
the expression of all clock genes studied. Among the components of the negative
limb of the feedback loop, Per1, Per2, Per3, Cry2 but not Cry1 genes show a
shortened duration of their peak expression under SP compared with LP. Moreover, 
mRNA expression of Per1, Per3 and Cry1 are phase advanced in SP compared with LP.
Per3 shows an mRNA peak of higher amplitude under SP conditions whereas Per1 and 
Per2 peak amplitudes are unaffected by photoperiod changes. Bmal1 expression is
phase advanced without a change of duration in SP compared with LP. Furthermore, 
the expression of Clock is rhythmic under SP whereas no rhythm is observed under 
LP. These results, which provide further evidence that the core clock mechanisms 
of the SCN integrate photoperiod, are discussed in the context of the existing
molecular model.

PMID: 12699768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Biol Rhythms. 2003 Apr;18(2):159-69.

Aging alters circadian and light-induced expression of clock genes in golden
hamsters.

Kolker DE(1), Fukuyama H, Huang DS, Takahashi JS, Horton TH, Turek FW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Physiology, Northwestern University, Evanston, 
IL 60208, USA. kolkerd@mail.nih.gov

Aging alters numerous aspects of circadian biology, including the amplitude of
rhythms generated by the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the hypothalamus, the
site of the central circadian pacemaker in mammals, and the response of the
pacemaker to environmental stimuli such as light. Although previous studies have 
described molecular correlates of these behavioral changes, to date only 1 study 
in rats has attempted to determine if there are age-related changes in the
expression of genes that comprise the circadian clock itself. We used in situ
hybridization to examine the effects of age on the circadian pattern of
expression of a subset of the genes that comprise the molecular machinery of the 
circadian clock in golden hamsters. Here we report that age alters the 24-h
expression profile of Clock and its binding partner Bmal1 in the hamster SCN.
There is no effect of age on the 24-h profile of either Per1 or Per2 when
hamsters are housed in constant darkness. We also found that light pulses, which 
induce smaller phase shifts in old animals than in young, lead to decreased
induction of Per1, but not of Per2, in the SCN of old hamsters.

PMID: 12693870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Biol Rhythms. 2003 Apr;18(2):134-44.

Clock gene daily profiles and their phase relationship in the rat suprachiasmatic
nucleus are affected by photoperiod.

Sumová A(1), Jác M, Sládek M, Sauman I, Illnerová H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague.
sumova@biomed.cas.cz

Rhythmicity of the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), a site of the circadian
pacemaker, is affected by daylength; that is, by the photoperiod. Whereas various
markers of rhythmicity have been followed, so far there have been no studies on
the effect of the photoperiod on the expression of the clock genes in the rat
SCN. To fill the gap and to better understand the photoperiodic modulation of the
SCN state, rats were maintained either under a long photoperiod with 16 h of
light and 8 h of darkness per day (LD16:8) or under a short LD8:16 photoperiod,
and daily profiles of Per1, Cry1, Bmal1 and Clock mRNA in darkness were assessed 
by in situ hybridization method. The photoperiod affected phase, waveform, and
amplitude of the rhythmic gene expression as well as phase relationship between
their profiles. Under the long period, the interval of elevated Per1 mRNA lasted 
for a longer and that of elevated Bmal1 mRNA for a shorter time than under the
short photoperiod. Under both photoperiods, the morning and the daytime Per1 and 
Cry1 mRNA rise as well as the morning Bmal1 mRNA decline were closely linked to
the morning light onset. Amplitude of Per1, Cry1, and Bmal1 mRNA rhythms was
larger under the short than under the long photoperiod. Also, under the short
photoperiod, the daily Clock mRNA profile exhibited a significant rhythm.
Altogether, the data indicate that the whole complex molecular clockwork in the
rat SCN is photoperiod dependent and hence may differ according to the season of 
the year.

PMID: 12693868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2003 Mar;22(3):396-404.

Cross-talk between hypoxic and circadian pathways: cooperative roles for
hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha and CLOCK in transcriptional activation of the
vasopressin gene.

Ghorbel MT(1), Coulson JM, Murphy D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuroendocrinology Research Group, University Research Center for
Neuroendocrinology, University of Bristol, Bristol Royal Infirmary, UK.
m.ghorbel@bris.ac.uk

The vasopressin gene is expressed in the suprachiasmatic nucleus where the basic 
helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS factors CLOCK and MOP3 regulate circadian expression 
through interactions with E-box sequences. We have examined vasopressin gene
regulation by HIF-1alpha, a bHLH-PAS factor involved in responses to hypoxia. By 
transfecting Neuro-2A cells with 5' flanking regions of vasopressin gene driving 
a luciferase reporter, we have shown that CLOCK and HIF-1alpha cooperate in the
induction of expression from 1000 bp and 350 bp of the vasopressin promoter but
do not activate a 120-bp promoter fragment. The region between -191 and -128
contains an E-box A that appears to be essential for HIF-1alpha/CLOCK-mediated
transcriptional activity. However, gel-shift analysis shows that the cooperative 
effect of HIF-1alpha and CLOCK results in MOP3 binding, but does not involve
heterodimerization of HIF-1alpha/CLOCK, at E-box A. These data indicate that
cross-talk between mediators of hypoxic and circadian pathways can regulate
target genes.

PMID: 12691740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 Mar 17;111(1-2):1-7.

Expression of the transcriptional coactivators CBP and p300 in the hamster
suprachiasmatic nucleus: possible molecular components of the mammalian circadian
clock.

Fiore P(1), Gannon RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Dowling College, Oakdale, NY 11769, USA.

Immediate early genes are expressed in the mammalian suprachiasmatic nucleus in
response to photic information arriving from the retina at restricted times of
the day, therefore their expression is regulated by the circadian biological
clock. These light-induced genes are also activated by the phosphorylated form of
CREB (pCREB) that binds to a cAMP response element upstream of the genes. The
nuclear proteins CBP and p300 are known to be coactivators with pCREB in certain 
cell types, but their identification within the rodent SCN has not been reported.
Therefore, in this study we examined the distribution of both CBP and p300 in the
hamster suprachiasmatic nucleus. CBP and p300 immunoreactivity is detected in
cells throughout the suprachiasmatic nucleus, and the pattern of staining within 
cells is indicative of a nuclear location for these proteins. The number of cells
immunoreactive for both CBP and p300 significantly decreases at mid-night
circadian times with respect to mid-day circadian times, although the reduction
is less than 20%. Neither CBP nor p300 expression is affected by a circadian
phase-resetting light pulse given late in the night. The ability of CBP and p300 
to interact with pCREB as well as with the clock gene BMAL1 is discussed, and we 
propose that CBP and p300 may interact with, and link, both clock genes and
clock-controlled genes in the generation of circadian rhythms in mammals. We
further suggest that there will be a general importance for the role of
transcriptional coactivators such as CBP and p300 in many of the molecular
pathways related to the mammalian circadian clock.

PMID: 12654499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Neuroendocrinol. 2003 Apr;15(4):350-4.

Molecular control of Xenopus retinal circadian rhythms.

Green CB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, 375 Gilmer Hall, University of Virginia, PO Box 400328,
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4328, USA. cbg8b@virginia.edu

Vertebrate retinas contain endogenous circadian clocks that control many aspects 
of retinal physiology. Our work has focused on studying the molecular mechanism
of this clock and the way in which it controls the many cellular rhythms within
the retina. These studies focus on the retina of Xenopus laevis, a
well-established model system extensively used for the study of both retinal
physiology and circadian function. We have cloned Xenopus homologues of the genes
thought to be critical for vertebrate clock function, including Clock, Bmal1,
cryptochromes and period, as well as other rhythmic genes such as nocturnin. We
have used these genes to manipulate the clock within different subsets of retinal
photoreceptors via cell-specific promoters, in order to study the location of the
clock within the retina. These in vivo experiments have shown that photoreceptor 
cells contain clocks that are necessary for the rhythmic production of melatonin.
We have also used biochemical approaches to further investigate the molecular
events that drive specific rhythmic outputs, such as circadian regulation of
nocturnin gene transcription and control of post-transcriptional events within
these clock-containing cells.

PMID: 12622833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Neuroendocrinol. 2003 Apr;15(4):329-34.

Expression of mCLOCK and other circadian clock-relevant proteins in the mouse
suprachiasmatic nuclei.

Maywood ES(1), O'Brien JA, Hastings MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH,
UK.

Circadian timing in mammals is based upon the cell-autonomous clockwork located
in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the hypothalamus. It is thought to involve
interlocked feedback loops in which periodic transcriptional drive to core clock 
genes is mediated by CLOCK/BMAL1 heterodimers. Negative-feedback actions of the
encoded proteins PER and CRY terminate this phase of the cycle. In lower species,
rhythmic abundance of the mCLOCK homologue initiates the subsequent cycle. By
contrast, it is proposed that the new circadian cycle in mammals is triggered by 
indirect, positive transcriptional actions leading to a subsequent surge in
BMAL1. The aim of this study was to test predictions made by this model
concerning the behaviour of the native clock factor mCLOCK in the mouse SCN.
Using in situ hybridization, immunocytochemistry, Western blotting and
immunoprecipitation, we demonstrate constitutive expression of mCLOCK as a
nuclear antigen in the SCN. mCLOCK forms alternating, periodic associations with 
either mBMAL1 or the negative regulators mPER and mCRY. The results confirm
predictions made by the "two-loop" model of the mouse clock, and further
highlight the role of interlocked cycles of positive and negative transcriptional
regulatory complexes at the heart of the circadian clockwork.

PMID: 12622829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Biol Rhythms. 2003 Feb;18(1):12-25.

Gender dimorphism in the role of cycle (BMAL1) in rest, rest regulation, and
longevity in Drosophila melanogaster.

Hendricks JC(1), Lu S, Kume K, Yin JC, Yang Z, Sehgal A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sleep and Respiratory Neurobiology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. jch@mail.med.upenn.edu

The central clock is generally thought to provide timing information for
rest/activity but not to otherwise participate in regulation of these states. To 
test the hypothesis that genes that are components of the molecular clock also
regulate rest, the authors quantified the duration and intensity of consolidated 
rest and activity for the four viable Drosophila mutations of the central clock
that lead to arrhythmic locomotor behavior and for the pdf mutant that lacks
pigment-dispersing factor, an output neuropeptide. Only the cycle (cyc01) and
Clock (Clk(Jrk)) mutants had abnormalities that mapped to the mutant locus,
namely, decreased consolidated rest and grossly extended periods of activity. All
mutants with the exception of the cyc01 fly exhibited a qualitatively normal
compensatory rebound after rest deprivation. This abnormal response in cyc01 was 
sexually dimorphic, being reduced or absent in males and exaggerated in females. 
Finally, the cyc01 mutation shortened the life span of male flies. These data
indicate that cycle regulates rest and life span in male Drosophila.

PMID: 12568241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Neuroscience. 2003;116(2):583-91.

Circadian profile and photic regulation of clock genes in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus of a diurnal mammal Arvicanthis ansorgei.

Caldelas I(1), Poirel VJ, Sicard B, Pévet P, Challet E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurobiology of Rhythms, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique UMR7518, Louis Pasteur University, 67000 Strasbourg, France.

The molecular mechanisms of the mammalian circadian clock located in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus have been essentially studied in nocturnal species.
Currently, it is not clear if the clockwork and the synchronizing mechanisms are 
similar between diurnal and nocturnal species. Here we investigated in a
day-active rodent Arvicanthis ansorgei, some of the molecular mechanisms that
participate in the generation of circadian rhythmicity and processing of photic
signals. In situ hybridization was used to characterize circadian profiles of
expression of Per1, Per2, Cry2 and Bmal1 in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of A.
ansorgei housed in constant dim red light. All the clock genes studied showed a
circadian expression. Per1 and Per2 mRNA increased during the subjective day and 
decreased during the subjective night. Also, Bmal1 exhibited a circadian
expression, but in anti-phase to that of Per1. The expression of Cry2 displayed a
circadian pattern, increasing during the late subjective day and decreasing
during the late subjective night. We also obtained the phase responses to light
for wheel-running rhythm and clock gene expression. At a behavioral level, light 
was able to induce phase shifts only during the subjective night, like in other
diurnal and nocturnal species. At a molecular level, light pulse exposure during 
the night led to an up-regulation of Per1 and Per2 concomitant with a
down-regulation of Cry2 in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of A. ansorgei. In
contrast, Bmal1 expression was not affected by light pulses at the circadian
times investigated. This study demonstrates that light exposure during the
subjective night has opposite effects on the expression of the clock genes Per1
and Per2 compared with that of Cry2. These differential effects can participate
in photic resetting of the circadian clock. Our data also indicate that the
molecular mechanisms underlying circadian rhythmicity and photic synchronization 
share clear similarities between diurnal and nocturnal mammals.

Copyright 2003 IBRO

PMID: 12559113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Neuroreport. 2003 Jan 20;14(1):15-9.

Involvement of CLOCK:BMAL1 heterodimer in serum-responsive mPer1 induction.

Jung H(1), Choe Y, Kim H, Park N, Son GH, Khang I, Kim K.

Author information: 
(1)Development and Neuroendocrine Research Laboratory, School of Biomedical
Sciences, Seoul National University, Korea.

A rapid induction of mouse period1 (mPer1) gene expression is supposed to be
critical in the clock gene regulation, especially in the phase resetting of the
clock, but its molecular mechanism is poorly understood. Based on the previous
finding that the process does not involve de novo synthesis of proteins, we
postulated the involvement of CLOCK:BMAL1 heterodimer, a positive regulator of
circadian oscillator, in the rapid induction of mPer1 transcription. To test this
hypothesis, we utilized CLOCKdelta19, a dominant-negative mutant, to suppress the
function of CLOCK:BMAL1 in vitro. Serum-evoked rapid increases of mPer1 mRNA
expression and promoter activity were significantly blunted when CLOCK:BMAL1
function was interfered with. Furthermore, DNA binding activity of CLOCK:BMAL1
heterodimer to five E-boxes of mPer1 promoter markedly increased shortly after
serum shock. Taken together, these results suggest that CLOCK:BMAL1 heterodimer
is not only a core component of negative feedback loop driving circadian
oscillator, but also involved in the rapid induction of mPer1during phase
resetting of the clock.

Copyright 2003 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

PMID: 12544823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Jan;17(1):141-51.

No circadian rhythms in testis: Period1 expression is clock independent and
developmentally regulated in the mouse.

Morse D(1), Cermakian N, Brancorsini S, Parvinen M, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique-Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale-Université Louis Pasteur, BP 10142, 67404 Illkirch-Strasbourg,
France.

Spermatogenesis is a process whereby haploid spermatozoa differentiate through
meiosis from precursor stem cells. We examined the expression of circadian clock 
genes in the testis, to assess clock control over the timing of different
developmental events. Clock genes are known to oscillate with circadian
rhythmicity in the central clock structure, the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the
hypothalamus, but also in peripheral tissues. Here we show that Per1 gene
expression in the testis is constant over a 24-h period and that the Per1
transcript is expressed at a level higher than the peak values of the Per1
oscillations observed for other tissues. Bmal1, another clock gene whose
expression oscillates in other tissues, also shows constant expression levels in 
the testis. In addition, the levels and phosphorylation state of the PER1 protein
are not oscillating at all times of day. Strikingly, Per1 is restricted primarily
to step 7 to 10 spermatids and thus appears to be developmentally regulated. The 
expression of the Clock transcript is also developmentally regulated, but it is
found principally in spermatogonia and spermatocytes up until the time of the
first meiotic division. Per1 expression is not altered in testes from Clock
mutant mice, suggesting that CLOCK does not activate Per1 in male germ cells, in 
contrast to what it does in other mouse tissues. Taken together, our observations
suggest that the testis, in contrast to all other peripheral tissues, lacks a
functioning circadian clock.

PMID: 12511614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. BMC Neurosci. 2002 Dec 20;3:20. Epub 2002 Dec 20.

A role for cryptochromes in sleep regulation.

Wisor JP(1), O'Hara BF, Terao A, Selby CP, Kilduff TS, Sancar A, Edgar DM,
Franken P.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. jwisor@stanford.edu

BACKGROUND: The cryptochrome 1 and 2 genes (cry1 and cry2) are necessary for the 
generation of circadian rhythms, as mice lacking both of these genes (cry1,2-/-) 
lack circadian rhythms. We studied sleep in cry1,2-/- mice under baseline
conditions as well as under conditions of constant darkness and enforced
wakefulness to determine whether cryptochromes influence sleep regulatory
processes.
RESULTS: Under all three conditions, cry1,2-/- mice exhibit the hallmarks of high
non-REM sleep (NREMS) drive (i.e., increases in NREMS time, NREMS consolidation, 
and EEG delta power during NREMS). This unexpected phenotype was associated with 
elevated brain mRNA levels of period 1 and 2 (per1,2), and albumin d-binding
protein (dbp), which are known to be transcriptionally inhibited by CRY1,2. To
further examine the relationship between circadian genes and sleep homeostasis,
we examined wild type mice and rats following sleep deprivation and found
increased levels of per1,2 mRNA and decreased levels of dbp mRNA specifically in 
the cerebral cortex; these changes subsided with recovery sleep. The expression
of per3, cry1,2, clock, npas2, bmal1, and casein-kinase-1epsilon did not change
with sleep deprivation.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that mice lacking cryptochromes are not
simply a genetic model of circadian arrhythmicity in rodents and functionally
implicate cryptochromes in the homeostatic regulation of sleep.

PMCID: PMC149230
PMID: 12495442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Science. 2002 Dec 20;298(5602):2339-40.

Circadian rhythms. Carbon monoxide and clocks.

Boehning D(1), Snyder SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 2002 Dec 20;298(5602):2385-7.

PMID: 12493901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2002 Nov;120(1):37P-40P.

[A systems-biological approach in drug discovery for circadian rhythm disorders].

[Article in Japanese]

Ueda HR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo.

A paradigm shift is occurring in all over the biological fields, from the
molecular level to the system level. However, systematic and efficient method to 
dissect the complicated genetic network is still immature. To dissect such a
complicated system, we took a systems-biological approach based on genomic,
molecular and cell biological techniques and applied to mammalian circadian
rhythms, one of the most complicated biological systems. We profiled
suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) and liver genome-wide expression patterns under
light/dark (LD) cycles and constant darkness (DD). We extensively determined
transcription start sites (TSS) of human orthologues for newly identified cycling
genes and then performed bioinformatical searches for relationships between
time-of-day specific expression and transcription factor response elements around
TSS. Here we demonstrate the role of the Rev-ErbA/ROR response element in gene
expression during circadian night, which is in phase with Bmal1 and antiphase to 
Per2 oscillations. This role was verified using a newly developed in vitro
validation system, in which cultured fibroblasts transiently transfected with
clock-controlled reporter vectors exhibited robust circadian bioluminescence. The
systems-biological approach used here enhances accurate and comprehensive
measurement of circadian dynamics, accelerates extensive identification of
clockwork circuits, and leads to systems-level understanding of mammalian
circadian clocks.

PMID: 12491774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Invest Dermatol. 2002 Dec;119(6):1220-3.

Low-dose ultraviolet B rays alter the mRNA expression of the circadian clock
genes in cultured human keratinocytes.

Kawara S(1), Mydlarski R, Mamelak AJ, Freed I, Wang B, Watanabe H, Shivji G,
Tavadia SK, Suzuki H, Bjarnason GA, Jordan RC, Sauder DN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Sunnybrook & Women's College Health Sciences Center, 
University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Current understanding of mammalian circadian rhythms suggests that they are
regulated by light targeting signaling pathways in the hypothalamic
suprachiasmatic nuclei. Recently, investigators have identified the existence of 
extraretinal photoreceptors and a potential role for the skin in this regulatory 
process has been implied. We demonstrated that mRNA of the circadian clock genes 
Per1, Clock, and bmal1/mop3 are expressed in normal human cultured keratinocytes.
Low-dose ultraviolet B rays initially downregulate all circadian clock genes and 
then induce altered expression of the genes in keratinocyte cell cultures.
Ultraviolet light targeting superficial layers of skin (keratinocytes) may
therefore contribute to circadian rhythm modulation.

PMID: 12485420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Science. 2002 Nov 22;298(5598):1567-8.

Essay: Amersham Biosciences and Science Prize. PAS domains and metabolic status
signaling.

Rutter J(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Houston, TX 75390, USA.
jrutte@biochem.swmed.edu

PMID: 12446897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Science. 2002 Dec 20;298(5602):2385-7. Epub 2002 Nov 20.

NPAS2: a gas-responsive transcription factor.

Dioum EM(1), Rutter J, Tuckerman JR, Gonzalez G, Gilles-Gonzalez MA, McKnight SL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Plant Biology and Plant Biotechnology Center, 
The Ohio State University, 1060 Carmack Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2002 Dec 20;298(5602):2339-40.

Neuronal PAS domain protein 2 (NPAS2) is a mammalian transcription factor that
binds DNA as an obligate dimeric partner of BMAL1 and is implicated in the
regulation of circadian rhythm. Here we show that both PAS domains of NPAS2 bind 
heme as a prosthetic group and that the heme status controls DNA binding in
vitro. NPAS2-BMAL1 heterodimers, existing in either the apo (heme-free) or holo
(heme-loaded) state, bound DNA avidly under favorably reducing ratios of the
reduced and oxidized forms of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate. Low
micromolar concentrations of carbon monoxide inhibited the DNA binding activity
of holo-NPAS2 but not that of apo-NPAS2. Upon exposure to carbon monoxide,
inactive BMAL1 homodimers were formed at the expense of NPAS2-BMAL1 heterodimers.
These results indicate that the heterodimerization of NPAS2, and presumably the
expression of its target genes, are regulated by a gas through the heme-based
sensor described here.

PMID: 12446832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Mol Pharmacol. 2002 Dec;62(6):1393-9.

Alteration of intrinsic biological rhythms during interferon treatment and its
possible mechanism.

Koyanagi S(1), Ohdo S.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacokinetics, Division of Clinical Pharmacy, Department of
Medico-Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

One of the most indispensable biological functions for all living organisms is
the circadian clock, which acts like a multifunctional timer to regulate the
homeostatic system, including sleep and wakefulness, hormonal secretions, and
various other bodily functions with a 24-h cycle. We reported previously that
interferon (IFN) has the ability to modulate the biological clock system at the
genetic level. In the present study, this mechanism was investigated further by
evaluating the effects of IFN-alpha on circadian output function. Treatment of
cultured hepatic cells (HepG2) with IFN-alpha significantly decreased the protein
levels of CLOCK and BMAL1, which are positive regulators of circadian output
rhythm, then their mRNA levels. Aurintricarboxylic acid, a ligand inhibitor of
IFN-alpha, dose dependently inhibited the IFN-alpha-induced phosphorylation of
the signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) protein in HepG2
cells, accompanied by the restoration of Clock and Bmal1 mRNA levels. The
continuous administration of IFN-alpha significantly decreased CLOCK and BMAL1
protein levels in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and liver of mice, thereby
preventing oscillations in the expression of clock and clock-controlled output
genes. These results reveal a possible pharmacological action by IFN-alpha on the
core circadian oscillation mechanism and indicate that the disruptive effect of
IFN-alpha on circadian output function is the underlying cause of its adverse
effects on 24-h rhythms in physiology and behavior.

PMID: 12435807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Blood. 2003 Mar 1;101(5):1841-4. Epub 2002 Oct 24.

The 4G5G polymorphism in the gene for PAI-1 and the circadian oscillation of
plasma PAI-1.

van der Bom JG(1), Bots ML, Haverkate F, Kluft C, Grobbee DE.

Author information: 
(1)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht; Van Creveldkliniek, The Netherlands. j.g.vanderbom@jc.azu.nl

Plasminogen activator inhibitor type I (PAI-1) antigen concentrations follow a
circadian oscillation peaking in the morning. Some individuals show no apparent
circadian rhythm, while others show up to a 10-fold variation in PAI-1 over 24
hours. Results from experimental studies suggest that a polymorphism in the
promoter of the gene for PAI-1 (4G5G) directly influences the circadian
expression of the PAI-1 gene. We studied whether the diurnal variation of PAI-1
antigen differs for the genotypes of the 4G5G polymorphism. A population-based,
cross-sectional study was performed among 263 subjects selected from the
Rotterdam Study, a population-based cohort of 7983 men and women aged 55 years
and older. The 4G allele was associated with a more pronounced circadian
expression of PAI-1 antigen. Morning PAI-1 antigen concentrations were 79 ng/mL
(95% confidence interval [CI], 68-92) in subjects homozygous for 4G, 62 ng/mL
(95% CI, 54-72) in heterozygous subjects, and 59 ng/mL (95% CI, 49-71) in
subjects homozygous for 5G. While respective PAI-1 antigen concentrations in the 
afternoon were 40 ng/mL (95% CI, 33-49), 41 ng/mL (95% CI, 37-47), and 40 ng/mL
(95% CI, 49-71). These findings suggest that the morning increase in PAI-1
antigen concentration is more pronounced among subjects homozygous for the 4G
allele compared with the morning increase among the other genotypes.
Additionally, these findings show that homozygosity for the 4G allele is
associated with increased PAI-1 levels during the morning only.

PMID: 12406875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Nature. 2002 Oct 24;419(6909):841-4.

Dec1 and Dec2 are regulators of the mammalian molecular clock.

Honma S(1), Kawamoto T, Takagi Y, Fujimoto K, Sato F, Noshiro M, Kato Y, Honma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

Comment in
    Nature. 2002 Oct 24;419(6909):798-9.

The circadian rhythms in mammals are regulated by a pacemaker located in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus. Four clock-gene families have been
found to be involved in a transcription-translation feedback loop that generates 
the circadian rhythm at the intracellular level. The proteins Clock and Bmal1
form a heterodimer which activates the transcription of the Per gene from the
E-box elements in its promoter region. Protein products of Per act together with 
Cry proteins to inhibit Per transcription, thus closing the autoregulatory
feedback loop. We found that Dec1 and Dec2, basic helix-loop-helix transcription 
factors, repressed Clock/Bmal1-induced transactivation of the mouse Per1 promoter
through direct protein-protein interactions with Bmal1 and/or competition for
E-box elements. Dec1 and Dec2 are expressed in the suprachiasmic nucleus in a
circadian fashion, with a peak in the subjective day. A brief light pulse induced
Dec1 but not Dec2 expression in the suprachiasmic nucleus in a phase-dependent
manner. Dec1 and Dec2 are regulators of the mammalian molecular clock, and form a
fifth clock-gene family.

PMID: 12397359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Nature. 2002 Oct 24;419(6909):798-9.

Circadian rhythms: finer clock control.

Alvarez JD, Sehgal A.

Comment on
    Nature. 2002 Oct 24;419(6909):841-4.

PMID: 12397342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Oct 25;298(2):198-202.

Functional CLOCK is not involved in the entrainment of peripheral clocks to the
restricted feeding: entrainable expression of mPer2 and BMAL1 mRNAs in the heart 
of Clock mutant mice on Jcl:ICR background.

Oishi K(1), Miyazaki K, Ishida N.

Author information: 
(1)Clock Cell Biology Group, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Central 6, 1-1-1,
Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan.

The mammalian circadian timing system consists of a central pacemaker in brain
hypothalamus and damping oscillators in most peripheral tissues. To investigate
the mechanism that controls circadian rhythms in the mammalian peripheral
tissues, we examined the expression rhythm of mPer2, BMAL1, albumin D-site
binding protein (DBP), and Rev-erbalpha mRNAs in the heart of homozygous Clock
mutant mice on Jcl:ICR background under the temporal feeding restriction.
Unexpectedly, the restricted feeding (RF) shifted the circadian phase of both
mPer2 and BMAL1 mRNA expressions in the heart not only of wild-type mice but also
of Clock mutant mice. Furthermore, in the Clock mutant mice, the amplitude of the
circadian expression of mPer2 and BMAL1 mRNAs was dramatically increased by the
RF. These data indicate that functional CLOCK is not required for an entrainment 
of peripheral clocks to RF. On the other hand, the expression levels of DBP and
Rev-erbalpha mRNAs were blunted in Clock mutant mice not only under ad libitum
but also under RF conditions. Thus, it seems that the rhythmic expression of
Rev-erbalpha is not involved in the RF-induced circadian expression of BMAL1
mRNA, although REV-ERBalpha has been identified as a major regulator of BMAL1
transcription. Thus, the entraining mechanism of peripheral tissues to the RF
seems to be different from that to the central clock in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus.

PMID: 12387815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Oct 15;99(21):13890-5. Epub 2002 Oct 8.

Temporal expression of seven clock genes in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and the
pars tuberalis of the sheep: evidence for an internal coincidence timer.

Lincoln G(1), Messager S, Andersson H, Hazlerigg D.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council, Human Reproductive Sciences Unit, University of
Edinburgh, Chancellor's Building, 49 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4SB, 
Scotland, UK. g.lincoln@hrsu.mrc.ac.uk

The 24-h expression of seven clock genes (Bmal1, Clock, Per1, Per2, Cry1, Cry2,
and CK1 epsilon ) was assayed by in situ hybridization in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN) and the pars tuberalis (PT) of the pituitary gland, collected every
4 h throughout 24 h, from female Soay sheep kept under long (16-h light/8-h dark)
or short (8-h light/16-h dark) photoperiods. Locomotor activity was diurnal,
inversely related to melatonin secretion, and prolactin levels were increased
under long days. All clock genes were expressed in the ovine SCN and PT. In the
SCN, there was a 24-h rhythm in Clock expression, in parallel with Bmal1, in
antiphase with cycles in Per1 and Per2; there was low-amplitude oscillation of
Cry1 and Cry2. The waveform of only Per1 and Per2 expression was affected by
photoperiod, with extended elevated expression under long days. In the PT, the
high-amplitude 24-h cycles in the expression of Bmal1, Clock, Per1, Per2, Cry1,
and Cry2, but not CK1 epsilon, were influenced by photoperiod. Per1 and Per2
peaked during the day, whereas Cry1 and Cry2 peaked early in the night. Hence,
photoperiod via melatonin had a marked effect on the phase relationship between
Per/Cry genes in the PT. This supports the conclusion that an "external
coincidence model" best explains the way photoperiod affects the waveform of
clock gene expression in the SCN, the central pacemaker, whereas an "internal
coincidence model" best explains the way melatonin affects the phasing of clock
gene expression in the PT to mediate the photoperiodic control of a summer or
winter physiology.

PMCID: PMC129793
PMID: 12374857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Cell. 2002 Oct 4;111(1):41-50.

The circadian gene Period2 plays an important role in tumor suppression and DNA
damage response in vivo.

Fu L(1), Pelicano H, Liu J, Huang P, Lee C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell 2002 Dec 27;111(7):1055.

The Period2 gene plays a key role in controlling circadian rhythm in mice. We
report here that mice deficient in the mPer2 gene are cancer prone. After gamma
radiation, these mice show a marked increase in tumor development and reduced
apoptosis in thymocytes. The core circadian genes are induced by gamma radiation 
in wild-type mice but not in mPer2 mutant mice. Temporal expression of genes
involved in cell cycle regulation and tumor suppression, such as Cyclin D1,
Cyclin A, Mdm-2, and Gadd45alpha, is deregulated in mPer2 mutant mice. In
particular, the transcription of c-myc is controlled directly by circadian
regulators and is deregulated in the mPer2 mutant. Our studies suggest that the
mPer2 gene functions in tumor suppression by regulating DNA damage-responsive
pathways.

PMID: 12372299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Genes Cells. 2002 Oct;7(10):1073-86.

Zebrafish CRY represses transcription mediated by CLOCK-BMAL heterodimer without 
inhibiting its binding to DNA.

Ishikawa T(1), Hirayama J, Kobayashi Y, Todo T.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Biology Center, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

BACKGROUND: CLOCK and BMAL1 proteins, members of the basic helix-loop-helix PAS
(PER-ARNT-SIM) superfamily of transcription factors which bind to the E-box DNA
motif, are required for the high-level expression of the circadian clock genes
period (per) and cryptochrome (cry). CRY inhibits transcriptional activity of the
CLOCK-BMAL1 heterodimer, generating a negative-feedback loop that is the core
element of the circadian oscillator.
RESULTS: We show that zebrafish CRY (zCRY1a) neither disrupts the association
between zfCLOCK and zfBMAL nor inhibits binding of the zfCLOCK-zfBMAL heterodimer
to an E-box-bearing DNA fragment. Instead it binds to the heterodimer to form a
stable zCRY1a-zfCLOCK-zfBMAL-E-box complex. Another zebrafish CRY protein, zCRY4,
does not have transcriptional inhibitor activity, whereas zCRY1a has strong
activity. zCRY4 does not associate with zfCLOCK and zfBMAL. We also show that the
presence of a chemical reductant in the reaction mixture is crucial for efficient
binding of the CLOCK-BMAL heterodimer to E-box bearing DNA, which is indicative
of the reduction/oxidation (redox)-sensitive character of the heterodimer.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that CRY represses CLOCK-BMAL-mediated
transcription by interacting directly with the zfCLOCK-zfBMAL-E-box complex.

PMID: 12354100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Uirusu. 2002 Jun;52(1):207-16.

[Functional analyses of regulatory proteins of herpesviruses].

[Article in Japanese]

Kawaguchi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Regulation , Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and 
Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

PMID: 12227174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Zoolog Sci. 2002 Aug;19(8):841-50.

A temperature-dependent timing mechanism is involved in the circadian system that
drives locomotor rhythms in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster.

Yoshii T(1), Sakamoto M, Tomioka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Biology and Informatics, Faculty of Science, Research
Institute for Time Studies, Yamaguchi University, Japan.

The circadian clock of Drosophila melanogaster is thought to include rhythmic
expression of period gene. Recent studies suggested, however, that a per-less
oscillation is also involved in the regulation of circadian locomotor rhythms. In
the present study, we examined the existence and the property of the possible
per-less oscillation using arrhythmic clock mutant flies carrying per (01),
tim(01), dClk(Jrk) or cyc(01), which lack rhythmic per expression. When
temperature cycles consisting of 25 degrees C and 30 degrees C with various
periods (T=8-32 hr) were given, wild-type (Canton-S) flies showed locomotor
rhythms entrained to temperature cycles over a wide range of period (T=8-32 hr)
in constant light (LL) while only to T=24 hr in constant darkness (DD). The
mutant flies showed rhythms synchronizing with the given cycle both under LL and 
DD. In per(01) and tim(01) flies, the phase of a major peak slightly changed
dependent on Ts in DD, while it did not in dClk(Jrk) and cyc(01) flies. When they
were transferred from a constant temperature to a temperature cycle under DD,
several cycles were necessary to establish a clear temperature entrainment in
per(01) and tim (01) flies. These results suggest that per(01) and tim(01) flies 
have a temperature-entrainable weak oscillatory mechanism and that the per-less
oscillatory mechanism may require dClk and cyc. In addition, per (01) and tim(01)
flies changed from thermoactive in DD to cryoactive in LL, while dClk(Jrk) and
cyc(01) flies did not. It is thus suggested that dClk and cyc are also involved
in determining the light-associated temperature preference in per(01) and tim(01)
flies.

PMID: 12193800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Cell Sci. 2002 Sep 1;115(Pt 17):3369-77.

Central and peripheral circadian oscillator mechanisms in flies and mammals.

Glossop NR(1), Hardin PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, 369 Science and
Research 2 Bldg., Houston, TX 77204-5001, USA.

Circadian oscillators are cell-autonomous time-keeping mechanisms that reside in 
diverse tissues in many organisms. In flies and mice, the core molecular
components that sustain these oscillators are highly conserved, but the functions
of some of these components appear to have diverged significantly. One possible
reason for these differences is that previous comparisons have focused primarily 
on the central oscillator of the mouse and peripheral oscillators in flies.
Recent research on mouse and Drosophila peripheral oscillators shows that the
function of the core components between these organisms may be more highly
conserved than was first believed, indicating the following: (1) that central and
peripheral oscillators in flies do not necessarily have the same molecular
mechanisms; (2) that mammalian central oscillators are regulated differently from
peripheral oscillators; and (3) that different peripheral oscillators within and 
across species show striking similarities. The core feedback loop in peripheral
oscillators might therefore be functionally well conserved, and central
oscillators could be specialized versions of a basic oscillator design.

PMID: 12154068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Neuroreport. 2002 Jul 19;13(10):1239-42.

Circadian expression of clock genes during ontogeny in the rat heart.

Sakamoto K(1), Oishi K, Nagase T, Miyazaki K, Ishida N.

Author information: 
(1)Clock Cell Biology Group, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology, Central 6, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba 305-8566, Japan.

Recent studies have suggested that peripheral tissues in mammals have an
autonomous circadian oscillator driven by negative feedback loops consisting of
periodical expression of clock genes. In the present study we investigated the
mechanism that regulates circadian rhythms in mammalian peripheral tissues, and
observed developmental aspects in circadian expression of clock genes in the
heart of postnatal rats. Daily expression patterns of clock genes (rPer1, rPer2
and BMAL1) and a clock-controlled gene Dbp were examined by Northern blot
analysis. Circadian expression of rPer1, BMAL1 and Dbp mRNAs started between
postnatal day 2 (P2) and P5, but rPer2 mRNA did not show rhythmicity until P14.
Rhythmic expression of other genes in the heart occurred even in the absence of
rhythmic rPer2 expression. These findings suggest that in the rat heart, rhythmic
expression of rPer2 was not essential to generate circadian rhythmicity at the
early postnatal stage. Judging from mRNA rhythms in the heart, it was probably
after P20 that rats established the mature circadian system controlling
peripheral rhythms.

PMID: 12151777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Cell. 2002 Jul 26;110(2):251-60.

The orphan nuclear receptor REV-ERBalpha controls circadian transcription within 
the positive limb of the mammalian circadian oscillator.

Preitner N(1), Damiola F, Lopez-Molina L, Zakany J, Duboule D, Albrecht U,
Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Sciences II, University of Geneva, 30, Quai
Ernest Ansermet, CH 1211 -4, Geneva, Switzerland.

Mammalian circadian rhythms are generated by a feedback loop in which BMAL1 and
CLOCK, players of the positive limb, activate transcription of the cryptochrome
and period genes, components of the negative limb. Bmal1 and Per transcription
cycles display nearly opposite phases and are thus governed by different
mechanisms. Here, we identify the orphan nuclear receptor REV-ERBalpha as the
major regulator of cyclic Bmal1 transcription. Circadian Rev-erbalpha expression 
is controlled by components of the general feedback loop. Thus, REV-ERBalpha
constitutes a molecular link through which components of the negative limb drive 
antiphasic expression of components of the positive limb. While REV-ERBalpha
influences the period length and affects the phase-shifting properties of the
clock, it is not required for circadian rhythm generation.

PMID: 12150932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):36009-17. Epub 2002 Jul 18.

Circadian Transcription. Thinking outside the E-Box.

Muñoz E(1), Brewer M, Baler R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit on Temporal Gene Expression, Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular
Regulation, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The E-Box is a widely used DNA control element. Despite its brevity and broad
distribution the E-Box is a remarkably versatile sequence that affects many
different genetic programs, including proliferation, differentiation,
tissue-specific responses, and cell death. The circadian clock is one of the
latest pathways shown to employ this element. In this context, E-Boxes are likely
to play a key role in establishing the robust waves of gene expression
characteristic of circadian transcription. The regulatory flexibility of the
E-Box hinges on the sequence ambiguity allowed at its core, the strong influence 
of the surrounding sequences, and the recruitment of spatially and temporally
regulated E-Box-binding factors. Therefore, understanding how a particular E-Box 
can accomplish a specific task entails the identification and systematic analysis
of these cis- and trans-acting E-Box modifiers. In the present study we compared 
the E-Box-containing minimal promoters of vasopressin and cyclin B1, two genes
that can respond to the transcriptional oscillators driving the circadian clock
and cell cycle, respectively. Results of this comparison will help elucidate the 
manner in which discreet DNA modules associate to either augment or restrain the 
activation of potential circadian E-Boxes in response to competing regulatory
signals.

PMID: 12130638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):36863-71. Epub 2002 Jul 16.

Regulation of pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide gene
transcription by TTF-1, a homeodomain-containing transcription factor.

Kim MS(1), Hur MK, Son YJ, Park JI, Chun SY, D'Elia AV, Damante G, Cho S, Kim K, 
Lee BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, University of 
Ulsan, Ulsan 680-749, South Korea.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) is an important
hypophysiotrophic factor as well as a regulator for immune, reproductive, and
neural tissues. We recently found that TTF-1, a homeodomain-containing
transcription factor essential for the development of the fetal diencephalon, is 
postnatally expressed in the hypothalamic area and plays a transcription
regulatory role for certain neurohormones. Based on the similarity of synthesis
sites between PACAP and TTF-1 and, moreover, on the presence of conserved core
TTF-1 binding motifs in the 5'-flanking region of the PACAP gene, we sought to
uncover a regulatory role of TTF-1 in PACAP gene transcription. The TTF-1
homeodomain binds to six of the seven putative binding domains observed in the
5'-flanking region of the PACAP gene. In the C6 glioma cell-line, TTF-1 activates
the PACAP promoter in a dose-dependent manner. This transactivation of PACAP by
TTF-1 was totally removed when the core TTF-1 binding motif at -369 was deleted. 
RNase protection assays showed that TTF-1 and PACAP mRNAs have daily fluctuations
in the rat hypothalamus. They both were at low levels during the day and high
levels during the night. Intracerebroventricular administration of an antisense
TTF-1 oligodeoxynucleotide significantly decreased the PACAP mRNA level as well
as TTF-1 protein content in the rat hypothalamus, suggesting that TTF-1 also
regulates PACAP transcription in vivo. Moreover, the TTF-1 promoter was inhibited
by molecular oscillators of CLOCK and BMAL-1. Taken together, these data suggest 
that TTF-1 plays an important regulatory role in the gene transcription for
PACAP, which may be important for the generation of a daily rhythm of
hypothalamic PACAP gene expression.

PMID: 12122016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Cell. 2002 May 17;109(4):497-508.

The VPAC(2) receptor is essential for circadian function in the mouse
suprachiasmatic nuclei.

Harmar AJ(1), Marston HM, Shen S, Spratt C, West KM, Sheward WJ, Morrison CF,
Dorin JR, Piggins HD, Reubi JC, Kelly JS, Maywood ES, Hastings MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Edinburgh, 1 George Square, United
Kingdom. tony.harmar@ed.ac.uk

The neuropeptides pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) and 
vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) are implicated in the photic entrainment of
circadian rhythms in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN). We now report that mice
carrying a null mutation of the VPAC(2) receptor for VIP and PACAP (Vipr2(-/-))
are incapable of sustaining normal circadian rhythms of rest/activity behavior.
These mice also fail to exhibit circadian expression of the core clock genes
mPer1, mPer2, and mCry1 and the clock-controlled gene arginine vasopressin (AVP) 
in the SCN. Moreover, the mutants fail to show acute induction of mPer1 and mPer2
by nocturnal illumination. This study highlights the role of intercellular
neuropeptidergic signaling in maintenance of circadian function within the SCN.

PMID: 12086606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Nat Neurosci. 2002 Jul;5(7):616-8.

Short circuiting the circadian clock.

van den Pol AN, Obrietan K.

PMID: 12085090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Neurosignals. 2002 Mar-Apr;11(2):103-14.

Regulation of period 1 expression in cultured rat pineal.

Fukuhara C(1), Dirden JC, Tosini G.

Collaborators: Tosini G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Institute, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30310-1495, 
USA.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the in vitro expression of Period
1 (Per1), Period 2 (Per2) and arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AA-NAT) genes
in the rat pineal gland to understand the mechanism(s) regulating the expression 
of these genes in this organ. Pineals, when maintained in vitro for 5 days, did
not show circadian rhythmicity in the expression of any of the three genes
monitored. Norepinephrine (NE) induced AA-NAT and Per1, whereas its effect on
Per2 was negligible. Contrary to what was observed in other systems, NE
stimulation did not induce circadian expression of Per1. The effect of NE on Per1
level was dose- and receptor subtype-dependent, and both cAMP and cGMP induced
Per1. Per1 was not induced by repeated NE - or forskolin - stimulation. Protein
synthesis was not necessary for NE-induced Per1, but it was for reduction of Per1
following NE stimulation. Per1 transcription in pinealocytes was activated by
BMAL1/CLOCK. Our results indicate that important differences are present in the
regulation of these genes in the mammalian pineal.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12077484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2002 Jul;283(1):C103-14.

Alternative splicing yields novel BMAL2 variants: tissue distribution and
functional characterization.

Schoenhard JA(1), Eren M, Johnson CH, Vaughan DE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology,
Vanderbilt University, Tennessee 37235, USA.

The BMAL2 gene encodes a member of the basic helix-loop-helix PER-ARNT-SIM family
of transcription factors, which control diverse physiological processes including
circadian rhythms. We identified four novel human BMAL2 transcripts that differ
by alternative splicing within their NH2-terminal regions. Divergent expression
of these and previously reported transcripts was observed among human tissues.
The functional consequences of alternative splicing for transcriptional
activation by CLOCK:BMAL2 heterodimers were assessed using luciferase reporter
gene constructs that contained one of three diurnally regulated promoters,
namely, those of the mouse period1, mouse vasopressin, and human plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 genes. These studies revealed that alternative splicing
generates BMAL2 isoforms possessing high, medium, low, or no transcriptional
activity. Similar results were obtained with each promoter, suggesting that
alternative splicing may influence the amplitudes of both central and peripheral 
oscillators. Indeed, alternative splicing of BMAL2 may provide tissues with a
rheostat capable of regulating CLOCK:BMAL2 heterodimer function across a broad
continuum of potential transcriptional activities to accommodate varied metabolic
demands and physiological roles.

PMID: 12055078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 May 28;99(11):7728-33.

Bimodal regulation of mPeriod promoters by CREB-dependent signaling and
CLOCK/BMAL1 activity.

Travnickova-Bendova Z(1), Cermakian N, Reppert SM, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique-Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale-Université Louis Pasteur, B.P. 10142, 67404
Illkirch-Strasbourg, France.

Circadian rhythmicity in mammals is under the control of a molecular pacemaker
constituted of clock gene products organized in transcriptional autoregulatory
loops. Phase resetting of the clock in response to light involves dynamic changes
in the expression of several clock genes. The molecular pathways used by light to
influence pacemaker-driven oscillation of clock genes remain poorly understood.
We explored the functional integration of both light- and clock-responsive
transcriptional regulation at the promoter level of the Period (Per) genes. Three
Per genes exist in the mouse. Whereas mPer1 and mPer2 are light-inducible in
clock neurons of the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus, mPer3 is not. We have 
studied the promoter structure of the three mPer genes and compared their
regulation. All three mPer promoters contain E-boxes and respond to the
CLOCK/brain and muscle aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)-like
protein 1 (BMAL1) heterodimer. On the other hand, only mPer1 and mPer2 promoters 
contain bona fide cAMP-responsive elements (CREs) that bind CRE-binding protein
(CREB) from suprachiasmatic nucleus protein extracts. The mPer1 promoter is
responsive to synergistic activation of the cAMP and mitogen-activated protein
kinase pathways, a physiological response that requires integrity of the CRE. In 
contrast, activation of mPer promoters by CLOCK/BMAL1 occurs regardless of an
intact CRE. Altogether, these results constitute strong evidence that CREB acts
as a pivotal endpoint of signaling pathways for the regulation of mPer genes. Our
results reveal that signaling-dependent activation of mPer genes is distinct from
the CLOCK/BMAL1-driven transcription required within the clock feedback loop.

PMCID: PMC124335
PMID: 12032351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Nature. 2002 May 16;417(6886):287-91.

Stress response genes protect against lethal effects of sleep deprivation in
Drosophila.

Shaw PJ(1), Tononi G, Greenspan RJ, Robinson DF.

Author information: 
(1)The Neurosciences Institute, 10640 John J. Hopkins Drive, San Diego,
California 92121, USA.

Sleep is controlled by two processes: a homeostatic drive that increases during
waking and dissipates during sleep, and a circadian pacemaker that controls its
timing. Although these two systems can operate independently, recent studies
indicate a more intimate relationship. To study the interaction between
homeostatic and circadian processes in Drosophila, we examined homeostasis in the
canonical loss-of-function clock mutants period (per(01)), timeless (tim(01)),
clock (Clk(jrk)) and cycle (cyc(01)). cyc(01) mutants showed a disproportionately
large sleep rebound and died after 10 hours of sleep deprivation, although they
were more resistant than other clock mutants to various stressors. Unlike other
clock mutants, cyc(01) flies showed a reduced expression of heat-shock genes
after sleep loss. However, activating heat-shock genes before sleep deprivation
rescued cyc(01) flies from its lethal effects. Consistent with the protective
effect of heat-shock genes, was the observation that flies carrying a mutation
for the heat-shock protein Hsp83 (Hsp83(08445)) showed exaggerated homeostatic
response and died after sleep deprivation. These data represent the first step in
identifying the molecular mechanisms that constitute the sleep homeostat.

PMID: 12015603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 10;277(19):17248-54. Epub 2002 Mar 1.

The circadian regulatory proteins BMAL1 and cryptochromes are substrates of
casein kinase Iepsilon.

Eide EJ(1), Vielhaber EL, Hinz WA, Virshup DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute Center for
Children, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

The serine/threonine protein kinase casein kinase I epsilon (CKIepsilon) is a key
regulator of metazoan circadian rhythm. Genetic and biochemical data suggest that
CKIepsilon binds to and phosphorylates the PERIOD proteins. However, the PERIOD
proteins interact with a variety of circadian regulators, suggesting the
possibility that CKIepsilon may interact with and phosphorylate additional clock 
components as well. We find that CRY1 and BMAL1 are phosphoproteins in cultured
cells. Mammalian PERIOD proteins act as a scaffold with distinct domains that
simultaneously bind CKIepsilon and mCRY1 and mCRY2 (mCRY). mCRY is phosphorylated
by CKIepsilon only when both proteins are bound to mammalian PERIOD proteins.
BMAL1 is also a substrate for CKIepsilon in vitro, and CKIepsilon kinase activity
positively regulates BMAL1-dependent transcription from circadian promoters in
reporter assays. We conclude that CKIepsilon phosphorylates multiple circadian
substrates and may exert its effects on circadian rhythm in part by a direct
effect on BMAL1-dependent transcription.

PMCID: PMC1513548
PMID: 11875063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Mar;22(6):1693-703.

Control of intracellular dynamics of mammalian period proteins by casein kinase I
epsilon (CKIepsilon) and CKIdelta in cultured cells.

Akashi M(1), Tsuchiya Y, Yoshino T, Nishida E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

Recent studies have shown that casein kinase I epsilon (CKIepsilon) is an
essential regulator of the mammalian circadian clock. However, the detailed
mechanisms by which CKIepsilon regulates each component of the circadian
negative-feedback loop have not been fully defined. We show here that mPer
proteins, negative limbs of the autoregulatory loop, are specific substrates for 
CKIepsilon and CKIdelta. The CKI phosphorylation of mPer1 and mPer3 proteins
results in their rapid degradation, which is dependent on the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Moreover, CKIepsilon and CKIdelta are able to
induce nuclear translocation of mPer3, which requires its nuclear localization
signal. The mutation in potential phosphorylation sites on mPer3 decreased the
extent of both nuclear translocation and degradation of mPer3 that are stimulated
by CKIepsilon. CKIepsilon and CKIdelta affected the inhibitory effect of mPer
proteins on the transcriptional activity of BMAL1-CLOCK, but the inhibitory
effect of mCry proteins on the activity of BMAL1-CLOCK was unaffected. These
results suggest that CKIepsilon and CKIdelta regulate the mammalian circadian
autoregulatory loop by controlling both protein turnover and subcellular
localization of mPer proteins.

PMCID: PMC135601
PMID: 11865049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Feb 1;290(4):1228-36.

The bHLH/PAS factor MOP3 does not participate in hypoxia responses.

Cowden KD(1), Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate Group, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19014, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix/PAS (bHLH/PAS) family of proteins regulates
transcriptional responses during development and in response to environmental
stimuli. bHLH/PAS factors act as heterodimers, and genetic and biochemical data
indicate that multiple heterodimeric combinations are found in vivo to regulate
hypoxic gene expression. For example, HIF1alpha heterodimerizes with the highly
related proteins ARNT or ARNT2 in neurons. In vivo, MOP3 interacts with CLOCK to 
regulate circadian rhythms; however, its role in hypoxia responses is unclear. We
show here that unlike ARNT and ARNT2, MOP3 does not effectively form HIF-1
complexes or restore HIF-1 target gene expression in response to low oxygen when 
expressed in Arnt(-/-) ES cells. Furthermore, Mop3(-/-) day 9.5 embryos exhibit
no angiogenic defects as shown for Arnt(-/-), Hif1alpha(-/-), and Hif2alpha(-/-) 
embryos. Therefore, by a variety of criteria, we show that MOP3 has little if any
role in the regulation of hypoxia responses in vivo.

©2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11811994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2001 Dec;947:398-402.

Molecular mechanisms of morning onset of myocardial infarction.

Maemura K(1), Layne MD, Watanabe M, Perrell MA, Nagai R, Lee ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Tokyo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Japan. kmae-tky@umin.ac.jp

We recently isolated a novel bHLH/PAS protein, CLIF (cycle like factor), by yeast
two-hybrid screening of human umbilical endothelial cell cDNA library. CLIF is
preferentially expressed in endothelial and neuronal cells. Because CLIF is
expressed in vascular endothelial cells and forms a heterodimer with CLOCK, the
key transcription factor controlling the circadian rhythm, we hypothesized that
CLIF regulates the circadian oscillation of PAI-1 gene expression in endothelial 
cells. Northern blot analysis of mouse organs showed circadian oscillations of
PAI-I mRNA levels. In addition, the clock-related genes also showed circadian
oscillation in peripheral tissues. In endothelial cells, the heterodimer of CLIF 
and CLOCK upregulated the PAI-1 gene expression through E-box sites. Furthermore,
Period and Cryptochrome, which are negative regulators in the feedback loop of
the biological clock, inhibited PAI-1 promoter activation by the CLOCK:CLIF
heterodimer. These results suggest that the peripheral tissues have their own
biological clock and CLIF regulates the circadian oscillation of PAI-1 gene
expression in endothelial cells. This study suggests a novel molecular mechanism 
of the morning onset of myocardial infarction. Here we review our recent work and
literature.

PMID: 11795300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jan 25;290(3):933-41.

Interactivating feedback loops within the mammalian clock: BMAL1 is negatively
autoregulated and upregulated by CRY1, CRY2, and PER2.

Yu W(1), Nomura M, Ikeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Saitama Medical School, 38 Morohongo, Moroyama,
Saitama, 350-0495, Japan.

Transcriptional regulation appears to be fundamental to circadian oscillations of
clock gene expression. These oscillations are believed to control output rhythms.
The transcriptional feedback loop and a model of interlocked loops have been
proposed as the basis for these oscillations. We characterized the genomic
structure of the mouse Bmal1 gene (mBmal1) and defined the mBmal1 promoter
region. Transcription of mBmal1 was activated by CRY1, CRY2, and PER2, and was
repressed by BMAL1-CLOCK dimers. Therefore, CRY, PER2, and BMAL1-CLOCK play
bidirectional roles in transcription when they are at high levels by late day and
midnight, respectively. This underlies the opposite phase of BMAL1 compared to
CRY and PER. We propose that a BMAL1 negative feedback loop interlocks with the
CRY and PER2 negative feedback loop by inter-activation, forming a third positive
forward loop. This transcriptional model suggests a molecular basis for the
maintenance of stability, persistence, and period of circadian rhythms. The
transcriptional potency of CRY is predominant within the mammalian clock,
suggesting a clearance mechanism for CRY in period maintenance. (c)2002 Elsevier 
Science (USA).

PMID: 11798163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Circ Res. 2001 Dec 7;89(12):1084-6.

Molecular clock mechanisms and circadian rhythms intrinsic to the heart.

Portman MA.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2001 Jun 8;88(11):1142-50.
    Circ Res. 2001 Dec 7;89(12):1199-208.

PMID: 11739270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Nov 20;98(24):13751-6. Epub 2001 Nov 13.

Biological clock in total darkness: the Clock/MOP3 circadian system of the blind 
subterranean mole rat.

Avivi A(1), Albrecht U, Oster H, Joel A, Beiles A, Nevo E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Evolution, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa 31905,
Israel.

Blind subterranean mole rats retain a degenerated, subcutaneous, visually blind
but functionally circadian eye involved in photoperiodic perception. Here we
describe the cloning, sequence, and expression of the circadian Clock and MOP3
cDNAs of the Spalax ehrenbergi superspecies in Israel. Both genes are relatively 
conserved, although characterized by a significant number of amino acid
substitutions. The glutamine-rich area of Clock, which is assumed to function in 
circadian rhythmicity, is expanded in Spalax compared with that of humans and
mice, and is different in amino acid composition from that of rats. We also show 
that MOP3 is a bona fide partner of Spalax Clock and that the Spalax Clock/MOP3
dimer is less potent than its human counterpart in driving transcription. We
suggest that this reduction in transcriptional activity may be attributed to the 
Spalax Clock glutamine-rich domain, which is unique in its amino acid composition
compared with other studied mammalian species. Understanding Clock/MOP3 function 
could highlight circadian mechanisms in blind mammals and their unique pattern as
a result of adapting to life underground.

PMCID: PMC61113
PMID: 11707566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 4;277(1):267-71. Epub 2001 Oct 30.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylates and negatively regulates basic
helix-loop-helix-PAS transcription factor BMAL1.

Sanada K(1), Okano T, Fukada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, The
University of Tokyo and Core Research for Engineering, Science, and Technology,
Japan Science and Technology, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

In vertebrates, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) exhibits circadian
activation in several clock structures and likely participates in the timekeeping
mechanism of the circadian clock. Here we show that MAPK associates with a basic 
helix-loop-helix-PAS transcription factor BMAL1, a positive regulator for the
autoregulatory feedback loop of the circadian oscillator. MAPK phosphorylates
BMAL1 at multiple sites, including Ser-527, Thr-534, and Ser-599, in vitro, and
BMAL1:CLOCK-induced transactivation from the E-box element is inhibited by
expression of a constitutive active form of MAPK kinase in 293 cells. The
inhibitory effect is reversed by coexpression of the kinase-dead mutant of MAPK
or by mutation of BMAL1 at Thr-534. These results indicate that
BMAL1:CLOCK-induced transcription is negatively regulated by MAPK-mediated
phosphorylation of BMAL1 at Thr-534 and suggest a molecular link between
circadian-activated MAPK and the clock oscillator.

PMID: 11687575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Circulation. 2001 Oct 9;104(15):1746-8.

Angiotensin II induces circadian gene expression of clock genes in cultured
vascular smooth muscle cells.

Nonaka H(1), Emoto N, Ikeda K, Fukuya H, Rohman MS, Raharjo SB, Yagita K, Okamura
H, Yokoyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular and Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Daily rhythms of mammalian physiology and endocrinology are regulated
by circadian pacemakers. The master circadian pacemaker resides in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus, which is located in the hypothalamus of the brain, but
circadian oscillators also exist in peripheral tissues. Because many studies have
demonstrated apparent circadian variations in the frequency of cardiovascular
disorders, it is of great interest to investigate a possible relation between
circadian gene expression and cardiovascular function. We examined whether a
circadian oscillation system exists in the aorta and/or in cultured vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMCs).
METHODS AND RESULTS: The mRNA levels of clock genes were assayed by northern blot
analysis. The mouse aorta showed a clear circadian oscillation in the expression 
of mPer2, dbp, and Bmal1. Brief treatment of VSMCs with angiotensin II induced a 
robust increase in mPer2 gene expression, followed by a marked reduction in mPer2
mRNA levels and subsequent synchronous cycling of mPer2, dbp, and Bmal1 mRNAs.
The induction of mPer2 in VSMCs by angiotensin II was completely abolished by
treatment with CV11947, a specific angiotensin II type1 receptor antagonist.
CONCLUSIONS: The present results demonstrate that the aorta and VSMCs possess a
circadian oscillation system which is comparable to that of the suprachiasmatic
nucleus and that the circadian gene expression in VSMCs is induced by angiotensin
II through the angiotensin II type1 receptor. Our in vitro system will provide a 
useful tool to further analyze the physiological significance of the peripheral
clock in cardiovascular function.

PMID: 11591607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Neurosci. 2001 Oct 1;21(19):7742-50.

Expression of Period genes: rhythmic and nonrhythmic compartments of the
suprachiasmatic nucleus pacemaker.

Hamada T(1), LeSauter J, Venuti JM, Silver R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027, USA.

The mammalian circadian clock lying in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) controls
daily rhythms and synchronizes the organism to its environment. In all organisms 
studied, circadian timekeeping is cell-autonomous, and rhythmicity is thought to 
be generated by a feedback loop involving clock proteins that inhibit
transcription of their own genes. In the present study, we examined how these
cellular properties are organized within the SCN tissue to produce rhythmicity
and photic entrainment. The results show that the SCN has two compartments
regulating Period genes Per1, Per2, and Per3 mRNA expression differentially. One 
compartment shows endogenous rhythmicity in Per1, Per2, and Per3 mRNA expression.
The other compartment does not have rhythmic mRNA expression but has gated
light-induced Per1 and Per2 and high levels of endogenous nonrhythmic Per3 mRNA
expression. These results reveal the occurrence of differential regulation of
clock genes in two distinct SCN regions and suggest a potential mechanism for
producing functional differences in distinct SCN subregions.

PMCID: PMC3275352
PMID: 11567064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Genes Cells. 2001 Sep;6(9):825-36.

Chicken pineal clock genes: implication of BMAL2 as a bidirectional regulator in 
circadian clock oscillation.

Okano T(1), Yamamoto K, Okano K, Hirota T, Kasahara T, Sasaki M, Takanaka Y,
Fukada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-Ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In a transcription/translation-based autoregulatory feedback loop of 
vertebrate circadian clock systems, a BMAL1-CLOCK heterodimer is a positive
regulator for the transcription of the negative element gene Per. The chicken
pineal gland represents a photosensitive clock tissue, but the pineal clock genes
constituting the oscillator loop have been less well characterized.
RESULTS: We identified expression of the Per2, Bmal1, Bmal2 and Clock genes in
the chicken pineal gland. Messenger RNA levels of these genes exhibited overt
circadian rhythms in the pineal cells, both in vivo and in culture. In vitro
functional analyses revealed the formation of cBMAL1-cCLOCK and cBMAL2-cCLOCK
heteromers. Both of the cBMAL-cCLOCK heteromers activated E-box element-dependent
transcription, which was negatively regulated by cPER2 in luciferase assays.
Co-expression of cCLOCK, cBMAL1 and cBMAL2 co-operatively activated E-box
element-dependent transcription, and a greater level of expression of cBMAL2
inhibited the activation. In the cultured pineal cells, an over-expression of
either cBMAL1 or cBMAL2 disrupted the circadian rhythm of melatonin production.
CONCLUSION: The functional characterization of the chicken pineal clock molecules
supports the key roles of BMAL1, BMAL2 and CLOCK which contribute to the
E-box-dependent transcriptional regulation in the circadian clock system.

PMID: 11554928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Science. 2001 Jul 20;293(5529):437-8. Epub 2001 Jul 5.

Circadian rhythms. Chronobiology--reducing time.

Schibler U(1), Ripperger JA, Brown SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Sciences II, University of Geneva, CH-1211
Geneva 4, Switzerland. ueli.schibler@molbio.unige.ch

Comment on
    Science. 2001 Jul 20;293(5529):510-4.
    Science. 2001 Jul 20;293(5529):506-9.

PMID: 11441150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Science. 2001 Jul 20;293(5529):506-9. Epub 2001 Jul 5.

NPAS2: an analog of clock operative in the mammalian forebrain.

Reick M(1), Garcia JA, Dudley C, McKnight SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2001 Jul 20;293(5529):437-8.

Neuronal PAS domain protein 2 (NPAS2) is a transcription factor expressed
primarily in the mammalian forebrain. NPAS2 is highly related in primary amino
acid sequence to Clock, a transcription factor expressed in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus that heterodimerizes with BMAL1 and regulates circadian rhythm. To
investigate the biological role of NPAS2, we prepared a neuroblastoma cell line
capable of conditional induction of the NPAS2:BMAL1 heterodimer and identified
putative target genes by representational difference analysis, DNA microarrays,
and Northern blotting. Coinduction of NPAS2 and BMAL1 activated transcription of 
the endogenous Per1, Per2, and Cry1 genes, which encode negatively activating
components of the circadian regulatory apparatus, and repressed transcription of 
the endogenous BMAL1 gene. Analysis of the frontal cortex of wild-type mice kept 
in a 24-hour light-dark cycle revealed that Per1, Per2, and Cry1 mRNA levels were
elevated during darkness and reduced during light, whereas BMAL1 mRNA displayed
the opposite pattern. In situ hybridization assays of mice kept in constant
darkness revealed that Per2 mRNA abundance did not oscillate as a function of the
circadian cycle in NPAS2-deficient mice. Thus, NPAS2 likely functions as part of 
a molecular clock operative in the mammalian forebrain.

PMID: 11441147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Science. 2001 Jul 20;293(5529):510-4. Epub 2001 Jul 5.

Regulation of clock and NPAS2 DNA binding by the redox state of NAD cofactors.

Rutter J(1), Reick M, Wu LC, McKnight SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas-Southwestern Medical Center,
5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, Texas 75390-9152, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2001 Jul 20;293(5529):437-8.

Clock:BMAL1 and NPAS2:BMAL1 are heterodimeric transcription factors that control 
gene expression as a function of the light-dark cycle. Although built to
fluctuate at or near a 24-hour cycle, the clock can be entrained by light,
activity, or food. Here we show that the DNA-binding activity of the Clock:BMAL1 
and NPAS2:BMAL1 heterodimers is regulated by the redox state of nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NAD) cofactors in a purified system. The reduced forms of
the redox cofactors, NAD(H) and NADP(H), strongly enhance DNA binding of the
Clock:BMAL1 and NPAS2:BMAL1 heterodimers, whereas the oxidized forms inhibit.
These observations raise the possibility that food, neuronal activity, or both
may entrain the circadian clock by direct modulation of cellular redox state.

PMID: 11441146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Curr Biol. 2001 Apr 3;11(7):R268-70.

Circadian rhythms: mop up the clock!

Brown SA(1), Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Sciences II, Université de Genève 30,
Quai Ernest Ansermet, CH-1211 Genève-4, Switzerland.
steven.brown@molbiol.unige.ch

All circadian clock genes discovered in Drosophila have mammalian counterparts
with extensive sequence homology. Similarities and differences have been
identified between insect and mammalian oscillators. Recent studies have shed new
light on two mammalian clock components: Mop3 and Per2.

PMID: 11413016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Circ Res. 2001 Jun 8;88(11):1142-50.

Clock genes in the heart: characterization and attenuation with hypertrophy.

Young ME(1), Razeghi P, Taegtmeyer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of
Texas-Houston Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2001 Dec 7;89(12):1084-6.

We investigated whether the heart, like other mammalian organs, possesses
internal clocks, and, if so, whether pressure overload-induced hypertrophy alters
the clock mechanism. Clock genes are intrinsically maintained, as shown by
rhythmic changes even in single cells. Clocks are believed to confer a selective 
advantage by priming the cell for the expected environmental stimulus. In this
way, clocks allow anticipation, thereby synchronizing responsiveness of the cell 
with the timing of the stimulus. We have found that in rat heart all mammalian
homologues of known Drosophila clock genes (bmal1, clock, cry1, cry2, per1, per2,
per3, dbp, hlf, and tef) show circadian patterns of expression and that the
induction of clock output genes (the PAR [rich in proline and acidic amino acid
residues] transcription factors dbp, hlf, and tef) is attenuated in the
pressure-overloaded hypertrophied heart. The results expose a new dynamic
regulatory system in the heart, which is partially lost with hypertrophy.
Although the target genes of these PAR transcription factors are not known in the
heart, the results provide evidence for a diminished ability of the hypertrophied
heart to anticipate and subsequently adapt to physiological alterations during
the day.

PMID: 11397780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Am J Pathol. 2001 May;158(5):1793-801.

Circadian expression of clock genes in human oral mucosa and skin: association
with specific cell-cycle phases.

Bjarnason GA(1), Jordan RC, Wood PA, Li Q, Lincoln DW, Sothern RB, Hrushesky WJ, 
Ben-David Y.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto-Sunnybrook Regional Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
bjarnason@srcl.sunnybrook.utoronto.ca

We studied the relative RNA expression of clock genes throughout one 24-hour
period in biopsies obtained from the oral mucosa and skin from eight healthy
diurnally active male study participants. We found that the human clock genes
hClock, hTim, hPer1, hCry1, and hBmal1 are expressed in oral mucosa and skin,
with a circadian profile consistent with that found in the suprachiasmatic nuclei
and the peripheral tissues of rodents. hPer1, hCry1, and hBmal1 have a rhythmic
expression, peaking early in the morning, in late afternoon, and at night,
respectively, whereas hClock and hTim are not rhythmic. This is the first human
study to show a circadian profile of expression for all five clock genes as
documented in rodents, suggesting their functional importance in man. In
concurrent oral mucosa biopsies, thymidylate synthase enzyme activity, a marker
for DNA synthesis, had a circadian variation with peak activity in early
afternoon, coinciding with the timing of S phase in our previous study on
cell-cycle timing in human oral mucosa. The major peak in hPer1 expression occurs
at the same time of day as the peak in G(1) phase in oral mucosa, suggesting a
possible link between the circadian clock and the mammalian cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC1891949
PMID: 11337377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Neurobiol. 2001 Jun 5;47(3):161-75.

Regulation of the cycling of timeless (tim) RNA.

Wang GK(1), Ousley A, Darlington TK, Chen D, Chen Y, Fu W, Hickman LJ, Kay SA,
Sehgal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Center for Sleep and Respiratory Neurobiology, 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Pennsylvania Medical School,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Circadian rhythms in Drosophila depend upon expression of the timeless (tim) and 
period (per) genes, which encode interacting components of the endogenous clock. 
These two clock genes show a robust circadian oscillation in transcription rate
as well as RNA and protein levels. Transcriptional activation of both genes
requires the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) PAS transcription factors dCLOCK
(dCLK) and CYCLE (CYC), which bind E-box elements. We investigated the role of
E-box elements in regulating behavioral rhythmicity and tim gene expression. We
show that mutation of the upstream E-box in the tim gene prevents the rescue by
tim cDNA sequences of the arrhythmic tim(01) phenotype. RNA encoded by this
mutated tim transgene fails to cycle and is expressed at low levels. While a tim 
transgene carrying a wild-type E-box restores behavioral rhythms, tim RNA levels 
are intermediate to those of the mutant E-box transgenic lines and wild type, and
do not display high amplitude cycling. On the other hand, high-amplitude RNA
cycling was consistently obtained with a tim transgene that contains genomic,
rather than cDNA, sequences. To identify additional sequences that may be
required for tim cycling, we investigated the role of an E-box in the first
intron of the tim gene through cell culture experiments. In these experiments,
the presence of this intron did not have any effect on the activation of tim
transcription by dCLK/CYC. As the upstream E-box was implicated in activation by 
dCLK/CYC in cell culture, we assayed sequences containing this E-box for
association with proteins in fly head extracts. These studies provide the first
biochemical evidence for an in vivo complex containing dCLK and CYC that binds
the tim upstream sequence and is detected at all times of day. Together, these
data highlight molecular mechanisms that are critical for behavioral rhythms.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 11333398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Nihon Shinkei Seishin Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2000 Nov;20(5):203-12.

[BMAL1 and circadian rhythm].

[Article in Japanese]

Ikeda M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Saitama Medical School, 38 Morohongo, Moroyama-cho, 
Iruma-gun, Saitama 350-0495, Japan.

hBmal1 cDNA has been cloned from a human brain cDNA library and revealed that the
cDNA encoded a novel bHLH-PAS transcription factor. The rBmal1 mRNA expression
was found not only at high levels in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN), but also
in the pyriform cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum. Furthermore, this expression
was found in the eyes, pineal body, and peripheral organs, such as the muscle,
liver, and heart. Bmal1 mRNA levels reveal a circadian rhythm in the rat SCN,
with the highest expression levels at ZT18. The yeast two-hybrid screening have
demonstrated that CLOCK forms a heterodimer with BMAL1. CLOCK. BMAL1 heterodimer 
functions as a positive transcription factor through binding to the E-box in the 
promoter region of the mPer1. Nuclear translocation is promoted by dimerization
among PERs, or between PERs and CRYs, and the complexes inhibit the transcription
of their own genes. This feedback loop is used in the clock output system driving
the transcription of arginine vasopressin peptide and serotonin
N-acetyl-transferase by binding the CLOCK-BMAL1 dimer to an E-box in their
promoters.

PMID: 11326546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Science. 2001 Apr 13;292(5515):278-81.

Molecular mechanisms of the biological clock in cultured fibroblasts.

Yagita K(1), Tamanini F, van Der Horst GT, Okamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Brain Science, Department of Brain Sciences, Kobe
University Graduate School of Medicine, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

In mammals, the central circadian pacemaker resides in the hypothalamic
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), but circadian oscillators also exist in peripheral
tissues. Here, using wild-type and cryptochrome (mCry)-deficient cell lines
derived from mCry mutant mice, we show that the peripheral oscillator in cultured
fibroblasts is identical to the oscillator in the SCN in (i) temporal expression 
profiles of all known clock genes, (ii) the phase of the various mRNA rhythms
(i.e., antiphase oscillation of Bmal1 and mPer genes), (iii) the delay between
maximum mRNA levels and appearance of nuclear mPER1 and mPER2 protein, (iv) the
inability to produce oscillations in the absence of functional mCry genes, and
(v) the control of period length by mCRY proteins.

PMID: 11303101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Neuron. 2001 Mar;29(3):555-8.

The circadian clocks of mice and men.

Chang DC(1), Reppert SM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Chronobiology, MassGeneral Hospital for Children, 
Massachusetts General Hospital and, Program in Neuroscience, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

PMID: 11301014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2001 Feb 19;87(1):92-9.

Clock gene expressions in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and other areas of the
brain during rhythm splitting in CS mice.

Abe H(1), Honma S, Namihira M, Masubuchi S, Ikeda M, Ebihara S, Honma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Division of Physiological Science, Hokkaido
University Graduate School of Medicine, 060-8638, Sapporo, Japan.
hiroabe@med.hokudai.ac.jp

The CS mouse is a mutant strain which displays spontaneous splitting in the
circadian locomotor rhythm under continuous darkness. To clarify whether the
rhythm splitting occurs in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) where the mammalian 
circadian clock is located, the circadian rhythmicities of mammalian clock genes,
mPer1, mBMAL1 and mClock, were examined in the SCN and cerebral cortex during
rhythm splitting. The circadian profiles of the clock genes during rhythm
splitting were essentially the same as those observed under unsplit conditions.
However, the mPer1 gene expression throughout the day was bimodal in the piriform
and cingulate cortices, peaking in correspondence with two split components of
behavioral rhythm. These results indicate that the circadian profiles of three
clock gene expressions in the SCN are not consistent with the overt circadian
locomotor rhythm, suggesting that the site of rhythm splitting is somewhere
outside the SCN, or alternatively different subregions or other clock genes in
the SCN are involved in rhythm splitting.

PMID: 11223163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Nihon Shinkei Seishin Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2000 Aug;20(3):107-11.

[Molecular mechanism of biological clock: for chronobiological approach to
stress].

[Article in Japanese]

Ebisawa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Saitama Medical School, 38 Morohongo, Moroyama-cho, 
Iruma-gun, Saitama, 350-0495 Japan.

Recent progress in molecular chronobiology revealed that the clock genes control 
intracellular feedback loops. CLOCK protein and BMAL1 protein, first discovered
as components of the circadian clock in mammals, are known to function as
transcriptional activators in the circadian feedback loop of drosophila. PERIOD
and TIMELESS proteins work as inhibitors for these activators in drosophila and
possibly in mammals. The clock genes described above are also expressed in
peripheral tissues with circadian rhythmicity. Cultured rat-1 fibroblast shows
circadian expression of clock genes after serum shock or forskolin stimulation.
These results indicate that the clock genes function not only as components of
the endogenous clock, but also as a coordinator of the circadian activity of
peripheral tissues. It will be important to study stress from the aspect of
circadian rhythm.

PMID: 11215151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Eur J Neurosci. 2001 Feb;13(4):687-93.

Differential daily expression of Per1 and Per2 mRNA in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus of fetal and early postnatal mice.

Shimomura H(1), Moriya T, Sudo M, Wakamatsu H, Akiyama M, Miyake Y, Shibata S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Brain Science, School of Human Science, Waseda 
University, 2-579-15 Mikajima, Tokorozawa, Saitama 359-1192, Japan.

It is well known that there are circadian rhythms of 2-deoxyglucose uptake and
neuronal firing in the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) during fetal and early
postnatal periods. A core clock mechanism in the mouse SCN appears to involve a
transcriptional feedback loop in which CLOCK and BMAL1 function as positive
regulators and three mPeriod (mPer) genes play a role in negative feedback. Per
genes expression occurs not only in the adult SCN but also in the fetal SCN.
However, the developmental change in these genes remains unclear. In this
experiment, we examined the day--night pattern of expression of Per1 and Per2
mRNA in the mouse SCN and cerebral cortex on embryonic day 17, postnatal day 3,
and in young adult mice under a light-dark cycle. Daily rhythms of mRNA content
were observed in mPer1 but not mPer2 in the fetal SCN. Interestingly, the
expression of mPer2 in the SCN was high throughout the entire day, and a
significant daily rhythm of this gene was observed on postnatal day 6. The
expression pattern of SCN mPer1 in constant darkness was similar to that seen in 
the light-dark cycle. The present results suggest that the daily oscillation of
mPer1 but not of mPer2 in the SCN in fetal and early postnatal mice may be
associated with the daily rhythms of 2-deoxyglucose uptake and neuronal firing.

PMID: 11207804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Neurosci Lett. 2001 Mar 9;300(2):111-4.

Cloning of mouse BMAL2 and its daily expression profile in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus: a remarkable acceleration of Bmal2 sequence divergence after Bmal gene
duplication.

Okano T(1), Sasaki M, Fukada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, The
University of Tokyo, Japan.

Brain-Muscle-Arnt-Like-protein 2 (BMAL2; Arnt4) (aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator) is a recently identified basic
Helix-Loop-Helix-Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS) transcription factor, which contributes 
to a positive regulation of autoregulatory feedback loop in vertebrate circadian 
clock systems. In this study, we cloned cDNAs encoding mouse and rat BMAL2
(mBMAL2 and rBMAL2) from mouse midbrain and rat-1 fibroblast cells, respectively.
A phylogenetic analysis strongly suggested that vertebrate Bmal1 and Bmal2 genes 
were generated by a single gene duplication of an ancestral Bmal gene, a
vertebrate ortholog of dCyc gene, and that 'BMAL2's putatively termed so far are 
orthologous. Interestingly, BMAL2 proteins have diverged about 20-fold more
rapidly than BMAL1 proteins after the duplication, suggesting an
as-yet-unidentified function conserved in BMAL1 but not in BMAL2. mBmal2 mRNA was
constitutively expressed throughout the day under light-dark cycle in the mouse
hypothalamus containing suprachiasmatic nucleus, the site of the central
circadian oscillator in mammals.

PMID: 11207387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Annu Rev Physiol. 2001;63:647-76.

Molecular analysis of mammalian circadian rhythms.

Reppert SM(1), Weaver DR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Chronobiology, Mass General Hospital for Children,
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.
reppert@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

In mammals, a master circadian "clock" resides in the suprachiasmatic nuclei
(SCN) of the anterior hypothalamus. The SCN clock is composed of multiple,
single-cell circadian oscillators, which, when synchronized, generate coordinated
circadian outputs that regulate overt rhythms. Eight clock genes have been cloned
that are involved in interacting transcriptional-/translational-feedback loops
that compose the molecular clockwork. The daily light-dark cycle ultimately
impinges on the control of two clock genes that reset the core clock mechanism in
the SCN. Clock-controlled genes are also generated by the central clock
mechanism, but their protein products transduce downstream effects. Peripheral
oscillators are controlled by the SCN and provide local control of overt rhythm
expression. Greater understanding of the cellular and molecular mechanisms of the
SCN clockwork provides opportunities for pharmacological manipulation of
circadian timing.

PMID: 11181971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 13;98(4):1877-82. Epub 2001 Feb 6.

Herpes simplex virus 1 alpha regulatory protein ICP0 functionally interacts with 
cellular transcription factor BMAL1.

Kawaguchi Y(1), Tanaka M, Yokoymama A, Matsuda G, Kato K, Kagawa H, Hirai K,
Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Virology, Division of Virology and Immunology, Medical
Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

The infected cell protein no. 0 (ICP0) of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) is a
promiscuous transactivator shown to enhance the expression of gene introduced
into cells by infection or transfection. At the molecular level, ICP0 is a 775-aa
ring finger protein localized initially in the nucleus and late in infection in
the cytoplasm and mediates the degradation of several proteins and stabilization 
of others. None of the known functions at the molecular level account for the
apparent activity of ICP0 as a transactivator. Here we report that ICP0
functionally interacts with cellular transcription factor BMAL1, a member of the 
basic helix-loop-helix PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) super family of transcriptional
regulators. Specifically, sequences mapped to the exon II of ICP0 interacted with
BMAL1 in the yeast two-hybrid system and in reciprocal pull-down experiments in
vitro. Moreover, the enhancement of transcription of a luciferase reporter
construct whose promoter contained multiple BMAL1-binding sites by ICP0 and BMAL1
was significantly greater than that observed by ICP0 or BMAL1 alone. Although the
level of BMAL1 present in nuclei of infected cells remained unchanged between 3
and 8 h after infection, the level of cytoplasmic BMAL1 was reduced at 8 h after 
infection. The reduction of cytoplasmic BMAL1 was significantly greater in cells 
infected with the ICP0-null mutant than in the wild-type virus-infected cells,
suggesting that ICP0 mediates partial stabilization of the protein. These results
indicate that ICP0 interacts physically and functionally with at least one
cellular transcription-regulatory factor.

PMCID: PMC29350
PMID: 11172044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Cell. 2000 Dec 22;103(7):1009-17.

Mop3 is an essential component of the master circadian pacemaker in mammals.

Bunger MK(1), Wilsbacher LD, Moran SM, Clendenin C, Radcliffe LA, Hogenesch JB,
Simon MC, Takahashi JS, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)The McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Circadian oscillations in mammalian physiology and behavior are regulated by an
endogenous biological clock. Here we show that loss of the PAS protein MOP3 (also
known as BMAL1) in mice results in immediate and complete loss of circadian
rhythmicity in constant darkness. Additionally, locomotor activity in light-dark 
(LD) cycles is impaired and activity levels are reduced in Mop3-/- mice. Analysis
of Period gene expression in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) indicates that
these behavioral phenotypes arise from loss of circadian function at the
molecular level. These results provide genetic evidence that MOP3 is the bona
fide heterodimeric partner of mCLOCK. Furthermore, these data demonstrate that
MOP3 is a nonredundant and essential component of the circadian pacemaker in
mammals.

PMCID: PMC3779439
PMID: 11163178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Biol Rhythms. 2000 Dec;15(6):472-82.

Specific sequences outside the E-box are required for proper per expression and
behavioral rescue.

Lyons LC(1), Darlington TK, Hao H, Houl J, Kay SA, Hardin PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, TX, USA.

Comment in
    J Biol Rhythms. 2000 Dec;15(6):483-90.

A 69 bp circadian regulatory sequence (CRS) upstream of the per gene is
sufficient to drive circadian transcription, mediate proper spatial expression,
and rescue behavioral rhythmicity in per01 flies. Within the CRS, an E-box is
required for transcriptional activation by two basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
PERARNT-SIM (PAS) transcription factors, dCLOCK (dCLK) and CYCLE (CYC). To define
sequences within the CRS that are required for spatial expression, circadian
expression, and behavioral rhythmicity, a series of mutants that alter blocks of 
3 to 12 nucleotides across the entire CRS were used to drive lacZ or per
expression in vivo. As expected, the E-box within the CRS is necessary for
high-level expression and behavioral rhythmicity, but sequences outside the E-box
are also required for transcriptional activation, proper spatial expression, and 
behavioral rhythmicity. These results indicate that the dCLK-CYC target site
extends beyond the E-box and that factors other than dCLK and CYC modulate per
transcription.

PMID: 11106064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Science. 2000 Oct 27;290(5492):799-801.

Antiphase oscillation of the left and right suprachiasmatic nuclei.

de la Iglesia HO(1), Meyer J, Carpino A Jr, Schwartz WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 55 Lake
Avenue North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA. hacho@bio.umass.edu

An unusual property of the circadian timekeeping systems of animals is rhythm
"splitting," in which a single daily period of physical activity (usually
measured as wheel running) dissociates into two stably coupled components about
12 hours apart; this behavior has been ascribed to a clock composed of two
circadian oscillators cycling in antiphase. We analyzed gene expression in the
hypothalamic circadian clock, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), of behaviorally 
"split" hamsters housed in constant light. The results show that the two
oscillators underlying the split condition correspond to the left and right sides
of the bilaterally paired SCN.

PMID: 11052942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Neurosci. 2000 Oct 15;20(20):7525-30.

Light and glutamate-induced degradation of the circadian oscillating protein
BMAL1 during the mammalian clock resetting.

Tamaru T(1), Isojima Y, Yamada T, Okada M, Nagai K, Takamatsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo 143-8540, 
Japan. tetamaru@med.toho-u.ac.jp.

Recently discovered mammalian clock genes are believed to compose the core
oscillator, which generates the circadian rhythm. BMAL1/CLOCK heterodimer is the 
essential positive element that drives clock-related transcription and
self-sustaining oscillation by a negative feedback mechanism. We examined BMAL1
protein expression in the rat suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) by immunoblot
analysis. Anti-BMAL1 antiserum raised against rBMAL1 recognized 70 kDa mBMAL1b
and detected a similar immunoreactivity (IR) as a major band in rat brains.
Robust circadian BMAL1-IR oscillations with nocturnal peaks were detected in the 
SCN during a light/dark cycle and under constant darkness. A short duration light
exposure at night acutely reduced BMAL1-IR in the SCN during photoentrainment.
This might be attributable to the degradation of BMAL1 protein. Application of
glutamate and NMDA to the SCN slices at projected night, a procedure mimicking
photic phase delay shift, also acutely reduced BMAL1-IR in a similar manner. A
rapid decrease of BMAL1 protein suggests that BMAL1 protein might be implicated
in the light-transducing pathway within the SCN.

PMID: 11027210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 24;275(47):36847-51.

CLIF, a novel cycle-like factor, regulates the circadian oscillation of
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 gene expression.

Maemura K(1), de la Monte SM, Chin MT, Layne MD, Hsieh CM, Yet SF, Perrella MA,
Lee ME.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular and the Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
kmae-tky@umin.ac.jp

The onset of myocardial infarction occurs frequently in the early morning, and it
may partly result from circadian variation of fibrinolytic activity. Plasminogen 
activator inhibitor-1 activity shows a circadian oscillation and may account for 
the morning onset of myocardial infarction. However, the molecular mechanisms
regulating this circadian oscillation remain unknown. Recent evidence indicates
that basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/PAS domain transcription factors play a
crucial role in controlling the biological clock that controls circadian rhythm. 
We isolated a novel bHLH/PAS protein, cycle-like factor (CLIF) from human
umbilical vein endothelial cells. CLIF shares high homology with Drosophila
CYCLE, one of the essential transcriptional regulators of circadian rhythm. CLIF 
is expressed in endothelial cells and neurons in the brain, including the
suprachiasmatic nucleus, the center of the circadian clock. In endothelial cells,
CLIF forms a heterodimer with CLOCK and up-regulates the PAI-1 gene through E-box
sites. Furthermore, Period2 and Cryptochrome1, whose expression show a circadian 
oscillation in peripheral tissues, inhibit the PAI-1 promoter activation by the
CLOCK:CLIF heterodimer. These results suggest that CLIF regulates the circadian
oscillation of PAI-1 gene expression in endothelial cells. In addition, the
results potentially provide a molecular basis for the morning onset of myocardial
infarction.

PMID: 11018023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Genes Cells. 2000 Sep;5(9):739-47.

Transactivation mechanisms of mouse clock transcription factors, mClock and
mArnt3.

Takahata S(1), Ozaki T, Mimura J, Kikuchi Y, Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University,
Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The Arnt3 (also termed as BMAL1 or MOP3)/Clock heterodimer is a
positive regulator of circadian rhythm and activates the transcription of target 
genes such as per1 and vasopressin.
RESULTS: We investigated the transcriptional mechanism of mArnt3/mClock
heterodimer. While mClock did not possess any distinct activation domain, mArnt3 
contained a transcriptional activation domain at the most C-terminal end, the
activity of which was not expressed, even in the one hybrid system, until it was 
bound by mClock. It has been suggested that mClock plays a regulatory or
structural role in exerting a transcription enhancing effect of the mArnt3/mClock
heterodimer. Deletion proceeding from amino acids 559-492 of mClock markedly
reduced the transactivation activity of mArnt3/mClock heterodimer, in consistence
with the results of the Clock-delta 19 mutant. Yeast and mammalian two-hybrid
systems revealed that CBP and p300 interacted with mArnt3 via the CREB binding
domain. The In vivo interaction between mArnt3 and CBP was confirmed by the GST
pull down assay.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these results suggest that the mArnt3/mClock
heterodimer exerted its transactivation activity via CBP or p300 interacting with
mArnt3 in the heterodimer with mClock playing a structural or regulatory role in 
the transactivation process.

PMID: 10971655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Genes Cells. 2000 Sep;5(9):725-38.

Molecular analysis of zebrafish photolyase/cryptochrome family: two types of
cryptochromes present in zebrafish.

Kobayashi Y(1), Ishikawa T, Hirayama J, Daiyasu H, Kanai S, Toh H, Fukuda I,
Tsujimura T, Terada N, Kamei Y, Yuba S, Iwai S, Todo T.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Biology Center, Kyoto University, Yoshidakonoe-cho, Sakyoku, Kyoto
606-8501 Japan.

BACKGROUND: Cryptochromes (CRY), members of the DNA photolyase/cryptochrome
protein family, regulate the circadian clock in animals and plants. Two types of 
animal CRYs are known, mammalian CRY and Drosophila CRY. Both CRYs participate in
the regulation of circadian rhythm, but they have different light dependencies
for their reactions and have different effects on the negative feedback loop
which generates a circadian oscillation of gene expression. Mammalian CRYs act as
a potent inhibitor of transcriptional activator whose reactions do not depend on 
light, but Drosophila CRY functions as a light-dependent suppressor of
transcriptional inhibitor.
RESULTS: We cloned seven zebrafish genes that carry members of the DNA
photolyase/cryptochrome protein family; one (6-4)photolyase and six cry genes. A 
sequence analysis and determination of their in vitro functions showed that these
zebrafish cry genes constitute two groups. One has a high sequence similarity to 
mammalian cry genes and inhibits CLOCK:BMAL1 mediated transcription. The other,
which has a higher sequence similarity to the Drosophila cry gene rather than the
mammalian cry genes, does not carry transcription inhibitor activity. The
expressions of these cry genes oscillate in a circadian manner, but their
patterns differ.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that functionally diverse cry genes are
present in zebrafish and each gene has different role in the molecular clock.

PMID: 10971654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(17):6269-75.

Targeted disruption of the mPer3 gene: subtle effects on circadian clock
function.

Shearman LP(1), Jin X, Lee C, Reppert SM, Weaver DR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Chronobiology, MassGeneral Hospital for Children, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Neurons in the mammalian suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) contain a cell-autonomous 
circadian clock that is based on a transcriptional-translational feedback loop.
The basic helix-loop-helix-PAS proteins CLOCK and BMAL1 are positive regulators
and drive the expression of the negative regulators CRY1 and CRY2, as well as
PER1, PER2, and PER3. To assess the role of mouse PER3 (mPER3) in the circadian
timing system, we generated mice with a targeted disruption of the mPer3 gene.
Western blot analysis confirmed the absence of mPER3-immunoreactive proteins in
mice homozygous for the targeted allele. mPer1, mPer2, mCry1, and Bmal1 RNA
rhythms in the SCN did not differ between mPER3-deficient and wild-type mice.
Rhythmic expression of mPer1 and mPer2 RNAs in skeletal muscle also did not
differ between mPER3-deficient and wild-type mice. mPer3 transcripts were
rhythmically expressed in the SCN and skeletal muscle of mice homozygous for the 
targeted allele, but the level of expression of the mutant transcript was lower
than that in wild-type controls. Locomotor activity rhythms in mPER3-deficient
mice were grossly normal, but the circadian cycle length was significantly (0.5
h) shorter than that in controls. The results demonstrate that mPer3 is not
necessary for circadian rhythms in mice.

PMCID: PMC86101
PMID: 10938103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 20;275(42):32991-8.

Characterization of the chicken serotonin N-acetyltransferase gene. Activation
via clock gene heterodimer/E box interaction.

Chong NW(1), Bernard M, Klein DC.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Neuroendocrinology, Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology,
NICHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The abundance of serotonin N-acetyltransferase (arylalkylamine
N-acetyltransferase, AANAT) mRNA in the chicken pineal gland exhibits a circadian
rhythm, which is translated into a circadian rhythm in melatonin production. Here
we have started to elucidate the molecular basis of the circadian rhythm in
chicken AANAT (cAANAT). The 5'-flanking region of the cAANAT gene was isolated
and found to contain an E box DNA element that confers strong luciferase reporter
activity. In transfection experiments using chicken pineal cells, an E box
mutation dramatically decreased reporter activity. Northern blot analysis
indicated that several putative clock genes (bmal1, Clock, and MOP4) are
co-expressed in the chicken pineal gland. bmal1 mRNA is expressed in a rhythmic
manner in the chicken pineal gland, with peak levels at early subjective night,
coincident with the increase in cAANAT expression. Co-transfection experiments in
COS cells demonstrated that chicken BMAL1/CLOCK and human BMAL1/MOP4 heterodimers
bound the AANAT E box element and enhanced transcription. These observations
suggest that binding of clock gene heterodimers to the cAANAT E box is a critical
element in the expression of the cAANAT gene in vitro.

PMID: 10931848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Neurosci. 2000 Jul 1;20(13):RC83.

The basic helix-loop-helix-PAS protein MOP9 is a brain-specific heterodimeric
partner of circadian and hypoxia factors.

Hogenesch JB(1), Gu YZ, Moran SM, Shimomura K, Radcliffe LA, Takahashi JS,
Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)The McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

PAS (PER, ARNT, SIM) proteins play important roles in adaptation to low
atmospheric and cellular oxygen levels, exposure to certain environmental
pollutants, and diurnal oscillations in light and temperature. In an attempt to
better understand how organisms sense environmental changes, we have
characterized a novel member of the PAS superfamily, MOP9 (member of PAS
superfamily), that maps to human chromosome 12p11.22-11.23. This protein displays
significant homology to the Drosophila circadian factor CYCLE and its putative
mammalian ortholog MOP3/bMAL1. Like its homologs, MOP9 forms a transcriptionally 
active heterodimer with the circadian CLOCK protein, the structurally related
MOP4, and hypoxia-inducible factors, such as HIF1alpha. In a manner consistent
with its role as a biologically relevant partner of these proteins, MOP9 is
coexpressed in regions of the brain such as the thalamus, hypothalamus, and
amygdala. Importantly, MOP9 is coexpressed with CLOCK in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus, the site of the master circadian oscillator in mammals.

PMID: 10864977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Genomics. 2000 May 1;65(3):224-33.

The human and mouse Period1 genes: five well-conserved E-boxes additively
contribute to the enhancement of mPer1 transcription.

Hida A(1), Koike N, Hirose M, Hattori M, Sakaki Y, Tei H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural Genomics, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, University of Tokyo, Japan.

The clock gene, Period1, from human and mouse was sequenced and characterized.
Both human PERIOD1 (human PER1) and mouse Period1 (mouse Per1) consisted of 23
exons spanning approximately 16 kb, and their structures showed strong similarity
to each other. For example, six highly conserved regions were identified in the
5' upstream sequences. These conserved segments exhibited 77-88% identity and
possessed several potential regulatory elements including five E-boxes (the
binding site of the CLOCK-BMAL1 complex) and four cyclic AMP response elements.
Transient transfection assays using a mPer1-luciferase fusion gene revealed that 
each of the conserved E-boxes additively functions as an enhancer for the
transactivation of mPer1 by mCLOCK and mBMAL1.

PMID: 10857746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(13):4773-81.

Role of DBP in the circadian oscillatory mechanism.

Yamaguchi S(1), Mitsui S, Yan L, Yagita K, Miyake S, Okamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Brain Science, Kobe University School of Medicine,
Japan.

Transcript levels of DBP, a member of the PAR leucine zipper transcription factor
family, exhibit a robust rhythm in suprachiasmatic nuclei, the mammalian
circadian center. Here we report that DBP is able to activate the promoter of a
putative clock oscillating gene, mPer1, by directly binding to the mPer1
promoter. The mPer1 promoter is cooperatively activated by DBP and CLOCK-BMAL1.
On the other hand, dbp transcription is activated by CLOCK-BMAL1 through E-boxes 
and inhibited by the mPER and mCRY proteins, as is the case for mPer1. Thus, a
clock-controlled dbp gene may play an important role in central clock
oscillation.

PMCID: PMC85912
PMID: 10848603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Science. 2000 May 12;288(5468):943-4.

Circadian rhythms. Two feedback loops run mammalian clock.

Barinaga M.

Comment on
    Science. 2000 May 12;288(5468):1013-9.

PMID: 10841707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Science. 2000 May 12;288(5468):1013-9.

Interacting molecular loops in the mammalian circadian clock.

Shearman LP(1), Sriram S, Weaver DR, Maywood ES, Chaves I, Zheng B, Kume K, Lee
CC, van der Horst GT, Hastings MH, Reppert SM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Chronobiology, MassGeneral Hospital for Children, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114,
USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2000 May 12;288(5468):943-4.

We show that, in the mouse, the core mechanism for the master circadian clock
consists of interacting positive and negative transcription and translation
feedback loops. Analysis of Clock/Clock mutant mice, homozygous Period2(Brdm1)
mutants, and Cryptochrome-deficient mice reveals substantially altered Bmal1
rhythms, consistent with a dominant role of PERIOD2 in the positive regulation of
the Bmal1 loop. In vitro analysis of CRYPTOCHROME inhibition of CLOCK:
BMAL1-mediated transcription shows that the inhibition is through direct
protein:protein interactions, independent of the PERIOD and TIMELESS proteins.
PERIOD2 is a positive regulator of the Bmal1 loop, and CRYPTOCHROMES are the
negative regulators of the Period and Cryptochrome cycles.

PMID: 10807566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Apr 11;97(8):4339-44.

Asynchronous oscillations of two zebrafish CLOCK partners reveal differential
clock control and function.

Cermakian N(1), Whitmore D, Foulkes NS, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale, Université Louis Pasteur, B. P. 163, 67404
Illkirch-Strasbourg, France.

Most clock genes encode transcription factors that interact to elicit cooperative
control of clock function. Using a two-hybrid system approach, we have isolated
two different partners of zebrafish (zf) CLOCK, which are similar to the
mammalian BMAL1 (brain and muscle arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator-like protein 1). The two homologs, zfBMAL1 and zfBMAL2, contain
conserved basic helix-loop-helix-PAS (Period-Arylhydrocarbon
receptor-Singleminded) domains but diverge in the carboxyl termini, thus bearing 
different transcriptional activation potential. As for zfClock, the expression of
both zfBmals oscillates in most tissues in the animal. However, in many tissues, 
the peak, levels, and kinetics of expression are different between the two genes 
and for the same gene from tissue to tissue. These results support the existence 
of independent peripheral oscillators and suggest that zfBMAL1 and zfBMAL2 may
exert distinct circadian functions, interacting differentially with zfCLOCK at
various times in different tissues. Our findings also indicate that multiple
controls may be exerted by the central clock and/or that peripheral oscillators
can differentially interpret central clock signals.

PMCID: PMC18243
PMID: 10760301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Neurosci. 2000 Mar 1;20(5):1746-53.

dCLOCK is present in limiting amounts and likely mediates daily interactions
between the dCLOCK-CYC transcription factor and the PER-TIM complex.

Bae K(1), Lee C, Hardin PE, Edery I.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Microbiology, Rutgers University, Center for Advanced
Biotechnology and Medicine, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

In Drosophila melanogaster four circadian clock proteins termed PERIOD (PER),
TIMELESS (TIM), dCLOCK (dCLK), and CYCLE (CYC/dBMAL1) function in a
transcriptional feedback loop that is a core element of the oscillator mechanism.
dCLK and CYC are members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/PAS (PER-ARNT-SIM) 
superfamily of transcription factors and are required for high-level expression
of per and tim and repression of dClk, whereas PER and TIM inhibit
dCLK-CYC-mediated transcription and lead to the activation of dClk. To understand
further the dynamic regulation within the circadian oscillator mechanism, we
biochemically characterized in vivo-produced CYC, determined the interactions of 
the four clock proteins, and calculated their absolute levels as a function of
time. Our results indicate that throughout a daily cycle the majority of the dCLK
present in adult heads stably interacts with CYC, indicating that CYC is the
primary in vivo partner of dCLK. dCLK-CYC dimers are bound by PER and TIM during 
the late evening and early morning, suggesting the formation of a tetrameric
complex with impaired transcriptional activity. Although dCLK is present in
limiting amounts and CYC is by far the most abundant of the four clock proteins
that have been examined, PER and TIM appear to interact preferentially with dCLK.
Our results suggest that dCLK is the main component regulating the daily
abundance of transcriptionally active dCLK-CYC complexes.

PMID: 10684876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Feb 5;268(1):164-71.

Rhythmic expression of BMAL1 mRNA is altered in Clock mutant mice: differential
regulation in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and peripheral tissues.

Oishi K(1), Fukui H, Ishida N.

Author information: 
(1)Ishida Group of Clock Gene, National Institute of Bioscience and Human
Technology, Agency of Industrial Science and Technology, MITI, Higashi 1-1,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8566, Japan.

BMAL1 is a putative clock gene which encodes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS 
transcription factor. To examine whether the CLOCK protein is required for the
circadian expression of BMAL1 mRNA, in situ hybridization and Northern blot
analysis were performed in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) and peripheral
tissues of homozygous Clock mutant mice. In the SCN of Clock mutants, BMAL1 mRNA 
did not oscillate significantly but apparently expressed with low levels, while
in wild-type mice the mRNA was robustly oscillated in a circadian manner. The
peak-trough amplitudes of BMAL1 mRNA levels were 6.5-, 8.6-, and 6.7-fold in
liver, heart, and kidney of wild-type mice, respectively. In Clock mutants, the
amplitudes were extremely damped to 1.2-, 2.1-, and 1.4-fold, respectively.
Furthermore, expressions of BMAL1 mRNA in the peripheral of Clock mutant mice
were close to the peak level in wild-type mice, whereas mPer2 mRNA levels were
severely blunted at trough values. Daily expression of albumin site D-binding
protein (DBP), a clock controlled output gene (CCG), was also abolished at trough
values by the Clock mutation in all tissues examined. These observations suggest 
that the circadian expression of BMAL1 mRNA is affected by the CLOCK-induced
transcriptional feedback loop in the SCN and peripheral tissues in a different
way and that the regulation mechanism appeared to be different from those in
mPer2 and DBP expressions in vivo.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10652231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Mech Dev. 2000 Feb;90(2):253-61.

ARNT2 acts as the dimerization partner of SIM1 for the development of the
hypothalamus.

Michaud JL(1), DeRossi C, May NR, Holdener BC, Fan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montréal, Canada.

One major function of the hypothalamus is to maintain homeostasis by modulating
the secretion of pituitary hormones. The paraventricular (PVN) and supraoptic
(SON) nuclei are major integration centers for the output of the hypothalamus to 
the pituitary. The bHLH-PAS transcription factor SIM1 is crucial for the
development of several neuroendocrine lineages within the PVN and SON. bHLH-PAS
proteins require heterodimerization for their function. ARNT, ARNT2, and BMAL1
are the three known general heterodimerization partners for bHLH-PAS proteins.
Here, we provide evidence that Sim1 and Arnt2 form dimers in vitro, that they are
co-expressed in the PVN and SON, and that their loss of function affects the
development of the same sets of neuroendocrine cell types within the PVN and SON.
Together, these results implicate ARNT2 as the in vivo dimerization partner of
SIM1 in controlling the development of these neuroendocrine lineages.

PMID: 10640708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Science. 1999 Dec 24;286(5449):2460-1.

Perspectives: neurobiology. The CRYs fo flies and mice.

Hardin PE(1), Glossop NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA.
phardin@uh.edu

Comment on
    Science. 1999 Dec 24;286(5449):2531-4.

PMID: 10636810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Cell. 1999 Dec 10;99(6):661-71.

Cycling vrille expression is required for a functional Drosophila clock.

Blau J(1), Young MW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10021, 
USA.

We identified a novel regulatory loop within Drosophila's circadian clock. A
screen for clock-controlled genes recovered vrille (vri), a transcription factor 
essential for embryonic development. vri is expressed in circadian pacemaker
cells in larval and adult brains. vri RNA levels oscillate with a circadian
rhythm. Cycling is directly regulated by the transcription factors dCLOCK and
CYCLE, which are also required for oscillations of period and timeless RNA.
Eliminating the normal vri cycle suppresses period and timeless expression and
causes long-period behavioral rhythms and arrhythmicity, indicating that cycling 
vri is required for a functional Drosophila clock. We also show that dCLOCK and
VRI independently regulate levels of a neuropeptide, pigment dispersing factor,
which appears to regulate overt behavior.

PMID: 10612401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Science. 1999 Oct 22;286(5440):768-71.

Light-independent role of CRY1 and CRY2 in the mammalian circadian clock.

Griffin EA Jr(1), Staknis D, Weitz CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 USA.

Cryptochrome (CRY), a photoreceptor for the circadian clock in Drosophila, binds 
to the clock component TIM in a light-dependent fashion and blocks its function. 
In mammals, genetic evidence suggests a role for CRYs within the clock, distinct 
from hypothetical photoreceptor functions. Mammalian CRY1 and CRY2 are here shown
to act as light-independent inhibitors of CLOCK-BMAL1, the activator driving Per1
transcription. CRY1 or CRY2 (or both) showed light-independent interactions with 
CLOCK and BMAL1, as well as with PER1, PER2, and TIM. Thus, mammalian CRYs act as
light-independent components of the circadian clock and probably regulate Per1
transcriptional cycling by contacting both the activator and its feedback
inhibitors.

PMID: 10531061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Trends Cell Biol. 1999 Sep;9(9):371-2.

Setting the clock in Madrid.

Foulkes NS(1), Naranjo JR, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS-INSERM-Université Louis Pasteur, Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

PMID: 10532822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Neurosci Lett. 1999 Aug 13;271(1):1-4.

Circadian rhythms and light responsiveness of mammalian clock gene, Clock and
BMAL1, transcripts in the rat retina.

Namihira M(1), Honma S, Abe H, Tanahashi Y, Ikeda M, Honma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.

Circadian expression and light-responsiveness of the mammalian clock genes, Clock
and BMAL1, in the rat retina were examined by in situ hydbribization under
constant darkness. A small but significant daily variation was detected in the
Clock transcript level, but not in BMAL1. Light increased the Clock and BMAL1
expressions significantly when examined 60 min after exposure. The light-induced 
gene expression was phase-dependent for Clock and peaked at ZT2, while rather
constant throughout the day for BMAL1. These findings suggest that Clock and
BMAL1 play different roles in the generation of circadian rhytm in the retina
from those in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Different roles are also suggested
between the two genes in the photic signal transduction in the retina.

PMID: 10471199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Science. 1999 Aug 13;285(5430):1066-8.

Requirement of circadian genes for cocaine sensitization in Drosophila.

Andretic R(1), Chaney S, Hirsh J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Gilmer Hall, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
VA 22903, USA.

The circadian clock consists of a feedback loop in which clock genes are
rhythmically expressed, giving rise to cycling levels of RNA and proteins. Four
of the five circadian genes identified to date influence responsiveness to
freebase cocaine in the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. Sensitization to
repeated cocaine exposures, a phenomenon also seen in humans and animal models
and associated with enhanced drug craving, is eliminated in flies mutant for
period, clock, cycle, and doubletime, but not in flies lacking the gene timeless.
Flies that do not sensitize owing to lack of these genes do not show the
induction of tyrosine decarboxylase normally seen after cocaine exposure. These
findings indicate unexpected roles for these genes in regulating cocaine
sensitization and indicate that they function as regulators of tyrosine
decarboxylase.

PMID: 10446052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Cell. 1999 Jul 23;98(2):193-205.

mCRY1 and mCRY2 are essential components of the negative limb of the circadian
clock feedback loop.

Kume K(1), Zylka MJ, Sriram S, Shearman LP, Weaver DR, Jin X, Maywood ES,
Hastings MH, Reppert SM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Chronobiology, Pediatric Service, Massachusetts
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston 02114, USA.

We determined that two mouse cryptochrome genes, mCry1 and mCry2, act in the
negative limb of the clock feedback loop. In cell lines, mPER proteins (alone or 
in combination) have modest effects on their cellular location and ability to
inhibit CLOCK:BMAL1 -mediated transcription. This suggested cryptochrome
involvement in the negative limb of the feedback loop. Indeed, mCry1 and mCry2
RNA levels are reduced in the central and peripheral clocks of Clock/Clock mutant
mice. mCRY1 and mCRY2 are nuclear proteins that interact with each of the mPER
proteins, translocate each mPER protein from cytoplasm to nucleus, and are
rhythmically expressed in the suprachiasmatic circadian clock. Luciferase
reporter gene assays show that mCRY1 or mCRY2 alone abrogates CLOCK:BMAL1-E
box-mediated transcription. The mPER and mCRY proteins appear to inhibit the
transcriptional complex differentially.

PMID: 10428031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Reprod Nutr Dev. 1999 May-Jun;39(3):325-34.

Melatonin synthesis pathway: circadian regulation of the genes encoding the key
enzymes in the chicken pineal gland and retina.

Bernard M(1), Guerlotté J, Grève P, Gréchez-Cassiau A, Iuvone MP, Zatz M, Chong
NW, Klein DC, Voisin P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de neuroendocrinologie, UMR CNRS 6558, Poitiers, France.
neurobio@campus.univ-poitiers.fr

The mRNAs encoding three enzymes of the melatonin synthesis pathway (tryptophan
hydroxylase (TPH), arylalkylamine-N-acetyltransferase (AANAT) and
hydroxyindole-O-methyl-transferase (HIOMT)) are expressed with a day/night rhythm
in the chicken pineal gland and retina. TPH and AANAT mRNA levels reach their
peak at night. HIOMT mRNA levels peak at night in the retina, but during the day 
in the pineal gland. In this tissue, the rhythm of TPH, AANAT and HIOMT mRNA
levels persisted in constant darkness (DD), both in vivo and in vitro, indicating
that the three genes are controlled by the circadian oscillator of the chicken
pineal. In the retina, the rhythms of TPH and AANAT mRNA levels also persisted in
DD in vivo, suggesting that they are driven by a circadian oscillator. In
contrast, the rhythm of HIOMT mRNA in the retina appeared to be controlled only
by light. The clones of chicken AANAT and HIOMT genes that we have isolated
should help us to understand the molecular mechanisms of: 1) their
transcriptional regulation by circadian oscillators and by light; 2) their
tissue-specific expression in the pineal gland and the retina.

PMID: 10420435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Reprod Nutr Dev. 1999 May-Jun;39(3):277-94.

Circadian clocks--from genes to complex behaviour.

Roenneberg T(1), Merrow M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Psychology, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich,
Germany. till.roenneberg@imp.med.uni-muenchen.de

Circadian clocks control temporal structure in practically all organisms and on
all levels of biology, from gene expression to complex behaviour and cognition.
Over the last decades, research has begun to unravel the physiological and, more 
recently, molecular mechanisms that underlie this endogenous temporal programme. 
The generation of circadian rhythms can be explained, at the molecular level, by 
a model based upon a set of genes and their products which form an autoregulating
negative feedback loop. The elements contributing to this transcriptional
feedback appear to be conserved from insects to mammals. Here, we summarize the
process of the genetic and molecular research that led to 'closing the molecular 
loop'. Now that the reductionist approach has led to the description of a
detailed clock model at the molecular level, further insights into the circadian 
system can be provided by combining the extensive knowledge gained from decades
of physiological research with molecular tools, thereby reconstructing the clock 
within the organism and its environment. We describe experiments combining old
and new tools and show that they constitute a powerful approach to understanding 
the mechanisms that lead to temporal structure in complex behaviour.

PMID: 10420431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Aug;19(8):5316-25.

PER and TIM inhibit the DNA binding activity of a Drosophila CLOCK-CYC/dBMAL1
heterodimer without disrupting formation of the heterodimer: a basis for
circadian transcription.

Lee C(1), Bae K, Edery I.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers University,
Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854,
USA.

The Drosophila CLOCK (dCLOCK) and CYCLE (CYC) (also referred to as dBMAL1)
proteins are members of the basic helix-loop-helix PAS (PER-ARNT-SIM) superfamily
of transcription factors and are required for high-level expression of the
circadian clock genes period (per) and timeless (tim). Several lines of evidence 
indicate that PER, TIM, or a PER-TIM heterodimer somehow inhibit the
transcriptional activity of a putative dCLOCK-CYC complex, generating a
negative-feedback loop that is a core element of the Drosophila circadian
oscillator. In this report we show that PER and/or TIM inhibits the binding of a 
dCLOCK-CYC heterodimer to an E-box-containing DNA fragment that is present in the
5' nontranscribed region of per and acts as a circadian enhancer element.
Surprisingly, inhibition of this DNA binding activity by PER, TIM, or both is not
accompanied by disruption of the association between dCLOCK and CYC. The results 
suggest that the interaction of PER, TIM, or both with the dCLOCK-CYC heterodimer
induces a conformational change or masks protein regions in the heterodimer,
leading to a reduction in DNA binding activity. Together with other findings, our
results strongly suggest that daily cycles in the association of PER and TIM with
the dCLOCK-CYC complex probably contribute to rhythmic expression of per and tim.

PMCID: PMC84375
PMID: 10409723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Jul 14;260(3):760-7.

Characterization of three splice variants and genomic organization of the mouse
BMAL1 gene.

Yu W(1), Ikeda M, Abe H, Honma S, Ebisawa T, Yamauchi T, Honma K, Nomura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Saitama Medical School, Moroyama, Saitama, 350-0495,
Japan.

The BMAL1 gene encodes a member of the basic helix-loop-helix/PER-ARNT-SIM
(bHLH/PAS) family of transcription factors. It is a key regulator of circadian
rhythms. Using sequence information from human BMAL1 (hBMAL1) cDNAs previously
reported by our laboratory, we have isolated and characterized cDNAs encoding
three splice variants of the mouse BMAL1 (mBMAL1) gene. Of the three splice
variants, mBMAL1b extends for 1878 bp in the coding sequence, which is 91%
identical to that of hBMAL1b; its deduced amino acid sequence is 626 residues
long and is 98% identical to that of hBMAL1b, and sequence identities in the
bHLH, PAS-A, and PAS-B regions are 98, 100, and 100%, respectively. mBMAL1b'
arises from alternative usage of exon 2, which results in a 7-amino-acid
insertion and alternative splice acceptor usage at the intron 9/exon 10 splice
junction, which causes an alanine residue deletion. mBMAL1b' encodes 632 amino
acids and contains the bHLH/PAS domains. mBMAL1g' is generated by alternative
splice acceptor usage at the intron 6/exon 7 splice junction, which results in a 
28-bp deletion adjacent to the 5' end of the PAS domain. Since the 28-bp deletion
shifts the reading frame, mBMAL1g' is predicted to encode a product of only 222
amino acids that lacks the PAS domain. The tissue distributions of the three
splice variants showed some variation. The variations in the tissue distributions
and predicted amino acid sequences suggest that the three splice variants may
have different functions. Direct sequencing of the genomic mBMAL1 clones
indicated that the coding sequence of mBMAL1 spans 32 kb and includes 17 exons.
An unusual exon/intron donor sequence was found in intron 14, which begins with
GC at the 5' end. Comparison with the bHLH/PAS family genes revealed that the
intron/exon splice pattern of mBMAL1 most closely matches that of the mAhr, which
suggests that BMAL1 and Ahr belong to the same subclass and may be derived from a
common primordial gene.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10403839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Neurosci Lett. 1999 May 21;267(1):69-72.

Daily variation and light responsiveness of mammalian clock gene, Clock and
BMAL1, transcripts in the pineal body and different areas of brain in rats.

Namihira M(1), Honma S, Abe H, Tanahashi Y, Ikeda M, Honma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.

Expression patterns of mammalian clock genes, Clock and BMAL1, were examined by
in situ hybridization in the pineal body, olfactory bulb, hippocampus and
cerebellum in rats under constant darkness. In the pineal, the level of Clock
transcript was significantly higher at ZT18 (subjective night) than at ZT6
(subjective day), while the level of BMAL1 transcript was significantly higher at
ZT6 than at ZT18. A 30 min light pulse did not affect the transcript levels of
Clock nor of BMAL1. The Clock expression in the cerebellum was significantly
increased at ZT6 than at ZT18, while no difference was detected in the olfactory 
bulb and hippocampus at these two phases. The BMAL1 expressions in these areas
were similar to the case in the pineal. These findings indicate that the
mammalian clock gene, Clock and BMAL1, are expressed differently in the different
areas of the brain and the pineal.

PMID: 10400251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Plant Mol Biol. 1999 Mar;39(4):641-5.

News in chloroplast protein import.

Caliebe A(1), Soill J.

Author information: 
(1)Botanisches Institut, Christian-Albrechts-Universität Kiel, Germany.

PMID: 10350079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1999 Mar 20;66(1-2):104-10.

Phase-dependent induction by light of rat Clock gene expression in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus.

Abe H(1), Honma S, Namihira M, Tanahashi Y, Ikeda M, Yu W, Honma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo
060-8638, Japan. hiroabe@med.hokudai.ac.jp

To clarify the role of Clock in the photic signal transduction of rat circadian
clock, we cloned and sequenced rat Clock and examined the effect of a single
light pulse on the Clock mRNA expression in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) by 
in situ hybridization. Rats were exposed to a 30 min light pulse ( approximately 
300 lx) at one of six circadian phases in constant darkness (DD), and sacrificed 
60 min after the light on. In the rats without light exposure, the mRNA level in 
the SCN was high at ZT (Zeitgeber time) 6 and low at ZT 18 and 22. Light exposure
increased Clock mRNA level in the SCN in phase dependent manner. The mRNA level
was significantly increased during the subjective night (ZT10-22). The light had 
no effect on the mRNA level during the subjective day (ZT2 and 6). The Clock mRNA
was also detected in the piriform cortex (PC), and increased by light at ZT14.
These results suggest that Clock transcription in the SCN is involved in the
photic signal transduction of circadian clock in rats.

Copyright 1999 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 10095082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Cell. 1999 Jan 8;96(1):57-68.

A molecular mechanism regulating rhythmic output from the suprachiasmatic
circadian clock.

Jin X(1), Shearman LP, Weaver DR, Zylka MJ, de Vries GJ, Reppert SM.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Service, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston 02114, USA.

We examined the transcriptional regulation of the clock-controlled arginine
vasopressin gene in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN). A core clock mechanism in
mouse SCN appears to involve a transcriptional feedback loop in which CLOCK and
BMAL1 are positive regulators and three mPeriod (mPer) genes are involved in
negative feedback. We show that the RNA rhythm of each mPer gene is severely
blunted in Clock/Clock mice. The vasopressin RNA rhythm is abolished in the SCN
of Clock/Clock animals, leading to markedly decreased peptide levels. Luciferase 
reporter gene assays show that CLOCK-BMAL1 heterodimers act through an E box
enhancer in the vasopressin gene to activate transcription; this activation can
be inhibited by the mPER and mTIM proteins. These data indicate that the
transcriptional machinery of the core clockwork directly regulates a
clock-controlled output rhythm.

PMID: 9989497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. EMBO J. 1999 Feb 1;18(3):675-86.

TIMELESS-dependent positive and negative autoregulation in the Drosophila
circadian clock.

Suri V(1), Lanjuin A, Rosbash M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 415 South Street,
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02454, USA.

The timeless protein (TIM) is a central component of the circadian pacemaker
machinery of the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster. Both TIM and its partner
protein, the period protein PER, show robust circadian oscillations in mRNA and
protein levels. Yet the role of TIM in the rhythm generation mechanism is largely
unknown. To analyze TIM function, we constructed transgenic flies that carry a
heat shock-inducible copy of the timeless gene (tim) in an arrhythmic tim
loss-of-function genetic background. When heat shocked, TIM levels in these flies
rapidly increased and initiated a molecular cycle of PER accumulation and
processing with dynamics very similar to the PER cycle observed in wild-type
flies. Analysis of period (per) mRNA levels and transcription uncovered a novel
role for TIM in clock regulation: TIM increases per mRNA levels through a
post-transcriptional mechanism. Our results suggest positive as well as negative 
autoregulation in the Drosophila circadian clock.

PMCID: PMC1171160
PMID: 9927427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Dec 18;253(2):199-203.

Antiphase circadian expression between BMAL1 and period homologue mRNA in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus and peripheral tissues of rats.

Oishi K(1), Sakamoto K, Okada T, Nagase T, Ishida N.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Bioscience and Human Technology, Agency of Industrial
Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Japan.

BMAL1 is a putative transcription factor which is involved in circadian rhythm
generation in Drosophila. Northern blot analysis was performed to investigate the
expression of rat BMAL1 mRNA in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) and peripheral 
tissues. In the SCN, circadian expression of BMAL1 mRNA which reaches its peak
level at the time of dark-light transition was observed, and the expression
pattern was antiphase to those of two period (per) homologues, rPer1 and rPer2.
However, no circadian oscillation for rat Clock mRNA was detected. The circadian 
expression of BMAL1 mRNA was also observed in peripheral tissues such as brain
(excluding the SCN), eye, heart, kidney, and lung. The amplitudes of BMAL1 and
rPer2 mRNA expression levels were correlated between the different tissues,
suggesting that the circadian expression of BMAL1 mRNA plays an important role in
generating the circadian expression of per homologue genes in mammals.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9878515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Neurosci Lett. 1998 Dec 18;258(2):93-6.

Circadian rhythm and light responsiveness of BMAL1 expression, a partner of
mammalian clock gene Clock, in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of rats.

Abe H(1), Honma S, Namihira M, Tanahashi Y, Ikeda M, Honma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan. hiroabe@med.hokudai.ac.jp

To clarify whether BMAL1 is involved in the photic signal transduction in the
mammalian circadian clock, we examined the effects of a single light pulse on the
level of BMAL1 mRNA in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of rats by in situ
hybridization. Rats were exposed to 30 min light of ca. 300 lux at six different 
phases in constant darkness and decapitated 60 min later. BMAL1 transcripts in
the SCN of the control animals showed a robust circadian oscillation with the
highest expression at ZT (Zeitgeber time) 18 and the lowest at ZT2. The light
pulse slightly increased the level of BMAL1 transcripts in the SCN. However, the 
increment did not depend on the phase of light pulse. There was no significant
change in the BMAL1 mRNA level up to 120 min after a light pulse at ZT14 and
ZT22. These results indicate that BMAL1 transcription is not involved in the
photic signal transduction responsible for non-parametric entrainment of the
circadian clock in rats.

PMID: 9875535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Neuron. 1998 Nov;21(5):1101-13.

Mammalian circadian autoregulatory loop: a timeless ortholog and mPer1 interact
and negatively regulate CLOCK-BMAL1-induced transcription.

Sangoram AM(1), Saez L, Antoch MP, Gekakis N, Staknis D, Whiteley A, Fruechte EM,
Vitaterna MH, Shimomura K, King DP, Young MW, Weitz CJ, Takahashi JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Physiology and National Science Foundation,
Center for Biological Timing, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York
10021, USA.

We report the cloning and mapping of mouse (mTim) and human (hTIM) orthologs of
the Drosophila timeless (dtim) gene. The mammalian Tim genes are widely expressed
in a variety of tissues; however, unlike Drosophila, mTim mRNA levels do not
oscillate in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) or retina. Importantly, hTIM
interacts with the Drosophila PERIOD (dPER) protein as well as the mouse PER1 and
PER2 proteins in vitro. In Drosophila (S2) cells, hTIM and dPER interact and
translocate into the nucleus. Finally, hTIM and mPER1 specifically inhibit
CLOCK-BMAL1-induced transactivation of the mPer1 promoter. Taken together, these 
results demonstrate that mTim and hTIM are mammalian orthologs of timeless and
provide a framework for a basic circadian autoregulatory loop in mammals.

PMID: 9856465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Cell. 1998 Nov 25;95(5):669-79.

CRY, a Drosophila clock and light-regulated cryptochrome, is a major contributor 
to circadian rhythm resetting and photosensitivity.

Emery P(1), So WV, Kaneko M, Hall JC, Rosbash M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Brandeis University Waltham, Massachusetts 02454, USA.

Light is a major environmental signal for circadian rhythms. We have identified
and analyzed cry, a novel Drosophila cryptochrome gene. All characterized family 
members are directly photosensitive and include plant blue light photoreceptors. 
We show that cry transcription is under circadian regulation, influenced by the
Drosophila clock genes period, timeless, Clock, and cycle. We also show that cry 
protein levels are dramatically affected by light exposure. Importantly,
circadian photosensitivity is increased in a cry-overexpressing strain. These
physiological and genetic data therefore link a specific photoreceptor molecule
to circadian rhythmicity. Taken together with the data in the accompanying paper,
we propose that CRY is a major Drosophila photoreceptor dedicated to the
resetting of circadian rhythms.

PMID: 9845369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 1998 Oct;8(5):635-41.

PASting together the mammalian clock.

Whitmore D(1), Sassone-Corsi P, Foulkes NS.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS-INSERM-ULP, Illkirch, France.

Over the past year, the first components of the mammalian clock have been
identified; Clock, bmal1 and three homologs of Drosophila period have been
cloned, all of which encode PAS proteins. Expression of the mammalian period gene
oscillates in many tissues in vivo and in immortalized cell cultures in vitro.
Now, can we say that every cell has a circadian clock?

PMID: 9811634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Nov;18(11):6571-83.

Novel cofactors and TFIIA mediate functional core promoter selectivity by the
human TAFII150-containing TFIID complex.

Martinez E(1), Ge H, Tao Y, Yuan CX, Palhan V, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, New York 10021, USA.

TATA-binding protein-associated factors (TAFIIs) within TFIID control
differential gene transcription through interactions with both activators and
core promoter elements. In particular, TAFII150 contributes to
initiator-dependent transcription through an unknown mechanism. Here, we address 
whether TAFIIs within TFIID are sufficient, in conjunction with highly purified
general transcription factors (GTFs), for differential core promoter-dependent
transcription by RNA polymerase II and whether additional cofactors are required.
We identify the human homologue of Drosophila TAFII150 through cognate cDNA
cloning and show that it is a tightly associated component of human TFIID. More
importantly, we demonstrate that the human TAFII150-containing TFIID complex is
not sufficient, in the context of all purified GTFs and RNA polymerase II, to
mediate transcription synergism between TATA and initiator elements and
initiator-directed transcription from a TAFII-dependent TATA-less promoter.
Therefore, TAFII-promoter interactions are not sufficient for the productive core
promoter-selective functions of TFIID. Consistent with this finding, we have
partially purified novel cofactor activities (TICs) that potentiate the
TAFII-mediated synergism between TATA and initiator elements (TIC-1) and
TAFII-dependent transcription from TATA-less promoters (TIC-2 and -3).
Furthermore, we demonstrate an essential function for TFIIA in TIC- and
TAFII-dependent basal transcription from a TATA-less promoter. Our results reveal
a parallel between the basal transcription activity of TAFIIs through core
promoter elements and TAFII-dependent activator function.

PMCID: PMC109242
PMID: 9774672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Sep 8;250(1):83-7.

Circadian oscillation of BMAL1, a partner of a mammalian clock gene Clock, in rat
suprachiasmatic nucleus.

Honma S(1), Ikeda M, Abe H, Tanahashi Y, Namihira M, Honma K, Nomura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
060-8638, Japan. sathonma@med.hokudai.ac.jp

A superfamily gene which encodes a bHLH (basic helix-loop-helix)/PAS
transcription factor, BMAL1, was cloned and sequenced from rat cDNA. A robust
circadian rhythm of rat BMAL1 expression was detected by in situ hybridization in
the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the site of the circadian clock, with the
highest level at the subjective night. Less prominent and completely reversed
circadian rhythms of rBMAL1 mRNA were observed in the piriform and parietal
cortices. The hybridization signals of rBMAL1 mRNA were also detected in the
olfactory bulb, hippocampus, and cerebellum. Since the product of rBMAL1 was
recently demonstrated to dimerize with the protein of a mammalian clock gene,
Clock, and the protein complex was shown to bind the E Box in the promoter region
of mPer1 (a mouse homologue to Drosophila clock gene, Per), rBMAL1 possibly plays
a critical role in the clock mechanism generating the circadian oscillation in
rats.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9735336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jul 30;248(3):789-94.

Transcriptionally active heterodimer formation of an Arnt-like PAS protein,
Arnt3, with HIF-1a, HLF, and clock.

Takahata S(1), Sogawa K, Kobayashi A, Ema M, Mimura J, Ozaki N, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University,
Sendai, Japan.

We isolated a cDNA clone encoding a polypeptide of 626 amino acids containing
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and PAS domains from a mouse cDNA library of P19
cells. This protein, termed Arnt3, showed the highest similarity to Arnt and
Arnt2 in the bHLH and PAS regions. Arnt3 mRNA was expressed in brain, skeletal
muscle, 13.5-day embryos, and P19 cells treated with retinoic acid. The partner
PAS proteins of Arnt3 were searched for by the two-hybrid system in yeast, and
HIF-1 alpha, HLF, and Clock among various bHLH/PAS proteins were found. Gel
mobility shift analysis using nuclear extracts from 293T cells cotransfected with
Arnt3 and HIF-1 alpha (or HLF) expression plasmids revealed that these complexes 
specifically bound the hypoxia-response element (HRE). Coexpression of Arnt3 and 
HIF-1 alpha (or HLF) in Arnt-deficient c4 cells enhanced transcription of a
reporter gene driven by the HRE sequences. We also showed that Arnt3 contained an
activation domain at the C-terminal region and a repression domain between the
PAS-A and PAS-B regions.

PMID: 9704006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Science. 1998 Jun 5;280(5369):1548-9.

Circadian rhythms. An end in the beginning.

Dunlap J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA. 
jay.c.dunlap@dartmouth.edu

Comment on
    Science. 1998 Jun 5;280(5369):1564-9.
    Science. 1998 Jun 5;280(5369):1599-603.

PMID: 9644021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Cell. 1998 May 29;93(5):805-14.

CYCLE is a second bHLH-PAS clock protein essential for circadian rhythmicity and 
transcription of Drosophila period and timeless.

Rutila JE(1), Suri V, Le M, So WV, Rosbash M, Hall JC.

Author information: 
(1)NSF, Center for Biological Timing, and Department of Biology, Brandeis
University, Waltham, Massachusetts 02254, USA.

We report the identification, characterization, and cloning of another novel
Drosophila clock gene, cycle (cyc). Homozygous cyc flies are completely
arrhythmic. Heterozygous cyc/+ flies are rhythmic but have altered periods,
indicating that the cyc locus has a dosage effect on period. The molecular
circadian phenotype of homozygous cyc flies is like homozygous Clk flies
presented in the accompanying paper: mutant flies have little or no transcription
of the per and tim genes. Cloning of the gene indicates that it also encodes a
bHLH-PAS transcription factor and is a Drosophila homolog of the human protein
BMAL1. cyc is a nonsense mutation, consistent with its strong loss-of-function
phenotype. We propose that the CYC:CLK heterodimer binds to per and tim E boxes
and makes a major contribution to the circadian transcription of Drosophila clock
genes.

PMID: 9630224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Science. 1998 Jun 5;280(5369):1599-603.

Closing the circadian loop: CLOCK-induced transcription of its own inhibitors per
and tim.

Darlington TK(1), Wager-Smith K, Ceriani MF, Staknis D, Gekakis N, Steeves TD,
Weitz CJ, Takahashi JS, Kay SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and NSF Center for Biological Timing, The Scripps
Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 1998 Jun 5;280(5369):1548-9.

The circadian oscillator generates a rhythmic output with a period of about 24
hours. Despite extensive studies in several model systems, the biochemical mode
of action has not yet been demonstrated for any of its components. Here, the
Drosophila CLOCK protein was shown to induce transcription of the circadian
rhythm genes period and timeless. dCLOCK functioned as a heterodimer with a
Drosophila homolog of BMAL1. These proteins acted through an E-box sequence in
the period promoter. The timeless promoter contains an 18-base pair element
encompassing an E-box, which was sufficient to confer dCLOCK responsiveness to a 
reporter gene. PERIOD and TIMELESS proteins blocked dCLOCK's ability to
transactivate their promoters via the E-box. Thus, dCLOCK drives expression of
period and timeless, which in turn inhibit dCLOCK's activity and close the
circadian loop.

PMID: 9616122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Science. 1998 Jun 5;280(5369):1564-9.

Role of the CLOCK protein in the mammalian circadian mechanism.

Gekakis N(1), Staknis D, Nguyen HB, Davis FC, Wilsbacher LD, King DP, Takahashi
JS, Weitz CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA 02115, USA.
02115, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 1998 Jun 5;280(5369):1548-9.

The mouse Clock gene encodes a bHLH-PAS protein that regulates circadian rhythms 
and is related to transcription factors that act as heterodimers. Potential
partners of CLOCK were isolated in a two-hybrid screen, and one, BMAL1, was
coexpressed with CLOCK and PER1 at known circadian clock sites in brain and
retina. CLOCK-BMAL1 heterodimers activated transcription from E-box elements, a
type of transcription factor-binding site, found adjacent to the mouse per1 gene 
and from an identical E-box known to be important for per gene expression in
Drosophila. Mutant CLOCK from the dominant-negative Clock allele and BMAL1 formed
heterodimers that bound DNA but failed to activate transcription. Thus,
CLOCK-BMAL1 heterodimers appear to drive the positive component of per
transcriptional oscillations, which are thought to underlie circadian
rhythmicity.

PMID: 9616112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mamm Genome. 1998 Jun;9(6):463-8.

Cloning and chromosomal localization of a new member of the bHLH/PAS
transcription factor family.

Wolting CD(1), McGlade CJ.

Author information: 
(1)AMGEN Research Institute, Department of Medical Biophysics and Ontario Cancer 
Institute, University of Toronto, 620 University Ave, Suite 706, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada, M5G 2C1.

Here we report the cloning and primary characterization of TIC, a new member of
the bHLH/PAS domain family of transcription factors. Northern blot analysis
indicates that the 3.3-kb Tic mRNA is widely expressed. A polyclonal antibody
against TIC identifies multiple protein species in most cell lines and tissues
tested, suggesting that alternative splicing may result in the production of
protein isoforms. Interspecies backcross and FISH mapping have been used to
localize the Tic gene to mouse Chromosome (Chr) 7 F2-F3, given the locus name
Arntl. FISH mapping was also used to localize the human gene to Chr 11p15.

PMID: 9585435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Apr 7;233(1):258-64.

cDNA cloning and tissue-specific expression of a novel basic helix-loop-helix/PAS
protein (BMAL1) and identification of alternatively spliced variants with
alternative translation initiation site usage.

Ikeda M(1), Nomura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Saitama Medical School, Moroyama, Japan.
mikeda@saitama-med.ac.jp

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/PAS proteins, such as Sim, act as transcriptional
factors, playing a critical role in the control of central nervous system (CNS)
development. To isolate novel bHLH/PAS factors in the CNS an iterative search of 
a database for expressed sequence tags (ESTs) resulted in the location of several
bHLH/PAS protein-like sequences. The rapid amplification of cDNA end (RACE)
method was applied to isolate full-length cDNAs of these ESTs. Several 5' and 3' 
terminal sequences were isolated using primers derived from an EST from the human
brain cDNA library. The predicted novel factor polypeptide had bHLH and PAS
domains that were highly homologous with those of Ah receptor nuclear
translocator (Arnt) and Arnt2. Combination of the isolated cDNA fragments
revealed the existence of several alternatively spliced variants. The
distribution of the novel bHLH/PAS factor message was analyzed by Northern blot
hybridization. This detected only one transcript, which was 2.9 kb in size.
Strong hybridization was found in the brain, skeletal muscle and heart.
Expression of the novel bHLH/PAS factor, brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1
(BMAL1), was different from that of Arnt and Arnt2, suggesting that BMAL1 has a
different function in the CNS and muscle than Arnt and Arnt2.

PMID: 9144434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


