
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 23. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8301. [Epub ahead of print]

The retinoblastoma protein regulates hypoxia-inducible genetic programs, tumor
cell invasiveness and neuroendocrine differentiation in prostate cancer cells.

Labrecque MP(1), Takhar MK(1), Nason R(1), Santacruz S(1), Tam KJ(1,)(2), Massah 
S(1), Haegert A(2), Bell RH(2), Altamirano-Dimas M(2), Collins CC(2), Lee FJ(1), 
Prefontaine GG(1), Cox ME(2), Beischlag TV(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British
Columbia, Canada. (2)Department of Urologic Sciences, The Vancouver Prostate
Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Loss of tumor suppressor proteins, such as the retinoblastoma protein (Rb),
results in tumor progression and metastasis. Metastasis is facilitated by low
oxygen availability within the tumor that is detected by hypoxia inducible
factors (HIFs). The HIF1 complex, HIF1a and dimerization partner the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), is the master regulator of the 
hypoxic response. Previously, we demonstrated that Rb represses the
transcriptional response to hypoxia by virtue of its association with HIF1. In
this report, we further characterized the role Rb plays in mediating
hypoxia-regulated genetic programs by stably ablating Rb expression with
retrovirally-introduced short hairpin RNA in LNCaP and 22Rv1 human prostate
cancer cells. DNA microarray analysis revealed that loss of Rb in conjunction
with hypoxia leads to aberrant expression of hypoxia-regulated genetic programs
that increase cell invasion and promote neuroendocrine differentiation. For the
first time, we have established a direct link between hypoxic tumor environments,
Rb inactivation and progression to late stage metastatic neuroendocrine prostate 
cancer. Understanding the molecular pathways responsible for progression of
benign prostate tumors to metastasized and lethal forms will aid in the
development of more effective prostate cancer therapies.

PMID: 27015368  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 23. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8297. [Epub ahead of print]

Loss of HIF-1a in macrophages attenuates AhR/ARNT-mediated tumorigenesis in a
PAH-driven tumor model.

Henke N(1), Ferreirós N(2), Geisslinger G(2), Ding MG(1), Essler S(1), Fuhrmann
DC(1), Geis T(1), Namgaladze D(1), Dehne N(1), Brüne B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry I, Goethe-University Frankfurt, 60590 Frankfurt,
Germany. (2)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Pharmazentrum Frankfurt,
Goethe-University Frankfurt, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany.

Activation of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) and macrophage infiltration of solid
tumors independently promote tumor progression. As little is known how myeloid
HIF affects tumor development, we injected the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
(PAH) and procarcinogen 3-methylcholanthrene (MCA; 100 µg/100 µl) subcutaneously 
into myeloid-specific Hif-1a and Hif-2a knockout mice (C57BL/6J) to induce
fibrosarcomas (n = 16). Deletion of Hif-1a but not Hif-2a in macrophages
diminished tumor outgrowth in the MCA-model. While analysis of the tumor
initiation phase showed comparable inflammation after MCA-injection, metabolism
of MCA was impaired in the absence of Hif-1a. An ex vivo macrophage/fibroblast
coculture recapitulated reduced DNA damage after MCA-stimulation in fibroblasts
of cocultures with Hif-1a LysM-/- macrophages compared to wild type macrophages. 
A loss of myeloid Hif-1a decreased RNA levels of arylhydrocarbon receptor
(AhR)/arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) targets such as Cyp1a1
because of reduced Arnt but unchanged Ahr expression. Cocultures using Hif-1a
LysM-/- macrophages stimulated with the carcinogen 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene
(DMBA; 2 µg/ml) also attenuated a DNA damage response in fibroblasts, while the
DNA damage-inducing metabolite DMBA-trans-3,4-dihydrodiol remained effective in
the absence of Hif-1a. In chemical-induced carcinogenesis, HIF-1a in macrophages 
maintains ARNT expression to facilitate PAH-biotransformation. This implies a
metabolic activation of PAHs in stromal cells, i.e. myeloid-derived cells, to be 
crucial for tumor initiation.

PMID: 27015123  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Nat Commun. 2016 Mar 18;7:11000. doi: 10.1038/ncomms11000.

Structure and mechanism of the essential two-component signal-transduction system
WalKR in Staphylococcus aureus.

Ji Q(1), Chen PJ(1), Qin G(2,)(3), Deng X(1), Hao Z(1), Wawrzak Z(4), Yeo WS(5), 
Quang JW(6), Cho H(5), Luo GZ(1), Weng X(1), You Q(1), Luan CH(6), Yang X(7), Bae
T(5), Yu K(2), Jiang H(2), He C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and
Institute for Biophysical Dynamics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The
University of Chicago, 929 East 57th Street, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Drug Discovery and Design Center,
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai
201203, China. (3)Shanghai Center for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai Academy
of Science and Technology, Shanghai 201203, China. (4)Synchrotron Research
Center, LS-CAT, Northwestern University, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA. (5)Indiana
University School of Medicine-Northwest, Gary, Indiana 46408, USA.
(6)High-Throughput Analysis Laboratory, Department of Molecular Biosciences,
Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Northwestern University,
Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA. (7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Chicago, 929 E 57th Street, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Most low GC Gram-positive bacteria possess an essential walKR two-component
system (TCS) for signal transduction involved in regulating cell wall
homoeostasis. Despite the well-established intracellular regulatory mechanism,
the role of this TCS in extracellular signal recognition and factors that
modulate the activity of this TCS remain largely unknown. Here we identify the
extracellular receptor of the kinase 'WalK' (erWalK) as a key hub for bridging
extracellular signal input and intracellular kinase activity modulation in
Staphylococcus aureus. Characterization of the crystal structure of erWalK
revealed a canonical Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain for signal sensing. Single
amino-acid mutation of potential signal-transduction residues resulted in
severely impaired function of WalKR. A small molecule derived from
structure-based virtual screening against erWalK is capable of selectively
activating the walKR TCS. The molecular level characterization of erWalK will not
only facilitate exploration of natural signal(s) but also provide a template for 
rational design of erWalK inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4802049
PMID: 26987594  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Biomol Screen. 2016 Mar 14. pii: 1087057116636592. [Epub ahead of print]

Screening for Non-Pore-Binding Modulators of EAG K+ Channels.

Fernandes AS(1), Morais-Cabral JH(1), Harley CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)IBMC, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto,
Porto, Portugal. (2)IBMC, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade
do Porto, Porto, Portugal Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde,
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal harleyca@ibmc.up.pt.

Members of the ether-à-go-go (EAG) family of voltage-gated K(+) channels are
involved in several pathophysiological diseases, and there has been a great
interest in screening for drugs that modulate the activity of these channels.
Many drugs have been shown to bind in the pore of these channels, blocking ion
flux and causing disease pathology. In this report, we present two independent
screening campaigns in which we wanted to identify small molecules that bind to
either the intracellular cytoplasmic amino terminal Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain
from the human EAG-related gene (ERG) channel or the amino or carboxy terminal
globular domains from the mouse EAG1 channel, affecting their interaction. We
report that in both cases, compounds were identified that showed weak,
nonspecific binding. We suggest alternative routes should be pursued in future
efforts to identify specific, high-affinity binders to these cytoplasmic domains.

© 2016 Society for Laboratory Automation and Screening.

PMID: 26975997  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Biochem Pharmacol. 2016 Mar 9. pii: S0006-2952(16)00138-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bcp.2016.03.004. [Epub ahead of print]

Selective suppression of the human aryl hydrocarbon receptor function can be
mediated through binding interference at the C-terminal half of the receptor.

Ren L(1), Thompson JD(2), Cheung M(2), Ngo K(2), Sung S(2), Leong S(2), Chan
WK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Harbin Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Harbin, China. (2)Department
of Pharmaceutics & Medicinal Chemistry, Thomas J. Long School of Pharmacy &
Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, CA 95211, United States.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutics & Medicinal Chemistry, Thomas J. Long School of
Pharmacy & Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, CA 95211, United
States. Electronic address: wchan@pacific.edu.

The human aryl hydrocarbon receptor is a cytosolic signaling molecule which
affects immune response and aberrant cell growth. Canonical signaling of the
receptor requires the recruitment of coactivators to the promoter region to
remodel local chromatin structure. We predicted that interference of this
recruitment would block the aryl hydrocarbon receptor function. To prove that, we
employed phage display to identify nine peptides of twelve-amino-acid in length
which target the C-terminal half of the human aryl hydrocarbon receptor,
including the region where coactivators bind. Eight 12mer peptides, in the form
of GFP fusion, suppressed the ligand-dependent transcription of six AHR target
genes (cyp1a1, cyp1a2, cyp1b1, ugt1a1, nqo1, and ahrr) in different patterns in
Hep3B cells, whereas the AHR antagonist CH-223191 suppressed all these target
genes similarly. Three of the 12mer peptides (namely 11-3, 1-7, and 7-3)
suppressed the 3MC-induced, CYP1A1-dependent EROD activity and the ROS production
caused by benzo[a]pyrene. These 12mer peptides suppressed the AHR function
synergistically with CH-223191. In conclusion, we provide evidence that targeting
the C-terminal half of the human aryl hydrocarbon receptor is a viable, new
approach to selectively block the receptor function.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26970402  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Biochem Pharmacol. 2016 Apr 15;106:94-103. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2016.02.020. Epub
2016 Mar 2.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) regulation of L-Type Amino Acid Transporter 1
(LAT-1) expression in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.

Tomblin JK(1), Arthur S(2), Primerano DA(3), Chaudhry AR(4), Fan J(5), Denvir
J(6), Salisbury TB(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Physiology and Toxicology, Joan C. Edwards School 
of Medicine, Marshall University, 1 John Marshall Drive, Huntington, WV 25755,
USA. Electronic address: tomblin36@marshall.edu. (2)Department of Clinical &
Translational Science, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, Marshall University, 1
John Marshall Drive, Huntington, WV 25755, USA. Electronic address:
arthursu@marshall.edu. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Joan C.
Edwards School of Medicine, Marshall University, 1 John Marshall Drive,
Huntington, WV 25755, USA. Electronic address: primeran@marshall.edu.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Physiology and Toxicology, Joan C. Edwards School 
of Medicine, Marshall University, 1 John Marshall Drive, Huntington, WV 25755,
USA. Electronic address: chaudhry@marshall.edu. (5)Department of Biochemistry and
Microbiology, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, Marshall University, 1 John
Marshall Drive, Huntington, WV 25755, USA. Electronic address: fanj@marshall.edu.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Joan C. Edwards School of
Medicine, Marshall University, 1 John Marshall Drive, Huntington, WV 25755, USA. 
Electronic address: denvir@marshall.edu. (7)Department of Pharmacology,
Physiology and Toxicology, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, Marshall
University, 1 John Marshall Drive, Huntington, WV 25755, USA. Electronic address:
salisburyt@marshall.edu.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that is regulated by environmental toxicants that function as AHR agonists such
as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). L-Type Amino Acid Transporter 1
(LAT1) is a leucine transporter that is overexpressed in cancer. The regulation
of LAT1 by AHR in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells (BCCs) was
investigated in this report. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) revealed a
significant association between TCDD-regulated genes (TRGs) and molecular
transport. Overlapping the TCDD-RNA-Seq dataset obtained in this study with a
published TCDD-ChIP-seq dataset identified LAT1 as a primary target of
AHR-dependent TCDD induction. Short interfering RNA (siRNA)-directed knockdown of
AHR confirmed that TCDD-stimulated increases in LAT1 mRNA and protein required
AHR expression. TCDD-stimulated increases in LAT1 mRNA were also inhibited by the
AHR antagonist CH-223191. Upregulation of LAT1 by TCDD coincided with increases
in leucine uptake by MCF-7 cells in response to TCDD. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation-quantitative PCR (ChIP-qPCR) assays revealed increases in
AHR, AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) and p300 binding and histone H3 acetylation 
at an AHR binding site in the LAT1 gene in response to TCDD. In MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 cells, endogenous levels of LAT1 mRNA and protein were reduced in
response to knockdown of AHR expression. Knockdown experiments demonstrated that 
proliferation of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells is dependent on both LAT1 and AHR.
Collectively, these findings confirm the dependence of cancer cells on leucine
uptake and establish a mechanism for extrinsic and intrinsic regulation of LAT1
by AHR.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4813787 [Available on 2017-04-15]
PMID: 26944194  [PubMed - in process]


7. MBio. 2016 Mar 1;7(2). pii: e02089-15. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02089-15.

Balance between Coiled-Coil Stability and Dynamics Regulates Activity of BvgS
Sensor Kinase in Bordetella.

Lesne E(1), Krammer EM(2), Dupre E(1), Locht C(1), Lensink MF(2), Antoine R(3),
Jacob-Dubuisson F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lille, INSERM, CNRS, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
U1019-UMR 8204-CIIL, Centre d'Infection et d'Immunité de Lille, Lille, France.
(2)Université de Lille, CNRS, UMR 8576-UGSF, Unité de Glycobiologie Structurale
et Fonctionnelle, Lille, France. (3)Université de Lille, INSERM, CNRS, CHU Lille,
Institut Pasteur de Lille, U1019-UMR 8204-CIIL, Centre d'Infection et d'Immunité 
de Lille, Lille, France rudy.antoine@pasteur-lille.fr
francoise.jacob@ibl.cnrs.fr.

The two-component system BvgAS controls the expression of the virulence regulon
of Bordetella pertussis. BvgS is a prototype of bacterial sensor kinases with
extracytoplasmic Venus flytrap perception domains. Following its transmembrane
segment, BvgS harbors a cytoplasmic Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain and then a
predicted 2-helix coiled coil that precede the
dimerization-histidine-phosphotransfer domain of the kinase. BvgS homologs have a
similar domain organization, or they harbor only a predicted coiled coil between 
the transmembrane and the dimerization-histidine-phosphotransfer domains. Here,
we show that the 2-helix coiled coil of BvgS regulates the enzymatic activity in 
a mechanical manner. Its marginally stable hydrophobic interface enables a switch
between a state of great rotational dynamics in the kinase mode and a more rigid 
conformation in the phosphatase mode in response to signal perception by the
periplasmic domains. We further show that the activity of BvgS is controlled in
the same manner if its PAS domain is replaced with the natural a-helical
sequences of PAS-less homologs. Clamshell motions of the Venus flytrap domains
trigger the shift of the coiled coil's dynamics. Thus, we have uncovered a
general mechanism of regulation for the BvgS family of Venus flytrap-containing
two-component sensor kinases.IMPORTANCE: The two-component system BvgAS of the
whooping cough agent Bordetella pertussis regulates the virulence factors
necessary for infection in a coordinated manner. BvgS is the prototype of a
family of sensor kinase proteins found in major bacterial pathogens. When BvgS
functions as a kinase, B. pertussis is virulent, and the bacterium shifts to an
avirulent phase after BvgS senses chemicals that make it switch to phosphatase.
Our goal is to decipher the signaling mechanisms of BvgS in order to understand
virulence regulation in Bordetella, which may lead to new antimicrobial
treatments targeting those two-component systems. We discovered that the activity
of BvgS is regulated in a mechanical manner. A short region of the protein that
precedes the enzymatic domain switches between two states in response to signal
perception by other BvgS domains. This switch region is conserved among BvgS
homologs, and thus, the regulation uncovered here will likely be relevant for the
family.

Copyright © 2016 Lesne et al.

PMID: 26933056  [PubMed - in process]


8. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Feb 29. pii: 201509428. [Epub ahead of print]

Functional and topological diversity of LOV domain photoreceptors.

Glantz ST(1), Carpenter EJ(2), Melkonian M(3), Gardner KH(4), Boyden ES(5), Wong 
GK(6), Chow BY(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104; (2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
Canada T6G 2E9; (3)Institute of Botany, Cologne Biocenter, University of Cologne,
50674 Cologne, Germany; (4)Structural Biology Initiative, CUNY Advanced Science
Research Center, City College of New York, New York, NY 10031; Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, City College of New York, New York, NY 10031;
Biochemistry, Chemistry and Biology Programs, Graduate Center, The City
University of New York, New York, NY 10031; (5)The Media Laboratory,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; Department of
Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139; Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; McGovern Institute for Brain Sciences,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; (6)Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada T6G 2E9;
Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada T6G 2E1;
BGI-Shenzhen, Beishan Industrial Zone, Yantian District, Shenzhen 518083, China. 
(7)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104; bchow@seas.upenn.edu.

Light-oxygen-voltage sensitive (LOV) flavoproteins are ubiquitous photoreceptors 
that mediate responses to environmental cues. Photosensory inputs are transduced 
into signaling outputs via structural rearrangements in sensor domains that
consequently modulate the activity of an effector domain or multidomain clusters.
Establishing the diversity in effector function and sensor-effector topology will
inform what signaling mechanisms govern light-responsive behaviors across
multiple kingdoms of life and how these signals are transduced. Here, we report
the bioinformatics identification of over 6,700 candidate LOV domains (including 
over 4,000 previously unidentified sequences from plants and protists), and
insights from their annotations for ontological function and structural
arrangements. Motif analysis identified the sensors from ~42 million ORFs, with
strong statistical separation from other flavoproteins and non-LOV members of the
structurally related Per-aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT)-Sim family. Conserved-domain analysis determined putative light-regulated 
function and multidomain topologies. We found that for certain effectors,
sensor-effector linker length is discretized based on both phylogeny and the
preservation of a-helical heptad repeats within an extended coiled-coil linker
structure. This finding suggests that preserving sensor-effector orientation is a
key determinant of linker length, in addition to ancestry, in LOV signaling
structure-function. We found a surprisingly high prevalence of effectors with
functions previously thought to be rare among LOV proteins, such as regulators of
G protein signaling, and discovered several previously unidentified effectors,
such as lipases. This work highlights the value of applying genomic and
transcriptomic technologies to diverse organisms to capture the structural and
functional variation in photosensory proteins that are vastly important in
adaptation, photobiology, and optogenetics.

PMCID: PMC4801262
PMID: 26929367  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2016 Feb 27;196-197:74-84. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2016.02.006. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular evidence for the existence of an aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway in
scallops Chlamys farreri.

Cai Y(1), Pan L(2), Miao J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Mariculture, Ministry of Education, Ocean University of
China, Qingdao 266003, PR China. (2)Key Laboratory of Mariculture, Ministry of
Education, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, PR China. Electronic
address: panlq@ouc.edu.cn.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that controls the expression of a diverse set of genes. In this study we cloned
full-length cDNAs encoding an AhR homologue (designated CfAhR, Accession number: 
FJ588640) from scallop Chlamys farreri. The CfAhR sequence was constituted by an 
open reading frame (ORF) of 2466bp encoding 821 amino acids. The predicted
molecular weight was 93.0kDa. The CfAhR showed a high conservation of the
residues and domains essential to the function of AhR, including basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domains. Phylogenetic analysis
demonstrated that it was clustered within the invertebrate AhR branch. CfAhR
expression was detected in gill, digestive gland, ovary, spermary, mantle and
adductor, and the highest transcription level was observed in gill. Recombinant
plasmid CfAhR-pET32a (designated rCfAhR) was successfully expressed in
Escherichia coli BL21. To investigate the molecular detoxification mechanism of
benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) detoxification-related genes (AhR; aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator, ARNT; heat shock protein 90, HSP90; cytochrome P450 1A1,
CYP1A1; glutathione S-transferase pi, GST-pi and P glycoprotein, Pgp) in C.
farreri gill, real-time quantitative PCR analysis revealed that the mRNA
expression level of CfAhR, xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes and efflux
transporters was induced by BaP and was sensitive to BaP exposure time and
concentration, suggesting that BaP influenced the expression of a putative
AhR/ARNT signaling pathway in scallops. Our results support the possibility that 
CfAhR genes are early molecular indicators of BaP through a putative CYP
signaling pathway in marine bivalves.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26927881  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. J Struct Biol. 2016 May;194(2):205-13. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2016.02.019. Epub 2016 
Feb 24.

The crystal structure of the tandem-PAS sensing domain of Campylobacter jejuni
chemoreceptor Tlp1 suggests indirect mechanism of ligand recognition.

Machuca MA(1), Liu YC(1), Beckham SA(2), Gunzburg MJ(2), Roujeinikova A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute,
Australia; Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800,
Australia. (2)Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery
Institute, Australia; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash
University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia. (3)Infection and Immunity Program,
Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Australia; Department of Microbiology,
Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia; Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia.
Electronic address: Anna.Roujeinikova@monash.edu.

Chemotaxis and motility play an important role in the colonisation of avian and
human hosts by Campylobacter jejuni. Chemotactic recognition of extracellular
signals is mediated by the periplasmic sensing domain of methyl-accepting
chemotactic proteins (membrane-embedded receptors). In this work, we report a
high-resolution structure of the periplasmic sensing domain of transducer-like
protein 1 (Tlp1), an aspartate receptor of C. jejuni. Crystallographic analysis
revealed that it contains two Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) subdomains. An acetate and
chloride ions (both from the crystallisation buffer) were observed bound to the
membrane-proximal and membrane-distal PAS subdomains, respectively. Surprisingly,
despite being crystallised in the presence of aspartate, the structure did not
show any electron density corresponding to this amino acid. Furthermore, no
binding between the sensing domain of Tlp1 and aspartate was detected by
microcalorimetric experiments. These structural and biophysical data suggest that
Tlp1 does not sense aspartate directly; instead, ligand recognition is likely to 
occur indirectly via an as yet unidentified periplasmic binding protein.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26923153  [PubMed - in process]


11. Protein Expr Purif. 2016 Feb 23;122:72-81. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2016.02.011. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Binding studies using Pichia pastoris expressed human aryl hydrocarbon receptor
and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator proteins.

Zheng Y(1), Xie J(1), Huang X(2), Dong J(1), Park MS(1), Chan WK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, Thomas J. Long School of 
Pharmacy and Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, CA 95211, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Qianfoshan Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong, 250014, China. (3)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, 
Thomas J. Long School of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, University of the Pacific,
Stockton, CA 95211, USA. Electronic address: wchan@pacific.edu.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a transcription factor which activates
gene transcription by binding to its corresponding enhancer as the heterodimer,
which is consisted of AHR and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 
(ARNT). Human AHR can be rather difficult to study, when compared among the AHR
of other species, since it is relatively unstable and less sensitive to some
ligands in vitro. Overexpression of human AHR has been limited to the baculovirus
expression, which is costly and tedious due to the need of repetitive baculovirus
production. Here we explored whether we could generate abundant amounts of human 
AHR and ARNT in a better overexpression system for functional study. We observed 
that human AHR and ARNT can be expressed in Pichia pastoris with yields that are 
comparable to the baculovirus system only if their cDNAs are optimized for Pichia
expression. Fusion with a c-myc tag at their C-termini seems to increase the
expression yield. These Pichia expressed proteins can effectively heterodimerize 
and form the ternary AHR/ARNT/enhancer complex in the presence of
ß-naphthoflavone or kynurenine. Limited proteolysis using thermolysin can be used
to study the heterodimerization of these human AHR and ARNT proteins.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26923060  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Science. 2016 Feb 5;351(6273):608-12. doi: 10.1126/science.aad1172.

Structures of aminoarabinose transferase ArnT suggest a molecular basis for lipid
A glycosylation.

Petrou VI(1), Herrera CM(2), Schultz KM(3), Clarke OB(4), Vendome J(5), Tomasek
D(1), Banerjee S(6), Rajashankar KR(6), Belcher Dufrisne M(1), Kloss B(7),
Kloppmann E(8), Rost B(9), Klug CS(3), Trent MS(2), Shapiro L(4), Mancia F(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Cellular Biophysics, Columbia University, New
York, NY 10032, USA. (2)Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Georgia,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Athens, GA 30602, USA. (3)Department of
Biophysics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. (4)Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA. (5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA. Department of Systems Biology, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA. (6)Department of Chemistry and Chemical
Biology, Cornell University, Northeastern Collaborative Access Team, Advanced
Photon Source, Argonne, IL 60439, USA. (7)New York Consortium on Membrane Protein
Structure, New York Structural Biology Center, 89 Convent Avenue, New York, NY
10027, USA. (8)Department of Informatics, Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology, Technische Universität München, Boltzmannstrasse 3, 85748 Garching,
Germany. (9)Department of Informatics, Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, 
Technische Universität München, Boltzmannstrasse 3, 85748 Garching, Germany.
Institute for Advanced Study (TUM-IAS), Technische Universität München,
Boltzmannstrasse 3, 85748 Garching, Germany. (10)Department of Physiology and
Cellular Biophysics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
fm123@cumc.columbia.edu.

Polymyxins are antibiotics used in the last line of defense to combat
multidrug-resistant infections by Gram-negative bacteria. Polymyxin resistance
arises through charge modification of the bacterial outer membrane with the
attachment of the cationic sugar 4-amino-4-deoxy-l-arabinose to lipid A, a
reaction catalyzed by the integral membrane lipid-to-lipid glycosyltransferase
4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose transferase (ArnT). Here, we report crystal
structures of ArnT from Cupriavidus metallidurans, alone and in complex with the 
lipid carrier undecaprenyl phosphate, at 2.8 and 3.2 angstrom resolution,
respectively. The structures show cavities for both lipidic substrates, which
converge at the active site. A structural rearrangement occurs on undecaprenyl
phosphate binding, which stabilizes the active site and likely allows lipid A
binding. Functional mutagenesis experiments based on these structures suggest a
mechanistic model for ArnT family enzymes.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26912703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 20. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7539. [Epub ahead of print]

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) isoforms control lymphoid
cancer cell proliferation through differentially regulating tumor suppressor p53 
activity.

Gardella KA(1), Muro I(2), Fang G(2), Sarkar K(1), Mendez O(1), Wright CW(2,)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX, USA. (2)Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, and the
Center for Molecular and Cellular Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, The University
of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is involved in
xenobiotic and hypoxic responses, and we previously showed that ARNT also
regulates nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) signaling by altering the DNA binding
activity of the RelB subunit. However, our initial study of ARNT-mediated RelB
modulation was based on simultaneous suppression of the two ARNT isoforms,
isoform 1 and 3, and precluded the examination of their individual functions. We 
find here that while normal lymphocytes harbor equal levels of isoform 1 and 3,
lymphoid malignancies exhibit a shift to higher levels of ARNT isoform 1. These
elevated levels of ARNT isoform 1 are critical to the proliferation of these
cancerous cells, as suppression of isoform 1 in a human multiple myeloma (MM)
cell line, and an anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) cell line, triggered
S-phase cell cycle arrest, spontaneous apoptosis, and sensitized cells to
doxorubicin treatment. Furthermore, co-suppression of RelB or p53 with ARNT
isoform 1 prevented cell cycle arrest and blocked doxorubicin induced apoptosis. 
Together our findings reveal that certain blood cancers rely on ARNT isoform 1 to
potentiate proliferation by antagonizing RelB and p53-dependent cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis. Significantly, our results identify ARNT isoform 1 as a potential 
target for anticancer therapies.

PMID: 26909609  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Mar 8;113(10):2756-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1517549113. Epub 2016 Feb 22.

Early doors (Edo) mutant mouse reveals the importance of period 2 (PER2) PAS
domain structure for circadian pacemaking.

Militi S(1), Maywood ES(2), Sandate CR(3), Chesham JE(2), Barnard AR(1), Parsons 
MJ(1), Vibert JL(1), Joynson GM(1), Partch CL(3), Hastings MH(2), Nolan PM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Harwell, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus,
Oxfordshire OX11 0RD, United Kingdom; (2)Division of Neurobiology, Medical
Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge Biomedical Campus,
Cambridge CB2 0QH, United Kingdom; (3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064. (4)Medical Research Council
Harwell, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Oxfordshire OX11 0RD, United
Kingdom; p.nolan@har.mrc.ac.uk.

The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) defines 24 h of time via a
transcriptional/posttranslational feedback loop in which transactivation of Per
(period) and Cry (cryptochrome) genes by BMAL1-CLOCK complexes is suppressed by
PER-CRY complexes. The molecular/structural basis of how circadian protein
complexes function is poorly understood. We describe a novel
N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU)-induced mutation, early doors (Edo), in the
PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) domain dimerization region of period 2 (PER2) (I324N) that
accelerates the circadian clock of Per2(Edo/Edo) mice by 1.5 h. Structural and
biophysical analyses revealed that Edo alters the packing of the highly conserved
interdomain linker of the PER2 PAS core such that, although PER2(Edo) complexes
with clock proteins, its vulnerability to degradation mediated by casein kinase
1e (CSNK1E) is increased. The functional relevance of this mutation is revealed
by the ultrashort (<19 h) but robust circadian rhythms in Per2(Edo/Edo);
Csnk1e(Tau/Tau) mice and the SCN. These periods are unprecedented in mice. Thus, 
Per2(Edo) reveals a direct causal link between the molecular structure of the
PER2 PAS core and the pace of SCN circadian timekeeping.

PMCID: PMC4791021
PMID: 26903623  [PubMed - in process]


15. J Environ Sci (China). 2016 Jan;39:165-74. doi: 10.1016/j.jes.2015.11.008. Epub
2015 Dec 22.

Development and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against human aryl
hydrocarbon receptor.

Tian W(1), Pei X(1), Xie HQ(2), Xu SL(1), Tian J(1), Hu Q(1), Xu H(1), Chen Y(1),
Fu H(1), Cao Z(3), Zhao B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100085, China. (2)Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China. Electronic address:
qhxie@rcees.ac.cn. (3)China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 211198, China.
Electronic address: zycao1999@hotmail.com. (4)Research Center for
Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China.
Electronic address: binzhao@rcees.ac.cn.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a ligand-dependent nuclear receptor, is involved
in a diverse spectrum of biological and toxicological effects. Due to the lack of
three dimensional (3D) crystal or nuclear magnetic resonance structure, the
mechanisms of these complex effects of AhR remain to be unclear. Also, commercial
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against human AhR protein (hAhR), as alternative
immunological tools, are very limited. Thus, in order to provide more tools for
further studies on hAhR, we prepared two mAbs (1D6 and 4A6) against hAhR. The two
newly generated mAbs specifically bound to amino acids 484-508 (located in
transcription activation domain) and amino acids 201-215 (located in Per-ARNT-Sim
domain) of hAhR, respectively. These epitopes were new as compared with those of 
commercial mAbs. The mAbs were also characterized by enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay, western blot, immunoprecipitation and indirect immunofluorescence assay in
different cell lines. The results showed that the two mAbs could recognize the
linearized AhRs in six different human cell lines and a rat hepatoma cell line,
as well as the hAhR with native conformations. We concluded that the newly
generated mAbs could be employed in AhR-based bioassays for analysis of
environmental contaminants, and held great potential for further revealing the
spatial structure of AhR and its biological functions in future studies.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26899655  [PubMed - in process]


16. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 May;1864(5):488-500. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2016.02.012. Epub 2016 Feb 11.

The molecular mechanism of heme loss from oxidized soluble guanylate cyclase
induced by conformational change.

Pan J(1), Zhang X(1), Yuan H(1), Xu Q(2), Zhang H(1), Zhou Y(1), Huang ZX(1), Tan
X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry & Shanghai Key laboratory of Chemical Biology for
Protein Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China. (2)Institutes of
Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China. (3)Department of
Chemistry & Shanghai Key laboratory of Chemical Biology for Protein Science,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China; Institutes of Biomedical Sciences,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China. Electronic address: xstan@fudan.edu.cn.

Heme oxidation and loss of soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) is thought to be an
important contributor to the development of cardiovascular diseases.
Nevertheless, it remains unknown why the heme loses readily in oxidized sGC. In
the current study, the conformational change of sGC upon heme oxidation by ODQ
was studied based on the fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) between
the heme and a fluorophore fluorescein arsenical helix binder (FlAsH-EDT2)
labeled at different domains of sGC ß1. This study provides an opportunity to
monitor the domain movement of sGC relative to the heme. The results indicated
that heme oxidation by ODQ in truncated sCC induced the heme-associated aF helix 
moving away from the heme, the Per/Arnt/Sim domain (PAS) domain moving closer to 
the heme, but led the helical domain going further from the heme. We proposed
that the synergistic effect of these conformational changes of the discrete
region upon heme oxidation forces the heme pocket open, and subsequent heme loss 
readily. Furthermore, the kinetic studies suggested that the heme oxidation was a
fast process and the conformational change was a relatively slow process. The
kinetics of heme loss from oxidized sGC was monitored by a new method based on
the heme group de-quenching the fluorescence of FlAsH-EDT2.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26876536  [PubMed - in process]


17. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 10;6:21520. doi: 10.1038/srep21520.

Induction of WNT11 by hypoxia and hypoxia-inducible factor-1a regulates cell
proliferation, migration and invasion.

Mori H(1), Yao Y(1), Learman BS(1), Kurozumi K(2), Ishida J(2), Ramakrishnan
SK(1), Overmyer KA(1), Xue X(1), Cawthorn WP(1,)(3), Reid MA(1), Taylor M(1),
Ning X(1,)(4), Shah YM(1,)(5), MacDougald OA(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular &Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA. (2)Department of Neurological Surgery, Okayama University
Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama,
Japan. (3)BHF/University Centre for Cardiovascular Science, The Queen's Medical
Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. (4)College of Animal 
Science and Technology, Northwest Agriculture and Forestry University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi, PRC. (5)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Changes in cellular oxygen tension play important roles in physiological
processes including development and pathological processes such as tumor
promotion. The cellular adaptations to sustained hypoxia are mediated by
hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) to regulate downstream target gene expression.
With hypoxia, the stabilized HIF-a and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (ARNT, also known as HIF-ß) heterodimer bind to hypoxia response
elements (HREs) and regulate expression of target genes. Here, we report that
WNT11 is induced by hypoxia in many cell types, and that transcription of WNT11
is regulated primarily by HIF-1a. We observed induced WNT11 expression in the
hypoxic area of allograft tumors. In addition, in mice bearing orthotopic
malignant gliomas, inhibition with bevacizumab of vascular endothelial growth
factor, which is an important stimulus for angiogenesis, increased nuclear HIF-1a
and HIF-2a, and expression of WNT11. Gain- and loss-of-function approaches
revealed that WNT11 stimulates proliferation, migration and invasion of
cancer-derived cells, and increases activity of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 
and 9. Since tumor hypoxia has been proposed to increase tumor aggressiveness,
these data suggest WNT11 as a possible target for cancer therapies, especially
for tumors treated with antiangiogenic therapy.

PMCID: PMC4748282
PMID: 26861754  [PubMed - in process]


18. Arch Toxicol. 2016 Feb 8. [Epub ahead of print]

The Brassica-derived phytochemical indolo[3,2-b]carbazole protects against
oxidative DNA damage by aryl hydrocarbon receptor activation.

Faust D(1), Nikolova T(1), Wätjen W(2), Kaina B(1), Dietrich C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, University Medical Center of the Johannes
Gutenberg-University Mainz, Obere Zahlbacherstr. 67, 55131, Mainz, Germany.
(2)Institute of Agricultural and Nutritional Sciences, Martin-Luther University
Halle-Wittenberg, Weinbergweg 22, 06120, Halle (Saale), Germany. (3)Institute of 
Toxicology, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz,
Obere Zahlbacherstr. 67, 55131, Mainz, Germany. cdietric@uni-mainz.de.

Epidemiological studies suggest that a high intake of Brassica vegetables
protects against colon carcinogenesis. Brassica vegetables are rich in
glucosinolates which are hydrolysed during digestion to various products
including indole-3-carbinol. In animal studies, a protective effect of
indole-3-carbinol has been demonstrated in colon carcinogenesis.
Indole-3-carbinol is highly unstable and, therefore, the observed protection
likely results from condensation products of indole-3-carbinol, e.g.
diindolylmethane or indolo[3,2-b]carbazole (ICZ). Interestingly, ICZ is a potent 
activator of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a transcription factor known to
mediate toxic effects of environmental pollutants, such as dioxin and polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons. Here, we show that ICZ protects against oxidative DNA
damage in various cell lines including the colon carcinoma cell line Caco-2. When
preincubated for 24 h, ICZ decreases DNA single-strand break (SSB) and 8-oxo-dG
formation induced by tertiary-butylhydroperoxide (t-BOOH), hydrogen peroxide or
benzo[a]pyrene. Simultaneous addition of ICZ does not protect against
t-BOOH-induced SSB formation, which disproves a direct radical scavenging effect.
The repair of SSBs was not enhanced, but the data indicate that ICZ attenuates
the ROS level following t-BOOH. The antioxidant response factor Nrf2 was not
activated following ICZ. Functional inhibition of the AhR and AhR-/ARNT-defective
cell lines demonstrate that the AhR/ARNT pathway is mandatory for the observed
ROS defence caused by ICZ, supporting the hypothesis that AhR-mediated regulation
of defence genes is involved. The data point to a hitherto unknown protective
function of ICZ and a novel role of the AhR in the defence against oxidative DNA 
damage.

PMID: 26856715  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. PeerJ. 2016 Jan 26;4:e1632. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1632. eCollection 2016.

The Tibetan medicine Zuotai influences clock gene expression in the liver of
mice.

Li H(1), Li WK(1), Lu YF(1), Wei LX(2), Liu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab for Basic Pharmacology of Ministry of Education, Zunyi Medical College
, Zunyi , China. (2)Northwest Plateau Institute of Bology, Chinese Academia of
Sciences , Xining, Qinghai , China.

Background. The circadian clock is involved in drug metabolism, efficacy and
toxicity. Drugs could in turn affect the biological clock as a mechanism of their
actions. Zuotai is an essential component of many popular Tibetan medicines for
sedation, tranquil and "detoxification," and is mainly composed of metacinnabar
(ß-HgS). The pharmacological and/or toxicological basis of its action is unknown.
This study aimed to examine the effect of Zuotai on biological clock gene
expression in the liver of mice. Materials and methods. Mice were orally given
Zuotai (10 mg/kg, 1.5-fold of clinical dose) daily for 7 days, and livers were
collected every 4 h during the 24 h period. Total RNA was extracted and subjected
to real-time RT-PCR analysis of circadian clock gene expression. Results. Zuotai 
decreased the oscillation amplitude of the clock core gene Clock, neuronal PAS
domain protein 2 (Npas2), Brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (Bmal1) at 10:00. 
For the clock feedback negative control genes, Zuotai had no effect on the
oscillation of the clock gene Cryptochrome (Cry1) and Period genes (Per1-3). For 
the clock-driven target genes, Zuotai increased the oscillation amplitude of the 
PAR-bZip family member D-box-binding protein (Dbp), decreased nuclear factor
interleukin 3 (Nfil3) at 10:00, but had no effect on thyrotroph embryonic factor 
(Tef); Zuotai increased the expression of nuclear receptor Rev-Erba (Nr1d1) at
18:00, but had little influence on the nuclear receptor Rev-Erbß (Nr1d2) and
RORa. Conclusion. The Tibetan medicine Zuotai could influence the expression of
clock genes, which could contribute to pharmacological and/or toxicological
effects of Zuotai.

PMCID: PMC4741069
PMID: 26855871  [PubMed]


20. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 3;6:20223. doi: 10.1038/srep20223.

Notch-regulated miR-223 targets the aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway and
increases cytokine production in macrophages from rheumatoid arthritis patients.

Ogando J(1), Tardáguila M(1), Díaz-Alderete A(1), Usategui A(2), Miranda-Ramos
V(2), Martínez-Herrera DJ(3), de la Fuente L(4), García-León MJ(5), Moreno MC(6),
Escudero S(6), Cañete JD(7), Toribio ML(5), Cases I(8), Pascual-Montano A(3),
Pablos JL(2), Mañes S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Oncology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología/CSIC, 
Madrid. (2)Servicio de Reumatología, Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de
Octubre, Madrid. (3)Bioinformatics Unit, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología/CSIC,
Madrid. (4)Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe, Valencia. (5)Centro de
Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa/CSIC-UAM, Madrid. (6)Flow Cytometry Unit, Centro 
Nacional de Biotecnología/CSIC, Madrid. (7)Unitat d'Artritis, Hospital Clínic de 
Barcelona and Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pí i Sunyer (IDIBAPS),
Barcelona. (8)Institut de Medicina Predictiva i Personalitzada del Càncer,
Badalona, Barcelona, Spain.

Evidence links aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) activation to rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) pathogenesis, although results are inconsistent. AHR agonists inhibit
pro-inflammatory cytokine expression in macrophages, pivotal cells in RA
aetiopathogenesis, which hints at specific circuits that regulate the AHR pathway
in RA macrophages. We compared microRNA (miR) expression in CD14(+) cells from
patients with active RA or with osteoarthritis (OA). Seven miR were downregulated
and one (miR-223) upregulated in RA compared to OA cells. miR-223 upregulation
correlated with reduced Notch3 and Notch effector expression in RA patients.
Overexpression of the Notch-induced repressor HEY-1 and co-culture of healthy
donor monocytes with Notch ligand-expressing cells showed direct Notch-mediated
downregulation of miR-223. Bioinformatics predicted the AHR regulator ARNT (AHR
nuclear translocator) as a miR-223 target. Pre-miR-223 overexpression silenced
ARNT 3'UTR-driven reporter expression, reduced ARNT (but not AHR) protein levels 
and prevented AHR/ARNT-mediated inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokine
expression. miR-223 counteracted AHR/ARNT-induced Notch3 upregulation in
monocytes. Levels of ARNT and of CYP1B1, an AHR/ARNT signalling effector, were
reduced in RA compared to OA synovial tissue, which correlated with miR-223
levels. Our results associate Notch signalling to miR-223 downregulation in RA
macrophages, and identify miR-223 as a negative regulator of the AHR/ARNT pathway
through ARNT targeting.

PMCID: PMC4738320
PMID: 26838552  [PubMed - in process]


21. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 25;291(13):7017-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.713412. Epub 2016
Jan 21.

Circadian Clock in a Mouse Colon Tumor Regulates Intracellular Iron Levels to
Promote Tumor Progression.

Okazaki F(1), Matsunaga N(2), Okazaki H(3), Azuma H(2), Hamamura K(3), Tsuruta
A(2), Tsurudome Y(2), Ogino T(2), Hara Y(2), Suzuki T(4), Hyodo K(4), Ishihara
H(4), Kikuchi H(5), To H(6), Aramaki H(7), Koyanagi S(8), Ohdo S(9).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medical Pharmaceutics, Graduate School of Medicine and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences for Research, University of Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, the 
Department of Pharmaceutics and. (2)the Department of Pharmaceutics and. (3)the
Department of Molecular Biology and. (4)the Formulation Research, Pharmaceutical 
Science & Technology Core Function Unit and. (5)Chief Innovation Officer Group,
Eisai Product Creation Systems, Eisai Co., Ltd., Ibaraki 300-2635, Japan. (6)From
the Department of Medical Pharmaceutics, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Sciences for Research, University of Toyama, Toyama 930-0194.
(7)the Department of Molecular Biology and Drug Innovation Research Center,
Daiichi University of Pharmacy, Fukuoka 815-8511, and. (8)the Department of
Global Healthcare Science, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka 812-8582. (9)the Department of Pharmaceutics and
ohdo@phar.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

Iron is an important biological catalyst and is critical for DNA synthesis during
cell proliferation. Cellular iron uptake is enhanced in tumor cells to support
increased DNA synthesis. Circadian variations in DNA synthesis and proliferation 
have been identified in tumor cells, but their relationship with intracellular
iron levels is unclear. In this study, we identified a 24-h rhythm in iron
regulatory protein 2 (IRP2) levels in colon-26 tumors implanted in mice. Our
findings suggest that IRP2 regulates the 24-h rhythm of transferrin receptor 1
(Tfr1) mRNA expression post-transcriptionally, by binding to RNA stem-loop
structures known as iron-response elements. We also found thatIrp2mRNA
transcription is promoted by circadian clock genes, including brain and muscle
Arnt-like 1 (BMAL1) and the circadian locomotor output cycles kaput (CLOCK)
heterodimer. Moreover, growth in colon-26(<U+0394>19) tumors expressing the clock-mutant
protein (CLOCK(<U+0394>19)) was low compared with that in wild-type colon-26 tumor. The 
time-dependent variation of cellular iron levels, and the proliferation rate in
wild-type colon-26 tumor was decreased by CLOCK(<U+0394>19)expression. Our findings
suggest that circadian organization contributes to tumor cell proliferation by
regulating iron metabolism in the tumor.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4807285 [Available on 2017-03-25]
PMID: 26797126  [PubMed - in process]


22. Front Neurosci. 2016 Jan 12;9:514. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2015.00514. eCollection
2015.

Molecular Mechanisms Regulating the Dendritic Development of Newborn Olfactory
Bulb Interneurons in a Sensory Experience-Dependent Manner.

Yoshihara S(1), Takahashi H(1), Tsuboi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for the Molecular Biology of Neural Systems, Advanced Medical
Research Center, Nara Medical University Kashihara, Japan.

Inhibitory interneurons in the olfactory bulb are generated continuously
throughout life in the subventricular zone and differentiate into periglomerular 
and granule cells. Neural circuits that undergo reorganization by newborn
olfactory bulb interneurons are necessary for odor detection, odor
discrimination, olfactory memory, and innate olfactory responses. Although
sensory experience has been shown to regulate development in a variety of species
and in various structures, including the retina, cortex, and hippocampus, little 
is known about how sensory experience regulates the dendritic development of
newborn olfactory bulb interneurons. Recent studies revealed that the 5T4
oncofetal trophoblast glycoprotein and the neuronal Per/Arnt/Sim domain protein 4
(Npas4) transcription factor regulate dendritic branching and dendritic spine
formation, respectively, in olfactory bulb interneurons. Here, we summarize the
molecular mechanisms that underlie the sensory input-dependent development of
newborn interneurons and the formation of functional neural circuitry in the
olfactory bulb.

PMCID: PMC4709855
PMID: 26793053  [PubMed]


23. Bone. 2016 Mar;84:194-203. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2016.01.006. Epub 2016 Jan 14.

Deficiency of circadian clock protein BMAL1 in mice results in a low bone mass
phenotype.

Samsa WE(1), Vasanji A(2), Midura RJ(3), Kondratov RV(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Regulation in Health and Diseases, BGES, Cleveland State
University, 2121 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44115-2214, USA. Electronic address: 
samsa.william@gmail.com. (2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Cleveland
Clinic, 9500 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. Electronic address:
avasanji@image-iq.com. (3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Cleveland Clinic,
9500 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. Electronic address: midurar@ccf.org. 
(4)Center for Gene Regulation in Health and Diseases, BGES, Cleveland State
University, 2121 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44115-2214, USA. Electronic address: 
r.kondratov@csuohio.edu.

The circadian clock is an endogenous time keeping system that controls the
physiology and behavior of many organisms. The transcription factor Brain and
Muscle ARNT-like Protein 1 (BMAL1) is a component of the circadian clock and
necessary for clock function. Bmal1(-/-) mice display accelerated aging and many 
accompanying age associated pathologies. Here, we report that mice deficient for 
BMAL1 have a low bone mass phenotype that is absent at birth and progressively
worsens over their lifespan. Accelerated aging of these mice is associated with
the formation of bony bridges occurring across the metaphysis to the epiphysis,
resulting in shorter long bones. Using micro-computed tomography we show that
Bmal1(-/-) mice have reductions in cortical and trabecular bone volume and other 
micro-structural parameters and a lower bone mineral density. Histology shows a
deficiency of BMAL1 results in a reduced number of active osteoblasts and
osteocytes in vivo. Isolation of bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells from 
Bmal1(-/-) mice demonstrate a reduced ability to differentiate into osteoblasts
in vitro, which likely explains the observed reductions in osteoblasts and
osteocytes, and may contribute to the observed osteopenia. Our data support the
role of the circadian clock in the regulation of bone homeostasis and shows that 
BMAL1 deficiency results in a low bone mass phenotype.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4755907 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26789548  [PubMed - in process]


24. IUBMB Life. 2016 Feb;68(2):122-35. doi: 10.1002/iub.1464. Epub 2015 Dec 28.

Identification of differentially expressed three novel transcript variants of
mouse ARNT gene.

Ishqi HM(1), Ur Rehman S(1), Sarwar T(1), Husain MA(1), Tabish M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, A.M. University,
Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh, India.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT/HIF1-ß) is an obligatory
transcriptional partner of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and
hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a). It has a basic helix-loop-helix domain that
belongs to period-ARNT-single-minded (PAS) protein family. PAS proteins act as
heterodimeric transcription factors with ARNT being master dimerization partner. 
The ARNT-HIF-1a complex is an important transcriptional regulator of the hypoxic 
response of the tumor cells. Previous studies have reported two transcript
variants of the gene produced by alternative splicing in mouse. One transcript
variant contains all 22 exons while the other variant lacks exon-E5. In our
study, using combinatorial approach comprising bioinformatics tools and molecular
biology techniques involving RT-PCR, semi-nested PCR, sequencing and qPCR, we
have identified three novel transcript variants of Arnt gene in mouse. All three 
new transcripts arise as a result of alternative splicing of newly identified
exons with exon-E2, replacing reported exon-E1. These transcripts encode for
three protein isofoms having different N-termini. The expression of these
transcripts was found to be different in different tissues of adult mice. In
silico analysis of the upstream region of the new exons revealed three distinct
promoter regions designated as PA, PB and PC present upstream of newly identified
exons. These promoters possess potential signature sequences for common as well
as different transcription factors suggesting complex regulation of Arnt gene. In
silico post translational studies of the conceptually translated amino acid
sequences of these transcripts show similarity in some of the properties while
differ in others. The diversity at N-termini of protein isoforms suggests the
possibility of forming different complexes in different tissues and may also be
important for unique interactions with partner molecules. © 2015 IUBMB Life,
68(2):122-135, 2016.

© 2015 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26707719  [PubMed - in process]


25. FASEB J. 2016 Apr;30(4):1634-42. doi: 10.1096/fj.15-282475. Epub 2015 Dec 23.

Circadian clocks govern calorie restriction-mediated life span extension through 
BMAL1- and IGF-1-dependent mechanisms.

Patel SA(1), Chaudhari A(1), Gupta R(1), Velingkaar N(1), Kondratov RV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological, Geological, and Environmental Sciences, and Center
for Gene Regulation in Health and Diseases, Cleveland State University,
Cleveland, Ohio, USA. (2)Department of Biological, Geological, and Environmental 
Sciences, and Center for Gene Regulation in Health and Diseases, Cleveland State 
University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA r.kondratov@csuohio.edu.

Calorie restriction (CR) increases longevity in many species by unknown
mechanisms. The circadian clock was proposed as a potential mediator of CR.
Deficiency of the core component of the circadian clock-transcriptional factor
BMAL1 (brain and muscle ARNT [aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator]-like protein 1)-results in accelerated aging. Here we investigated 
the role of BMAL1 in mechanisms of CR. The 30% CR diet increased the life span of
wild-type (WT) mice by 20% compared to mice on anad libitum(AL) diet but failed
to increase life span ofBmal1(-/-)mice. BMAL1 deficiency impaired CR-mediated
changes in the plasma levels of IGF-1 and insulin. We detected a statistically
significantly reduction of IGF-1 in CRvs.AL by 50 to 70% in WT mice at several
daily time points tested, while inBmal1(-/-)the reduction was not significant.
Insulin levels in WT were reduced by 5 to 9%, whileBmal1(-/-)induced it by 10 to 
35% at all time points tested. CR up-regulated the daily average expression
ofBmal1(by 150%) and its downstream target genesPeriods(by 470% forPer1and by
130% forPer2). We propose that BMAL1 is an important mediator of CR, and
activation of BMAL1 might link CR mechanisms with biologic clocks.-Patel, S. A., 
Chaudhari, A., Gupta, R., Velingkaar, N., Kondratov, R. V. Circadian clocks
govern calorie restriction-mediated life span extension through BMAL1- and
IGF-1-dependent mechanisms.

© FASEB.

PMID: 26700733  [PubMed - in process]


26. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Jan 15;469(3):580-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.12.030. Epub 2015 Dec 12.

Identification of a novel circadian clock modulator controlling BMAL1 expression 
through a ROR/REV-ERB-response element-dependent mechanism.

Lee J(1), Lee S(2), Chung S(3), Park N(4), Son GH(5), An H(2), Jang J(2), Chang
DJ(6), Suh YG(7), Kim K(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea; Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, Daegu
Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), Daegu, South Korea.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea; Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of
Medicine, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea. (4)Department of Biological
Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, South
Korea. (5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Korea
University, Seoul, South Korea. (6)College of Pharmacy, Sunchon National
University, Suncheon, South Korea. (7)College of Pharmacy, Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea. Electronic address: ygsuh@snu.ac.kr.
(8)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea; Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, College
of Natural Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea; Department of
Brain & Cognitive Sciences, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology
(DGIST), Daegu, South Korea. Electronic address: kyungjin@dgist.ac.kr.

Circadian rhythms, biological oscillations with a period of about 24 h, are
maintained by an innate genetically determined time-keeping system called the
molecular circadian clockwork. Despite the physiological and clinical importance 
of the circadian clock, development of small molecule modulators targeting the
core clock machinery has only recently been initiated. BMAL1, a core clock gene, 
is controlled by a ROR/REV-ERB-response element (RORE)-dependent mechanism, which
plays an important role in stabilizing the period of the molecular circadian
clock. Therefore, we aimed to identify a novel small molecule modulator that
regulates Bmal1 gene expression in RORE-dependency, thereby influencing the
molecular feedback loop of the circadian clock. For this purpose, we carried out 
a cell-based screen of more than 1000 drug-like compounds, using a luciferase
reporter driven by the proximal region of the mouse Bmal1 promoter. One compound,
designated KK-S6, repressed the RORE-dependent transcriptional activity of the
mBmal1 promoter and reduced endogenous BMAL1 protein expression. More
importantly, KK-S6 significantly altered the amplitude of circadian oscillations 
of Bmal1 and Per2 promoter activities in a dose-dependent manner, but barely
affected the period length. KK-S6 effectively decreased mRNA expression of
metabolic genes acting downstream of REV-ERBa, Pai-1 and Citrate synthase, that
contain RORE cis-element in their promoter. KK-S6 likely acts in a RORE-dependent
manner by reinforcing the REV-ERBa activity, though not by the same mechanism as 
known REV-ERB agonists. In conclusion, the present study demonstrates that KK-S6 
functions as a novel modulator of the amplitude of molecular circadian rhythms by
influencing RORE-mediated BMAL1 expression.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26692477  [PubMed - in process]


27. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Dec 4;16(12):29011-28. doi: 10.3390/ijms161226144.

The Role of the Neuroprotective Factor Npas4 in Cerebral Ischemia.

Choy FC(1), Klaric TS(2), Koblar SA(3), Lewis MD(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, 
Australia. fongchan.choy@adelaide.edu.au. (2)School of Biological Sciences, The
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.
thomas.klaric@alumni.adelaide.edu.au. (3)School of Medicine, The University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia. simon.koblar@adelaide.edu.au. (4)School
of Biological Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.
Martin.Lewis@sahmri.com. (5)School of Medicine, The University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia. Martin.Lewis@sahmri.com. (6)South Australian Health
&amp; Medical Research Institute, North Terrace, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.
Martin.Lewis@sahmri.com.

Stroke is one of the leading causes of death and adult disability in the world.
Although many molecules have been documented to have a neuroprotective effect,
the majority of these molecules failed to improve the neurological outcomes for
patients with brain ischemia. It has been proposed that neuroprotection alone
may, in fact, not be adequate for improving the prognosis of ischemic stroke.
Neuroprotectants that can regulate other processes which occur in the brain
during ischemia could potentially be targets for the development of effective
therapeutic interventions in stroke. Neuronal Per-Arnt-Sim domain protein 4
(Npas4) is an activity-dependent transcription factor whose expression is induced
in various brain insults, including cerebral ischemia. It has been shown that
Npas4 plays an important role in protecting neurons against many types of
neurodegenerative insult. Recently, it was demonstrated that Npas4 indeed has a
neuroprotective role in ischemic stroke and that Npas4 might be involved in
modulating the cell death pathway and inflammatory response. In this review, we
summarize the current knowledge of the roles that Npas4 may play in
neuroinflammation and ischemia. Understanding how ischemic lesion size in stroke 
may be reduced through modulation of Npas4-dependent apoptotic and inflammatory
pathways could lead to the development of new stroke therapies.

PMCID: PMC4691091
PMID: 26690124  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2015 Oct 14. pii: 0271678X15606146. [Epub ahead of
print]

Reduction of the neuroprotective transcription factor Npas4 results in increased 
neuronal necrosis, inflammation and brain lesion size following ischaemia.

Choy FC(1), Klaric TS(1), Leong WK(1), Koblar SA(2), Lewis MD(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA,
Australia. (2)School of Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA,
Australia. (3)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, SA, Australia School of Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide,
SA, Australia South Australian Health & Medical Research Institute, North
Terrace, Adelaide, SA, Australia martin.lewis@sahmri.com.

Stroke is the second leading cause of death and the most frequent cause of adult 
disability. Neuronal Per-Arnt-Sim domain protein 4 (Npas4) is an
activity-dependent transcription factor whose expression is induced in various
brain insults, including cerebral ischaemia. Although previous studies have
demonstrated that Npas4 plays a critical role in protecting neurons against
neurodegenerative insults, the neuroprotective effect of Npas4 in response to
ischaemic brain injury remains unknown. In this study, we used a loss-of-function
approach to examine the neuroprotective potential of Npas4 in the context of
ischaemic damage. Using oxygen and glucose deprivation, we demonstrated that the 
knockdown of Npas4 in mouse cortical neurons resulted in increased susceptibility
to cell death. The protective effect of Npas4 was further investigated in vivo
using a photochemically-induced stroke model in mice. We found a significantly
larger lesion size and increased neurodegeneration in Npas4 knockout mice as
compared to wild-type mice. Moreover, we also showed that ablation of Npas4
caused an increase in activated astrocytes and microglia, pro-inflammatory
cytokines interleukin-6 and tumour necrosis factor alpha levels and a switch from
apoptotic to necrotic cell death. Taken together, these data suggest that Npas4
plays a neuroprotective role in ischaemic stroke by limiting progressive
neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26661154  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Anticancer Res. 2015 Dec;35(12):6615-22.

Up-regulation of PER3 Expression Is Correlated with Better Clinical Outcome in
Acute Leukemia.

Yang MY(1), Lin PM(2), Hsiao HH(3), Hsu JF(4), Lin HY(5), Hsu CM(6), Chen IY(1), 
Su SW(1), Liu YC(7), Lin SF(7).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang
Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, R.O.C. (2)Department of Nursing, I-Shou
University, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan, R.O.C. (3)Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung
City, Taiwan, R.O.C. Faculty of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung
City, Taiwan, R.O.C. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Municipal
Ta-Tung Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan, R.O.C. Division of
Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(6)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang
Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, R.O.C. Department of Otolaryngology, Kaoshiung
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, R.O.C. (7)Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan, R.O.C. Faculty of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan, R.O.C. shlin@cc.kmu.edu.tw 
ycliu@cc.kmu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Altered expression of circadian clock genes has been linked to
various types of cancer. This study aimed to investigate whether these genes are 
also altered in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and acute lymphoid leukemia (ALL).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The expression profiles of nine circadian clock genes of
peripheral blood (PB) leukocytes from patients with newly-diagnosed AML (n=41),
ALL (n=23) and healthy individuals (n=51) were investigated.
RESULTS: In AML, the expression of period 1 (PER1), period 2 (PER2), period 3
(PER3), cryptochrome 1 (CRY1), cryptochrome 2 (CRY2), brain and muscle aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)-like 1 (BMAL1), and timeless
(TIM) was significantly down-regulated, while that of CK1e was significantly
up-regulated. In ALL, the expression of PER3 and CRY1 was significantly
down-regulated, whereas those of CK1e and TIM were significantly up-regulated.
Recovery of PER3 expression was observed in both patients with AML and those with
ALL who achieved remission but not in patients who relapsed after treatment.
CONCLUSION: Circadian clock genes are altered in patients with acute leukemia and
up-regulation of PER3 is correlated with a better clinical outcome.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26637877  [PubMed - in process]


30. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2015 Sep;5(5):378-89. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2015.05.007. Epub
2015 Jun 6.

HIF-1a pathway: role, regulation and intervention for cancer therapy.

Masoud GN(1), Li W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, the University of 
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) has been recognized as an important cancer
drug target. Many recent studies have provided convincing evidences of strong
correlation between elevated levels of HIF-1 and tumor metastasis, angiogenesis, 
poor patient prognosis as well as tumor resistance therapy. It was found that
hypoxia (low O2 levels) is a common character in many types of solid tumors. As
an adaptive response to hypoxic stress, hypoxic tumor cells activate several
survival pathways to carry out their essential biological processes in different 
ways compared with normal cells. Recent advances in cancer biology at the
cellular and molecular levels highlighted the HIF-1a pathway as a crucial
survival pathway for which novel strategies of cancer therapy could be developed.
However, targeting the HIF-1a pathway has been a challenging but promising
progresses have been made in the past twenty years. This review summarizes the
role and regulation of the HIF-1a in cancer, and recent therapeutic approaches
targeting this important pathway.

PMCID: PMC4629436
PMID: 26579469  [PubMed]


31. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2015 Mar;5(2):113-22. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2015.01.003. Epub
2015 Feb 2.

Circadian rhythms in liver metabolism and disease.

Ferrell JM(1), Chiang JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Medical Sciences, Northeast Ohio Medical University,
Rootstown OH 44272, USA.

Mounting research evidence demonstrates a significant negative impact of
circadian disruption on human health. Shift work, chronic jet lag and sleep
disturbances are associated with increased incidence of metabolic syndrome, and
consequently result in obesity, type 2 diabetes and dyslipidemia. Here, these
associations are reviewed with respect to liver metabolism and disease.

PMCID: PMC4629216
PMID: 26579436  [PubMed]


32. Radiat Oncol. 2015 Nov 16;10:229. doi: 10.1186/s13014-015-0539-9.

The expression level of the transcription factor Aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT) determines cellular survival after radiation
treatment.

Mandl M(1), Lieberum M(2,)(3), Dunst J(4), Depping R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, Center for Structural and Cell Biology in Medicine,
University of Luebeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23562, Luebeck, Germany.
markus.mandl@uni-luebeck.de. (2)Institute of Physiology, Center for Structural
and Cell Biology in Medicine, University of Luebeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160,
23562, Luebeck, Germany. mariakatharina.lieberum@student.uni-luebeck.de.
(3)Klinik für Strahlentherapie, Universitaetsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, Campus 
Luebeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538, Luebeck, Germany.
mariakatharina.lieberum@student.uni-luebeck.de. (4)Klinik für Strahlentherapie,
Universitaetsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Luebeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 
23538, Luebeck, Germany. juergen.dunst@uksh.de. (5)Institute of Physiology,
Center for Structural and Cell Biology in Medicine, University of Luebeck,
Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23562, Luebeck, Germany. reinhard.depping@uni-luebeck.de.

BACKGROUND: Tumour hypoxia promotes radioresistance and is associated with poor
prognosis. The transcription factor Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (ARNT), also designated as Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1ß, is
part of the HIF pathway which mediates cellular adaptations to oxygen deprivation
and facilitates tumour progression. The subunits HIF-1a and ARNT are key players 
within this pathway. HIF-1a is regulated in an oxygen-dependent manner whereas
ARNT is considered to be constitutively expressed. However, there is mounting
evidence that certain tumour cells are capable to elevate ARNT in hypoxia which
suggests a survival benefit. Therefore the objective of this study was to
elucidate effects of an altered ARNT expression level on the cellular response to
radiation.
METHODS: Different human cell lines (Hep3B, MCF-7, 786-Owt, 786-Ovhl, RCC4wt and 
RCC4vhl) originating from various tumour entities (Hepatocellular carcinoma,
breast cancer and renal cell carcinoma respectively) were X-irradiated using a
conventional linear accelerator. Knockdown of ARNT expression was achieved by
transient siRNA transfection. Complementary experiments were performed by forced 
ARNT overexpression using appropriate plasmids. Presence/absence of ARNT protein 
was confirmed by Western blot analysis. Clonogenic survival assays were performed
in order to determine cellular survival post irradiation. Statistical comparison 
of two groups was achieved by the unpaired t-test.
RESULTS: The results of this study indicate that ARNT depletion renders tumour
cells susceptible to radiation whereas overexpression of this transcription
factor confers radioresistance.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide evidence to consider ARNT as a drug target
and as a predictive marker in clinical applications concerning the response to
radiation.

PMCID: PMC4647475
PMID: 26572229  [PubMed - in process]


33. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2016 Jan 15;310(2):C142-50. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00172.2015. Epub 2015 Nov 11.

Activation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor mediates suppression of hypoxia-inducible
factor-dependent erythropoietin expression by indoxyl sulfate.

Asai H(1), Hirata J(2), Hirano A(2), Hirai K(2), Seki S(2), Watanabe-Akanuma
M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Safety Research Center, Kureha Corporation, Tokyo, Japan asaih@kureha.co.jp.
(2)Safety Research Center, Kureha Corporation, Tokyo, Japan.

Indoxyl sulfate (IS) is a representative uremic toxin that accumulates in the
blood of patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD). In addition to the
involvement in the progression of CKD, a recent report indicates that IS
suppresses hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-dependent erythropoietin (EPO)
production, suggesting that IS may also contribute to the progression of renal
anemia. In this report, we provide evidence that aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) 
mediates IS-induced suppression of HIF activation and subsequent EPO production. 
In HepG2 cells, IS at concentrations similar to the blood levels in CKD patients 
suppressed hypoxia- or cobalt chloride-induced EPO mRNA expression and
transcriptional activation of HIF. IS also induced AhR activation, and AhR
blockade resulted in abolishment of IS-induced suppression of HIF activation. The
HIF transcription factor is a heterodimeric complex composed of HIF-a subunits
(HIF-1a and HIF-2a) and AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT). IS suppressed nuclear
accumulation of the HIF-a-ARNT complex accompanied by an increase of the AhR-ARNT
complex in the nucleus, implying the involvement of interactions among AhR,
HIF-a, and ARNT in the suppression mechanism. In rats, oral administration of
indole, a metabolic precursor of IS, inhibited bleeding-induced elevation of
renal EPO mRNA expression and plasma EPO concentration and strongly induced AhR
activation in the liver and renal cortex tissues. Collectively, this study is the
first to elucidate the detailed mechanism by which AhR plays an indispensable
role in the suppression of HIF activation by IS. Hence, IS-induced activation of 
AhR may be a potential therapeutic target for treating renal anemia.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 26561638  [PubMed - in process]


34. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 24;112(47):E6579-88. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1515308112. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

Circadian and feeding rhythms differentially affect rhythmic mRNA transcription
and translation in mouse liver.

Atger F(1), Gobet C(2), Marquis J(3), Martin E(4), Wang J(5), Weger B(4),
Lefebvre G(3), Descombes P(6), Naef F(7), Gachon F(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Circadian Rhythms, Nestlé Institute of Health
Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, University of Lausanne, CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland; (2)Department 
of Diabetes and Circadian Rhythms, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015
Lausanne, Switzerland; Institute of Bioengineering, School of Life Sciences,
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics,
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; (3)Functional Genomic, Nestlé Institute of Health 
Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; (4)Department of Diabetes and Circadian 
Rhythms, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland;
(5)Institute of Bioengineering, School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, CH-1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland; (6)Functional Genomic, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015 
Lausanne, Switzerland; Faculty of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. (7)Institute of Bioengineering, School
of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne and Swiss Institute of
Bioinformatics, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; felix.naef@epfl.ch
frederic.gachon@rd.nestle.com. (8)Department of Diabetes and Circadian Rhythms,
Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; Faculty of
Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland felix.naef@epfl.ch frederic.gachon@rd.nestle.com.

Diurnal oscillations of gene expression are a hallmark of rhythmic physiology
across most living organisms. Such oscillations are controlled by the interplay
between the circadian clock and feeding rhythms. Although rhythmic mRNA
accumulation has been extensively studied, comparatively less is known about
their transcription and translation. Here, we quantified simultaneously temporal 
transcription, accumulation, and translation of mouse liver mRNAs under
physiological light-dark conditions and ad libitum or night-restricted feeding in
WT and brain and muscle Arnt-like 1 (Bmal1)-deficient animals. We found that
rhythmic transcription predominantly drives rhythmic mRNA accumulation and
translation for a majority of genes. Comparison of wild-type and Bmal1 KO mice
shows that circadian clock and feeding rhythms have broad impact on rhythmic gene
expression, Bmal1 deletion affecting surprisingly both transcriptional and
posttranscriptional levels. Translation efficiency is differentially regulated
during the diurnal cycle for genes with 5'-Terminal Oligo Pyrimidine tract
(5'-TOP) sequences and for genes involved in mitochondrial activity, many
harboring a Translation Initiator of Short 5'-UTR (TISU) motif. The increased
translation efficiency of 5'-TOP and TISU genes is mainly driven by feeding
rhythms but Bmal1 deletion also affects amplitude and phase of translation,
including TISU genes. Together this study emphasizes the complex interconnections
between circadian and feeding rhythms at several steps ultimately determining
rhythmic gene expression and translation.

PMCID: PMC4664316
PMID: 26554015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Front Pharmacol. 2015 Oct 21;6:238. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00238. eCollection
2015.

Nuciferine downregulates Per-Arnt-Sim kinase expression during its alleviation of
lipogenesis and inflammation on oleic acid-induced hepatic steatosis in HepG2
cells.

Zhang DD(1), Zhang JG(1), Wu X(1), Liu Y(1), Gu SY(1), Zhu GH(1), Wang YZ(1), Liu
GL(1), Li XY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong 
University School of Medicine Shanghai, China.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a prevalent liver disease associated
with lipotoxicity, lipid peroxidation, oxidative stress, and inflammation.
Nuciferine, an active ingredient extracted from the natural lotus leaf, has been 
reported to be effective for the prevention and treatment of NAFLD. Per-Arnt-Sim 
kinase (PASK) is a nutrient responsive protein kinase that regulates lipid and
glucose metabolism, mitochondrial respiration, and gene expression. The aim of
the present study was to investigate the protective effect of nuciferine against 
NAFLD and its inhibitory effect on PASK, exploring the possible underlying
mechanism of nuciferine-mediated inhibition on NAFLD. Relevant biochemical
parameters (lipid accumulation, extent of oxidative stress and release of
inflammation cytokines) in oleic acid (OA)-induced HepG2 cells that mimicked
steatosis in vitro were measured and compared with the control. It was found that
nuciferine and silenced-PASK (siRNA PASK) both inhibited triglyceride (TG)
accumulation and was effective in decreasing fatty acid (FFAs). The content of
total antioxidant capacity (T-AOC) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) were increased 
respectively by nuciferine and siRNA PASK without increase in glutathione (GSH). 
Malondialdehyde (MDA) was decreased respectively by nuciferine and siRNA PASK. In
addition, nuciferine decreased TNF-a, IL-6 and IL-8 as well as the siRNA PASK
group. IL-10 was increased by nuciferine and siRNA PASK respectively. Further
investigation revealed that nuciferine and siRNA PASK could respectively regulate
the expression of target genes involved in lipogenesis and inflammation,
suggesting that nuciferine may be a potential therapeutic treatment for NAFLD.
Furthermore, the modulated effect of nuciferine on (OA)-induced HepG2 cells
lipogenesis and inflammation, which was accompanied with PASK inhibition, was
also consistent with siRNA PASK, implying that PASK might play a role in
nuciferine-mediated regulation on NAFLD.

PMCID: PMC4612658
PMID: 26539118  [PubMed]


36. Toxicol Lett. 2016 Jan 5;240(1):122-9. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2015.10.017. Epub
2015 Oct 28.

The nuclear aryl hydocarbon receptor is involved in regulation of DNA repair and 
cell survival following treatment with ionizing radiation.

Dittmann KH(1), Rothmund MC(2), Paasch A(2), Mayer C(2), Fehrenbacher B(3),
Schaller M(3), Frauenstein K(4), Fritsche E(4), Haarmann-Stemmann T(4), Braeuning
A(5), Rodemann HP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiobiology and Molecular Environmental Research, Department of
Radiation Oncology, University of Tuebingen, Germany. Electronic address:
klaus.dittmann@uni-tuebingen.de. (2)Division of Radiobiology and Molecular
Environmental Research, Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Tuebingen, Germany. (3)Department of Dermatology, University of Tübingen, 72076
Tübingen, Germany. (4)AG Molekulare Toxikologie, Institut für umweltmedizinische 
Forschung an der Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Germany. (5)Federal
Institute for Risk Assessment, Deptartment of Food Safety, Berlin, Germany.

In the present study, we explored the role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
for <U+03B3>-H2AX associated DNA repair in response to treatment with ionizing
radiation. Ionizing radiation was able to stabilize AhR protein and to induce a
nuclear translocation in a similar way as described for exposure to aromatic
hydrocarbons. A comparable AhR protein stabilization was obtained by treatment
with hydroxyl-nonenal-generated by radiation-induced lipid peroxidation. AhR
knockdown resulted in significant radio-sensitization of both A549- and HaCaT
cells. Under these conditions an increased amount of residual <U+03B3>-H2AX foci and a
delayed decline of <U+03B3>-H2AX foci was observed. Knockdown of the co-activator ARNT, 
which is essential for transcriptional activation of AhR target genes, reduced
AhR-dependent CYP1A expression in response to irradiation, but was without effect
on the amount of residual <U+03B3>-H2AX foci. Nuclear AhR was found in complex with
<U+03B3>-H2AX, DNA-PK, ATM and Lamin A. AhR and <U+03B3>-H2AX form together nuclear foci, which
disappear during DNA repair. Presence of nuclear AhR protein is associated with
ATM activation and chromatin relaxation indicated by acetylation of histone H3.
Taken together, we could show, that beyond the function as a transcription factor
the nuclear AhR is involved in the regulation of DNA repair. Reduction of nuclear
AhR inhibits DNA-double stand repair and radiosensitizes cells. First hints for
its molecular mechanism suggest a role during ATM activation and chromatin
relaxation, both essential for DNA repair.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26520184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Glycobiology. 2016 Mar;26(3):286-300. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwv095. Epub 2015 Oct
29.

ArnT proteins that catalyze the glycosylation of lipopolysaccharide share common 
features with bacterial N-oligosaccharyltransferases.

Tavares-Carreón F(1), Fathy Mohamed Y(2), Andrade A(3), Valvano MA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Western Ontario,
London, ON, Canada N6A 5C1 Instituto de Biotecnología, Facultad de Ciencias
Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León. Nuevo León, Mexico. (2)Centre for
Infection and Immunity, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast BT9 5GZ, UK
Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Alexandria
University, Alexandria, Egypt. (3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada N6A 5C1 Departamento de
Microbiología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León,
Monterrey, Nuevo León, Mexico. (4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada N6A 5C1 Centre for Infection
and Immunity, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast BT9 5GZ, UK
m.valvano@qub.ac.uk.

ArnT is a glycosyltransferase that catalyzes the addition of
4-amino-4-deoxy-l-arabinose (l-Ara4N) to the lipid A moiety of the
lipopolysaccharide. This is a critical modification enabling bacteria to resist
killing by antimicrobial peptides. ArnT is an integral inner membrane protein
consisting of 13 predicted transmembrane helices and a large periplasmic
C-terminal domain. We report here the identification of a functional motif with a
canonical consensus sequence DEXRYAX(5)MX(3)GXWX(9)YFEKPX(4)W spanning the first 
periplasmic loop, which is highly conserved in all ArnT proteins examined.
Site-directed mutagenesis demonstrated the contribution of this motif in ArnT
function, suggesting that these proteins have a common mechanism. We also
demonstrate that the Burkholderia cenocepacia and Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium ArnT C-terminal domain is required for polymyxin B resistance in
vivo. Deletion of the C-terminal domain in B. cenocepacia ArnT resulted in a
protein with significantly reduced in vitro binding to a lipid A fluorescent
substrate and unable to catalyze lipid A modification with l-Ara4N. An in silico 
predicted structural model of ArnT strongly resembled the tertiary structure of
Campylobacter lari PglB, a bacterial oligosaccharyltransferase involved in
protein N-glycosylation. Therefore, distantly related oligosaccharyltransferases 
from ArnT and PglB families operating on lipid and polypeptide substrates,
respectively, share unexpected structural similarity that could not be predicted 
from direct amino acid sequence comparisons. We propose that lipid A and protein 
glycosylation enzymes share a conserved catalytic mechanism despite their
evolutionary divergence.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4736538 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26515403  [PubMed - in process]


38. Arch Oral Biol. 2016 Jan;61:53-9. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2015.10.016. Epub
2015 Oct 22.

The role of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) in the pathology of pleomorphic
adenoma in parotid gland.

Drozdzik A(1), Kowalczyk R(2), Lipski M(3), Lapczuk J(4), Urasinska E(5),
Kurzawski M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Dentistry, Pomeranian Medical University, Powstancow
Wlkp 72, 70-111 Szczecin, Poland. Electronic address: agdro@pum.edu.pl.
(2)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, Pomeranian Medical University, Powstancow
Wlk 72, 70-111 Szczecin, Poland. (3)Department of Preclinical Conservative and
Endodontic Dentistry, Powstancow Wlkp 72, 70-111 Szczecin, Poland. (4)Department 
of Pharmacology, Pomeranian Medical University, Powstancow Wlkp 72, 70-111
Szczecin, Poland. (5)Department of Pathomorphology, Pomeranian Medical
University, Unii Lubelskiej 1, 71-252 Szczecin, Poland.

OBJECTIVES: Pleomorphic adenoma (benign mixed tumor) is one of the most common
salivary gland tumors. However, molecular mechanisms implicated in its
development are not entirely defined. Therefore, the study aimed at definition of
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) involvement in pleomorphic adenoma pathology, as 
the AhR controlled gene system was documented to play a role in development of
various human tumors.
DESIGN: The study was carried out in pleomorphic adenoma and control parotid
gland tissues where gene expression of AHR, AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT), AhR 
repressor (AHRR), as well as AhR controlled genes: CYP1A1 and CYP1B1, at mRNA and
protein (immunohistochemistry) levels were studied. Functional evaluation of AhR 
system was evaluated in HSY cells (human parotid gland adenocarcinoma cells)
using 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) as AhR specific inducer.
RESULTS: Pleomorphic adenoma specimens showed cytoplasmic and nuclear AhR
expression in epithelial cells as well as in mesenchymal cells. In parotid gland 
AhR was expressed in cytoplasm of duct cells. Quantitative expression at mRNA
level showed significantly higher expression of AHR, ARNT and CYP1B1, and
comparable levels of CYP1A1 in pleomorphic adenoma tissue in comparison to
healthy parotid gland. The HSY cell study revealed significantly higher
expression level of AHRR in HSY as compared with MCF-7 cells (human breast
adenocarcinoma cell line used as reference). Upon TCDD stimulation a drop in AHRR
level in HSY cells and an increase in MCF-7 cells were observed. The HSY and
MCF-7 cell proliferation rate (measured by WST-1 test) was not affected by TCDD.
CONCLUSIONS: Summarizing both in vitro and in vivo observations it can be stated 
that AhR system may play a role in the pathology of pleomorphic adenoma.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26513682  [PubMed - in process]


39. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2015 Dec;110(3):301-8. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2015.10.009. Epub 2015 Oct 14.

Association between brain-muscle-ARNT-like protein-2 (BMAL2) gene polymorphism
and type 2 diabetes mellitus in obese Japanese individuals: A cross-sectional
analysis of the Japan Multi-institutional Collaborative Cohort Study.

Yamaguchi M(1), Uemura H(1), Arisawa K(2), Katsuura-Kamano S(1), Hamajima N(3),
Hishida A(4), Suma S(5), Oze I(6), Nakamura K(7), Takashima N(8), Suzuki S(9),
Ibusuki R(10), Mikami H(11), Ohnaka K(12), Kuriyama N(13), Kubo M(14), Tanaka
H(6); Japan Multi-institutional Collaborative Cohort (J-MICC) Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, The Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
Tokushima University Graduate School, 3-18-15, Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima City,
Tokushima 770-8503, Japan. (2)Department of Preventive Medicine, The Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Tokushima University Graduate School, 3-18-15, Kuramoto-cho,
Tokushima City, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan. Electronic address:
karisawa@tokushima-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Healthcare Administration, Nagoya
University Graduate School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya City,
Aichi 466-8550, Japan. (4)Department of Preventive Medicine, Nagoya University
Graduate School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya City, Aichi
466-8550, Japan. (5)Department of Preventive Medicine, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya City, Aichi 466-8550,
Japan; Department of Oral Disease Research, National Center for Geriatrics and
Gerontology, 7-430 Morioka-cho, Obu City, Aichi 474-8511, Japan. (6)Division of
Epidemiology and Prevention, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Kanokoden, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya City, Aichi 464-8681, Japan. (7)St Mary's College
Faculty of Nursing, Tsubukuhonmachi 422, Kurume City, Fukuoka 830-8558, Japan.
(8)Department of Public Health, Shiga University of Medical Science, Seta
Tsukinowa-cho, Otsu City, Shiga 520-2192, Japan. (9)Department of Public Health, 
Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 1 Kawasumi,
Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya City, Aichi 467-8601, Japan. (10)Department of
International Island and Community Medicine, Kagoshima University Graduate School
of Medical and Dental Sciences, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima City, Kagoshima
890-8544, Japan. (11)Chiba Cancer Center Research Institute, Cancer Prevention
Center, 666-2 Nitona-cho, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8717, Japan. (12)Department of
Geriatric Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
3-1-1, Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka City, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
(13)Department of Epidemiology for Community Health and Medicine, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine, 465 Kajii-cho, Kawaramachi-hirokoji,
Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto City, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan. (14)Laboratory for Genotyping
Development, Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, 
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama City, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

AIMS: Brain-muscle-Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1) and BMAL2 genes are essential
components of the circadian clock, and are considered to be involved in glucose
homeostasis. We examined whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of BMAL1 
and BMAL2 were associated with the prevalence of type 2 diabetes (T2DM) in the
general Japanese population.
METHODS: We studied 2467 subjects (1232 men and 1235 women, 35-69 years old),
including 105 men and 57 women with T2DM, from the participants of the Japan
Multi-institutional Collaborative Cohort Study. The association between SNPs in
the BMAL1 (rs11022775 and rs2290035) and BMAL2 (rs7958822) genes and T2DM were
analyzed by multiple logistic regression after adjustment for potential
confounders. Analysis was also performed after stratification by body mass index 
(=25kg/m(2) and <25kg/m(2)) to investigate an interaction between genotypes and
obesity.
RESULTS: The A/G and A/A genotypes of BMAL2 rs7958822 showed significantly higher
adjusted odds ratios (OR) for T2DM than the G/G genotype among obese men (OR=2.2,
95% confidence intervals [CI] 1.1, 4.6, P for interaction=0.0495) and obese women
(OR=2.7, 95% CI 1.1, 6.7, P for interaction=0.199). There were no significant
associations between BMAL1 rs11022775 or rs2290035 genotypes and T2DM.
CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to show the
significant association between BMAL2 rs7958822 genotype and T2DM among obese
subjects.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26497775  [PubMed - in process]


40. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 22;10(10):e0140483. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140483.
eCollection 2015.

Application of the pMHC Array to Characterise Tumour Antigen Specific T Cell
Populations in Leukaemia Patients at Disease Diagnosis.

Brooks SE(1), Bonney SA(1), Lee C(2), Publicover A(3), Khan G(4), Smits EL(5),
Sigurdardottir D(6), Arno M(7), Li D(8), Mills KI(9), Pulford K(8), Banham AH(8),
van Tendeloo V(5), Mufti GJ(10), Rammensee HG(6), Elliott TJ(1), Orchard KH(3),
Guinn BA(11).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Sciences Unit (MP824), Somers Cancer Sciences Building, University of
Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. (2)Cancer Sciences Unit (MP824), Somers
Cancer Sciences Building, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom;
Department of Haematology, Southampton University Hospitals Trust, University of 
Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. (3)Department of Haematology,
Southampton University Hospitals Trust, University of Southampton, Southampton,
United Kingdom. (4)Department of Life Sciences, University of Bedfordshire, Park 
Square, Luton, United Kingdom. (5)Laboratory of Experimental Haematology, Vaccine
and Infectious Disease Institute, University of Antwerp, Wilrijkstraat 10, B-2650
Antwerp, Belgium. (6)Department of Immunology, Institute for Cell Biology,
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (7)King's Genomics Centre, School of
Biomedical and Health Sciences, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(8)Nuffield Division of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Radcliffe Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom. 
(9)Blood Cancer Research Group, Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology
(CCRCB), Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom. (10)Department of
Haematological Medicine, King's College London School of Medicine, London, United
Kingdom. (11)Cancer Sciences Unit (MP824), Somers Cancer Sciences Building,
University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom; Department of Life
Sciences, University of Bedfordshire, Park Square, Luton, United Kingdom;
Department of Haematological Medicine, King's College London School of Medicine, 
London, United Kingdom.

Immunotherapy treatments for cancer are becoming increasingly successful, however
to further improve our understanding of the T-cell recognition involved in
effective responses and to encourage moves towards the development of
personalised treatments for leukaemia immunotherapy, precise antigenic targets in
individual patients have been identified. Cellular arrays using peptide-MHC
(pMHC) tetramers allow the simultaneous detection of different antigen specific
T-cell populations naturally circulating in patients and normal donors. We have
developed the pMHC array to detect CD8+ T-cell populations in leukaemia patients 
that recognise epitopes within viral antigens (cytomegalovirus (CMV) and
influenza (Flu)) and leukaemia antigens (including Per Arnt Sim domain 1 (PASD1),
MelanA, Wilms' Tumour (WT1) and tyrosinase). We show that the pMHC array is at
least as sensitive as flow cytometry and has the potential to rapidly identify
more than 40 specific T-cell populations in a small sample of T-cells (0.8-1.4 x 
10(6)). Fourteen of the twenty-six acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) patients
analysed had T cells that recognised tumour antigen epitopes, and eight of these 
recognised PASD1 epitopes. Other tumour epitopes recognised were MelanA (n = 3), 
tyrosinase (n = 3) and WT1(126-134) (n = 1). One of the seven acute lymphocytic
leukaemia (ALL) patients analysed had T cells that recognised the MUC1(950-958)
epitope. In the future the pMHC array may be used provide point of care T-cell
analyses, predict patient response to conventional therapy and direct
personalised immunotherapy for patients.

PMCID: PMC4619595
PMID: 26492414  [PubMed - in process]


41. MBio. 2015 Oct 20;6(5):e01415-15. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01415-15.

Convergence of alarmone and cell cycle signaling from trans-encoded sensory
domains.

Sanselicio S(1), Viollier PH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Institute of Genetics and
Genomics in Geneva (iGE3), Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland. (2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Institute of
Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (iGE3), Faculty of Medicine, University of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland patrick.viollier@unige.ch.

Despite the myriad of different sensory domains encoded in bacterial genomes,
only a few are known to control the cell cycle. Here, suppressor genetics was
used to unveil the regulatory interplay between the PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) domain
protein MopJ and the uncharacterized GAF (cyclic GMP-phosphodiesterase-adenylyl
cyclase-FhlA) domain protein PtsP, which resembles an alternative component of
the phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) transferase system. Both of these systems
indirectly target the Caulobacter crescentus cell cycle master regulator CtrA,
but in different ways. While MopJ acts on CtrA via the cell cycle kinases DivJ
and DivL, which control the removal of CtrA at the G1-S transition, our data show
that PtsP signals through the conserved alarmone (p)ppGpp, which prevents CtrA
cycling under nutritional stress and in stationary phase. We found that PtsP
interacts genetically and physically with the (p)ppGpp synthase/hydrolase SpoT
and that it modulates several promoters that are directly activated by the cell
cycle transcriptional regulator GcrA. Thus, parallel systems integrate
nutritional and systemic signals within the cell cycle transcriptional network,
converging on the essential alphaproteobacterial regulator CtrA while also
affecting global cell cycle transcription in other ways.IMPORTANCE: Many
alphaproteobacteria divide asymmetrically, and their cell cycle progression is
carefully regulated. How these bacteria control the cell cycle in response to
nutrient limitation is not well understood. Here, we identify a multicomponent
signaling pathway that acts on the cell cycle when nutrients become scarce in
stationary phase. We show that efficient accumulation of the master cell cycle
regulator CtrA in stationary-phase Caulobacter crescentus cells requires the
previously identified stationary-phase/cell cycle regulator MopJ as well as the
phosphoenolpyruvate protein phosphotransferase PtsP, which acts via the conserved
(p)ppGpp synthase SpoT. We identify cell cycle-regulated promoters that are
affected by this pathway, providing an explanation of how (p)ppGpp-signaling
might couple starvation to control cell cycle progression in Caulobacter spp. and
likely other Alphaproteobacteria. This pathway has the potential to integrate
carbon fluctuation into cell cycle control, since in phosphotransferase systems
it is the glycolytic product phosphenolpyruvate (PEP) rather than ATP that is
used as the phosphor donor for phosphorylation.

Copyright © 2015 Sanselicio and Viollier.

PMCID: PMC4620464
PMID: 26489861  [PubMed - in process]


42. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Oct 17. [Epub ahead of print]

Selective Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Modulator 3,3'-Diindolylmethane Impairs AhR
and ARNT Signaling and Protects Mouse Neuronal Cells Against Hypoxia.

Rzemieniec J(1), Litwa E(1), Wnuk A(1), Lason W(1), Krzeptowski W(2), Kajta M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Neuroendocrinology, Institute of Pharmacology,
Polish Academy of Sciences, 12 Smetna Street, 31-343, Krakow, Poland.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Imaging, Confocal Microscopy Laboratory,
Institute of Zoology, Jagiellonian University, 9 Gronostajowa Street, 30-387,
Krakow, Poland. (3)Department of Experimental Neuroendocrinology, Institute of
Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences, 12 Smetna Street, 31-343, Krakow,
Poland. kajta@if-pan.krakow.pl.

The neuroprotective potential of 3,3'-diindolylmethane (DIM), which is a
selective aryl hydrocarbon receptor modulator, has recently been shown in
cellular and animal models of Parkinson's disease and lipopolysaccharide-induced 
inflammation. However, there are no data concerning the protective capacity and
mechanisms of DIM action in neuronal cells exposed to hypoxia. The aim of the
present study was to investigate the neuroprotective potential of DIM against the
hypoxia-induced damage in mouse hippocampal cells in primary cultures, with a
particular focus on DIM interactions with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR),
its nuclear translocator ARNT, and estrogen receptor ß (ERß). In the present
study, 18 h of hypoxia induced apoptotic processes, in terms of the mitochondrial
membrane potential, activation of caspase-3, and fragmentation of cell nuclei.
These effects were accompanied by substantial lactate dehydrogenase release and
neuronal cell death. The results of the present study demonstrated strong
neuroprotective and anti-apoptotic actions of DIM in hippocampal cells exposed to
hypoxia. In addition, DIM decreased the Ahr and Arnt mRNA expression and
stimulated Erß mRNA expression level. DIM-induced mRNA alterations were mirrored 
by changes in protein levels, except for ERß, as detected by ELISA, Western
blotting, and immunofluorescence labeling. We also demonstrated that DIM
decreased the expression of AhR-regulated CYP1A1. Using specific siRNAs, we
provided evidence that impairment of AhR and ARNT, but not ERß plays a key role
in the neuroprotective action of DIM against hypoxia-induced cell damage. This
study may have implication for identifying new agents that could protect neurons 
against hypoxia by targeting AhR/ARNT signaling.

PMID: 26476840  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


43. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 14;10(10):e0128708. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128708.
eCollection 2015.

Dopamine D2-Receptor Antagonists Down-Regulate CYP1A1/2 and CYP1B1 in the Rat
Liver.

Harkitis P(1), Daskalopoulos EP(1), Malliou F(1), Lang MA(2), Marselos M(1),
Fotopoulos A(3), Albucharali G(3), Konstandi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ioannina,
Ioannina GR-451 10, Greece. (2)University of Queensland, National Research Centre
for Environmental Toxicology (Entox), 39 Kessels Road, Coopers Plains, QLD 4108, 
Australia. (3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Ioannina, Ioannina GR-451 10, Greece.

Dopaminergic systems regulate the release of several hormones including growth
hormone (GH), thyroid hormones, insulin, glucocorticoids and prolactin (PRL) that
play significant roles in the regulation of various Cytochrome P450 (CYP)
enzymes. The present study investigated the role of dopamine D2-receptor-linked
pathways in the regulation of CYP1A1, CYP1A2 and CYP1B1 that belong to a battery 
of genes controlled by the Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor (AhR) and play a crucial
role in the metabolism and toxicity of numerous environmental toxicants.
Inhibition of dopamine D2-receptors with sulpiride (SULP) significantly repressed
the constitutive and benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P)-induced CYP1A1, CYP1A2 and CYP1B
expression in the rat liver. The expression of AhR, heat shock protein 90 (HSP90)
and AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT) was suppressed by SULP in B[a]P-treated
livers, whereas the AhRR expression was increased by the drug suggesting that the
SULP-mediated repression of the CYP1 inducibility is due to inactivation of the
AhR regulatory system. At signal transduction level, the D2-mediated
down-regulation of constitutive CYP1A1/2 and CYP1B1 expression appears to be
mediated by activation of the insulin/PI3K/AKT pathway. PRL-linked pathways
exerting a negative control on various CYPs, and inactivation of the
glucocorticoid-linked pathways that positively control the AhR-regulated CYP1
genes, may also participate in the SULP-mediated repression of both, the
constitutive and induced CYP1 expression. The present findings indicate that
drugs acting as D2-dopamine receptor antagonists can modify several hormone
systems that regulate the expression of CYP1A1, CYP1A2 and CYP1B1, and may affect
the toxicity and carcinogenicity outcome of numerous toxicants and
pre-carcinogenic substances. Therefore, these drugs could be considered as a part
of the strategy to reduce the risk of exposure to environmental pollutants and
pre-carcinogens.

PMCID: PMC4605514
PMID: 26466350  [PubMed - in process]


44. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2015 Oct;71(Pt 10):2127-36. doi:
10.1107/S139900471501384X. Epub 2015 Sep 30.

Structural basis for amino-acid recognition and transmembrane signalling by
tandem Per-Arnt-Sim (tandem PAS) chemoreceptor sensory domains.

Liu YC(1), Machuca MA(1), Beckham SA(2), Gunzburg MJ(2), Roujeinikova A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800,
Australia. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash
University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia.

Chemotaxis, mediated by methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein (MCP) receptors,
plays an important role in the ecology of bacterial populations. This paper
presents the first crystallographic analysis of the structure and ligand-induced 
conformational changes of the periplasmic tandem Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) sensing
domain (PTPSD) of a characterized MCP chemoreceptor. Analysis of the complex of
the Campylobacter jejuni Tlp3 PTPSD with isoleucine (a chemoattractant) revealed 
that the PTPSD is a dimer in the crystal. The two ligand-binding sites are
located in the membrane-distal PAS domains on the faces opposite to the dimer
interface. Mutagenesis experiments show that the five strongly conserved residues
that stabilize the main-chain moiety of isoleucine are essential for binding,
suggesting that the mechanism by which this family of chemoreceptors recognizes
amino acids is highly conserved. Although the fold and mode of ligand binding of 
the PTPSD are different from the aspartic acid receptor Tar, the structural
analysis suggests that the PTPSDs of amino-acid chemoreceptors are also likely to
signal by a piston displacement mechanism. The PTPSD fluctuates between piston
(C-terminal helix) `up' and piston `down' states. Binding of an attractant to the
distal PAS domain locks it in the closed form, weakening its association with the
proximal domain and resulting in the transition of the latter into an open form, 
concomitant with a downward (towards the membrane) 4 Å piston displacement of the
C-terminal helix. In vivo, this movement would generate a transmembrane signal by
driving a downward displacement of the transmembrane helix 2 towards the
cytoplasm.

PMID: 26457436  [PubMed - in process]


45. J Biol Chem. 2015 Nov 13;290(46):27767-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.678144. Epub
2015 Sep 30.

Homocitrullination Is a Novel Histone H1 Epigenetic Mark Dependent on Aryl
Hydrocarbon Receptor Recruitment of Carbamoyl Phosphate Synthase 1.

Joshi AD(1), Mustafa MG(2), Lichti CF(1), Elferink CJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555 and. (2)Protea, Morgantown, West Virginia 
26505. (3)From the Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555 and coelferi@utmb.edu.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a regulator of xenobiotic toxicity, is a
member of the eukaryotic Per-Arnt-Sim domain protein family of transcription
factors. Recent evidence identified a novel AhR DNA recognition sequence called
the nonconsensus xenobiotic response element (NC-XRE). AhR binding to the NC-XRE 
in response to activation by the canonical ligand
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin resulted in concomitant recruitment of
carbamoyl phosphate synthase 1 (CPS1) to the NC-XRE. Studies presented here
demonstrate that CPS1 is a bona fide nuclear protein involved in
homocitrullination (hcit), including a key lysine residue on histone H1
(H1K34hcit). H1K34hcit represents a hitherto unknown epigenetic mark implicated
in enhanced gene expression of the peptidylarginine deiminase 2 gene, itself a
chromatin-modifying protein. Collectively, our data suggest that AhR activation
promotes CPS1 recruitment to DNA enhancer sites in the genome, resulting in a
specific enzyme-independent post-translational modification of the linker histone
H1 protein (H1K34hcit), pivotal in altering local chromatin structure and
transcriptional activation.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4646023 [Available on 2016-11-13]
PMID: 26424795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Nutr. 2015 Nov;145(11):2448-55. doi: 10.3945/jn.115.215392. Epub 2015 Sep 30.

A Single Meal Containing Raw, Crushed Garlic Influences Expression of Immunity-
and Cancer-Related Genes in Whole Blood of Humans.

Charron CS(1), Dawson HD(1), Albaugh GP(1), Solverson PM(1), Vinyard BT(2),
Solano-Aguilar GI(1), Molokin A(1), Novotny JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Beltsville Human Nutrition Research Center and. (2)Biometrical Consulting
Services, USDA, Agricultural Research Service, Beltsville, MD. (3)Beltsville
Human Nutrition Research Center and janet.novotny@ars.usda.gov.

BACKGROUND: Preclinical and epidemiologic studies suggest that garlic intake is
inversely associated with the progression of cancer and cardiovascular disease.
OBJECTIVE: We designed a study to probe the mechanisms of garlic action in
humans.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized crossover feeding trial in which 17 volunteers
consumed a garlic-containing meal (100 g white bread, 15 g butter, and 5 g raw,
crushed garlic) or a garlic-free control meal (100 g white bread and 15 g butter)
after 10 d of consuming a controlled, garlic-free diet. Blood was collected
before and 3 h after test meal consumption for gene expression analysis in whole 
blood. Illumina BeadArray was used to screen for genes of interest, followed by
real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) 
on selected genes. To augment human study findings, Mono Mac 6 cells were treated
with a purified garlic extract (0.5 µL/mL), and mRNA was measured by qRT-PCR at
0, 3, 6, and 24 h.
RESULTS: The following 7 genes were found to be upregulated by garlic intake:
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT), hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF1A), proto-oncogene c-Jun (JUN), nuclear 
factor of activated T cells (NFAT) activating protein with immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motif 1 (NFAM1), oncostatin M (OSM), and V-rel avian
reticuloendotheliosis viral oncogene homolog (REL). Fold-increases in mRNA
transcripts ranged from 1.6 (HIF1A) to 3.0 (NFAM1) (P < 0.05). The mRNA levels of
5 of the 7 genes that were upregulated in the human trial were also upregulated
in cell culture at 3 and 6 h: AHR, HIF1A, JUN, OSM, and REL. Fold-increases in
mRNA transcripts in cell culture ranged from 1.7 (HIF1A) to 12.1 (JUN) (P <
0.01). OSM protein was measured by ELISA and was significantly higher than the
control at 3, 6, and 24 h (24 h: 19.5 ± 1.4 and 74.8 ± 1.4 pg/mL for control and 
garlic, respectively). OSM is a pleiotropic cytokine that inhibits several tumor 
cell lines in culture.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that the bioactivity of garlic is multifaceted
and includes activation of genes related to immunity, apoptosis, and xenobiotic
metabolism in humans and Mono Mac 6 cells. This trial is registered at
clinicaltrials.gov as NCT01293591.

© 2015 American Society for Nutrition.

PMCID: PMC4620724 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26423732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Diabetologia. 2015 Dec;58(12):2832-42. doi: 10.1007/s00125-015-3768-4. Epub 2015 
Sep 26.

Deletion of ARNT/HIF1ß in pancreatic beta cells does not impair glucose
homeostasis in mice, but is associated with defective glucose sensing ex vivo.

Pillai R(1), Paglialunga S(1), Hoang M(1), Cousteils K(1), Prentice KJ(2),
Bombardier E(3), Huang M(1), Gonzalez FJ(4), Tupling AR(3), Wheeler MB(2), Joseph
JW(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of Waterloo, Health Science Campus building A, 
room 4008, 10A Victoria Street South, Kitchener, ON, Canada, N2G 1C5.
(2)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Kinesiology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada.
(4)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)School of Pharmacy, University of Waterloo, Health Science Campus building A, 
room 4008, 10A Victoria Street South, Kitchener, ON, Canada, N2G 1C5.
j3joseph@uwaterloo.ca.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: It has been suggested that the transcription factor ARNT/HIF1ß
is critical for maintaining in vivo glucose homeostasis and pancreatic beta cell 
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS). Our goal was to gain more insights
into the metabolic defects seen after the loss of ARNT/HIF1ß in beta cells.
METHODS: The in vivo and in vitro consequences of the loss of ARNT/HIF1ß were
investigated in beta cell specific Arnt/Hif1ß knockout mice (ß-Arnt (fl/fl/Cre)
mice).
RESULTS: The only in vivo defects found in ß-Arnt (fl/fl/Cre) mice were
significant increases in the respiratory exchange ratio and in vivo carbohydrate 
oxidation, and a decrease in lipid oxidation. The mitochondrial oxygen
consumption rate was unaltered in mouse ß-Arnt (fl/fl/Cre) islets upon glucose
stimulation. ß-Arnt (fl/fl/Cre) islets had an impairment in the
glucose-stimulated increase in Ca(2+) signalling and a reduced insulin secretory 
response to glucose in the presence of KCl and diazoxide. The glucose-stimulated 
increase in the NADPH/NADP(+) ratio was reduced in ß-Arnt (fl/fl/Cre) islets. The
reduced GSIS and NADPH/NADP(+) levels in ß-Arnt (fl/fl/Cre) islets could be
rescued by treatment with membrane-permeable tricarboxylic acid intermediates.
Small interfering (si)RNA mediated knockdown of ARNT/HIF1ß in human islets also
inhibited GSIS. These results suggest that the regulation of GSIS by the KATP
channel-dependent and -independent pathways is affected by the loss of ARNT/HIF1ß
in islets.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This study provides three new insights into the role 
of ARNT/HIF1ß in beta cells: (1) ARNT/HIF1ß deletion in mice impairs GSIS ex
vivo; (2) ß-Arnt (fl/fl/Cre) mice have an increased respiratory exchange ratio;
and (3) ARNT/HIF1ß is required for GSIS in human islets.

PMID: 26409461  [PubMed - in process]


48. Nutrients. 2015 Sep 7;7(9):7437-50. doi: 10.3390/nu7095347.

Per-Arnt-Sim Kinase (PASK): An Emerging Regulator of Mammalian Glucose and Lipid 
Metabolism.

Zhang DD(1), Zhang JG(2), Wang YZ(3), Liu Y(4), Liu GL(5), Li XY(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Shanghai General Hospital, School of
medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, No.100 Haining Road, Shanghai 200025,
China. RainbowDan0513@hotmail.com. (2)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Shanghai
General Hospital, School of medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, No.100
Haining Road, Shanghai 200025, China. grissomzhang@hotmail.com. (3)Department of 
Clinical Pharmacy, Shanghai General Hospital, School of medicine, Shanghai
Jiaotong University, No.100 Haining Road, Shanghai 200025, China.
yzwyy0506@126.com. (4)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Shanghai General Hospital,
School of medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, No.100 Haining Road, Shanghai
200025, China. liuying2e@163.com. (5)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Shanghai
General Hospital, School of medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, No.100
Haining Road, Shanghai 200025, China. gaolinliu@aliyun.com. (6)Department of
Clinical Pharmacy, Shanghai General Hospital, School of medicine, Shanghai
Jiaotong University, No.100 Haining Road, Shanghai 200025, China.
lixiaoyulxb@163.com.

Per-Arnt-Sim Kinase (PASK) is an evolutionarily-conserved nutrient-responsive
protein kinase that regulates lipid and glucose metabolism, mitochondrial
respiration, phosphorylation, and gene expression. Recent data suggests that
mammalian PAS kinase is involved in glucose metabolism and acts on pancreatic
islet a/ß cells and glycogen synthase (GS), affecting insulin secretion and blood
glucose levels. In addition, PASK knockout mice (PASK-/-) are protected from
obesity, liver triglyceride accumulation, and insulin resistance when fed a
high-fat diet, implying that PASK may be a new target for metabolic syndrome
(MetS) treatment as well as the cellular nutrients and energy sensors-adenosine
monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and the targets of rapamycin 
(m-TOR). In this review, we will briefly summarize the regulation of PASK on
mammalian glucose and lipid metabolism and its possible mechanism, and further
explore the potential targets for MetS therapy.

PMCID: PMC4586542
PMID: 26371032  [PubMed - in process]


49. Toxicol Sci. 2015 Dec;148(2):517-30. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfv199. Epub 2015 Sep 8.

NcoA2-Dependent Inhibition of HIF-1a Activation Is Regulated via AhR.

Tsai CH(1), Li CH(2), Liao PL(3), Cheng YW(4), Lin CH(4), Huang SH(4), Kang
JJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)*Institute of Toxicology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan; (2)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine; Graduate
Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, and. (3)*Institute of
Toxicology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan;
School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
Taiwan. (4)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (5)*Institute of Toxicology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan; jjkang@ntu.edu.tw.

High endogenous levels of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) contribute to hypoxia
signaling pathway inhibition following exposure to the potent AhR ligand
benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P) and could alter cellular homeostasis and disease
condition. Increasing evidence indicates that AhR might compete with AhR nuclear 
translocator (ARNT) for complex formation with hypoxia-inducible factor-1a
(HIF-1a) for transactivation, which could alter several physiological variables. 
Nuclear receptor coactivator 2 (NcoA2) is a transcription coactivator that
regulates transcription factor activation and inhibition of basic
helix-loop-helix Per (Period)-ARNT-SIM (single-minded) (bHLH-PAS) family
proteins, such as HIF-1a, ARNT, and AhR, through protein-protein interactions. In
this study, we demonstrated that both hypoxia and hypoxia-mimic conditions
decreased NcoA2 protein expression in HEK293T cells. Hypoxia response element
(HRE) and xenobiotic-responsive element (XRE) transactivation also were
downregulated with NcoA2 knockdown under hypoxic conditions. In addition, B[a]P
significantly decreased NcoA2 protein expression be accompanied with AhR
degradation. We next evaluated whether the absence of AhR could affect NcoA2
protein function under hypoxia-mimetic conditions. NcoA2 and HIF-1a nuclear
localization decreased in both B[a]P-pretreated and AhR-knockdown HepG2 cells
under hypoxia-mimic conditions. Interestingly, NcoA2 overexpression downregulated
HRE transactivation by competing with HIF-1a and AhR to form protein complexes
with ARNT. Both NcoA2 knockdown and overexpression inhibited endothelial cell
tube formation in vitro. We also demonstrated using the in vivo plug assay that
NcoA2-regulated vascularization decreased in mice. Taken together, these results 
revealed a biphasic role of NcoA2 between AhR and hypoxic conditions, thus
providing a novel mechanism underlying the cross talk between AhR and hypoxia
that affects disease development and progression.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26350169  [PubMed - in process]


50. Biomark Cancer. 2015 Aug 16;7:31-8. doi: 10.4137/BIC.S28378. eCollection 2015.

Infrequent Expression of the Cancer-Testis Antigen, PASD1, in Ovarian Cancer.

Khan G(1), Brooks SE(2), Mills KI(3), Guinn BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Bedfordshire, Park Square, Luton,
Bedfordshire, UK. (2)Biomedical Imaging Unit, Southampton General Hospital,
Southampton, UK. (3)Blood Cancer Research Group, Centre for Cancer Research and
Cell Biology (CCRCB), Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, UK.

Ovarian cancer is very treatable in the early stages of disease; however, it is
usually detected in the later stages, at which time, treatment is no longer as
effective. If discovered early (Stage I), there is a 90% chance of five-year
survival. Therefore, it is imperative that early-stage biomarkers are identified 
to enhance the early detection of ovarian cancer. Cancer-testis antigens (CTAs), 
such as Per ARNT SIM (PAS) domain containing 1 (PASD1), are unique in that their 
expression is restricted to immunologically restricted sites, such as the testis 
and placenta, which do not express MHC class I, and cancer, making them ideally
positioned to act as targets for immunotherapy as well as potential biomarkers
for cancer detection where expressed. We examined the expression of PASD1a and b 
in a number of cell lines, as well as eight healthy ovary samples, eight normal
adjacent ovarian tissues, and 191 ovarian cancer tissues, which were
predominantly stage I (n = 164) and stage II (n = 14) disease. We found that
despite the positive staining of skin cancer, only one stage Ic ovarian cancer
patient tissue expressed PASD1a and b at detectable levels. This may reflect the 
predominantly stage I ovarian cancer samples examined. To examine the restriction
of PASD1 expression, we examined endometrial tissue arrays and found no
expression in 30 malignant tumor tissues, 23 cases of hyperplasia, or 16 normal
endometrial tissues. Our study suggests that the search for a single
cancer-testes antigen/biomarker that can detect early ovarian cancer must
continue.

PMCID: PMC4539101
PMID: 26327782  [PubMed]


51. Toxicology. 2015 Nov 4;337:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2015.08.007. Epub 2015 Aug 21.

Arylhydrocarbon receptor-dependent mIndy (Slc13a5) induction as possible
contributor to benzo[a]pyrene-induced lipid accumulation in hepatocytes.

Neuschäfer-Rube F(1), Schraplau A(1), Schewe B(1), Lieske S(2), Krützfeldt JM(1),
Ringel S(1), Henkel J(1), Birkenfeld AL(3), Püschel GP(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Potsdam, Institute of Nutritional Science, Department of
Nutritional Biochemistry, Arthur-Scheunert-Allee 114-116, D-14558 Nuthetal,
Germany. (2)University of Potsdam, Institute of Nutritional Science, Department
of Nutritional Biochemistry, Arthur-Scheunert-Allee 114-116, D-14558 Nuthetal,
Germany; Section of Metabolic Vascular Medicine and Paul Langerhans Institute
Dresden (PLID), Medical Clinic III, University Clinic Dresden, TU Dresden, 01307,
Germany. (3)Section of Metabolic Vascular Medicine and Paul Langerhans Institute 
Dresden (PLID), Medical Clinic III, University Clinic Dresden, TU Dresden, 01307,
Germany; Division of Diabetes & Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences & 
Medicine, King's College London, London SE1 8WA, UK. (4)University of Potsdam,
Institute of Nutritional Science, Department of Nutritional Biochemistry,
Arthur-Scheunert-Allee 114-116, D-14558 Nuthetal, Germany. Electronic address:
gpuesche@uni-potsdam.de.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is a growing problem in industrialized and
developing countries. Hepatic lipid accumulation is the result of an imbalance
between fatty acid uptake, fatty acid de novo synthesis, ß-oxidation and
secretion of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins from the hepatocyte. A central
regulator of hepatic lipid metabolism is cytosolic citrate that can either be
derived from the mitochondrium or be taken up from the blood via the plasma
membrane sodium citrate transporter NaCT, the product of the mammalian INDY gene 
(SLC13A5). mINDY ablation protects against diet-induced steatosis whereas mINDY
expression is increased in patients with hepatic steatosis. Diet-induced hepatic 
steatosis is also enhanced by activation of the arylhyrocarbon receptor (AhR)
both in humans and animal models. Therefore, the hypothesis was tested whether
the mINDY gene might be a target of the AhR. In accordance with such a
hypothesis, the AhR activator benzo[a]pyrene induced the mINDY expression in
primary cultures of rat hepatocytes in an AhR-dependent manner. This induction
resulted in an increased citrate uptake and citrate incorporation into lipids
which probably was further enhanced by the benzo[a]pyrene-dependent induction of 
key enzymes of fatty acid synthesis. A potential AhR binding site was identified 
in the mINDY promoter that appears to be conserved in the human promoter.
Elimination or mutation of this site largely abolished the activation of the
mINDY promoter by benzo[a]pyrene. This study thus identified the mINDY as an AhR 
target gene. AhR-dependent induction of the mINDY gene might contribute to the
development of hepatic steatosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26303333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Toxicol Sci. 2015 Nov;148(1):229-40. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfv178. Epub 2015 Aug
10.

Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Activation Synergistically Induces
Lipopolysaccharide-Mediated Expression of Proinflammatory Chemokine (c-c motif)
Ligand 20.

Lahoti TS(1), Boyer JA(1), Kusnadi A(1), Muku GE(1), Murray IA(1), Perdew GH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Center for Molecular
Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, Penn State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802. (2)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Center
for Molecular Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, Penn State University, University
Park, Pennsylvania 16802 ghp2@psu.edu.

The Ah receptor (AHR) is directly involved in the regulation of both innate and
adaptive immunity. However, these activities are poorly understood at the level
of gene regulation. The chemokine (c-c motif) ligand 20 (CCL20) plays a
nonredundant role in the chemoattraction of C-C motif receptor 6 expressing cells
(eg, T cells and others). A survey of promoter regions of chemokine genes
revealed that there are several putative dioxin responsive elements in the mouse 
Ccl20 promoter. The addition of an AHR agonist along with lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) to cultured primary peritoneal macrophages results in synergistic induction
of both Ccl20 mRNA and protein, compared with each compound alone. Through the
use of macrophage cultures derived from Ahr(-) (/) (-) and Ahr(nls/nls) mice, it 
was established that expression of the AHR and its ability to translocate into
the nucleus are necessary for AHR ligand-mediated synergistic induction of Ccl20.
Gel shift analysis determined that a potent tandem AHR binding site ~3.1 kb
upstream from the transcriptional start site can efficiently bind the AHR/ARNT
(aryl hydrocarbon receptor/AHR nuclear translocator) heterodimer upon activation 
with a number of AHR agonists. Furthermore, studies reveal that LPS increases AHR
levels on the Ccl20 promoter while decreasing HDAC1 occupancy. The level of Ccl20
constitutive expression in the colon is greatly attenuated in Ahr(-) (/) (-)
mice. These studies suggest that the presence of AHR ligands during localized
inflammation may augment chemokine expression, thus participating in the overall 
response to pathogens.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4731409 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26259605  [PubMed - in process]


53. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2015 Aug 8;17(1):69. doi: 10.1186/s12968-015-0171-8.

Fast assessment of long axis strain with standard cardiovascular magnetic
resonance: a validation study of a novel parameter with reference values.

Riffel JH(1), Andre F(2), Maertens M(3), Rost F(4), Keller MG(5), Giusca S(6),
Seitz S(7), Kristen AV(8), Müller M(9), Giannitsis E(10), Korosoglou G(11), Katus
HA(12,)(13), Buss SJ(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Angiology and Pneumology, University of Heidelberg, 
INF 410, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany. johannes.riffel@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Angiology and Pneumology, University of Heidelberg, 
INF 410, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany. florian.andre@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Angiology and Pneumology, University of Heidelberg, 
INF 410, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany. m-maertens@gmx.de. (4)Department of
Cardiology, Angiology and Pneumology, University of Heidelberg, INF 410, 69120,
Heidelberg, Germany. franzi.rost@gmx.net. (5)Department of Cardiology, Angiology 
and Pneumology, University of Heidelberg, INF 410, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
mariuskeller@gmail.com. (6)Department of Cardiology, Angiology and Pneumology,
University of Heidelberg, INF 410, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
sorin.giusca@med.uni-heidelberg.de. (7)Department of Cardiology, Angiology and
Pneumology, University of Heidelberg, INF 410, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
sebastian.seitz@med.uni-heidelberg.de. (8)Department of Cardiology, Angiology and
Pneumology, University of Heidelberg, INF 410, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
Arnt.Kristen@med.uni-heidelberg.de. (9)Department of Cardiology, Angiology and
Pneumology, University of Heidelberg, INF 410, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
Matthias.muller@med.uni-heidelberg.de. (10)Department of Cardiology, Angiology
and Pneumology, University of Heidelberg, INF 410, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
Evangelos.Giannitsis@med.uni-heidelberg.de. (11)Department of Cardiology,
Angiology and Pneumology, University of Heidelberg, INF 410, 69120, Heidelberg,
Germany. grigorios.korosoglou@med.uni-heidelberg.de. (12)Department of
Cardiology, Angiology and Pneumology, University of Heidelberg, INF 410, 69120,
Heidelberg, Germany. hugo.katus@med.uni-heidelberg.de. (13)DZHK (German Centre
for Cardiovascular Research), Heidelberg, Germany.
hugo.katus@med.uni-heidelberg.de. (14)Department of Cardiology, Angiology and
Pneumology, University of Heidelberg, INF 410, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
sebastian.buss@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

BACKGROUND: Assessment of longitudinal function with cardiovascular magnetic
resonance (CMR) is limited to measurement of systolic excursion of the mitral
annulus (MAPSE) or elaborate strain imaging modalities. The aim of this study was
to develop a fast assessable parameter for the measurement of long axis strain
(LAS) with CMR.
METHODS: 40 healthy volunteers and 125 patients with different forms of
cardiomyopathy were retrospectively analyzed. Four different approaches for the
assessment of LAS with CMR measuring the distance between the LV apex and a line 
connecting the origins of the mitral valve leaflets in enddiastole and endsystole
were evaluated. Values for LAS were calculated according to the strain formula.
RESULTS: LAS derived from the distance of the epicardial apical border to the
midpoint of the line connecting the mitral valve insertion points (LAS-epi/mid)
proved to be the most reliable parameter for the assessment of LAS among the
different approaches. LAS-epi/mid displayed the highest sensitivity (81.6 %) and 
specificity (97.5 %), furthermore showing the best correlation with feature
tracking (FTI) derived transmural longitudinal strain (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.85). Moreover,
LAS-epi/mid was non-inferior to FTI in discriminating controls from patients
(Area under the curve (AUC)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.95 vs. 0.94, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>NS). The time required for
analysis of LAS-epi/mid was significantly shorter than for FTI (67<U+2009>±<U+2009>8 s vs.
180<U+2009>±<U+2009>14 s, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). Additionally, LAS-epi/mid performed significantly better
than MAPSE (Delta AUC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.09; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.005) and the ejection fraction (Delta
AUC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.11; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0002). Reference values were derived from 234 selected healthy 
volunteers. Mean value for LAS-epi/mid was -17.1<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.3 %. Mean values for men
were significantly lower compared to women (-16.5<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.2 vs. -17.9<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.1 %;
p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001), while LAS decreased with age.
CONCLUSIONS: LAS-epi/mid is a novel and fast assessable parameter for the
analysis of global longitudinal function with non-inferiority compared to
transmural longitudinal strain.

PMCID: PMC4529700
PMID: 26253220  [PubMed - in process]


54. Syst Biol Reprod Med. 2015;61(6):360-6. doi: 10.3109/19396368.2015.1069420. Epub 
2015 Aug 6.

Evidence for clock genes circadian rhythms in human full-term placenta.

Pérez S(1), Murias L(2), Fernández-Plaza C(3), Díaz I(4), González C(2), Otero
J(1), Díaz E(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Transplants, Cell Therapy and Regenerative Medicine Unit, Central University
Hospital of Asturias (HUCA) , Oviedo , Spain . (2)b Area of Physiology,
Department of Functional Biology, University of Oviedo , Oviedo , Spain . (3)c
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics , HUCA , Oviedo , Spain , and. (4)d Area 
of Computation Science and Artificial Intelligence, Department of Computer
Science, University of Oviedo , Oviedo , Spain.

Biological rhythms are driven by endogenous biological clocks; in mammals, the
master clock is located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus.
This master pacemaker can synchronize other peripheral oscillators in several
tissues such as some involved in endocrine or reproductive functions. The
presence of an endogenous placental clock has received little attention. In fact,
there are no studies in human full-term placentas. To test the existence of an
endogenous pacemaker in this tissue we have studied the expression of circadian
locomoter output cycles kaput (Clock), brain and muscle arnt-like (Bmal)1, period
(Per)2, and cryptochrome (Cry)1 mRNAs at 00, 04, 08, 12, 16, and 20 hours by
qPCR. The four clock genes studied are expressed in full-term human placenta. The
results obtained allow us to suggest that a peripheral oscillator exists in human
placenta. Data were analyzed using Fourier series where only the Clock and Bmal1 
expression shows a circadian rhythm.

PMID: 26247999  [PubMed - in process]


55. Nature. 2015 Aug 20;524(7565):303-8. doi: 10.1038/nature14883. Epub 2015 Aug 5.

Structural integration in hypoxia-inducible factors.

Wu D(1), Potluri N(1), Lu J(1), Kim Y(2), Rastinejad F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Disease Program, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute,
Orlando, Florida 32827, USA. (2)Structural Biology Center, Biosciences Division, 
Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2015 Aug 20;524(7565):298-300.

The hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) coordinate cellular adaptations to low
oxygen stress by regulating transcriptional programs in erythropoiesis,
angiogenesis and metabolism. These programs promote the growth and progression of
many tumours, making HIFs attractive anticancer targets. Transcriptionally active
HIFs consist of HIF-a and ARNT (also called HIF-1ß) subunits. Here we describe
crystal structures for each of mouse HIF-2a-ARNT and HIF-1a-ARNT heterodimers in 
states that include bound small molecules and their hypoxia response element. A
highly integrated quaternary architecture is shared by HIF-2a-ARNT and
HIF-1a-ARNT, wherein ARNT spirals around the outside of each HIF-a subunit. Five 
distinct pockets are observed that permit small-molecule binding, including PAS
domain encapsulated sites and an interfacial cavity formed through subunit
heterodimerization. The DNA-reading head rotates, extends and cooperates with a
distal PAS domain to bind hypoxia response elements. HIF-a mutations linked to
human cancers map to sensitive sites that establish DNA binding and the stability
of PAS domains and pockets.

PMID: 26245371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Aug 3. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22330. [Epub ahead of print]

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor deletion in cerebellar granule neuron precursors
impairs neurogenesis.

Dever DP(1), Adham ZO(1), Thompson B(1), Genestine M(2), Cherry J(3), Olschowka
JA(4), DiCicco-Bloom E(2), Opanashuk LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York, 14642. (2)Department of Neuroscience
and Cell Biology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers, the State
University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey, 08854. (3)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Rochester, New York, 14642. (4)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy,
University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York,
14642.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated member of the
basic-helix-loop-helix/PER-ARNT-SIM(PAS) transcription factor superfamily that
also mediates the toxicity of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD).
Increasing evidence suggests that AhR influences the development of many tissues,
including the central nervous system. Our previous studies suggest that sustained
AhR activation by TCDD and/or AhR deletion disrupts cerebellar granule neuron
precursor (GNP) development. In the current study, to determine whether
endogenous AhR controls GNP development in a cell-autonomous manner, we created a
GNP-specific AhR deletion mouse, AhR(fx/fx) /Math1(CRE/+) (AhR CKO). Selective
AhR deletion in GNPs produced abnormalities in proliferation and differentiation.
Specifically, fewer GNPs were engaged in S-phase, as demonstrated by ~25%
reductions in thymidine (in vitro) and Bromodeoxyuridine (in vivo) incorporation.
Furthermore, total granule neuron numbers in the internal granule layer at PND21 
and PND60 were diminished in AhR conditional knockout (CKO) mice compared with
controls. Conversely, differentiation was enhanced, including ~40% increase in
neurite outgrowth and 50% increase in GABARa6 receptor expression in deletion
mutants. Our results suggest that AhR activity plays a role in regulating granule
neuron number and differentiation, possibly by coordinating this GNP
developmental transition. These studies provide novel insights for understanding 
the normal roles of AhR signaling during cerebellar granule cell neurogenesis and
may have important implications for the effects of environmental factors in
cerebellar dysgenesis. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Develop Neurobiol, 2015.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4740276 [Available on 2017-02-03]
PMID: 26243376  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


57. Nutr Res. 2015 Sep;35(9):792-9. doi: 10.1016/j.nutres.2015.06.009. Epub 2015 Jun 
30.

Involvement of adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase in the influence 
of timed high-fat evening diet on the hepatic clock and lipogenic gene expression
in mice.

Huang Y(1), Zhu Z(1), Xie M(2), Xue J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Preventive and
Translational Medicine for Geriatric Diseases, College of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, Jiangsu Province, China; Department 
of Pharmacy, The Affiliated Children's Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou
215003, Jiangsu Province, China. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Jiangsu Key
Laboratory of Preventive and Translational Medicine for Geriatric Diseases,
College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, Jiangsu
Province, China. (3)Department of Pharmacology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Preventive and Translational Medicine for Geriatric Diseases, College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, Jiangsu Province,
China. Electronic address: xuejie@suda.edu.cn.

A high-fat diet may result in changes in hepatic clock gene expression, but
potential mechanisms are not yet elucidated. Adenosine monophosphate-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) is a serine/threonine protein kinase that is recognized as 
a key regulator of energy metabolism and certain clock genes. Therefore, we
hypothesized that AMPK may be involved in the alteration of hepatic clock gene
expression under a high-fat environment. This study aimed to examine the effects 
of timed high-fat evening diet on the activity of hepatic AMPK, clock genes, and 
lipogenic genes. Mice with hyperlipidemic fatty livers were induced by orally
administering high-fat milk via gavage every evening (19:00-20:00) for 6 weeks.
Results showed that timed high-fat diet in the evening not only decreased the
hepatic AMPK protein expression and activity but also disturbed its circadian
rhythm. Accordingly, the hepatic clock genes, including clock,
brain-muscle-Arnt-like 1, cryptochrome 2, and period 2, exhibited prominent
changes in their expression rhythms and/or amplitudes. The diurnal rhythms of the
messenger RNA expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptora,
acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1a, and carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 were also
disrupted; the amplitude of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor<U+03B3>coactivator 1a was significantly decreased at 3 time points, and fatty
liver was observed. These findings demonstrate that timed high-fat diet at night 
can change hepatic AMPK protein levels, activity, and circadian rhythm, which may
subsequently alter the circadian expression of several hepatic clock genes and
finally result in the disorder of hepatic lipogenic gene expression and the
formation of fatty liver.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26239949  [PubMed - in process]


58. Sci Rep. 2015 Aug 3;5:12698. doi: 10.1038/srep12698.

Unsaturated fatty acids as high-affinity ligands of the C-terminal Per-ARNT-Sim
domain from the Hypoxia-inducible factor 3a.

Fala AM(1), Oliveira JF(1), Adamoski D(1), Aricetti JA(2), Dias MM(1), Dias
MV(1), Sforça ML(1), Lopes-de-Oliveira PS(1), Rocco SA(1), Caldana C(3), Dias
SM(1), Ambrosio AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório Nacional de Biociências, Centro Nacional de Pesquisa em Energia e 
Materiais, Campinas, SP, Brazil, 13083-100. (2)Laboratório Nacional de Ciência e 
Tecnologia do Bioetanol, Centro Nacional de Pesquisa em Energia e Materiais,,
Campinas, SP, Brazil, 13083-100. (3)1] Laboratório Nacional de Ciência e
Tecnologia do Bioetanol, Centro Nacional de Pesquisa em Energia e Materiais,,
Campinas, SP, Brazil, 13083-100 [2] Max Plack-partner group at the Laboratório
Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia do Bioetanol.

Hypoxia-inducible transcription factors (HIF) form heterodimeric complexes that
mediate cell responses to hypoxia. The oxygen-dependent stability and activity of
the HIF-a subunits is traditionally associated to post-translational
modifications such as hydroxylation, acetylation, ubiquitination, and
phosphorylation. Here we report novel evidence showing that unsaturated fatty
acids are naturally occurring, non-covalent structural ligands of HIF-3a, thus
providing the initial framework for exploring its exceptional role as a lipid
sensor under hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC4522956
PMID: 26237540  [PubMed - in process]


59. Neuroreport. 2015 Sep 30;26(14):827-32. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000000430.

Stress increases DNA methylation of the neuronal PAS domain 4 (Npas4) gene.

Furukawa-Hibi Y(1), Nagai T, Yun J, Yamada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychopharmacology and Hospital Pharmacy, Nagoya University
Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

Neuronal Per Arnt Sim domain 4 (Npas4), a brain-specific helix-loop-helix
transcription factor, was recently shown to regulate the development of GABAergic
inhibitory neurons. Npas4 mRNA expression levels were decreased in the
hippocampus of mice exposed to stress, which was accompanied by brain
dysfunction. We have suggested that transient stress reduced Npas4 transcription 
through the glucocorticoid receptor. In the present report, we investigated the
potential contribution of epigenetic modifications induced by stress on Npas4
gene expression. The Npas4 promoter region contains two CpG islands; in the
hippocampus, chronic restraint stress increases the DNA methylation levels of
both of these CpG islands. In the Neuro2a cell line, treatment with a DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, increased Npas4 mRNA levels 
and markedly reduced the DNA methylation levels of CpG island 2 in the Npas4
promoter. The DNA methylation sites in CpG island 2 overlap with two cyclic
adenosine monophosphate response element (CRE) sequences. Mutation of these CRE
sequences reduced Npas4 promoter activity. These results suggest that
transcription of the Npas4 gene is downregulated by stress through DNA
methylation of its promoter.

PMID: 26222956  [PubMed - in process]


60. Int J Biol Sci. 2015 Jul 17;11(9):1113-26. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.12152. eCollection
2015.

Norisoboldine, an Anti-Arthritis Alkaloid Isolated from Radix Linderae,
Attenuates Osteoclast Differentiation and Inflammatory Bone Erosion in an Aryl
Hydrocarbon Receptor-Dependent Manner.

Wei ZF(1), Lv Q(1), Xia Y(1), Yue MF(1), Shi C(1), Xia YF(1), Chou GX(2), Wang
ZT(2), Dai Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)1. State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicine, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Drug
Discovery for Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pharmacology of Chinese Materia
Medica, China Pharmaceutical University, 24 Tong Jia Xiang, Nanjing 210009,
China. (2)2. Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, Shanghai University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, China.

Norisoboldine (NOR), the primary isoquinoline alkaloid constituent of the root of
Lindera aggregata, has previously been demonstrated to attenuate osteoclast (OC) 
differentiation. Accumulative evidence has shown that aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR) plays an important role in regulating the differentiation of various cells,
and multiple isoquinoline alkaloids can modulate AhR. In the present study, we
explored the role of NOR in the AhR signaling pathway. These data showed that the
combination of AhR antagonist resveratrol (Res) or a-naphthoflavone (a-NF) nearly
reversed the inhibition of OC differentiation through NOR. NOR could stably bind 
to AhR, up-regulate the nuclear translocation of AhR, and enhance the
accumulation of the AhR-ARNT complex, AhR-mediated reporter gene activity and
CYP1A1 expression in RAW 264.7 cells, suggesting that NOR might be an agonist of 
AhR. Moreover, NOR inhibited the nuclear translocation of NF-<U+03BA>B-p65, resulting in
the evident accumulation of the AhR-NF-<U+03BA>B-p65 complex, which could be markedly
inhibited through either Res or a-NF. Although NOR only slightly affected the
expression of HIF-1a, NOR markedly reduced VEGF mRNA expression and ARNT-HIF-1a
complex accumulation. In vivo studies indicated that NOR decreased the number of 
OCs and ameliorated the bone erosion in the joints of rats with collagen-induced 
arthritis, accompanied by the up-regulation of CYP1A1 and the down-regulation of 
VEGF mRNA expression in the synovium of rats. A combination of a-NF nearly
completely reversed the effects of NOR. In conclusion, NOR attenuated OC
differentiation and bone erosion through the activation of AhR and the subsequent
inhibition of both NF-<U+03BA>B and HIF pathways.

PMCID: PMC4515821
PMID: 26221077  [PubMed - in process]


61. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Jul 9;6:513. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00513. eCollection
2015.

Setting the PAS, the role of circadian PAS domain proteins during environmental
adaptation in plants.

Vogt JH(1), Schippers JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, University of Potsdam , Potsdam,
Germany. (2)Institute for Biology I, RWTH Aachen University , Aachen, Germany.

The per-ARNT-sim (PAS) domain represents an ancient protein module that can be
found across all kingdoms of life. The domain functions as a sensing unit for a
diverse array of signals, including molecular oxygen, small metabolites, and
light. In plants, several PAS domain-containing proteins form an integral part of
the circadian clock and regulate responses to environmental change. Moreover,
these proteins function in pathways that control development and plant stress
adaptation responses. Here, we discuss the role of PAS domain-containing proteins
in anticipation, and adaptation to environmental changes in plants.

PMCID: PMC4496561
PMID: 26217364  [PubMed]


62. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol. 2015;36(3):283-9.

Identification of potential targets for ovarian cancer treatment by systematic
bioinformatics analysis.

Ye Q, Lei L, Aili AX.

PURPOSE OF INVESTIGATION: To provide a systematic overview to understand the
mechanism of ovarian cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data of GSE14407 downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO) database and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified. Gene
ontology and pathway enrichment analysis were performed by Database for
Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID). Furthermore, the
authors constructed the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network and
co-expression networks by Cytoscape.
RESULTS: A total 1,442 genes were identified to be differentially expressed.
Regulatory effects of DEGs mainly focused on cell cycle, transcription
regulation, and cellular protein metabolic process. Significant pathways were
determined to be p53 signaling pathway, amino sugar, and nucleotide sugar
metabolism. The most significant transcription factor was aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT). Abnormal spindle-like
microcephaly-associated protein (ASPM), Aurora kinase (AURKA), Cyclin-A2 (CCNA2),
G2/mitotic-specific cyclin-B1, (CCNB1), and Cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) were
significant nodes in PPI network.
CONCLUSION: The significant genes and pathways show potential targets for the
treatment of ovarian cancer.

PMID: 26189254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Jul 16;11(7):e1004986. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004986.
eCollection 2015.

The DSF Family of Cell-Cell Signals: An Expanding Class of Bacterial Virulence
Regulators.

Ryan RP(1), An SQ(1), Allan JH(1), McCarthy Y(2), Dow JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Microbiology, College of Life Sciences, University of
Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom. (2)School of Microbiology, Biosciences Institute,
University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.

Many pathogenic bacteria use cell-cell signaling systems involving the synthesis 
and perception of diffusible signal molecules to control virulence as a response 
to cell density or confinement to niches. Bacteria produce signals of diverse
structural classes. Signal molecules of the diffusible signal factor (DSF) family
are cis-2-unsaturated fatty acids. The paradigm is cis-11-methyl-2-dodecenoic
acid from Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris (Xcc), which controls virulence
in this plant pathogen. Although DSF synthesis was thought to be restricted to
the xanthomonads, it is now known that structurally related molecules are
produced by the unrelated bacteria Burkholderia cenocepacia and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. Furthermore, signaling involving these DSF family members contributes
to bacterial virulence, formation of biofilms and antibiotic tolerance in these
important human pathogens. Here we review the recent advances in understanding
DSF signaling and its regulatory role in different bacteria. These advances
include the description of the pathway/mechanism of DSF biosynthesis,
identification of novel DSF synthases and new members of the DSF family, the
demonstration of a diversity of DSF sensors to include proteins with a
Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain and the description of some of the signal transduction 
mechanisms that impinge on virulence factor expression. In addition, we address
the role of DSF family signals in interspecies signaling that modulates the
behavior of other microorganisms. Finally, we consider a number of recently
reported approaches for the control of bacterial virulence through the modulation
of DSF signaling.

PMCID: PMC4504480
PMID: 26181439  [PubMed - in process]


64. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Aug 15;336(2):329-37. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.06.017. Epub
2015 Jul 6.

The action of HIF-3a variants on HIF-2a-HIF-1ß heterodimer formation is directly 
probed in live cells.

Kim SH(1), Hwang D(2), Park H(3), Yang EG(2), Chung HS(2), Kim SY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Theragnosis, Biomedical Research Institute, Korea Institute of
Science and Technology, Hwarangno 14-gil 5, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-791, South
Korea; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Korea University of Science and
Technology (UST), KIST Campus, Seoul 136-791, South Korea. (2)Center for
Theragnosis, Biomedical Research Institute, Korea Institute of Science and
Technology, Hwarangno 14-gil 5, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-791, South Korea;
Department of Biological Chemistry, Korea University of Science and Technology
(UST), KIST Campus, Seoul 136-791, South Korea. (3)Department of Life Science,
University of Seoul, Siripdae-gil 13, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-743, South Korea. 
(4)Center for Theragnosis, Biomedical Research Institute, Korea Institute of
Science and Technology, Hwarangno 14-gil 5, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-791, South
Korea; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Korea University of Science and
Technology (UST), KIST Campus, Seoul 136-791, South Korea. Electronic address:
soyeonkim@kist.re.kr.

Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs), consisting of a and ß subunits, activate
various genes to adapt to low oxygen environments through their heterodimeric
complex formation in the nucleus. While most of the studies have been extensively
focused on the HIF-1a isoform, the effect of HIF-a isoforms on the complex
formation between HIF-2a and HIF-1ß in live cells has not been reported in
detail. To probe these interactions in a physiological condition, we established 
a fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) assay by introducing fluorescent 
reporter proteins onto the N-termini of HIF-2a and HIF-1ß in live PC3 cells.
After thorough validations of our FRET assay system, we showed that both HIF-1a
and HIF-3a variants likely function as negative regulators on the heterodimer
formation of HIF-2a with HIF-1ß in cells. We also characterized the localization 
and stabilization of HIF-3a variants and measured the interaction between HIF-3a 
variants and other HIF isoforms in live cells. In contrast to the previous
results showing HIF-3a-mediated blockage of HIF-1a translocation, the presence of
HIF-3a did not affect the localization of HIF-2a, suggesting distinct roles of
HIF-3a in regulation of two HIF-a isoforms.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26160453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 28;290(35):21615-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.645515. Epub
2015 Jul 1.

Heat Shock Protein 90 Associates with the Per-Arnt-Sim Domain of Heme-free
Soluble Guanylate Cyclase: IMplications for Enzyme Maturation.

Sarkar A(1), Dai Y(1), Haque MM(1), Seeger F(2), Ghosh A(1), Garcin ED(2),
Montfort WR(3), Hazen SL(4), Misra S(5), Stuehr DJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Pathobiology. (2)the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, University of Maryland at Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland
21250, and. (3)the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of
Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721. (4)Cellular and Molecular Medicine, and.
(5)Molecular Cardiology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, 
Ohio 44195. (6)From the Departments of Pathobiology, stuehrd@ccf.org.

Heat shock protein 90 (hsp90) drives heme insertion into the ß1 subunit of
soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) ß1, which enables it to associate with a partner 
sGCa1 subunit and mature into a nitric oxide (NO)-responsive active form. We
utilized fluorescence polarization measurements and hydrogen-deuterium exchange
mass spectrometry to define molecular interactions between the specific human
isoforms hsp90ß and apo-sGCß1. hsp90ß and its isolated M domain, but not its
isolated N and C domains, bind with low micromolar affinity to a heme-free,
truncated version of sGCß1 (sGCß1(1-359)-H105F). Surprisingly, hsp90ß and its M
domain bound to the Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain of apo-sGC-ß1(1-359), which lies
adjacent to its heme-binding (H-NOX) domain. The interaction specifically
involved solvent-exposed regions in the hsp90ß M domain that are largely distinct
from sites utilized by other hsp90 clients. The interaction strongly protected
two regions of the sGCß1 PAS domain and caused local structural relaxation in
other regions, including a PAS dimerization interface and a segment in the H-NOX 
domain. Our results suggest a means by which the hsp90ß interaction could prevent
apo-sGCß1 from associating with its partner sGCa1 subunit while enabling
structural changes to assist heme insertion into the H-NOX domain. This mechanism
would parallel that in other clients like the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and
HIF1a, which also interact with hsp90 through their PAS domains to control
protein partner and small ligand binding interactions.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4571885 [Available on 2016-08-28]
PMID: 26134567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. FASEB J. 2015 Oct;29(10):4248-55. doi: 10.1096/fj.15-275339. Epub 2015 Jun 23.

Circadian timing in central and peripheral tissues in a migratory songbird:
dependence on annual life-history states.

Singh D(1), Trivedi AK(1), Rani S(1), Panda S(1), Kumar V(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Science and Technology-Intensification of Research in High
Priority Areas Center for Excellence in Biological Rhythms Research and Indo-U.S.
Center for Biological Timing, Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi, 
India; Department of Zoology, University of Lucknow, Lucknow, India; and
Regulatory Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California, USA. (2)*Department of Science and Technology-Intensification of
Research in High Priority Areas Center for Excellence in Biological Rhythms
Research and Indo-U.S. Center for Biological Timing, Department of Zoology,
University of Delhi, Delhi, India; Department of Zoology, University of Lucknow, 
Lucknow, India; and Regulatory Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological 
Studies, La Jolla, California, USA drvkumar11@yahoo.com.

Predictable seasonal change in photoperiod triggers a sequential change in the
daily activity-rest pattern, adaptive for migration in several bird species. The 
night-migratory black-headed bunting (Emberiza melanocephala) is day active under
short photoperiods (8 h light:16 h dark, short day sensitive). Under long
photoperiods (16 h light:8 h dark), the buntings are initially day active (long
day premigratory) but subsequently become intensely night active (long day
migratory) and after few weeks again return to a day active pattern (long day
refractory). However, it is unclear how the daily expression of circadian genes
changes during photoperiod-induced seasonal life-history states (LHSs). We
measured period 2 (Per2), cryptochrome 1 (Cry1), brain and muscle arnt-like
protein 1 (Bmal1), and circadian locomotor output cycles kaput (Clock) mRNA
expressions in various neural and peripheral tissues of buntings in different
LHSs and discovered differences of ~2 to 6 h in the phase and 2- to 4-fold in
amplitude of circadian oscillations of Per2, Cry1, and Bmal1 between
photoperiod-induced LHSs. Phase relationship in mRNA oscillations was altered
between oscillator components in the circadian pacemaker system (retina, pineal, 
hypothalamus) as well as in the peripheral (liver, muscle) tissues. These results
show for the first time altered waveforms of clock gene expressions in all
tissues in parallel with behavioral shifts and suggest the involvement of
circadian system in photoperiod induction of seasonal LHSs in a migratory
species.

© FASEB.

PMID: 26103987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2015 Jul;32(7):1135-44. doi: 10.1007/s10815-015-0505-3.
Epub 2015 Jun 23.

Meta-analysis of the association of AhR Arg554Lys, AhRR Pro185Ala, and ARNT
Val189Val polymorphisms and endometriosis risk in Asians.

Zheng NN(1), Bi YP, Zheng Y, Zheng RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Tongde Hospital of Zhejiang Province,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310012, China.

PURPOSE: Several studies have suggested an association between the polymorphisms 
AhR Arg554Lys, AhRR Pro185Ala, and ARNT Val189Val and endometriosis, but results 
have been inconclusive. The aim of the present study was to assess these
associations by meta-analysis.
METHODS: Eligible literatures were retrieved from PubMed, ISI Web of Science,
Elsevier Science Direct, and several Chinese databases. The pooled odds ratios
(ORs) and the corresponding 95 % confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated with 
a random or fixed-effect model.
RESULTS: A total of six eligible studies were included. Regarding the AhR
Arg554Lys and ARNT Val189Val polymorphisms, no obvious associations were found in
either overall analysis or subgroup analysis based on the country, source of
control, sample size, and genotyping method. For the AhRR Pro185Ala polymorphism,
overall results suggested a marginal association with endometriosis
susceptibility under the dominant model (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.65, 95 % CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.00-2.72).
Furthermore, a significantly increased risk for endometriosis was found in the
subgroups which used the TaqMan method for genotype analysis or had a sample size
=200.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis suggested that the polymorphisms of AhR Arg554Lys
and ARNT Val189Val are not associated with endometriosis, while the AhRR
Pro185Ala polymorphism may be associated with endometriosis risk. However,
further case-control studies with larger sample sizes are needed to confirm our
results.

PMCID: PMC4531876 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26101050  [PubMed - in process]


68. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2015 Oct;72(19):3709-20. doi: 10.1007/s00018-015-1952-9. Epub 
2015 Jun 17.

Mechanisms for exporting large-sized cargoes from the endoplasmic reticulum.

Saito K(1), Katada T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan.
ksaito@mol.f.u-tokyo.ac.jp. (2)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan.

Cargo proteins exported from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus are
typically transported in coat protein complex II (COPII)-coated vesicles of 60-90
nm diameter. Several cargo molecules including collagens and chylomicrons form
structures that are too large to be accommodated by these vesicles, but their
secretion still requires COPII proteins. Here, we first review recent progress on
large cargo secretions derived especially from animal models and human diseases, 
which indicate the importance of COPII proteins. We then discuss the recent
isolation of specialized factors that modulate the process of COPII-dependent
cargo formation to facilitate the exit of large-sized cargoes from the
endoplasmic reticulum. Based on these findings, we propose a model that describes
the importance of the GTPase cycle for secretion of oversized cargoes. Next, we
summarize reports that describe the structures of COPII proteins and how these
results provide insight into the mechanism of assembly of the large cargo
carriers. Finally, we discuss what issues remain to be solved in the future.

PMCID: PMC4565863
PMID: 26082182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Appl Toxicol. 2015 Nov;35(11):1278-91. doi: 10.1002/jat.3176. Epub 2015 Jun 9.

Bisphenol A affects placental layers morphology and angiogenesis during early
pregnancy phase in mice.

Tait S(1), Tassinari R(1), Maranghi F(1), Mantovani A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Food and Veterinary Toxicology Unit, Department of Veterinary Public Health
and Food Safety, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

Bisphenol A (BPA) is a widespread endocrine disrupter mainly used in food contact
plastics. Much evidence supports the adverse effects of BPA, particularly on
susceptible groups such as pregnant women. The present study considered placental
development - relevant for pregnancy outcomes and fetal nutrition/programming -
as a potential target of BPA. Pregnant CD-1 mice were administered per os with
vehicle, 0.5 (BPA05) or 50 mg kg(-1) (BPA50) body weight day(-1) of BPA, from
gestational day (GD) 1 to GD11. At GD12, BPA50 induced significant degeneration
and necrosis of giant cells, increased vacuolization in the junctional zone in
the absence of glycogen accumulation and reduction of the spongiotrophoblast
layer. In addition, BPA05 induced glycogen depletion as well as significant
nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin in trophoblasts of labyrinthine and
spongiotrophoblast layers, supporting the activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway. Transcriptomic analysis indicated that BPA05 promoted and BPA50
inhibited blood vessel development and branching; morphologically, maternal
vessels were narrower in BPA05 placentas, whereas embryonic and maternal vessels 
were irregularly dilated in the labyrinth of BPA50 placentas. Quantitative
polymerase chain reaction evidenced an estrogen receptor ß induction by BPA50,
which did not correspond to downstream genes activation; indeed, the
transcription factor binding sites analysis supported the AhR/Arnt complex as
regulator of BPA50-modulated genes. Conversely, Creb appeared as the main
transcription factor regulating BPA05-modulated genes. Embryonic structures
(head, forelimb) showed divergent perturbations upon BPA05 or BPA50 exposure,
potentially related to unbalanced embryonic nutrition and/or to modulation of
genes involved in embryo development. Our findings support placenta as an
important target of BPA, even at environmentally relevant dose levels.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26063408  [PubMed - in process]


70. Future Med Chem. 2015;7(7):857-71. doi: 10.4155/fmc.15.32.

Searching phase II enzymes inducers, from Michael acceptor-[1,2]dithiolethione
hybrids, as cancer chemopreventive agents.

Couto M(1), de Ovalle S(1), Cabrera M(1), Cerecetto H(1), González M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Química Medicinal, Laboratorio de Química Orgánica, Facultad de
Ciencias-Facultad de Química, Universidad de la República, 11400 Montevideo,
Uruguay.

BACKGROUND: Cancer chemoprevention involves the carcinogenic process prevention, 
delay or reverse by the administration of chemopreventive agents, which are able 
to suppress or block the carcinogen metabolic activation/formation. The increased
activity of phase II detoxification enzymes such as quinone-reductase (QR) and
glutation-S-transferase (GST) correlates with the protection against
chemically-induced carcinogenesis. It has been shown that synthetic chalcones and
3H-[1,2]-dithiole-3-thiones promote expression of genes involved in
chemoprevention.
MATERIALS & METHODS: Herein, the induction of phase II enzymes by designed
Michael acceptor-dithiolethione hybrids was studied.
RESULTS & DISCUSSION: Hybrids 5 and 7 displayed the induction of
quinone-reductase and glutation-S-transferase in vitro in the same order on the
wild-type mouse-hepatoma Hepa 1c1c7 and on the
aryl-hydrocarbon-nuclear-translocator (Arnt)-defective mutant BPrc1 cells
indicating that 7 displays the best chemopreventive potential.

PMID: 26061105  [PubMed - in process]


71. Toxicol Lett. 2015 Sep 2;237(2):100-11. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2015.05.020. Epub
2015 Jun 1.

Expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor 1 (AHR1), AHR1 nuclear translocator 1
(ARNT1) and CYP1 family monooxygenase mRNAs and their activity in chicken ovarian
follicles following in vitro exposure to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD).

Antos PA(1), Blachuta M(1), Hrabia A(1), Grzegorzewska AK(1), Sechman A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Physiology and Endocrinology, University of Agriculture
in Krakow, Al. Mickiewicza 24/28, 30-059 Krakow, Poland. (2)Department of Animal 
Physiology and Endocrinology, University of Agriculture in Krakow, Al.
Mickiewicza 24/28, 30-059 Krakow, Poland. Electronic address:
rzsechma@cyf-kr.edu.pl.

The aim of this in vitro study was to determine the effect of TCDD and
luteinizing hormone (LH) on mRNA expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor 1
(AHR1), AHR1 nuclear translocator 1 (ARNT1), and the CYP1 family monooxygenases
(CYP1A4, CYP1A5, CYP1B1), and to assess the basal and TCDD-induced activity of
these enzymes in chicken ovarian follicles. White (WF) and yellowish (YF)
prehierarchical follicles and fragments of the theca (TL) and granulosa (GL)
layers of the 3 largest preovulatory follicles (F3-F1) were exposed to TCDD
(10nM), ovine LH (oLH; 10ng/mL) or a combination of TCDD (10nM) and oLH
(10ng/mL), and increasing doses of TCDD (0.01-100nM). AHR1 and ARNT1 mRNA
transcripts were found in all examined follicles. The effect of TCDD and oLH on
AHR1 and ARNT1 mRNA expression depended on the maturational state of the
follicle. CYP1A4 was predominantly expressed in the GL of the F3-F1 follicles; in
comparison with the WF, a higher level of CYP1A5 mRNA was found both in the GL
and TL of F3-F1 follicles. Alternatively, the highest level of CYP1B1 mRNA was
noticed in the WF follicles. In different developmental stages of the follicle
TCDD and oLH induced a different CYP1 isoform. TCDD increased EROD and MROD
activities in all the investigated ovarian follicles. In conclusion, AHR1 and
ARNT1 mRNA expression indicate that the chicken ovary is a target tissue for
dioxin and dioxin-like compounds. The expression of CYP1-family genes and
TCDD-inducible EROD and MROD activities in ovarian follicles suggest the
possibility of xenobiotic detoxification in the chicken ovary.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26043675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 3;10(6):e0127952. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127952.
eCollection 2015.

A model for aryl hydrocarbon receptor-activated gene expression shows potency and
efficacy changes and predicts squelching due to competition for transcription
co-activators.

Simon TW(1), Budinsky RA(2), Rowlands JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ted Simon LLC, Winston, GA, United States of America. (2)The Dow Chemical
Company, Toxicology and Environmental Research & Consulting. Midland, MI, United 
States of America.

A stochastic model of nuclear receptor-mediated transcription was developed based
on activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD) and subsequent binding the activated AHR 
to xenobiotic response elements (XREs) on DNA. The model was based on effects
observed in cells lines commonly used as in vitro experimental systems. Following
ligand binding, the AHR moves into the cell nucleus and forms a heterodimer with 
the aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT). In the model, a requirement for
binding to DNA is that a generic coregulatory protein is subsequently bound to
the AHR-ARNT dimer. Varying the amount of coregulator available within the
nucleus altered both the potency and efficacy of TCDD for inducing for
transcription of CYP1A1 mRNA, a commonly used marker for activation of the AHR.
Lowering the amount of available cofactor slightly increased the EC50 for the
transcriptional response without changing the efficacy or maximal response.
Further reduction in the amount of cofactor reduced the efficacy and produced
non-monotonic dose-response curves (NMDRCs) at higher ligand concentrations. The 
shapes of these NMDRCs were reminiscent of the phenomenon of squelching. Resource
limitations for transcriptional machinery are becoming apparent in eukaryotic
cells. Within single cells, nuclear receptor-mediated gene expression appears to 
be a stochastic process; however, intercellular communication and other aspects
of tissue coordination may represent a compensatory process to maintain an
organism's ability to respond on a phenotypic level to various stimuli within an 
inconstant environment.

PMCID: PMC4454675
PMID: 26039703  [PubMed - in process]


73. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 1;5:10773. doi: 10.1038/srep10773.

Burkholderia cenocepacia and Salmonella enterica ArnT proteins that transfer
4-amino-4-deoxy-l-arabinose to lipopolysaccharide share membrane topology and
functional amino acids.

Tavares-Carreón F(1), Patel KB(2), Valvano MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, N6A 5C1, Canada. (2)Centre for
Infection and Immunity, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, BT9 7AE, United
Kingdom. (3)1] Centre for Human Immunology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, N6A 5C1, Canada [2]
Centre for Infection and Immunity, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, BT9 7AE, 
United Kingdom.

We recently demonstrated that incorporation of 4-amino-4-deoxy-l-arabinose
(l-Ara4N) to the lipid A moiety of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is required for
transport of LPS to the outer membrane and viability of the Gram-negative
bacterium Burkholderia cenocepacia. ArnT is a membrane protein catalyzing the
transfer of l-Ara4N to the LPS molecule at the periplasmic face of the inner
membrane, but its topology and mechanism of action are not well characterized.
Here, we elucidate the topology of ArnT and identify key amino acids that likely 
contribute to its enzymatic function. PEGylation assays using a cysteineless
version of ArnT support a model of 13 transmembrane helices and a large
C-terminal region exposed to the periplasm. The same topological configuration is
proposed for the Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium ArnT. Four highly
conserved periplasmic residues in B. cenocepacia ArnT, tyrosine-43, lysine-69,
arginine-254 and glutamic acid-493, were required for activity. Tyrosine-43 and
lysine-69 span two highly conserved motifs, (42)RYA(44) and (66)YFEKP(70), that
are found in ArnT homologues from other species. The same residues in S. enterica
ArnT are also needed for function. We propose these aromatic and charged amino
acids participate in either undecaprenyl phosphate-l-Ara4N substrate recognition 
or transfer of l-Ara4N to the LPS.

PMID: 26030265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Int J Oncol. 2015 Jul;47(1):25-34. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3007. Epub 2015 May 15.

Interactional role of microRNAs and bHLH-PAS proteins in cancer (Review).

Li Y(1), Wei Y(1), Guo J(1), Cheng Y(1), He W(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Second Hospital of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730030, P.R. China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are recognized as an emerging class of master regulators that 
regulate human gene expression at the post-transcriptional level and are involved
in many normal and pathological cellular processes. Mammalian basic HLH
(helix-loop-helix)-PER-ARNT-SIM (bHLH-PAS) proteins are heterodimeric
transcriptional regulators that sense and respond to environmental signals (such 
as chemical pollutants) or to physiological signals (for instance hypoxia). In
the normal state, bHLH-PAS proteins are responsible for multiple critical aspects
of physiology to ensure the cell accurate homeostasis, but dysregulation of these
proteins has been shown to contribute to carcinogenic events such as tumor
initiation, promotion, and progression. Increasing epidemiological and
experimental studies have shown that bHLH-PAS proteins regulate a panel of
miRNAs, whereas some miRNAs also target bHLH-PAS proteins. The interaction
between miRNAs and certain bHLH-PAS proteins [hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) and 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)] is relevant to many vital events associated with
tumorigenesis. This review will summarize recent findings on the interesting and 
complicated underlying mechanisms that miRNAs interact with HIFs or AHR in
tumors, hopefully to benefit the discovery of novel drug-interfering targets for 
cancer therapy.

PMID: 25997457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Autophagy. 2015;11(6):967-9. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1045180.

EPAS1/HIF-2a is a driver of mammalian pexophagy.

Schönenberger MJ(1), Krek W, Kovacs WJ.

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Molecular Health Sciences; ETH Zurich ; Zurich , Switzerland.

Oxygen (O2) is an essential substrate in cellular metabolism and signaling and as
such is linked to the survival and normal function of metazoans. Central to the
molecular mechanisms underlying O2 homeostasis are hypoxia-inducible factors
(HIFs), heterodimeric transcription factors composed of O2-regulated a subunits
(HIF1A/HIF-1a or EPAS1/HIF-2a), and a constitutively expressed ARNT/HIF-1ß
subunit, that serve as master regulators of the adaptive response to hypoxia.
HIF1A and EPAS1 have both unique and overlapping functions in the regulation of
diverse cellular processes, but so far there has been no evidence linking HIF
signaling to peroxisomes. In a recent study we identified a unique function of
EPAS1 as promoter of pexophagy in hepatocytes. Here we summarize our findings and
discuss potential mechanisms by which EPAS1 might trigger pexophagy.

PMCID: PMC4502715 [Available on 2016-05-22]
PMID: 25997392  [PubMed - in process]


76. Cardiovasc Ultrasound. 2015 May 20;13:25. doi: 10.1186/s12947-015-0019-2.

Mitral valve analysis adding a virtual semi-transparent annulus plane for
detection of prolapsing segments.

Dumont KA(1), Karlsen JS(2), Helle-Valle T(3), Fiane AE(4), Lundblad R(5), Urheim
S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Rikshospitalet, Oslo University
Hospital, Post Office Box 4950, Nydalen, 0424, Oslo, Norway. kardum@ous-hf.no.
(2)Kalkulo AS, Martin Linges vei 17, 1364, Fornebu, Norway. jornskaa@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Rikshospitalet, Oslo University Hospital, Post Box
4950, Nydalen, 0424, Oslo, Norway. thomhell@medisin.uio.no. (4)Department of
Cardiothoracic Surgery and Faculty of Medicine in Oslo, Rikshospitalet, Oslo
University Hospital, Post Office Box 4950, Nydalen, 0424, Oslo, Norway.
arnt.fiane@ous-hf.no. (5)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Rikshospitalet,
Oslo University Hospital, Post Office Box 4950, Nydalen, 0424, Oslo, Norway.
runar.lundblad@gmail.com. (6)Department of Cardiology and Institute for Surgical 
Research, Rikshospitalet, Oslo University Hospital, Post Office Box 4950,
Nydalen, 0424, Oslo, Norway. stig.urheim@rikshospitalet.no.

BACKGROUND: We hypothesized that a novel three-dimensional virtual
semi-transparent annulus plane (3D VSAP) presented on a holographic screen can be
used to visualize the prolapsing tissue in degenerative mitral valve disease and 
furthermore, provide us with geometrical data of the mitral valve apparatus.
Phantom and patient studies were designed to demonstrate the feasibility of
creating a semi-automatic, semi-transparent mitral annulus plane visualized on a 
holographic display.
METHODS: Ten pipe cleaners mimicking the mitral annulus with different shapes and
three types of annuloplasty rings served as phantoms. We obtained 3D
transoesophageal examination of the phantoms in a special designed box filled
with water. Recordings were converted to the holographic display and a 3D VSAP
was created. The ratio of the major and minor axes as well as the non-planar
angles were calculated and compared with direct measures of the phantoms. Forty
patients with degenerative mitral valve disease were then analyzed with 3D
transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and a 3D VSAP was created on the holographic
display. A total of 240 segments were analyzed by two independent observers, one 
echo expert (observer I), and the other novice with limited echo experience
(observer II). The two observers created the 3D VSAP in each patient before
suggesting the valve pathology.
RESULTS: The major/minor axes ratio and non-planar angles by 3D VSAP correlated
with direct measurements by r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.65, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.02 and r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.99, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001,
respectively. The sensitivity and specificity of the 3D VSAP method in patients
was 81 and 97%, respectively (observer I) and for observer II 77 and 96%,
respectively. The accuracy and precisions were 93.9 and 89.4%, respectively
(observer I), 92.3 and 85.1% (observer II). Mitral valve analysis adding a 3D
VSAP was feasible with high accuracy and precision, providing a quick and less
subjective method for diagnosing mitral valve prolapse. This novel method may
improve preoperative diagnostics and may relieve a better understanding of the
pathophysiology of mitral valve disease. Thus, based on the specific findings in 
each patient, a tailored surgical repair can be planned and hopefully enhance
long-term repair patency in the future.

PMCID: PMC4445285
PMID: 25986226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Int J Obes (Lond). 2015 Sep;39(9):1339-48. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2015.85. Epub 2015
May 14.

Maternal obesity programs offspring non-alcoholic fatty liver disease through
disruption of 24-h rhythms in mice.

Mouralidarane A(1,)(2), Soeda J(1), Sugden D(2), Bocianowska A(2), Carter R(1),
Ray S(1), Saraswati R(3), Cordero P(1), Novelli M(3), Fusai G(4), Vinciguerra
M(1,)(5,)(6), Poston L(2), Taylor PD(2), Oben JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Liver and Digestive Health, University College London, Royal
Free Hospital, London, UK. (2)Women's Health Academic Centre, King's College
London, St Thomas' Hospital, London, UK. (3)Histopathology Department, University
College Hospital, University College London, London, UK. (4)Department of Liver
Medicine and Transplant, Sheila Sherlock Liver Centre, University College London,
Royal Free Hospital, London, UK. (5)Gastroenterology Unit, Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. (6)School of Science and
Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, UK.

BACKGROUND: Maternal obesity increases offspring propensity to metabolic
dysfunctions and to non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), which may lead to 
cirrhosis or liver cancer. The circadian clock is a transcriptional/epigenetic
molecular machinery synchronising physiological processes to coordinate energy
utilisation within a 24-h light/dark period. Alterations in rhythmicity have
profound effects on metabolic pathways, which we sought to investigate in
offspring with programmed NAFLD.
METHODS: Mice were fed a standard or an obesogenic diet (OD), before and
throughout pregnancy, and during lactation. Offspring were weaned onto standard
or an OD at 3 weeks postpartum and housed in 12:12 light/dark conditions.
Biochemical and histological indicators of NAFLD and fibrosis, analysis of
canonical clock genes with methylation status and locomotor activity were
investigated at 6 months.
RESULTS: We show that maternal obesity interacts with an obesogenic post-weaning 
diet to promote the development of NAFLD with disruption of canonical metabolic
rhythmicity gene expression in the liver. We demonstrate hypermethylation of
BMAL-1 (brain and muscle Arnt like-1) and Per2 promoter regions and altered 24-h 
rhythmicity of hepatic pro-inflammatory and fibrogenic mediators.
CONCLUSIONS: These data implicate disordered circadian rhythms in NAFLD and
suggest that disruption of this system during critical developmental periods may 
be responsible for the onset of chronic liver disease in adulthood.

PMID: 25971926  [PubMed - in process]


78. Nat Commun. 2015 May 8;6:7005. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8005.

Topological control of the Caulobacter cell cycle circuitry by a polarized
single-domain PAS protein.

Sanselicio S(1), Bergé M(1), Théraulaz L(1), Radhakrishnan SK(1), Viollier PH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Institute of Genetics and
Genomics in Geneva (iGE3), Faculty of Medicine/CMU, University of Geneva, Rue
Michel Servet 1, Genève 4 1211, Switzerland.

Despite the myriad of different sensory domains encoded in bacteria, only a few
types are known to control the cell cycle. Here we use a forward genetic screen
for Caulobacter crescentus motility mutants to identify a conserved single-domain
PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) protein (MopJ) with pleiotropic regulatory functions. MopJ
promotes re-accumulation of the master cell cycle regulator CtrA after its
proteolytic destruction is triggered by the DivJ kinase at the G1-S transition.
MopJ and CtrA syntheses are coordinately induced in S-phase, followed by the
sequestration of MopJ to cell poles in Caulobacter. Polarization requires
Caulobacter DivJ and the PopZ polar organizer. MopJ interacts with DivJ and
influences the localization and activity of downstream cell cycle effectors.
Because MopJ abundance is upregulated in stationary phase and by the alarmone
(p)ppGpp, conserved systemic signals acting on the cell cycle and growth phase
control are genetically integrated through this conserved single PAS-domain
protein.

PMCID: PMC4432633
PMID: 25952018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Nutrients. 2015 Apr 30;7(5):3166-83. doi: 10.3390/nu7053166.

a-Naphthoflavone Increases Lipid Accumulation in Mature Adipocytes and Enhances
Adipocyte-Stimulated Endothelial Tube Formation.

Wang ML(1), Lin SH(2), Hou YY(3), Chen YH(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nutrition and Health Sciences, Taipei Medical University, 250
Wu-Hsing Street, Taipei 110, Taiwan. b8706083@tmu.edu.tw. (2)School of Nutrition 
and Health Sciences, Taipei Medical University, 250 Wu-Hsing Street, Taipei 110, 
Taiwan. lin5611@tmu.edu.tw. (3)Department of Food and Beverage Management, Mackay
Medicine, Nursing and Management College, Taipei 112, Taiwan.
s212@eip.mkc.edu.tw. (4)School of Nutrition and Health Sciences, Taipei Medical
University, 250 Wu-Hsing Street, Taipei 110, Taiwan. yuehwa@tmu.edu.tw. (5)Cancer
Research Center, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei Medical University,
250 Wu-Hsing Street, Taipei 110, Taiwan. yuehwa@tmu.edu.tw.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated factor that regulates
biological effects associated with obesity. The AhR agonists, such as
environmental contaminants 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and
ß-naphthoflavone (BNF), inhibit preadipocyte differentiation and interfere with
the functions of adipose tissue, whereas the antagonist may have opposite or
protective effects in obesity. This study investigated the effects of
a-naphthoflavone (a-NF), an AhR antagonist, on adipogenesis- and
angiogenesis-associated factors in mature adipocytes and on cross-talk of mature 
adipocytes with endothelial cells (ECs). Besides, the roles of the AhR on lipid
accumulation and on secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor were also
determined by introducing siRNA of AhR. Differentiated 3T3-L1 cells were treated 
with a-naphthoflavone (a-NF) (1-5 µM) for 16 h. Lipid accumulation and the
expressions of AhR-associated factors in the cells were determined. The
interaction between adipocytes and ECs was investigated by cultivating ECs with
conditioned medium (CM) from a-NF-treated mature adipocytes, followed by the
determination of endothelial tube formation. The results showed that a-NF
significantly increased triglyceride (TG) accumulation in mature adipocytes,
which was associated with increased expression of hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL),
estrogen receptor (ER), as well as decreased expression of AhR, AhR nuclear
translocator (ARNT), cytochrome P4501B1 (CYP1B1), and nuclear factor
erythroid-2-related factor (NRF-2) proteins. In addition, CM stimulated formation
of tube-like structures in ECs, and a-NF further enhanced such stimulation in
association with modulated the secretions of various angiogenic mediators by
mature adipocytes. Similarly, increased TG accumulation and vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF) secretion were observed in AhR-knockout cells. In
conclusion, a-NF increased TG accumulation in mature adipocytes and enhanced
mature adipocyte-stimulated tube formation in ECs, suggesting that the AhR may
suppress obesity-induced adverse effects, and a-NF abolished the protective
effects of the AhR.

PMCID: PMC4446745
PMID: 25942489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mol Hum Reprod. 2015 Aug;21(8):662-71. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gav023. Epub 2015 May 
4.

Circadian clock regulation of melatonin MTNR1B receptor expression in human
myometrial smooth muscle cells.

Beesley S(1), Lee J(1), Olcese J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, and Program in Neuroscience, Florida State 
University College of Medicine, 1115 West Call Street, Tallahassee, FL 32306,
USA. (2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, and Program in Neuroscience, Florida
State University College of Medicine, 1115 West Call Street, Tallahassee, FL
32306, USA james.olcese@med.fsu.edu.

Circadian genes are expressed in virtually all cells and tissues, and circadian
rhythms influence many bodily processes, including reproductive physiology. The
expression of hMTNR1B is suppressed during pregnancy until late in term (much
like the oxytocin receptor), at which time it is up-regulated to allow for the
nocturnal melatonin/oxytocin synergy, which promotes strong nocturnal
contractions. Little is currently known about the regulation of hMNTR1b, nor
about its functional significance in the myometrium. We, therefore, aimed to
elucidate some of the transcription factors that regulate hMNTR1b gene expression
in the human myometrium and to determine if hMNTR1b is under circadian control.
In this study, we used immortalized and primary myometrial cells that were
assessed for circadian gene expression rhythms using real-time bioluminometry and
quantitative PCR. Chromatin immunoprecipitation examined the binding of the clock
gene product brain and muscle aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT)-like protein 1 (BMAL1) to the promoter of the hMTNR1B gene. Overexpression
studies tested the role of circadian locomotor output cycles kaput (CLOCK) and
its partner BMAL1 in regulating hMTNR1B expression. We confirmed circadian clock 
gene expression in both immortalized human myometrial cells and primary
myometrial cell cultures. We further showed that the hBMAL1 protein binds to an
E-box motif in the proximal promoter of the hMTNR1B gene. Overexpression studies 
demonstrated that the BMAL1/CLOCK complex activates expression of hMTNR1B leading
to a circadian rhythm in phase with the E-box driven clock gene hPER2 (Period 2).
These results indicate, for the first time, the presence of a functional
circadian clock in the human myometrium with the hMTNR1B gene as a clock
controlled target. Further investigations could open new vistas for understanding
the regulation of uterine contractions and the timing of human labor.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25939854  [PubMed - in process]


81. BMC Psychiatry. 2015 Apr 28;15:91. doi: 10.1186/s12888-015-0471-4.

Baclofen as relapse prevention in the treatment of Gamma- Hydroxybutyrate (GHB)
dependence: an open label study.

Kamal RM(1,)(2), Schellekens A(3), De Jong CA(4), Dijkstra BA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Nijmegen Institute for Scientist-Practitioners in Addiction (NISPA),
Hogedwarsstraat 3, PO Box 243, Vught, 5260 AE, the Netherlands.
rama.kamal@novadic-kentron.nl. (2)Novadic-Kentron Addiction Care network, Vught, 
the Netherlands. rama.kamal@novadic-kentron.nl. (3)Nijmegen Institute for
Scientist-Practitioners in Addiction (NISPA), Hogedwarsstraat 3, PO Box 243,
Vught, 5260 AE, the Netherlands. arnt.schellekens@gmail.com. (4)Nijmegen
Institute for Scientist-Practitioners in Addiction (NISPA), Hogedwarsstraat 3, PO
Box 243, Vught, 5260 AE, the Netherlands. nispa.dejong@gmail.com. (5)Nijmegen
Institute for Scientist-Practitioners in Addiction (NISPA), Hogedwarsstraat 3, PO
Box 243, Vught, 5260 AE, the Netherlands. boukje.dijkstra@novadic-kentron.nl.

BACKGROUND: GHB dependence is a growing health problem in several western
countries, especially the Netherlands. Attempts to stop using GHB are often
followed by relapse shortly after successful detoxification. Craving for GHB use 
and co-morbid psychiatric symptom levels are thought to be the major factors
contributing to the high relapse rates. Given its pharmacological profile,
baclofen might prove an effective anti-craving agent for patients with GHB
dependence. The aim of the current study is to assess the potential of baclofen
as an anti-craving agent relapse prevention intervention in GHB dependent
patients.
METHODS/DESIGN: In an open label non-randomized trial treatment with baclofen to 
a maximum of 60 mg/day will be compared with treatment as usual (TAU) in recently
detoxified GHB dependent patients (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>80). The primary outcome measure will be
the level of GHB use. Secondary outcome measures are craving levels, psychiatric 
symptom levels and quality of life. Questionnaires will be administered during
12 weeks of baclofen treatment and at follow-up (six months after the start of
treatment).
DISCUSSION: It is hypothesized that baclofen treatment compared to TAU will be
associated with significantly reduced GHB use. In addition, we hypothesize that
baclofen treatment will be associated with decreased craving and anxiety levels, 
and higher quality of life. If results are in line with our hypotheses, further
studies on the efficacy of baclofen using placebo controlled designs and long
term follow-up are warranted.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: The Netherlands Trial Register with number NTR4528 .
Registered 19 April 2014.

PMCID: PMC4424532
PMID: 25927622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 29;10(4):e0123951. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123951.
eCollection 2015.

Eag Domains Regulate LQT Mutant hERG Channels in Human Induced Pluripotent Stem
Cell-Derived Cardiomyocytes.

Liu QN(1), Trudeau MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Human Ether á go-go Related Gene potassium channels form the rapid component of
the delayed-rectifier (IKr) current in the heart. The N-terminal 'eag' domain,
which is composed of a Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain and a short PAS-cap region, is a
critical regulator of hERG channel function. In previous studies, we showed that 
isolated eag (i-eag) domains rescued the dysfunction of long QT type-2 associated
mutant hERG R56Q channels, by substituting for defective eag domains, when the
channels were expressed in Xenopus oocytes or HEK 293 cells.Here, our goal was to
determine whether the rescue of hERG R56Q channels by i-eag domains could be
translated into the environment of cardiac myocytes. We expressed hERG R56Q
channels in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes
(hiPSC-CMs) and measured electrical properties of the cells with whole-cell
patch-clamp recordings. We found that, like in non-myocyte cells, hERG R56Q had
defective, fast closing (deactivation) kinetics when expressed in hiPSC-CMs. We
report here that i-eag domains slowed the deactivation kinetics of hERG R56Q
channels in hiPSC-CMs. hERG R56Q channels prolonged the AP of hiPSCs, and the AP 
was shortened by co-expression of i-eag domains and hERG R56Q channels. We
measured robust Förster Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) between i-eag domains
tagged with Cyan fluorescent protein (CFP) and hERG R56Q channels tagged with
Citrine fluorescent proteins (Citrine), indicating their close proximity at the
cell membrane in live iPSC-CMs. Together, functional regulation and FRET
spectroscopy measurements indicated that i-eag domains interacted directly with
hERG R56Q channels in hiPSC-CMs. These results mean that the regulatory role of
i-eag domains is conserved in the cellular environment of human cardiomyocytes,
indicating that i-eag domains may be useful as a biological therapeutic.

PMCID: PMC4414485
PMID: 25923442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Hum Mutat. 2015 Aug;36(8):764-73. doi: 10.1002/humu.22805. Epub 2015 Jun 13.

An Interdomain KCNH2 Mutation Produces an Intermediate Long QT Syndrome.

Osterbur ML(1), Zheng R(2), Marion R(3), Walsh C(4), McDonald TV(1,)(2,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, NY. (2)Wilf Cardiovascular Research Institute, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics,
Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Bronx, NY. (4)Department of Pediatrics,
Division of Cardiology, Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Bronx, NY.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY.

Hereditary long QT syndrome is caused by deleterious mutation in one of several
genetic loci, including locus LQT2 that contains the KCNH2 gene (or hERG, human
ether-a-go-go related gene), causing faulty cardiac repolarization. Here, we
describe and characterize a novel mutation, p.Asp219Val in the hERG channel,
identified in an 11-year-old male with syncope and prolonged QT interval. Genetic
sequencing showed a nonsynonymous variation in KCNH2 (c.656A>T: amino acid
p.Asp219Val). p.Asp219Val resides in a region of the channel predicted to be
unstructured and flexible, located between the PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) domain and its 
interaction sites in the transmembrane domain. The p.Asp219Val hERG channel
produced K(+) current that activated with modest changes in voltage dependence.
Mutant channels were also slower to inactivate, recovered from inactivation more 
readily and demonstrated a significantly accelerated deactivation rate compared
with the slow deactivation of wild-type channels. The intermediate nature of the 
biophysical perturbation is consistent with the degree of severity in the
clinical phenotype. The findings of this study demonstrate a previously unknown
role of the proximal N-terminus in deactivation and support the hypothesis that
the proximal N-terminal domain is essential in maintaining slow hERG
deactivation.

© 2015 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMCID: PMC4667707 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25914329  [PubMed - in process]


84. Oncogene. 2015 Dec 10;34(50):6092-104. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.55. Epub 2015 Apr
13.

Anti-androgen flutamide suppresses hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation
via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor mediated induction of transforming growth
factor-ß1.

Koch DC(1,)(2), Jang HS(1,)(2), O'Donnell EF(1,)(2), Punj S(1,)(2), Kopparapu
PR(1,)(2), Bisson WH(2), Kerkvliet NI(2), Kolluri SK(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Cancer Research
Laboratory, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. (2)Department of
Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Environmental Health Sciences Center,
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
and a member of the basic helix-loop-helix PER/ARNT/SIM family of chemosensors
and developmental regulators. The AhR is widely known as a mediator of dioxin
toxicity; however, it also suppresses cancer cell proliferation and recent
findings have implicated its role as a tumor suppressor. We conducted a chemical 
library screen to identify nontoxic AhR ligands with anti-cancer effects and
discovered flutamide (Eulexin) as a putative AhR ligand. Flutamide is an androgen
receptor (AR) antagonist approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for the treatment of prostate cancer. We found that flutamide
inhibited the growth of several cancer cell lines independent of AR status, and
that suppression of AhR expression reversed the anti-proliferative effects of
flutamide. We investigated the AhR-dependent mechanism of action of flutamide in 
human hepatocellular carcinoma cells and identified that transforming growth
factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) is induced by flutamide in an AhR-dependent manner. In
contrast, the potent AhR agonist 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin had no
effect on TGF-ß1 expression, indicating the ligand specificity of AhR activation.
We also determined that TGF-ß1 induction is required for the AhR-dependent growth
inhibitory effects of flutamide. Therefore, flutamide may be effective in
AhR-positive cancers that are sensitive to TGF-ß1 signaling, such as
hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMID: 25867062  [PubMed - in process]


85. Blood. 2015 May 21;125(21):3263-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-10-607267. Epub 2015 
Apr 8.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator is an essential regulator of
murine hematopoietic stem cell viability.

Krock BL(1), Eisinger-Mathason TS(1), Giannoukos DN(2), Shay JE(1), Gohil M(1),
Lee DS(1), Nakazawa MS(1), Sesen J(3), Skuli N(3), Simon MC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA; (2)Abramson Family Cancer Research 
Institute, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Philadelphia, PA; and. (3)INSERM U1037,
Claudius Regaud Institute, Toulouse, France.

Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) are master regulators of the transcriptional
response to low oxygen and play essential roles in embryonic development, tissue 
homeostasis, and disease. Recent studies have demonstrated that hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) within the bone marrow localize to a hypoxic niche and that
HIF-1a promotes HSC adaptation to stress. Because the related factor HIF-2a is
also expressed in HSCs, the combined role of HIF-1a and HIF-2a in HSC maintenance
is unclear. To this end, we have conditionally deleted the HIF-a dimerization
partner, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) in the
hematopoietic system to ablate activity of both HIF-1a and HIF-2a and assessed
the functional consequence of ARNT deficiency on fetal liver and adult
hematopoiesis. We determined that ARNT is essential for adult and fetal HSC
viability and homeostasis. Importantly, conditional knockout of both Hif-1a and
Hif-2a phenocopied key aspects of these HSC phenotypes, demonstrating that the
impact of Arnt deletion is primarily HIF dependent. ARNT-deficient long-term HSCs
underwent apoptosis, potentially because of reduced B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2) and
vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) expression. Our results suggest
that HIF activity may regulate HSC homeostasis through these prosurvival factors.

PMCID: PMC4440881 [Available on 2016-05-21]
PMID: 25855602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):11530-46.

Down-regulation of ARNT promotes cancer metastasis by activating the
fibronectin/integrin ß1/FAK axis.

Huang CR(1,)(2), Lee CT(3), Chang KY(4,)(5), Chang WC(2), Liu YW(6), Lee JC(7),
Chen BK(1,)(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, College of Bioscience 
and Biotechnology, National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan, ROC. (2)Graduate
Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University,
Taiwan, ROC. (3)Department of Pathology, National Cheng Kung University Hospital,
Taiwan, ROC. (4)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research
Institutes, Taiwan, ROC. (5)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of
Internal Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of Medicine, 
National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan, ROC. (6)Department of Pathology, Kuo
General Hospital, Taiwan, ROC. (7)Department of Surgery, National Cheng Kung
University Hospital, Taiwan, ROC. (8)Department of Pharmacology, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan, ROC. (9)Institute for Cancer
Biology and Drug Discovery, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei
Medical University, Taiwan, ROC.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is broadly involved in 
regulating tumorigenesis by inducing genes that are involved in tumor growth and 
angiogenesis. Tumorigenesis usually involves normoxic conditions. However, the
role of ARNT in tumor metastasis during normoxia remains unclear. Here, we
demonstrate that ARNT protein levels were decreased in late-stage human
colorectal cancer using immunohistochemical analysis. Down-regulation of ARNT
protein promoted cancer cell migration and invasion, which was mediated by
activation of the fibronectin/integrin ß1/FAK signaling axis. In addition, the
enhancement of migration and invasion in ANRT knockdown cells was blocked when
ARNT was restored in the cells. In xenografts in severe combined immunodeficiency
mice, tumor growth was significantly inhibited in the ARNT-knockdown condition.
However, the tail-vein injection animal model revealed that the depletion of
ARNT-induced metastatic lung colonies was further enhanced when ARNT expression
was recovered post-injection. Interestingly, chemotherapeutic drugs inhibited
ARNT expression and promoted the invasion of residual tumor cells. These results 
suggest that ARNT may play a positive role during tumor growth (either in
early-stage tumor growth or in organ metastases), but plays a negative role in
tumor migration and invasion. Therefore, the efficiency of ARNT-targeted therapy 
during different cancer stages should be carefully evaluated.

PMCID: PMC4484474
PMID: 25839165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Islets. 2014;6(5-6):e1006075. doi: 10.1080/19382014.2015.1006075.

Overexpression of HIF-2a in pancreatic ß cells does not alter glucose
homeostasis.

Brunt JJ(1), Shi SY, Schroer SA, Sivasubramaniyam T, Cai EP, Woo M.

Author information: 
(1)a Toronto General Research Institute ; Toronto , Canada.

Both type 1 and type 2 diabetes are associated with insufficient functional
ß-cell mass. Understanding intracellular signaling pathways associated with this 
decline is important in broadening our understanding of the disease and potential
therapeutic strategies. The hypoxia inducible factor pathway (HIF) plays a
critical role in cellular adaptation to hypoxic conditions. Activation of this
pathway increases expression of numerous genes involved in multiple cellular
processes and has been shown to impact the regulation of ß-cell function.
Previously, deletion of HIF-1a or HIF-1ß in pancreatic ß-cells, as well as
constitutive activation of the HIF pathway in ß-cells, was shown to result in
glucose intolerance and impaired insulin secretion. The objective of this study
was to delineate roles of HIF-2a overexpression in pancreatic ß-cells in vivo. We
overexpressed HIF-2a in pancreatic ß-cells by employing the Cre-loxP system
driven by the Pdx1 promoter to delete a stop codon. Our study revealed that
pancreatic HIF-2a overexpression does not result in significant differences in
glucose tolerance, insulin sensitivity or ß-cell area compared to wild-type
littermates under basal conditions or after high fat diet. Together, our study
shows excess HIF-2a in the pancreatic ß-cells does not play a significant role in
ß-cell function and glucose homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4398283
PMID: 25833250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Chem Res Toxicol. 2015 May 18;28(5):907-18. doi: 10.1021/tx5005198. Epub 2015 Apr
9.

Omeprazole Inhibits Pancreatic Cancer Cell Invasion through a Nongenomic Aryl
Hydrocarbon Receptor Pathway.

Jin UH, Kim SB(1), Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, United States.

Omeprazole and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) are aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) agonists that inhibit the invasion of breast cancer cells through 
inhibition of CXCR4 transcription. Treatment of highly invasive Panc1 pancreatic 
cancer cells with TCDD, omeprazole, and seven other AhR-active pharmaceuticals
showed that only omeprazole and tranilast, but not TCDD, inhibited invasion in a 
Boyden chamber assay. Similar results were observed in MiaPaCa2 cells, another
quasimensenchymal pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (QM-PDA) pancreatic cancer
cell line, whereas invasion was not observed with BxPC3 or L3.6pL cells, which
are classified as classical (less invasive) pancreatic cancer cells. It was also 
observed in QM-PDA cells that TCDD, omeprazole, and tranilast did not induce
CYP1A1 or CXCR4 and that treatment with these compounds did not result in nuclear
uptake of AhR. In contrast, treatment of BxPC3 and L3.6pL cells with these AhR
ligands resulted in induction of CYP1A1 (by TCDD) and nuclear uptake of AhR,
which was similar to that observed for Ah-responsive MDA-MB-468 breast and HepG2 
liver cancer cell lines. Results of AhR and AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt)
knockdown experiments in Panc1 and MiaPaCa2 cells demonstrated that omeprazole-
and tranilast-mediated inhibition of invasion was AhR-dependent but
Arnt-independent. These results demonstrate that in the most highly invasive
subtype of pancreatic cancer cells (QM-PDA) the selective AhR modulators
omeprazole and tranilast inhibit invasion through a nongenomic AhR pathway.

PMID: 25826687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Reprod Sci. 2015 Oct;22(10):1297-311. doi: 10.1177/1933719115578925. Epub 2015
Mar 29.

Perinatal Administration of a Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor Induces
Impairments in Reproductive Function and Follicular Dynamics in Female Rat
Offspring.

Moore CJ(1), DeLong NE(2), Chan KA(3), Holloway AC(2), Petrik JJ(4), Sloboda
DM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, Pediatrics McMaster
University, Hamilton, Canada Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Pediatrics
McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Pediatrics McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, Pediatrics McMaster University, Hamilton,
Canada. (4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Pediatrics McMaster
University, Hamilton, Canada Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of
Guelph, Guelph, Canada. (5)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences,
Pediatrics McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Pediatrics McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada Department of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada sloboda@mcmaster.ca.

INTRODUCTION: Up to 10% of pregnant women take antidepressants, of which
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are the most commonly prescribed.
Using a rodent model, we investigated the reproductive impacts of perinatal SSRI 
treatment on reproductive cyclicity and function in female offspring.
METHODS: Virgin Wistar rats were given oral vehicle (n = 10) or fluoxetine
hydrochloride (FLX, 10 mg/kg/d; n = 11) from 2 weeks prior to mating until
weaning. Pubertal onset and reproductive cyclicity in offspring were assessed.
Blood and ovarian tissues were collected for measures of reproductive function.
RESULTS: Perinatal FLX tends to induce irregular reproductive cycles in adult
offspring, which most commonly manifest as a prolonged estrus phase (FLX 34% vs
control [CON] 10%) relative to CON offspring. The FLX offspring tended to have
longer cycles (P = .052), had more secondary follicles (P = .0067), more total
follicles (P = .0310), and increased apoptotic ovarian cells (P < .001).
Prenatally exposed FLX offspring demonstrated elevated ovarian messenger RNA
(mRNA) levels of ERß (P = .008), Cry1 (P = .043), and tryptophan hydroxylase 2 (P
= .024), independent of stage of cycle. Ovarian mRNA levels of brain and muscle
Arnt-like protein 1 (P = .046) and Pet-1 (P = .021) were increased in FLX
offspring a manner that was reproductive cycle stage dependent.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to investigate the postnatal effects of
maternal perinatal exposure to FLX on adult offspring reproduction. We show that 
genes that regulate serotonin signaling and action in the ovary are altered in
prenatally FLX-exposed offspring, which when coupled with increased expression of
components of the core Circadian Locomotor Output Cycles Kaput (CLOCK) gene
regulatory loop may suggest an interaction between serotonergic signaling and
clock gene signaling pathways leading to the altered reproductive phenotype.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25824009  [PubMed - in process]


90. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 26;10(3):e0121650. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121650.
eCollection 2015.

Hepatocyte-specific deletion of ARNT (aryl hydrocarbon Receptor Nuclear
Translocator) results in altered fibrotic gene expression in the thioacetamide
model of liver injury.

Scott C(1), Cha K(2), Rao R(3), Liddle C(3), George J(4), Gunton JE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes, Obesity & Endocrinology Group, Westmead Millennium Institute,
Westmead Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia; Faculty of Medicine, University of
Sydney, Westmead, Sydney, NSW, Australia; Diabetes and Transcription Factors
Group, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, NSW, Australia. (2)Diabetes,
Obesity & Endocrinology Group, Westmead Millennium Institute, Westmead Hospital, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia; Diabetes and Transcription Factors Group, Garvan
Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, NSW, Australia. (3)The Storr Liver Unit,
Westmead Millennium Institute and University of Sydney, Westmead Hospital,
Sydney, NSW, Australia. (4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney, Westmead,
Sydney, NSW, Australia; The Storr Liver Unit, Westmead Millennium Institute and
University of Sydney, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia. (5)Diabetes,
Obesity & Endocrinology Group, Westmead Millennium Institute, Westmead Hospital, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia; Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney, Westmead,
Sydney, NSW, Australia; Diabetes and Transcription Factors Group, Garvan
Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, NSW, Australia; St. Vincent's Clinical
School, University of NSW, Sydney, NSW, Australia; Department of Diabetes and
Endocrinology, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, NSW Australia.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Recent studies have shown that increased expression of liver
hypoxia inducible factor 2-a (HIF-2a) leads to liver inflammation and a
pro-fibrotic gene expression signature. Aryl hydrocarbon Receptor Nuclear
Translocator (ARNT) is required for HIF-2a transcriptional activity and has
previously been shown to regulate hepatic metabolism in mice. In these studies we
examined the role of hepatocyte ARNT in the thioacetamide (TAA)-induced model of 
liver fibrosis.
METHODS: Hepatocyte-specific ARNT-null (LARNT) mice were created using an albumin
promoter-driven Cre recombinase. LARNT and floxed control (FC) littermates were
placed on chow diet and received twice weekly intraperitoneal injections of
0.15mg/g body weight of TAA for 13 weeks.
RESULTS: TAA treated LARNT and FC mice had a similar pattern of fibrosis.
Quantification of Sirius red histology staining and hydroxyproline content
revealed mixed results in terms of collagen deposition in LARNT livers. There was
no significant difference in hepatocyte apoptosis or proliferation, as assessed
by cleaved Caspase-3 and Ki67 respectively. LARNT mice had decreased macrophage
accumulation, and decreased liver mRNA expression of Col1A1, Col1A2, Col5A1,
Tgfß1, Tgfß2, Timp1 and Timp2.
CONCLUSIONS: Deletion of hepatocyte ARNT leads to altered expression of collagen 
associated mRNA and reduced macrophage infiltration in the TAA-induced model of
liver fibrosis. It appears that hepatocyte ARNT is not a requirement for
initiation of liver fibrogenesis, but does regulate pro-fibrotic gene expression 
and macrophage accumulation.

PMCID: PMC4374875
PMID: 25812120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 23;10(3):e0120380. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120380.
eCollection 2015.

Hepatic circadian-clock system altered by insulin resistance, diabetes and
insulin sensitizer in mice.

Tseng HL(1), Yang SC(2), Yang SH(3), Shieh KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, Tzu Chi University,
Hualien, Taiwan; Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Tzu Chi
University, Hualien, Taiwan. (2)General Education Center, Tzu Chi College of
Technology, Hualien, Taiwan. (3)Institute of Medical Sciences, School of
Medicine, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan; Department of Physiology, School
of Medicine, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan; Department of Rehabilitation
Medicine, Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan.

Circadian rhythms are intrinsic rhythms that are coordinated with the rotation of
the Earth and are also generated by a set of circadian-clock genes at the
intracellular level. Growing evidence suggests a strong link between circadian
rhythms and energy metabolism; however, the fundamental mechanisms remain
unclear. In the present study, neonatal streptozotocin (STZ)-treated mice were
used to model the molecular and physiological progress from insulin resistance to
diabetes. Two-day-old male C57BL/6 mice received a single injection of STZ and
were tested for non-obese, hyperglycemic and hyperinsulinemic conditions in the
early stage, insulin resistance in the middle stage, and diabetes in the late
stage. Gene expression levels of the hepatic circadian-clock system were examined
by real-time quantitative PCR. Most of the components of the hepatic
circadian-clock gene expression system, such as the mRNAs of Bmal1 (brain and
muscle Arnt-like protein-1), Per2 (period 2) and Cry1 (cryptochrome 1), were
elevated, and circadian patterns were retained in the early and middle stages of 
insulin-resistant conditions. The insulin sensitizer, rosiglitazone, returns the 
physiological and molecular changes associated with the diabetic phenotype to
normal levels through peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) rather
than PPARa. Early and chronic treatment with rosiglitazone has been shown to be
effective to counter the diabetic condition. Over time, this effect acts to
attenuate the increased gene expression levels of the hepatic circadian-clock
system and delay the severity of diabetic conditions. Together, these results
support an essential role for the hepatic circadian-clock system in the
coordinated regulation and/or response of metabolic pathways.

PMCID: PMC4370469
PMID: 25799429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Haematologica. 2015 Jun;100(6):801-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.120048. Epub
2015 Mar 13.

BCL6--regulated by AhR/ARNT and wild-type MEF2B--drives expression of germinal
center markers MYBL1 and LMO2.

Ding J(1), Dirks WG(1), Ehrentraut S(1), Geffers R(2), MacLeod RA(1), Nagel S(1),
Pommerenke C(1), Romani J(1), Scherr M(3), Vaas LA(1), Zaborski M(1), Drexler
HG(1), Quentmeier H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz-Institute DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, 
Braunschweig. (2)Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Genome Analysis
Research Group, Braunschweig. (3)Medical School Hannover, Department of
Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Germany.
(4)Leibniz-Institute DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, 
Braunschweig hqu@dsmz.de.

Genetic heterogeneity is widespread in tumors, but poorly documented in cell
lines. According to immunoglobulin hypermutation analysis, the diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma cell line U-2932 comprises two subpopulations faithfully
representing original tumor subclones. We set out to identify molecular causes
underlying subclone-specific expression affecting 221 genes including surface
markers and the germinal center oncogenes BCL6 and MYC. Genomic copy number
variations explained 58/221 genes differentially expressed in the two U-2932
clones. Subclone-specific expression of the aryl-hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and
the resulting activity of the AhR/ARNT complex underlaid differential regulation 
of 11 genes including MEF2B. Knock-down and inhibitor experiments confirmed that 
AhR/ARNT regulates MEF2B, a key transcription factor for BCL6. AhR, MEF2B and
BCL6 levels correlated not only in the U-2932 subclones but in the majority of 23
cell lines tested, indicting overexpression of AhR as a novel mechanism behind
BCL6 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Enforced modulation of BCL6 affected 48/221
signature genes. Although BCL6 is known as a transcriptional repressor, 28 genes 
were up-regulated, including LMO2 and MYBL1 which, like BCL6, signify germinal
center diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Supporting the notion that BCL6 can induce 
gene expression, BCL6 and the majority of potential targets were co-regulated in 
a series of B-cell lines. In conclusion, genomic copy number aberrations,
activation of AhR/ARNT, and overexpression of BCL6 are collectively responsible
for differential expression of more than 100 genes in subclones of the U-2932
cell line. It is particularly interesting that BCL6 - regulated by AhR/ARNT and
wild-type MEF2B - may drive expression of germinal center markers in diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4450626
PMID: 25769544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Neurochem Res. 2015 May;40(5):961-70. doi: 10.1007/s11064-015-1551-z. Epub 2015
Mar 7.

Glutamate-Dependent BMAL1 Regulation in Cultured Bergmann Glia Cells.

Chi-Castañeda D(1), Waliszewski SM, Zepeda RC, Hernández-Kelly LC, Caba M, Ortega
A.

Author information: 
(1)Doctorado en Ciencias Biomédicas, CIB, Universidad Veracruzana, Apartado
Postal 91-190, Xalapa, Veracruz, Mexico.

Glutamate, the major excitatory amino acid, activates a wide variety of signal
transduction cascades. This neurotransmitter is involved in photic entrainment of
circadian rhythms, which regulate physiological and behavioral functions. The
circadian clock in vertebrates is based on a transcription-translation feedback
loop in which Brain and muscle aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT)-like protein 1 (BMAL1) acts as transcriptional activator of others clock
genes. This protein is expressed in nearly all suprachiasmatic nucleus neurons,
as well as in the granular layer of the cerebellum. In this context, we decided
to investigate the role of glutamate in the molecular mechanisms involved in the 
processes of transcription/translation of BMAL1 protein. To this end, primary
cultures of chick cerebellar Bergmann glial cells were stimulated with
glutamatergic ligands and we found that BMAL1 levels increased in a dose- and
time dependent manner. Additionally, we studied the phosphorylation of serine
residues in BMAL1 under glutamate stimulation and we were able to detect an
increase in the phosphorylation of this protein. The increased expression of
BMAL1 is most probably the result of a stabilization of the protein after it has 
been phosphorylated by the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase and/or the
Ca(2+)/diacylglycerol dependent protein kinase. The present results strongly
suggest that glutamate participates in regulating BMAL1 in glial cells and that
these cells might prove to be important in the control of circadian rhythms in
the cerebellum.

PMID: 25749891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cell Signal. 2015 Jun;27(6):1129-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.02.017. Epub
2015 Mar 3.

CK1d restrains lipin-1 induction, lipid droplet formation and cell proliferation 
under hypoxia by reducing HIF-1a/ARNT complex formation.

Kourti M(1), Ikonomou G(2), Giakoumakis NN(3), Rapsomaniki MA(3), Landegren U(4),
Siniossoglou S(5), Lygerou Z(3), Simos G(6), Mylonis I(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Thessaly,
Larissa, Greece. (2)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece; Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology,
SciLifeLab, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. (3)Laboratory of Biology, School
of Medicine, University of Patras, Rio, Patras, Greece. (4)Department of
Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, SciLifeLab, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden. (5)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge,
Wellcome Trust/Medical Research Council Building, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, 
United Kingdom. (6)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Thessaly, Larissa, Greece. Electronic address: simos@med.uth.gr. (7)Laboratory of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece.
Electronic address: mylonis@med.uth.gr.

Proliferation of cells under hypoxia is facilitated by metabolic adaptation,
mediated by the transcriptional activator Hypoxia Inducible Factor-1 (HIF-1).
HIF-1a, the inducible subunit of HIF-1 is regulated by oxygen as well as by
oxygen-independent mechanisms involving phosphorylation. We have previously shown
that CK1d phosphorylates HIF-1a in its N-terminus and reduces its affinity for
its heterodimerization partner ARNT. To investigate the importance of this
mechanism for cell proliferation under hypoxia, we visually monitored HIF-1a
interactions within the cell nucleus using the in situ proximity ligation assay
(PLA) and fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP). Both methods show
that CK1d-dependent modification of HIF-1a impairs the formation of a chromatin
binding HIF-1 complex. This is confirmed by analyzing expression of lipin-1, a
direct target of HIF-1 that mediates hypoxic neutral lipid accumulation.
Inhibition of CK1d increases lipid droplet formation and proliferation of both
cancer and normal cells specifically under hypoxia and in an HIF-1a- and
lipin-1-dependent manner. These data reveal a novel role for CK1d in regulating
lipid metabolism and, through it, cell adaptation to low oxygen conditions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4390155
PMID: 25744540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Environ Res. 2015 Apr;138:202-16. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2014.12.031. Epub 2015
Feb 27.

Transcriptional profiling and biological pathway analysis of human equivalence
PCB exposure in vitro: indicator of disease and disorder development in humans.

Ghosh S(1), Mitra PS(2), Loffredo CA(3), Trnovec T(4), Murinova L(4), Sovcikova
E(4), Ghimbovschi S(5), Zang S(2), Hoffman EP(5), Dutta SK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Department of Biology, Howard University,
Washington, DC 20059, USA. Electronic address: sghosh@howard.edu. (2)Molecular
Genetics Laboratory, Department of Biology, Howard University, Washington, DC
20059, USA. (3)Department of Oncology & Department of Biostatistics, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC 20057, USA. (4)Department of Environmental Medicine,
Slovak Medical University, Bratislava, Slovak Republic. (5)Center for Genetic
Medicine, Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC 20010, USA.
(6)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Department of Biology, Howard University,
Washington, DC 20059, USA. Electronic address: sdutta@howard.edu.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Our earlier gene-expression studies with a Slovak
PCBs-exposed population have revealed possible disease and disorder development
in accordance with epidemiological studies. The present investigation aimed to
develop an in vitro model system that can provide an indication of disrupted
biological pathways associated with developing future diseases, well in advance
of the clinical manifestations that may take years to appear in the actual human 
exposure scenario.
METHODS: We used human Primary Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMC) and exposed them to
a mixture of human equivalence levels of PCBs (PCB-118, -138, -153, -170, -180)
as found in the PCBs-exposed Slovak population. The microarray studies of global 
gene expression were conducted on the Affymetrix platform using Human Genome U133
Plus 2.0 Array along with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) to associate the
affected genes with their mechanistic pathways. High-throughput qRT-PCR Taqman
Low Density Array (TLDA) was done to further validate the selected 6
differentially expressed genes of our interest, viz., ARNT, CYP2D6, LEPR, LRP12, 
RRAD, TP53, with a small population validation sample (n=71).
RESULTS: Overall, we revealed a discreet gene expression profile in the
experimental model that resembled the diseases and disorders observed in
PCBs-exposed population studies. The disease pathways included endocrine system
disorders, genetic disorders, metabolic diseases, developmental disorders, and
cancers, strongly consistent with the evidence from epidemiological studies.
INTERPRETATION: These gene finger prints could lead to the identification of
populations and subgroups at high risk for disease, and can pose as early disease
biomarkers well ahead of time, before the actual disease becomes visible.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4739739
PMID: 25725301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Anim Reprod Sci. 2015 Apr;155:36-41. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2015.01.013. Epub
2015 Feb 7.

Polymorphism and DNA methylation in the promoter modulate KISS1 gene expression
and are associated with litter size in goats.

An XP(1), Hou JX(2), Lei YN(2), Gao TY(2), Cao BY(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi 712100, PR China. Electronic address: anxiaopengdky@163.com. (2)College
of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi
712100, PR China. (3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F
University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, PR China. Electronic address:
caobinyun@126.com.

Polymorphisms in the promoter region are likely to impact KISS1 gene
transcription and reproductive traits. In this study, Guanzhong (GZ, n=350) and
Boer (BE, n=196) goats were used to detect polymorphism in the promoter of the
goat KISS1 gene by DNA sequencing. In the GZ goats, the g.1384G>A mutation was
identified in the promoter of the goat KISS1 gene. Guanzhong goats were in
Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium at g.1384G>A locus (P<0.05). The 1384A allele was
predicted to eliminate methylation, AHR-arnt heterodimers and AHR-related factors
(AHRR) and myoblast determining factors (MYOD) transcription factor-binding
sites. Statistical results indicated that the g.1384G>A SNP was associated with
litter size in the GZ goats (P<0.05). Luciferase assay analysis suggested that
the 1384A allele increased luciferase activity when compared to the 1384G allele.
The RT-qPCR assay also demonstrated that the 1384A allele had greater amounts of 
KISS1 mRNA than the 1384G allele in homozygous individuals. Functional analysis
suggested that this g.1384G>A SNP may be an important genetic regulator of KISS1 
gene expression with effects on downstream processes that are modulated by KISS1 
gene because of the changes of methylation and transcription factor-binding
sites. Therefore, the current study provides evidence in goats for genetic
markers that might be used in breeding programs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25721560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Apr;29(4):627-42. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1356. Epub 2015 Feb
24.

Research resource: the dynamic transcriptional profile of sertoli cells during
the progression of spermatogenesis.

Zimmermann C(1), Stévant I, Borel C, Conne B, Pitetti JL, Calvel P, Kaessmann H, 
Jégou B, Chalmel F, Nef S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development (C.Z., I.S., C.B., B.C.,
J.-L.P., P.C., S.N.), University of Geneva Medical School, 1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland; Center for Integrative Genomics (H.K.), University of Lausanne,
Génopode, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; and Inserm U1085-IRSET (B.J., F.C.),
Université de Rennes 1, Campus de Beaulieu, F-35042 Rennes, France.

Sertoli cells (SCs), the only somatic cells within seminiferous tubules,
associate intimately with developing germ cells. They not only provide physical
and nutritional support but also secrete factors essential to the complex
developmental processes of germ cell proliferation and differentiation. The SC
transcriptome must therefore adapt rapidly during the different stages of
spermatogenesis. We report comprehensive genome-wide expression profiles of pure 
populations of SCs isolated at 5 distinct stages of the first wave of mouse
spermatogenesis, using RNA sequencing technology. We were able to reconstruct
about 13 901 high-confidence, nonredundant coding and noncoding transcripts,
characterized by complex alternative splicing patterns with more than 45%
comprising novel isoforms of known genes. Interestingly, roughly one-fifth (2939)
of these genes exhibited a dynamic expression profile reflecting the evolving
role of SCs during the progression of spermatogenesis, with stage-specific
expression of genes involved in biological processes such as cell cycle
regulation, metabolism and energy production, retinoic acid synthesis, and
blood-testis barrier biogenesis. Finally, regulatory network analysis identified 
the transcription factors endothelial PAS domain-containing protein 1
(EPAS1/Hif2a), aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT/Hif1ß), and
signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) as potential master
regulators driving the SC transcriptional program. Our results highlight the
plastic transcriptional landscape of SCs during the progression of
spermatogenesis and provide valuable resources to better understand SC function
and spermatogenesis and its related disorders, such as male infertility.

PMID: 25710594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Heart Rhythm. 2015 Jun;12(6):1306-14. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2015.02.019. Epub 2015
Feb 19.

The cardiomyocyte molecular clock regulates the circadian expression of Kcnh2 and
contributes to ventricular repolarization.

Schroder EA(1), Burgess DE(1), Zhang X(1), Lefta M(1), Smith JL(1), Patwardhan
A(2), Bartos DC(1), Elayi CS(3), Esser KA(1), Delisle BP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Muscle Biology, Department of Physiology. (2)Center for Biomedical 
Engineering. (3)Department of Cardiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington,
Kentucky. (4)Center for Muscle Biology, Department of Physiology.. Electronic
address: brian.delisle@uky.edu.

Comment in
    Heart Rhythm. 2015 Jun;12(6):1315-6.

BACKGROUND: Sudden cardiac death (SCD) follows a diurnal variation. Data suggest 
the timing of SCD is influenced by circadian (~24-hour) changes in neurohumoral
and cardiomyocyte-specific regulation of the heart's electrical properties. The
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors brain muscle arnt-like1 (BMAL1) and 
circadian locomotor output control kaput (CLOCK) coordinate the circadian
expression of select genes.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to test whether Bmal1 expression in cardiomyocytes
contributes to K(+) channel expression and diurnal changes in ventricular
repolarization.
METHODS: We used transgenic mice that allow for the inducible
cardiomyocyte-specific deletion of Bmal1 (iCS<U+0394>Bmal1(-/-)). We used quantitative
polymerase chain reaction, voltage clamping, promoter-reporter bioluminescence
assays, and electrocardiographic telemetry.
RESULTS: Although several K(+) channel gene transcripts were downregulated in
iCS<U+0394>Bmal1(-/-)mouse hearts, only Kcnh2 exhibited a robust circadian pattern of
expression that was disrupted in iCS<U+0394>Bmal1(-/-) hearts. Kcnh2 underlies the
rapidly activating delayed-rectifier K(+) current, and the rapidly activating
delayed-rectifier K(+) current recorded from iCS<U+0394>Bmal1(-/-) ventricular
cardiomyocytes was ~50% smaller than control ventricular myocytes.
Promoter-reporter assays demonstrated that the human Kcnh2 promoter is
transactivated by the coexpression of BMAL1 and CLOCK. Electrocardiographic
analysis showed that iCS<U+0394>Bmal1(-/-) mice developed a prolongation in the heart
rate-corrected QT interval during the light (resting) phase. This was secondary
to an augmented circadian rhythm in the uncorrected QT interval without a
corresponding change in the RR interval.
CONCLUSION: The molecular clock in the heart regulates the circadian expression
of Kcnh2, modifies K(+) channel gene expression, and is important for normal
ventricular repolarization. Disruption of the cardiomyocyte circadian clock
mechanism likely unmasks diurnal changes in ventricular repolarization that could
contribute to an increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias/SCD.

Copyright © 2015 Heart Rhythm Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4541807 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25701773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 20;6(8):6431-47.

Drug metabolism and clearance system in tumor cells of patients with multiple
myeloma.

Hassen W(1,)(2), Kassambara A(1,)(3), Reme T(1,)(3), Sahota S(4), Seckinger
A(5,)(6), Vincent L(7), Cartron G(7), Moreaux J(1,)(3,)(8), Hose D(5,)(6), Klein 
B(1,)(3,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, CNRS-UPR1142, Montpellier, France. (2)High
Institute of Biotechnology of Monastir, University of Monastir, Tunisia. (3)CHU
Montpellier, Laboratory for Monitoring Innovative Therapies, Department of
Biological Haematology, Montpellier, France. (4)Cancer Sciences Unit, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Southampton, UK. (5)Medizinische Klinik V,
Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (6)Nationales Centrum für
Tumorerkrankungen, Heidelberg, Germany. (7)CHU Montpellier, Department of
Clinical Hematology, Montpellier, France. (8)University of Montpellier 1, UFR
Medicine, Montpellier, France.

Resistance to chemotherapy is a major limitation of cancer treatments with
several molecular mechanisms involved, in particular altered local drug
metabolism and detoxification process. The role of drug metabolism and clearance 
system has not been satisfactorily investigated in Multiple Myeloma (MM), a
malignant plasma cell cancer for which a majority of patients escapes treatment. 
The expression of 350 genes encoding for uptake carriers, xenobiotic receptors,
phase I and II Drug Metabolizing Enzymes (DMEs) and efflux transporters was
interrogated in MM cells (MMCs) of newly-diagnosed patients in relation to their 
event free survival. MMCs of patients with a favourable outcome have an increased
expression of genes coding for xenobiotic receptors (RXRa, LXR, CAR and FXR) and 
accordingly of their gene targets, influx transporters and phase I/II DMEs. On
the contrary, MMCs of patients with unfavourable outcome displayed a global down 
regulation of genes coding for xenobiotic receptors and the downstream
detoxification genes but had a high expression of genes coding for ARNT and Nrf2 
pathways and ABC transporters. Altogether, these data suggests ARNT and Nrf2
pathways could be involved in MM primary resistance and that targeting RXRa, PXR,
LXR and FXR through agonists could open new perspectives to alleviate or reverse 
MM drug resistance.

PMCID: PMC4467447
PMID: 25669983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Pharmacol Rev. 2015;67(2):259-79. doi: 10.1124/pr.114.009001.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor in barrier organ physiology, immunology, and
toxicology.

Esser C(1), Rannug A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Research Institute for Environmental Medicine, Düsseldorf, Germany
(C.E.); and Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden (A.R.) chesser@uni-duesseldorf.de. (2)Leibniz Research
Institute for Environmental Medicine, Düsseldorf, Germany (C.E.); and Institute
of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden (A.R.).

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is an evolutionarily old transcription factor
belonging to the Per-ARNT-Sim-basic helix-loop-helix protein family. AhR
translocates into the nucleus upon binding of various small molecules into the
pocket of its single-ligand binding domain. AhR binding to both xenobiotic and
endogenous ligands results in highly cell-specific transcriptome changes and in
changes in cellular functions. We discuss here the role of AhR for immune cells
of the barrier organs: skin, gut, and lung. Both adaptive and innate immune cells
require AhR signaling at critical checkpoints. We also discuss the current two
prevailing views-namely, 1) AhR as a promiscuous sensor for small chemicals and
2) a role for AhR as a balancing factor for cell differentiation and function,
which is controlled by levels of endogenous high-affinity ligands. AhR signaling 
is considered a promising drug and preventive target, particularly for cancer,
inflammatory, and autoimmune diseases. Therefore, understanding its biology is of
great importance.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 25657351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jul 15;24(14):3895-907. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv047. Epub 2015
Feb 4.

A single nucleotide polymorphism associated with isolated cleft lip and palate,
thyroid cancer and hypothyroidism alters the activity of an oral epithelium and
thyroid enhancer near FOXE1.

Lidral AC(1), Liu H(2), Bullard SA(3), Bonde G(4), Machida J(5), Visel A(6),
Uribe LM(7), Li X(4), Amendt B(4), Cornell RA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, andrew-lidral@uiowa.edu. (2)Dows Research
Institute, State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology
(Hubei-MOST) and Key Laboratory for Oral Biomedicine of Ministry of Education,
School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and. (4)Department of Anatomy, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA, USA. (5)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Toyota
Memorial Hospital, Toyota City, Aichi, Japan. (6)Genomics Division, Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA and Department of Energy Joint
Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, CA, USA. (7)Department of Orthodontics.

Three common diseases, isolated cleft lip and cleft palate (CLP), hypothyroidism 
and thyroid cancer all map to the FOXE1 locus, but causative variants have yet to
be identified. In patients with CLP, the frequency of coding mutations in FOXE1
fails to account for the risk attributable to this locus, suggesting that the
common risk alleles reside in nearby regulatory elements. Using a combination of 
zebrafish and mouse transgenesis, we screened 15 conserved non-coding sequences
for enhancer activity, identifying three that regulate expression in a tissue
specific pattern consistent with endogenous foxe1 expression. These three,
located -82.4, -67.7 and +22.6 kb from the FOXE1 start codon, are all active in
the oral epithelium or branchial arches. The -67.7 and +22.6 kb elements are also
active in the developing heart, and the -67.7 kb element uniquely directs
expression in the developing thyroid. Within the -67.7 kb element is the SNP
rs7850258 that is associated with all three diseases. Quantitative reporter
assays in oral epithelial and thyroid cell lines show that the rs7850258 allele
(G) associated with CLP and hypothyroidism has significantly greater enhancer
activity than the allele associated with thyroid cancer (A). Moreover, consistent
with predicted transcription factor binding differences, the -67.7 kb element
containing rs7850258 allele G is significantly more responsive to both MYC and
ARNT than allele A. By demonstrating that this common non-coding variant alters
FOXE1 expression, we have identified at least in part the functional basis for
the genetic risk of these seemingly disparate disorders.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4476440 [Available on 2016-07-15]
PMID: 25652407  [PubMed - in process]


102. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;35(3):841-57. doi: 10.1159/000369742. Epub 2015 Jan
30.

Inverse regulation of early and late chondrogenic differentiation by oxygen
tension provides cues for stem cell-based cartilage tissue engineering.

Portron S(1), Hivernaud V, Merceron C, Lesoeur J, Masson M, Gauthier O, Vinatier 
C, Beck L, Guicheux J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM (Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale), UMRS 791, 
Center for osteoarticular and dental tissue engineering, Group STEP "Skeletal
Tissue Engineering and Physiopathology", Nantes Cedex 1, France.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Multipotent stem/stromal cells (MSC) are considered promising
for cartilage tissue engineering. However, chondrogenic differentiation of MSC
can ultimately lead to the formation of hypertrophic chondrocytes responsible for
the calcification of cartilage. To prevent the production of this calcified
matrix at the articular site, the late hypertrophic differentiation of MSCs must 
be carefully controlled. Given that articular cartilage is avascular, we
hypothesized that in addition to its stimulatory role in the early
differentiation of chondrogenic cells, hypoxia may prevent their late
hypertrophic conversion.
METHODS: Early and late chondrogenic differentiation were evaluated using human
adipose MSC and murine ATDC5 cells cultured under either normoxic (21%O2) or
hypoxic (5%O2) conditions. To investigate the effect of hypoxia on late
chondrogenic differentiation, the transcriptional activity of hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha (HIF-1a) and HIF-2a were evaluated using the NoShift DNA-binding
assay and through modulation of their activity (chemical inhibitor, RNA
interference). Results : Our data demonstrate that low oxygen tension not only
stimulates the early chondrogenic commitment of two complementary models of
chondrogenic cells, but also inhibits their hypertrophic differentiation.
Conclusion : These results suggest that hypoxia can be used as an instrumental
tool to prevent the formation of a calcified matrix in MSC-based cartilage tissue
engineering.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25632940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 20;290(12):7707-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.632786. Epub 2015
Jan 27.

Coiled-coil coactivators play a structural role mediating interactions in
hypoxia-inducible factor heterodimerization.

Guo Y(1), Scheuermann TH(1), Partch CL(1), Tomchick DR(1), Gardner KH(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Biophysics and Biochemistry, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-8816 and. (2)From the
Departments of Biophysics and Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-8816 and the Structural Biology Initiative,
CUNY Advanced Science Research Center, and Department of Chemistry, City College 
of New York, New York, New York 10031 Kevin.Gardner@asrc.cuny.edu.

The hypoxia-inducible factor complex (HIF-a·aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (ARNT)) requires association with several transcription coactivators
for a successful cellular response to hypoxic stress. In addition to the
conventional global transcription coactivator CREB-binding protein/p300
(CBP/p300) that binds to the HIF-a transactivation domain, a new group of
transcription coactivators called the coiled-coil coactivators (CCCs) interact
directly with the second PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) domain of ARNT (ARNT PAS-B). These
less studied transcription coactivators play essential roles in the HIF-dependent
hypoxia response, and CCC misregulation is associated with several forms of
cancer. To better understand CCC protein recruitment by the heterodimeric HIF
transcription factor, we used x-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy, and
biochemical methods to investigate the structure of the ARNT PAS-B domain in
complex with the C-terminal fragment of a coiled-coil coactivator protein,
transforming acidic coiled-coil coactivator 3 (TACC3). We found that the HIF-2a
PAS-B domain also directly interacts with TACC3, motivating an NMR data-derived
model suggesting a means by which TACC3 could form a ternary complex with HIF-2a 
PAS-B and ARNT PAS-B via ß-sheet/coiled-coil interactions. These findings suggest
that TACC3 could be recruited as a bridge to cooperatively mediate between the
HIF-2a PAS-B·ARNT PAS-B complex, thereby participating more directly in
HIF-dependent gene transcription than previously anticipated.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4367273
PMID: 25627682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Neoplasia. 2015 Jan;17(1):79-88. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.11.004.

A long noncoding RNA perturbs the circadian rhythm of hepatoma cells to
facilitate hepatocarcinogenesis.

Cui M(1), Zheng M(1), Sun B(1), Wang Y(2), Ye L(2), Zhang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Department of Cancer
Research, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, China. (2)State
Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Department of Biochemistry, College
of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of
Medicinal Chemical Biology, Department of Cancer Research, College of Life
Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, China. Electronic address:
zhangxd@nankai.edu.cn.

Clock circadian regulator (CLOCK)/brain and muscle arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1)
complex governs the regulation of circadian rhythm through triggering periodic
alterations of gene expression. However, the underlying mechanism of circadian
clock disruption in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains unclear. Here, we
report that a long noncoding RNA (lncRNA), highly upregulated in liver cancer
(HULC), contributes to the perturbations in circadian rhythm of hepatoma cells.
Our observations showed that HULC was able to heighten the expression levels of
CLOCK and its downstream circadian oscillators, such as period circadian clock 1 
and cryptochrome circadian clock 1, in hepatoma cells. Strikingly, HULC altered
the expression pattern and prolonged the periodic expression of CLOCK in hepatoma
cells. Mechanistically, the complementary base pairing between HULC and the 5'
untranslated region of CLOCK mRNA underlay the HULC-modulated expression of
CLOCK, and the mutants in the complementary region failed to achieve the event.
Moreover, immunohistochemistry staining and quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction validated that the levels of CLOCK were elevated in HCC tissues,
and the expression levels of HULC were positively associated with those of CLOCK 
in clinical HCC samples. In functional experiments, our data exhibited that CLOCK
was implicated in the HULC-accelerated proliferation of hepatoma cells in vitro
and in vivo. Taken together, our data show that an lncRNA, HULC, is responsible
for the perturbations in circadian rhythm through upregulating circadian
oscillator CLOCK in hepatoma cells, resulting in the promotion of
hepatocarcinogenesis. Thus, our finding provides new insights into the mechanism 
by which lncRNA accelerates hepatocarcinogenesis through disturbing circadian
rhythm of HCC.

Copyright © 2014 Neoplasia Press, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4309731
PMID: 25622901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015 Jun;30(6):1085-93. doi: 10.1111/jgh.12905.

Downregulation of ARNT2 promotes tumor growth and predicts poor prognosis in
human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Li W(1), Liang Y, Yang B, Sun H, Wu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
Fudan University, Shanghai, China; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical
College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Aryl-hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2 (ARNT2) is a
transcriptional regulator and member of the basic helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-SIM
(bHLH/PAS) superfamily. Recently, evidence of that ARNT is involved in
carcinogenesis and cancer progression has emerged. The aim of current study was
to investigate the role of ARNT2, a homolog of ARNT, in tumor growth, invasion,
and prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: Tissue microarray and immunohistochemical staining were used to examine 
the expression of ARNT2 in 195 HCC tissues. Factors associated with ARNT2 levels 
were assessed by univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses. Cell
proliferation, migration, and invasion assays were performed by using ARNT2
silencing and overexpressing HCCLM6 cell line. Orthotopic xenograft HCC model was
used to elucidate the effects of ARNT2 on HCC progression in vivo.
RESULTS: High intratumoral of ARNT2 level was well correlated with longer overall
survival (OS) and lower tumor to recurrence (TTR) of HCC patients after
resection. Multivariate analysis revealed that intratumoral ARNT2 overexpression 
was an independent prognostic factor for both OS and TTR. Knockdown of ARNT2 in
HCCLM6 cells was significantly enhanced while overexpression of ARNT2
significantly inhibited the ability of cell proliferation, invasion, and
migration. In animal studies, downregulation of ARNT2 in HCCLM6 cells promoted,
whereas upregulation of ARNT2 in HCCLM6 cells reduced HCCLM6 growth in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that ARNT2 plays an inhibitory role in HCC
progression and suggest that ARNT2 may be a potential prognostic predictor and
therapeutic target for HCC.

© 2015 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley Publishing
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25611915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Endocrinology. 2015 Apr;156(4):1408-15. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1872. Epub 2015 Jan 
21.

Sim1 inhibits bone formation by enhancing the sympathetic tone in male mice.

Wang X(1), Wei W, Zinn AR, Wan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology (X.W., W.W., Y.W.) and Internal Medicine (A.R.Z.) 
and Eugene McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development (A.R.Z.), The
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390.

Single-minded 1 (Sim1) is a basic helix-loop-helix Per-Arnt-Sim transcription
factor that is important for neuronal development in the hypothalamus.
Loss-of-function mutation of Sim1 causes early-onset obesity. However, it is
unknown whether and how Sim1 regulates bone remodeling. In this study, we found
that adult-onset Sim1 deletion increases bone formation, leading to high bone
mass. In contrast, Sim1-overexpressing transgenic mice exhibit decreased bone
formation and low bone mass. Sim1 does not directly regulate osteoblastogenesis, 
because bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells from Sim1 mutant mice display a normal
capacity for osteoblast differentiation. Instead, Sim1 inhibits bone formation
via stimulating the sympathetic nervous system, because sympathetic tone is
decreased by Sim1 deletion but increased by Sim1 overexpression. Treatment with
the ß-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol effectively reverses the high bone mass in
Sim1-knockout mice. These findings reveal Sim1 as a critical yet previously
unrecognized modulator of skeletal homeostasis that functions through a central
relay.

PMCID: PMC4399315
PMID: 25607894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. FASEB J. 2015 Apr;29(4):1603-14. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-267195. Epub 2015 Jan 8.

The clock protein period 2 synchronizes mitotic expansion and decidual
transformation of human endometrial stromal cells.

Muter J(1), Lucas ES(1), Chan YW(1), Brighton PJ(1), Moore JD(1), Lacey L(1),
Quenby S(1), Lam EW(1), Brosens JJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Translational & Systems Medicine, Warwick Medical School, and
Warwick Systems Biology Centre, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom; 
and Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Imperial Centre
for Translational and Experimental Medicine, London, United Kingdom. (2)*Division
of Translational & Systems Medicine, Warwick Medical School, and Warwick Systems 
Biology Centre, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom; and Department
of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Imperial Centre for Translational
and Experimental Medicine, London, United Kingdom j.j.brosens@warwick.ac.uk.

Implantation requires coordinated interactions between the conceptus and
surrounding decidual cells, but the involvement of clock genes in this process is
incompletely understood. Circadian oscillations are predicated on
transcriptional-translational feedback loops, which balance the activities of the
transcriptional activators CLOCK (circadian locomotor output cycles kaput) and
brain muscle arnt-like 1 and repressors encoded by PER (Period) and Cryptochrome 
genes. We show that loss of PER2 expression silences circadian oscillations in
decidualizing human endometrial stromal cells (HESCs). Down-regulation occurred
between 12 and 24 hours following differentiation and coincided with reduced
CLOCK binding to a noncanonical E-box enhancer in the PER2 promoter. RNA
sequencing revealed that premature inhibition of PER2 by small interfering RNA
knockdown leads to a grossly disorganized decidual response. Gene ontology
analysis highlighted a preponderance of cell cycle regulators among the 1121
genes perturbed upon PER2 knockdown. Congruently, PER2 inhibition abrogated
mitotic expansion of differentiating HESCs by inducing cell cycle block at G2/M. 
Analysis of 70 midluteal endometrial biopsies revealed an inverse correlation
between PER2 transcript levels and the number of miscarriages in women suffering 
reproductive failure (Spearman rank test, <U+03C1> = -0.3260; P = 0.0046). Thus, PER2
synchronizes endometrial proliferation with initiation of aperiodic decidual gene
expression; uncoupling of these events may cause recurrent pregnancy loss.

© The Author(s).

PMCID: PMC4396614
PMID: 25573754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mamm Genome. 2015 Feb;26(1-2):43-56. doi: 10.1007/s00335-014-9553-8. Epub 2015
Jan 6.

Influence of sex on genetic regulation of "drinking in the dark" alcohol
consumption.

Vanderlinden LA(1), Saba LM, Bennett B, Hoffman PL, Tabakoff B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Skaggs School of Pharmacy &
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 12850 E.
Montview Blvd., Campus Box: C238, Aurora, CO, 80045, USA,
lauren.vanderlinden@ucdenver.edu.

The ILSXISS (LXS) recombinant inbred (RI) panel of mice is a valuable resource
for genetic mapping studies of complex traits, due to its genetic diversity and
large number of strains. Male and female mice from this panel were used to
investigate genetic influences on alcohol consumption in the "drinking in the
dark" (DID) model. Male mice (38 strains) and female mice (36 strains) were given
access to 20% ethanol during the early phase of their circadian dark cycle for
four consecutive days. The first principal component of alcohol consumption
measures on days 2, 3, and 4 was used as a phenotype (DID phenotype) to calculate
QTLs, using a SNP marker set for the LXS RI panel. Five QTLs were identified,
three of which included a significant genotype by sex interaction, i.e., a
significant genotype effect in males and not females. To investigate candidate
genes associated with the DID phenotype, data from brain microarray analysis
(Affymetrix Mouse Exon 1.0 ST Arrays) of male LXS RI strains were combined with
RNA-Seq data (mouse brain transcriptome reconstruction) from the parental ILS and
ISS strains in order to identify expressed mouse brain transcripts. Candidate
genes were determined based on common eQTL and DID phenotype QTL regions and
correlation of transcript expression levels with the DID phenotype. The resulting
candidate genes (in particular, Arntl/Bmal1) focused attention on the influence
of circadian regulation on the variation in the DID phenotype in this population 
of mice.

PMCID: PMC4306387
PMID: 25559016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(24):3878-91. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.972889.

PITX1, a specificity determinant in the HIF-1a-mediated transcriptional response 
to hypoxia.

Mudie S(1), Bandarra D, Batie M, Biddlestone J, Moniz S, Ortmann B, Shmakova A,
Rocha S.

Author information: 
(1)a Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression; College of Life Sciences ;
University of Dundee ; Dundee , UK.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2015;14(10):1491.

Hypoxia is an important developmental cue for multicellular organisms but it is
also a contributing factor for several human pathologies, such as stroke,
cardiovascular diseases and cancer. In cells, hypoxia activates a major
transcriptional program coordinated by the Hypoxia Inducible Factor (HIF) family.
HIF can activate more than one hundred targets but not all of them are activated 
at the same time, and there is considerable cell type variability. In this report
we identified the paired-like homeodomain pituitary transcription factor (PITX1),
as a transcription factor that helps promote specificity in HIF-1a dependent
target gene activation. Mechanistically, PITX1 associates with HIF-1ß and it is
important for the induction of certain HIF-1 dependent genes but not all. In
particular, PITX1 controls the HIF-1a-dependent expression of the histone
demethylases; JMJD2B, JMJD2A, JMJD2C and JMJD1B. Functionally, PITX1 is required 
for the survival and proliferation responses in hypoxia, as PITX1 depleted cells 
have higher levels of apoptotic markers and reduced proliferation. Overall, our
study identified PITX1 as a key specificity factor in HIF-1a dependent responses,
suggesting PITX1 as a protein to target in hypoxic cancers.

PMCID: PMC4614811
PMID: 25558831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 23;9(12):e115801. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115801.
eCollection 2014.

The inhibitory effects of Npas4 on seizures in pilocarpine-induced epileptic
rats.

Wang D(1), Ren M(1), Guo J(2), Yang G(1), Long X(1), Hu R(1), Shen W(1), Wang
X(1), Zeng K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing Key Laboratory of Neurology, Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, the First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

To explore the effects of neuronal Per-Arnt-Sim domain protein 4 (Npas4) on
seizures in pilocarpine-induced epileptic rats, Npas4 expression was detected by 
double-label immunofluorescence, immunohistochemistry, and Western blotting in
the brains of pilocarpine-induced epileptic model rats at 6 h, 24 h, 72 h, 7 d,
14 d, 30 d, and 60 d after status epilepticus. Npas4 was localized primarily in
the nucleus and in the cytoplasm of neurons. The Npas4 protein levels increased
in the acute phase of seizures (between 6 h and 72 h) and decreased in the
chronic phases (between 7 d and 60 d) in the rat model. Npas4 expression was
knocked down by specific siRNA interference. Then, the animals were treated with 
pilocarpine, and the effects on seizures were evaluated on the 7th day. The onset
latencies of pilocarpine-induced seizures were decreased, while the seizure
frequency, duration and attack rate increased in these rats. Our study indicates 
that Npas4 inhibits seizure attacks in pilocarpine-induced epileptic rats.

PMCID: PMC4275263
PMID: 25536221  [PubMed - in process]


111. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 23;9(12):e115849. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115849.
eCollection 2014.

Role of hypoxia inducing factor-1ß in alcohol-induced autophagy, steatosis and
liver injury in mice.

Ni HM(1), Bhakta A(1), Wang S(2), Li Z(1), Manley S(1), Huang H(3), Copple B(1), 
Ding WX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, The University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, The University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, United States of America; Laboratory 
of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China. (3)Laboratory of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Chronic alcohol causes liver hypoxia and steatosis, which eventually develops
into alcoholic liver disease (ALD). While it has been known that alcohol
consumption activates hepatic hypoxia inducing factor-1a (HIF-1a), conflicting
results regarding the role of HIF-1a in alcohol-induced liver injury and
steatosis in mice have been reported. In the present study, we aimed to use
hepatocyte-specific HIF-1ß knockout mice to eliminate the possible compensatory
effects of the single knockout of the 1a subunit of HIF to study the role of HIFs
in ALD. C57BL/6 wild type mice were treated with acute ethanol to mimic human
binge drinking. Matched wild-type and hepatocyte specific HIF-1ß knockout mice
were also subjected to a recently established Gao-binge alcohol model to mimic
chronic plus binge conditions, which is quite common in human alcoholics. We
found that acute alcohol treatment increased BNIP3 and BNIP3L/NIX expression in
primary cultured hepatocytes and in mouse livers, suggesting that HIF may be
activated in these models. We further found that hepatocyte-specific HIF-1ß
knockout mice developed less steatosis and liver injury following the Gao-binge
model or acute ethanol treatment compared with their matched wild type mice.
Mechanistically, protection against Gao-binge treatment-induced steatosis and
liver injury was likely associated with increased FoxO3a activation and
subsequent induction of autophagy in hepatocyte-specific HIF-1ß knockout mice.

PMCID: PMC4275262
PMID: 25536043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jan 6;112(1):112-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1417910112. 
Epub 2014 Dec 22.

Engineering an improved light-induced dimer (iLID) for controlling the
localization and activity of signaling proteins.

Guntas G(1), Hallett RA(1), Zimmerman SP(1), Williams T(1), Yumerefendi H(1),
Bear JE(2), Kuhlman B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics. (2)Department of Cell Biology &
Physiology, University of North Carolina Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599. (3)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, University of 
North Carolina Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, and
bkuhlman@email.unc.edu.

The discovery of light-inducible protein-protein interactions has allowed for the
spatial and temporal control of a variety of biological processes. To be
effective, a photodimerizer should have several characteristics: it should show a
large change in binding affinity upon light stimulation, it should not
cross-react with other molecules in the cell, and it should be easily used in a
variety of organisms to recruit proteins of interest to each other. To create a
switch that meets these criteria we have embedded the bacterial SsrA peptide in
the C-terminal helix of a naturally occurring photoswitch, the
light-oxygen-voltage 2 (LOV2) domain from Avena sativa. In the dark the SsrA
peptide is sterically blocked from binding its natural binding partner, SspB.
When activated with blue light, the C-terminal helix of the LOV2 domain undocks
from the protein, allowing the SsrA peptide to bind SspB. Without optimization,
the switch exhibited a twofold change in binding affinity for SspB with light
stimulation. Here, we describe the use of computational protein design, phage
display, and high-throughput binding assays to create an improved light inducible
dimer (iLID) that changes its affinity for SspB by over 50-fold with light
stimulation. A crystal structure of iLID shows a critical interaction between the
surface of the LOV2 domain and a phenylalanine engineered to more tightly pin the
SsrA peptide against the LOV2 domain in the dark. We demonstrate the functional
utility of the switch through light-mediated subcellular localization in
mammalian cell culture and reversible control of small GTPase signaling.

PMCID: PMC4291625
PMID: 25535392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. BMC Microbiol. 2014 Dec 20;14:306. doi: 10.1186/s12866-014-0306-3.

Activation of gab cluster transcription in Bacillus thuringiensis by
<U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid or succinic semialdehyde is mediated by the Sigma
54-dependent transcriptional activator GabR.

Peng Q(1), Yang M(2), Wang W(3,)(4), Han L(5), Wang G(6,)(7), Wang P(8,)(9),
Zhang J(10), Song F(11).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute
of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China.
qpeng@ippcaas.cn. (2)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and
Insect Pests, Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Beijing, China. miny1989@126.com. (3)State Key Laboratory for Biology
of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China. tankwangwei@163.com. (4)College
of Life Sciences, Northeast Agriculture University, Harbin, China.
tankwangwei@163.com. (5)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and
Insect Pests, Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Beijing, China. llhan@rcees.ac.cn. (6)State Key Laboratory for Biology 
of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China. wang_guannan@126.com.
(7)College of Life Sciences, Northeast Agriculture University, Harbin, China.
wang_guannan@126.com. (8)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and
Insect Pests, Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Beijing, China. sourme@163.com. (9)College of Life Sciences, Northeast 
Agriculture University, Harbin, China. sourme@163.com. (10)State Key Laboratory
for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute of Plant Protection,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China. jzhang@ippcaas.cn.
(11)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests,
Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing,
China. fpsong@ippcaas.cn.

BACKGROUND: Bacillus thuringiensis GabR is a Sigma 54-dependent transcriptional
activator containing three typical domains, an N-terminal regulatory domain
Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS), a central AAA(+) (ATPases associated with different cellular 
activities) domain and a C-terminal helix-turn-helix (HTH) DNA binding domain.
GabR positively regulates the expression of the gabT gene of the gab gene
cluster, which is responsible for the <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA) shunt.
RESULTS: Purified GabR was shown to specifically bind to a repeat region that
mapped 58 bp upstream of the gabT start codon. The specific signal factors GABA
and succinic semialdehyde (SSA) activated gabT expression, whereas GABA- and
SSA-inducible gabT transcription was abolished in sigL and gabR mutants. GABA and
SSA did not induce the expression of either SigL or GabR. Deletion of the PAS
domain of GabR resulted in increased gabT transcriptional activity, both in the
presence and absence of GABA.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified the GabR-binding site on the gabT promoter;
however, GabR does not bind to its own promoter. gabT transcription is induced by
GABA and SSA, and inducible expression is dependent on SigL and activated by
GabR. The PAS domain in GabR is repressing its enhancer transcriptional activity 
on the gabT promoter. Repression is released upon GABA addition, whereupon
transcription is induced.

PMCID: PMC4279683
PMID: 25527261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Feb;14(2):343-54. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0158. Epub 
2014 Dec 18.

A novel compound, NK150460, exhibits selective antitumor activity against breast 
cancer cell lines through activation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor.

Fukasawa K(1), Kagaya S(2), Maruyama S(2), Kuroiwa S(2), Masuda K(2), Kameyama
Y(2), Satoh Y(2), Akatsu Y(2), Tomura A(2), Nishikawa K(2), Horie S(3), Ichikawa 
Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Laboratories, Research and Development Group, Nippon
Kayaku Co., Ltd., Kita-ku, Tokyo, Japan. Department of Urology, Graduate School
of Medicine, Juntendo University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
kazuteru.fukasawa@nipponkayaku.co.jp. (2)Pharmaceutical Research Laboratories,
Research and Development Group, Nippon Kayaku Co., Ltd., Kita-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medicine, Juntendo University,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Antiestrogen agents are commonly used to treat patients with estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive breast cancer. Tamoxifen has been the mainstay of endocrine
treatment for patients with early and advanced breast cancer for many years.
Following tamoxifen treatment failure, however, there are still limited options
for subsequent hormonal therapy. We discovered a novel compound, NK150460, that
inhibits 17ß-estradiol (E2)-dependent transcription without affecting binding of 
E2 to ER. Against our expectations, NK150460 inhibited growth of not only most
ER-positive, but also some ER-negative breast cancer cell lines, while never
inhibiting growth of non-breast cancer cell lines. Cell-based screening using a
random shRNA library, identified aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT) as a key gene involved in NK150460's antitumor mechanism. siRNAs against
not only ARNT but also its counterpart aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and their 
target protein, CYP1A1, dramatically abrogated NK150460's growth-inhibitory
activity. This suggests that the molecular cascade of AhR/ARNT plays an essential
role in NK150460's antitumor mechanism. Expression of ERa was decreased by
NK150460 treatment, and this was inhibited by an AhR antagonist. Unlike two other
AhR agonists now undergoing clinical developmental stage, NK150460 did not induce
histone H2AX phosphorylation or p53 expression, suggesting that it did not induce
a DNA damage response in treated cells. Cell lines expressing epithelial markers 
were more sensitive to NK150460 than mesenchymal marker-expressing cells. These
data indicate that NK150460 is a novel AhR agonist with selective antitumor
activity against breast cancer cell lines, and its features differ from those of 
the other two AhR agonists.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25522763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 30;111(52):18757-62. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1421708111. Epub 2014 Dec 15.

Hepatocyte circadian clock controls acetaminophen bioactivation through
NADPH-cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase.

Johnson BP(1), Walisser JA(1), Liu Y(1), Shen AL(1), McDearmon EL(2), Moran
SM(1), McIntosh BE(1), Vollrath AL(1), Schook AC(2), Takahashi JS(3), Bradfield
CA(4).

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
53792; (2)Department of Neurobiology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208; and. (3)Department of Neuroscience
and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390 Joseph.Takahashi@UTSouthwestern.edu
bradfield@oncology.wisc.edu. (4)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53792; Joseph.Takahashi@UTSouthwestern.edu
bradfield@oncology.wisc.edu.

The diurnal variation in acetaminophen (APAP) hepatotoxicity (chronotoxicity)
reportedly is driven by oscillations in metabolism that are influenced by the
circadian phases of feeding and fasting. To determine the relative contributions 
of the central clock and the hepatocyte circadian clock in modulating the
chronotoxicity of APAP, we used a conditional null allele of brain and muscle
Arnt-like 1 (Bmal1, aka Mop3 or Arntl) allowing deletion of the clock from
hepatocytes while keeping the central and other peripheral clocks (e.g., the
clocks controlling food intake) intact. We show that deletion of the hepatocyte
clock dramatically reduces APAP bioactivation and toxicity in vivo and in vitro
because of a reduction in NADPH-cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase gene expression,
protein, and activity.

PMCID: PMC4284582
PMID: 25512522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Dec 12;13(4):10529-36. doi: 10.4238/2014.December.12.15.

Association between hypoxia-inducible factor-1a levels in serum and synovial
fluid with the radiographic severity of knee osteoarthritis.

Chu H(1), Xu ZM(1), Yu H(1), Zhu KJ(1), Huang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, the 100th Hospital of Chinese People's Liberation 
Army, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, China. (2)Department of Orthopaedics, the 100th
Hospital of Chinese People's Liberation Army, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, China
szhuanghong@126.com.

Osteoarthritis (OA) is primarily characterized by articular cartilage
degradation. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a), a subunit of the basic
helix-loop-helix-containing PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) domain transcription factors,
plays a vital role in the survival of articular chondrocytes to the hostile
hypoxic microenvironment and complicates the progression of OA. In this study, we
examined whether HIF-1a levels in the serum and synovial fluid (SF) of patients
with knee OA were increased and whether the increase was correlated with the
radiographic severity of the disease. A total of 278 knee OA patients and 203
healthy controls were enrolled in this study. Knee OA radiographic grading was
performed according to Kellgren-Lawrence (KL) grading system by evaluating X-ray 
changes observed on anteroposterior knee radiography. HIF-1a levels in the serum 
and SF were determined using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Serum HIF-1a
levels in patients with knee OA were higher than those in healthy controls. Knee 
OA patients with KL grade 4 showed significantly elevated HIF-1a levels in the
serum and SF compared with those with KL grades 2 and 3. Knee OA patients with KL
grade 3 showed significantly higher SF levels of HIF-1a than those with KL grade 
2. HIF-1a levels in the serum and SF of knee OA patients were significantly
correlated with disease severity according to KL grading criteria. HIF-1a levels 
in the serum and SF were closely related to the radiographic severity of OA and
may serve as an alternative biomarker for the progression and prognosis of knee
OA.

PMID: 25511037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jan;26(1):49-57. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2014.11.002.
Epub 2014 Dec 11.

All-encomPASsing regulation of ß-cells: PAS domain proteins in ß-cell dysfunction
and diabetes.

Sabatini PV(1), Lynn FC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Group, Child and Family Research Institute, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada; The Departments of Surgery and Cellular and
Physiological Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, V5Z 4H4 Canada. Electronic address: psabatini@cfri.ca. (2)Diabetes
Research Group, Child and Family Research Institute, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada; The Departments of Surgery and Cellular and Physiological Sciences,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, V5Z 4H4 Canada.
Electronic address: francis.lynn@ubc.ca.

As a sensory micro-organ, pancreatic ß-cells continually respond to nutritional
signals and neuroendocrine input from other glucoregulatory organs. This sensory 
ability is essential for normal ß-cell function and systemic glucose homeostasis.
Period circadian protein (Per)-aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
protein (Arnt)-single-minded protein (Sim) (PAS) domain proteins have a conserved
role as sensory proteins, critical in adaptation to changes in voltage, oxygen
potential, and xenobiotics. Within ß-cells, PAS domain proteins such as hypoxia
inducible factor 1a (Hif1a), Arnt, PAS kinase, Bmal1, and Clock respond to
disparate stimuli, but act in concert to maintain proper ß-cell function.
Elucidating the function of these factors in islets offers a unique insight into 
the sensing capacity of ß-cells, the consequences of impaired sensory function,
and the potential to develop novel therapeutic targets for preserving ß-cell
function in diabetes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25500169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2015 Jan;39(1):114-24. doi:
10.1016/j.etap.2014.10.017. Epub 2014 Nov 1.

Collagen density regulates xenobiotic and hypoxic response of mammary epithelial 
cells.

Curran CS(1), Carrillo ER(2), Ponik SM(3), Keely PJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin at
Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic address: colleen_curran@hotmail.com. 
(2)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin at
Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic address: ecarrillo@wisc.edu.
(3)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin at
Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic address: ponik@wisc.edu.
(4)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin at
Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic address: pjkeely@wisc.edu.

Breast density, where collagen I is the dominant component, is a significant
breast cancer risk factor. Cell surface integrins interact with collagen,
activate focal adhesion kinase (FAK), and downstream cell signals associated with
xenobiotics (AhR, ARNT) and hypoxia (HIF-1a, ARNT). We examined if mammary cells 
cultured in high density (HD) or low density (LD) collagen gels affected
xenobiotic or hypoxic responses. ARNT production was significantly reduced by HD 
culture and in response to a FAK inhibitor. Consistent with a decrease in ARNT,
AhR and HIF-1a reporter activation and VEGF production was lower in HD compared
to LD. However, P450 production was enhanced in HD and induced by AhR and HIF-1a 
agonists, possibly in response to increased NF-<U+03BA>B activaton. Thus, collagen
density differentially regulates downstream cell signals of AhR and HIF-1a by
modulating the activity of FAK, the release of NF-<U+03BA>B transcriptional factors, and
the levels of ARNT.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4323890
PMID: 25481308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Mol Biol. 2015 Jan 30;427(2):415-32. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.11.012. Epub 2014 
Nov 20.

Cooperative substrate binding by a diguanylate cyclase.

Oliveira MC(1), Teixeira RD(1), Andrade MO(1), Pinheiro GM(2), Ramos CH(2), Farah
CS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo,
São Paulo, SP 05508-070, Brazil. (2)Institute of Chemistry, State University of
Campinas, Campinas, SP 13083-970, Brazil. (3)Department of Biochemistry,
Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP 05508-070, Brazil.
Electronic address: chsfarah@iq.usp.br.

XAC0610, from Xanthomonas citri subsp. citri, is a large multi-domain protein
containing one GAF (cGMP-specific phosphodiesterases, adenylyl cyclases and FhlA)
domain, four PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) domains and one GGDEF domain. This protein has a 
demonstrable in vivo and in vitro diguanylate cyclase (DGC) activity that leads
to the production of cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP), a ubiquitous bacterial signaling
molecule. Analysis of a Xac<U+0394>0610 knockout strain revealed that XAC0610 plays a
role in the regulation of Xac motility and resistance to H2O2. Site-directed
mutagenesis of a conserved DGC lysine residue (Lys759 in XAC0610) resulted in a
severe reduction in XAC0610 DGC activity. Furthermore, experimental and in silico
analyses suggest that XAC0610 is not subject to allosteric product inhibition, a 
common regulatory mechanism for DGC activity control. Instead, steady-state
kinetics of XAC0610 DGC activity revealed a positive cooperative effect of the
GTP substrate with a dissociation constant for the binding of the first GTP
molecule (K1) approximately 5× greater than the dissociation constant for the
binding of the second GTP molecule (K2). We present a general kinetics scheme
that should be used when analyzing DGC kinetics data and propose that cooperative
GTP binding could be a common, though up to now overlooked, feature of these
enzymes that may in some cases offer a physiologically relevant mechanism for
regulation of DGC activity in vivo.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 16;111(50):18073-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1414945111. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

hERG 1b is critical for human cardiac repolarization.

Jones DK(1), Liu F(1), Vaidyanathan R(2), Eckhardt LL(2), Trudeau MC(3),
Robertson GA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience and. (2)Medicine, University of Wisconsin School
of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705; and. (3)Department of
Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201.
(4)Departments of Neuroscience and garobert@wisc.edu.

The human ether-à-go-go-related gene (hERG; or KCNH2) encodes the voltage-gated
potassium channel underlying IKr, a repolarizing current in the heart. Mutations 
in KCNH2 or pharmacological agents that reduce IKr slow action potential (AP)
repolarization and can trigger cardiac arrhythmias associated with long QT
syndrome. Two channel-forming subunits encoded by KCNH2 (hERG 1a and 1b) are
expressed in cardiac tissue. In heterologous expression systems, these subunits
avidly coassemble and exhibit biophysical and pharmacological properties distinct
from those of homomeric hERG 1a channels. Despite these findings, adoption of
hERG 1a/1b heteromeric channels as a model for cardiac IKr has been hampered by
the lack of evidence for a direct functional role for the 1b subunit in native
tissue. In this study, we measured IKr and APs at physiological temperature in
cardiomyocytes derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC-CMs). We
found that specific knockdown of the 1b subunit using shRNA caused reductions in 
1b mRNA, 1b protein levels, and IKr magnitude by roughly one-half. AP duration
was increased and AP variability was enhanced relative to controls. Early
afterdepolarizations, considered cellular substrates for arrhythmia, were also
observed in cells with reduced 1b expression. Similar behavior was elicited when 
channels were effectively converted from heteromers to 1a homomers by expressing 
a fragment corresponding to the 1a-specific N-terminal Per-Arnt-Sim domain, which
is omitted from hERG 1b by alternate transcription. These findings establish that
hERG 1b is critical for normal repolarization and that loss of 1b is
proarrhythmic in human cardiac cells.

PMCID: PMC4273358
PMID: 25453103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2015 Mar;147:24-30. doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2014.11.003.
Epub 2014 Nov 6.

Cytochrome P450 1 family and cancers.

Go RE(1), Hwang KA(1), Choi KC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Chungbuk 361-763,Republic of Korea.
(2)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Chungbuk 361-763,Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: kchoi@cbu.ac.kr.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcriptional factor 
that dimerizes with aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT). This
complex binds to xenobiotics response element (XREs), and then starts the
expressions of downstream genes including cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1 family members:
CYP1A1, CYP1A2 and CYP1B1. Role of CYP1 family is involved in the metabolism of
endogenous hormones, xenobiotics and drug. The expression of CYP1 family is
regulated by estradiol (E2) or xenobiotics in diverse cancers. In breast cancers 
expressing estrogen receptors (ERs), level of CYP1B1 is increased by E2 and
reversed by an estrogen receptor antagonist, ICI 182,780 or 4-hydrotamoxifen,
which indicates that the expression of CYP1 family in downstream region of AhR is
regulated by an activation of ERa. In metabolic pathways, E2 is converted into
4-hydroxyestradiol by CYP1B1, which can be converted into mainly
estradiol-3,4-quinone, a potential carcinogen, by peroxidase. Increased
expression of CYP1 family indicates the possibility of carcinogenesis by exposure
of xenobiotics in endometrial and ovarian cancers. Apart from roles of CYP1
family in relation with ER pathway, CYP1 family is over-expressed in ER
independent cancers. CYP1A1 exhibits hydroxylase activity in oxidation of
arachidonic acid, which has been transformed to 12(R)-hydrxyeicosatetraenoic
(HETEs), a potent activator of AhR activity. On the basis of results,
phytoestrogens and dexamethasone are provided as cancer therapy regulating the
expression of CYP1 family. Thus, this review focuses on the role(s) of CYP1
family in ER-dependent or ER-independent cancers and the potential for cancer
therapy to target CYP1 family in these cancers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25448748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Nitric Oxide. 2015 Aug 1;48:10-5. doi: 10.1016/j.niox.2014.10.006. Epub 2014 Oct 
24.

Effects of acute supplementation of L-arginine and nitrate on endurance and
sprint performance in elite athletes.

Sandbakk SB(1), Sandbakk Ø(2), Peacock O(3), James P(4), Welde B(5), Stokes K(3),
Böhlke N(6), Tjønna AE(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Circulation and Medical Imaging, Norwegian University of Science
and Technology, Trondheim, Norway. (2)Center for Elite Sports Research,
Department of Neuroscience, Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
Trondheim, Norway. (3)Sport, Health and Exercise Science Research Group,
Department for Health, University of Bath, UK. (4)Wales Heart Research Institute,
Department of Cardiology, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK. (5)Department of Sport
and Physical Education, Nord-Trøndelag University College, Levanger, Norway.
(6)UK Sport Council, London, UK; Olympic Training Centre Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Department of Circulation and Medical Imaging, Norwegian University of Science
and Technology, Trondheim, Norway. Electronic address: arnt.e.tjonna@ntnu.no.

This study examined the effects of acute supplementation with L-arginine and
nitrate on running economy, endurance and sprint performance in endurance-trained
athletes. In a randomised cross-over, double-blinded design we compared the
effects of combined supplementation with 6 g L-arginine and 614 mg nitrate
against 614 mg nitrate alone and placebo in nine male elite cross-country skiers 
(age 18 ± 0 years, VO2max 69.3 ± 5.8 ml · min(-1) · kg(-1)). After a 48-hour
standardisation of nutrition and exercise the athletes were tested for plasma
nitrate and nitrite concentrations, blood pressure, submaximal running economy at
10 km · h(-1) and 14 km · h(-1) at 1% incline and 180 m as well as 5-km
time-trial running performances. Plasma nitrite concentration following
L-arginine + nitrate supplementation (319 ± 54 nmol · L(-1)) did not differ from 
nitrate alone (328 ± 107 nmol · L(-1)), and both were higher than placebo (149 ± 
64 nmol · L(-1), p < 0.01). There were no differences in physiological responses 
during submaximal running or in 5-km performance between treatments. The plasma
nitrite concentrations indicate greater nitric oxide availability both following 
acute supplementation of L-arginine + nitrate and with nitrate alone compared to 
placebo, but no additional effect was revealed when L-arginine was added to
nitrate. Still, there were no effects of supplementation on exercise economy or
endurance running performance in endurance-trained cross-country skiers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445632  [PubMed - in process]


123. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 2014 Dec;78(4):672-84. doi: 10.1128/MMBR.00033-14.

Internal sense of direction: sensing and signaling from cytoplasmic
chemoreceptors.

Collins KD(1), Lacal J(2), Ottemann KM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Environmental Toxicology, UC Santa Cruz, Santa 
Cruz, California, USA. (2)Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, Division of 
Biological Sciences, UC San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. (3)Department of
Microbiology and Environmental Toxicology, UC Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California,
USA Ottemann@ucsc.edu.

SUMMARY: Chemoreceptors sense environmental signals and drive chemotactic
responses in Bacteria and Archaea. There are two main classes of chemoreceptors: 
integral inner membrane and soluble cytoplasmic proteins. The latter were
identified more recently than integral membrane chemoreceptors and have been
studied much less thoroughly. These cytoplasmic chemoreceptors are the subject of
this review. Our analysis determined that 14% of bacterial and 43% of archaeal
chemoreceptors are cytoplasmic, based on currently sequenced genomes. Cytoplasmic
chemoreceptors appear to share the same key structural features as integral
membrane chemoreceptors, including the formations of homodimers, trimers of
dimers, and 12-nm hexagonal arrays within the cell. Cytoplasmic chemoreceptors
exhibit varied subcellular locations, with some localizing to the poles and
others appearing both cytoplasmic and polar. Some cytoplasmic chemoreceptors
adopt more exotic locations, including the formations of exclusively internal
clusters or moving dynamic clusters that coalesce at points of contact with other
cells. Cytoplasmic chemoreceptors presumably sense signals within the cytoplasm
and bear diverse signal input domains that are mostly N terminal to the domain
that defines chemoreceptors, the so-called MA domain. Similar to the case for
transmembrane receptors, our analysis suggests that the most common signal input 
domain is the PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) domain, but a variety of other N-terminal
domains exist. It is also common, however, for cytoplasmic chemoreceptors to have
C-terminal domains that may function for signal input. The most common of these
is the recently identified chemoreceptor zinc binding (CZB) domain, found in 8%
of all cytoplasmic chemoreceptors. The widespread nature and diverse signal input
domains suggest that these chemoreceptors can monitor a variety of
cytoplasmically based signals, most of which remain to be determined.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4248653
PMID: 25428939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Apr;135(4):1074-9. doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.491. Epub 2014
Nov 19.

Updated field synopsis and systematic meta-analyses of genetic association
studies in cutaneous melanoma: the MelGene database.

Antonopoulou K(1), Stefanaki I(1), Lill CM(2), Chatzinasiou F(1), Kypreou KP(1), 
Karagianni F(1), Athanasiadis E(3), Spyrou GM(3), Ioannidis JP(4), Bertram L(5), 
Evangelou E(6), Stratigos AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Athens School of Medicine, Andreas
Sygros Hospital, Athens, Greece. (2)1] Neuropsychiatric Genetics Group,
Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics,
Berlin, Germany [2] Department of Neurology, Focus Program Translational
Neuroscience, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University
Mainz, Mainz, Germany. (3)Center of Systems Biology, Biomedical Research
Foundation, Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece. (4)Department of Medicine,
Stanford Prevention Research Center, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California, USA. (5)1] Neuropsychiatric Genetics Group, Department of
Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany
[2] Department of Medicine, School of Public Health, Imperial College London,
London, UK. (6)1] Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, Clinical and Molecular 
Epidemiology Unit, School of Medicine, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece
[2] Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Imperial College London, St
Mary's Campus, London, UK.

We updated a field synopsis of genetic associations of cutaneous melanoma (CM) by
systematically retrieving and combining data from all studies in the field
published as of August 31, 2013. Data were available from 197 studies, which
included 83,343 CM cases and 187,809 controls and reported on 1,126 polymorphisms
in 289 different genes. Random-effects meta-analyses of 81 eligible polymorphisms
evaluated in >4 data sets confirmed 20 single-nucleotide polymorphisms across 10 
loci (TYR, AFG3L1P, CDK10, MYH7B, SLC45A2, MTAP, ATM, CLPTM1L, FTO, and CASP8)
that have previously been published with genome-wide significant evidence for
association (P<5 × 10(-8)) with CM risk, with certain variants possibly
functioning as proxies of already tagged genes. Four other loci (MITF, CCND1,
MX2, and PLA2G6) were also significantly associated with 5 × 10(-8)<P<1 × 10(-3).
In supplementary meta-analyses derived from genome-wide association studies, one 
additional locus located 11<U+2009>kb upstream of ARNT (chromosome 1q21) showed
genome-wide statistical significance with CM. Our approach serves as a useful
model in analyzing and integrating the reported germline alterations involved in 
CM.

PMID: 25407435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 18;9(11):e113513. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113513.
eCollection 2014.

Examining the polymorphisms in the hypoxia pathway genes in relation to outcome
in colorectal cancer.

Haja Mohideen AM(1), Hyde A(1), Squires J(1), Wang J(2), Dicks E(3), Younghusband
B(1), Parfrey P(3), Green R(1), Savas S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of
Newfoundland, St. John's, NL, Canada. (2)Division of Community Health and
Humanities, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's,
NL, Canada. (3)Clinical Epidemiology Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial
University of Newfoundland, St. John's, NL, Canada. (4)Discipline of Genetics,
Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, NL, Canada;
Discipline of Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland,
St. John's, NL, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Colorectal cancer is a common malignancy. Identification of genetic
prognostic markers may help prognostic estimations in colorectal cancer. Genes
that regulate response to hypoxia and other genes that are regulated under the
hypoxic conditions have been shown to play roles in cancer progression. In this
study, we hypothesized that genetic variations in the hypoxia pathway genes were 
associated with the risk of outcome in colorectal cancer patients.
METHODS: This study was performed in two phases. In the first phase, 49 SNPs from
six hypoxia pathway genes (HIF1A, HIF1B, HIF2A, LOX, MIF and CXCL12) in 272
colorectal cancer patients were analyzed. In the second phase, 77 SNPs from seven
hypoxia pathway genes (HIF1A, HIF1B, HIF2A, HIF2B, HIF3A, LOX and CXCL12) were
analyzed in an additional cohort of 535 patients. Kaplan Meier, Cox univariate
and multivariable regression analyses were performed to analyze the relationship 
between the SNPs and overall survival (OS), disease free survival (DFS) or
disease specific survival (DSS). Since this was a hypothesis-generating study, no
correction for multiple testing was applied.
RESULTS: In phase I, one SNP (HIF2A rs11125070) was found to be associated with
DFS in multivariable analysis; yet association of a proxy polymorphism (HIF2A
rs4953342) was not detected in the phase II patient cohort. In phase II,
associations of two SNPs (HIF2A rs4953352 and HIF2B rs12593988) were significant 
in both OS and DFS multivariable analyses. However, association of HIF2A
rs4953352 was not replicated in the phase I cohort using a proxy SNP (HIF2A
rs6706003).
CONCLUSION: Overall, our study did not find a convincing evidence of association 
of the investigated polymorphisms with the disease outcomes in colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC4236175
PMID: 25405996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Correct Health Care. 2015 Jan;21(1):7-11. doi: 10.1177/1078345814557248. Epub
2014 Nov 17.

A Road Not Taken: substance abuse programming in the New York City jail system.

Selling D(1), Lee D(1), Solimo A(1), Venters H(2).

Author information: 
(1)NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, Correctional Health Services, New
York City, NY, USA. (2)NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, Correctional 
Health Services, New York City, NY, USA hventer1@health.nyc.gov.

Substance abuse represents one of the most common diagnoses in jail settings and 
features prominently in the path into criminal justice involvement. In addition, 
substance abuse plays a major role in mortality, morbidity, and recidivism after 
release from jail. In 2008, a substance abuse treatment program was begun within 
the New York City jail system, the nation's second largest. This program, A Road 
Not Taken (ARNT), works collaboratively with courts, security officials within
the jail, and community programs to identify inmates who have substance abuse
concerns and provide in-jail programming and coordination of treatment after
jail. An evaluation of ARNT participants revealed that they experienced a lower
rate in incarceration after their program participation than they did before
participation.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMID: 25403463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Vasc Med. 2014 Dec;19(6):429-41. doi: 10.1177/1358863X14559588. Epub 2014 Nov 14.

Loss of endothelial-ARNT in adult mice contributes to dampened circulating
proangiogenic cells and delayed wound healing.

Han Y(1), Tao J(2), Gomer A(2), Ramirez-Bergeron DL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Case Cardiovascular Research Institute and University Hospitals Harrington
Heart & Vascular Institute, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH, USA University of Rochester, School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Rochester, NY, USA. (2)Case Cardiovascular Research Institute and University
Hospitals Harrington Heart & Vascular Institute, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA. (3)Case Cardiovascular Research Institute
and University Hospitals Harrington Heart & Vascular Institute, Case Western
Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA dlr36@case.edu.

The recruitment and homing of circulating bone marrow-derived cells include
endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) that are critical to neovascularization and
tissue regeneration of various vascular pathologies. We report here that
conditional inactivation of hypoxia-inducible factor's (HIF) transcriptional
activity in the endothelium of adult mice (Arnt(<U+0394>iEC) mice) results in a
disturbance of infiltrating cells, a hallmark of neoangiogenesis, during the
early phases of wound healing. Cutaneous biopsy punches show distinct migration
of CD31(+) cells into wounds of control mice by 36 hours. However, a significant 
decline in numbers of infiltrating cells with immature vascular markers, as well 
as decreased transcript levels of genes associated with their expression and
recruitment, were identified in wounds of Arnt(<U+0394>iEC) mice. Matrigel plug assays
further confirmed neoangiogenic deficiencies alongside a reduction in numbers of 
proangiogenic progenitor cells from bone marrow and peripheral blood samples of
recombinant vascular endothelial growth factor-treated Arnt(<U+0394>iEC) mice. In
addition to HIF's autocrine requirements in endothelial cells, our data implicate
that extrinsic microenvironmental cues provided by endothelial HIF are pivotal
for early migration of proangiogenic cells, including those involved in wound
healing.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMCID: PMC4260405
PMID: 25398385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2014 Nov 14;11:61. doi: 10.1186/s12989-014-0061-5.

Pulmonary and hemostatic toxicity of multi-walled carbon nanotubes and zinc oxide
nanoparticles after pulmonary exposure in Bmal1 knockout mice.

Luyts K(1), Smulders S(2), Napierska D(3), Van Kerckhoven S(4), Poels K(5),
Scheers H(6), Hemmeryckx B(7), Nemery B(8), Hoylaerts MF(9), Hoet PH(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Occupational and Environmental
Toxicology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Katrien.luyts@med.kuleuven.be.
(2)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Occupational and Environmental
Toxicology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Stijn.smulders@med.kuleuven.be.
(3)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Occupational and Environmental
Toxicology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Dorota.napierska@gmail.com. (4)Department
of Cardiovascular sciences, Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium. Soetkin.VanKerckhoven@med.kuleuven.be. (5)Department of Public
Health and Primary Care, Laboratory for Occupational and Environmental Hygiene,
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Katrien.Poels@med.kuleuven.be. (6)Department of
Public Health and Primary Care, Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Hans.Scheers@med.kuleuven.be. (7)Department of
Cardiovascular sciences, Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium. Bianca.Hemmeryckx@med.kuleuven.be. (8)Department of Public
Health and Primary Care, Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium. Ben.Nemery@med.kuleuven.be. (9)Department of Cardiovascular
sciences, Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 
Marc.Hoylaerts@med.kuleuven.be. (10)Department of Public Health and Primary Care,
Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
peter.hoet@med.kuleuven.be.

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary exposure to nanoparticles (NPs) may affect, in addition to 
pulmonary toxicity, the cardiovascular system such as procoagulant effects,
vascular dysfunction and progression of atherosclerosis. However, only few
studies have investigated hemostatic effects after pulmonary exposure.
METHODS: We used Bmal1 (brain and muscle ARNT-like protein-1) knockout
(Bmal1(-/-)) mice which have a disturbed circadian rhythm and procoagulant
phenotype, to study the pulmonary and hemostatic toxicity of multi-walled carbon 
nanotubes (MWCNTs) and zinc oxide (ZnO) NPs after subacute pulmonary exposure.
Bmal1(-/-) and wild-type (Bmal1(+/+)) mice were exposed via oropharyngeal
aspiration, once a week, during 5 consecutive weeks, to a cumulative dose of 32
or 128 µg MWCNTs or 32 or 64 µg ZnO NPs.
RESULTS: MWCNTs caused a pronounced inflammatory response in the lung with
increased cell counts in the broncho-alveolar lavage and increased secretion of
interleukin-1ß and cytokine-induced neutrophil chemo-attractant (KC), oxidative
stress (increased ratio of oxidized versus reduced glutathione and decreased
total glutathione) as well as anemic and procoagulant effects as evidenced by a
decreased prothrombin time with increased fibrinogen concentrations and
coagulation factor (F)VII. In contrast, the ZnO NPs seemed to suppress the
inflammatory (decreased neutrophils in Bmal1(-/-) mice) and oxidative response
(increased total glutathione in Bmal1(-/-) mice), but were also procoagulant with
a significant increase of FVIII. The procoagulant effects, as well as the
significant correlations between the pulmonary endpoints (inflammation and
oxidative stress) and hemostasis parameters were more pronounced in Bmal1(-/-)
mice than in Bmal1(+/+) mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The Bmal1(-/-) mouse is a sensitive animal model to study the
procoagulant effects of engineered NPs. The MWCNTs and ZnO NPs showed different
pulmonary toxicity but both NPs induced procoagulant effects, suggesting
different mechanisms of affecting hemostasis. However, the correlation analysis
suggests a causal association between the observed pulmonary and procoagulant
effects.

PMCID: PMC4234845
PMID: 25394423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Circulation. 2014 Dec 2;130(23):2040-51. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.011394. 
Epub 2014 Oct 30.

L-kynurenine/aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway mediates brain damage after
experimental stroke.

Cuartero MI(1), Ballesteros I(1), de la Parra J(1), Harkin AL(1), Abautret-Daly
A(1), Sherwin E(1), Fernández-Salguero P(1), Corbí AL(1), Lizasoain I(1), Moro
MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Unidad de Investigación Neurovascular, Departamento de Farmacología, 
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Complutense and Instituto de Investigación
Hospital 12 de Octubre (i+12), Madrid, Spain (M.I.C., I.B., J.d.l.P., I.L.);
Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland (A.L.H., A.A.-D., E.S.); Departamento Bioquímica
y Biología Molecular y Genética, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de
Extremadura, Badajoz, Spain (P.F.-S.); and Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, 
CSIC, Madrid, Spain (A.L.C.). (2)From the Unidad de Investigación Neurovascular, 
Departamento de Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Complutense and
Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre (i+12), Madrid, Spain (M.I.C., 
I.B., J.d.l.P., I.L.); Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland (A.L.H., A.A.-D., E.S.); 
Departamento Bioquímica y Biología Molecular y Genética, Facultad de Ciencias,
Universidad de Extremadura, Badajoz, Spain (P.F.-S.); and Centro de
Investigaciones Biológicas, CSIC, Madrid, Spain (A.L.C.). neurona@med.ucm.es
maribel_cd@hotmail.com.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2014 Dec 2;130(23):2002-4.

BACKGROUND: Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a transcription factor that
belongs to the basic helix-loop-helix PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim homology domain) family
known to mediate the toxic and carcinogenic effects of xenobiotics.
Interestingly, AhR is widely expressed in the central nervous system, but its
physiological and pathological roles are still unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To define the role of AhR in stroke, we used middle cerebral
artery occlusion in mice and oxygen-glucose deprivation in rat cortical neurons. 
The results presented here show that the ischemic insult increases total and
nuclear AhR levels and AhR transcriptional activity in neurons in vivo and in
vitro. We also show that AhR has a causal role in acute ischemic damage because
pharmacological or genetic loss-of-function approaches result in neuroprotection.
Inhibition of cAMP response element-binding protein-dependent signaling may
participate in the deleterious actions of AhR. Finally, we have also found that
L-kynurenine, a tryptophan metabolite with AhR agonistic properties, is an
endogenous ligand that mediates AhR activation in the brain after middle cerebral
artery occlusion.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that an L-kynurenine/AhR pathway mediates acute
brain damage after stroke and open new possibilities for the diagnosis and
treatment of this pathology.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25359166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Dec;94(6):1201-7. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12848. Epub 2014 Nov 20.

A balancing act times two: sensing and regulating cell envelope homeostasis in
Bacillus subtilis.

Fritz G(1), Mascher T.

Author information: 
(1)LOEWE Center for Synthetic Microbiology, Philipps-University Marburg, 35043,
Marburg, Germany.

Comment on
    Mol Microbiol. 2014 Dec;94(6):1242-59.

Bacterial cell wall homeostasis is an intricately coordinated process that
ensures that envelope integrity is maintained during cell growth and division,
but can also adequately respond to growth-limiting conditions such as phosphate
starvation. In Bacillus subtilis, biosynthesis of the two major cell wall
components, peptidoglycan and anionic polymers, is controlled by a pair of
paralogous two-component systems, WalRK and PhoPR respectively. Favorable growth 
conditions allow for a fast rate of cell wall biosynthesis (WalRK-ON) and the
incorporation of the phosphate-containing anionic polymer teichoic acids
(PhoPR-OFF). In contrast, growth-restricted cells under phosphate-limiting
conditions reduce the incorporation of peptidoglycan building blocks (WalRK-OFF) 
and switch from the phosphate-containing teichoic acids to the phosphate-free
anionic polymer teichuronic acid (PhoPR-ON). Botella et al. (2014) deepen our
knowledge on the PhoPR system by identifying one signal that is perceived by its 
histidine kinase PhoR. In fast-growing cells, intracellular intermediates of
teichoic acid biosynthesis are sensed by the cytoplasmic Per-Arnt-Sim domain as
an indicator of favorable conditions, thereby inhibiting the autokinase activity 
of PhoR and keeping the system inactive. Depletion of teichoic acid building
blocks under phosphate-limiting conditions relieves this inhibition, activates
PhoPR-dependent signal transduction and hence the switch to teichuronic acid
biosynthesis.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25355628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. FEBS Open Bio. 2014 Sep 16;4:796-803. doi: 10.1016/j.fob.2014.09.003. eCollection
2014.

The activation mechanism of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) by molecular
chaperone HSP90.

Tsuji N(1), Fukuda K(1), Nagata Y(1), Okada H(1), Haga A(1), Hatakeyama S(1),
Yoshida S(1), Okamoto T(1), Hosaka M(1), Sekine K(1), Ohtaka K(1), Yamamoto S(2),
Otaka M(3), Grave E(1), Itoh H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Graduate School and Faculty of Engineering
Science, Akita University, Akita 010-8502, Japan. (2)Department of Microbiology, 
Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Bunkyo-Ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily
that associates with the molecular chaperone HSP90 in the cytoplasm. The
activation mechanism of the AhR is not yet fully understood. It has been proposed
that after binding of ligands such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD),
3methylcholanthrene (3-MC), or ß-naphthoflavone (ß-NF), the AhR dissociates from 
HSP90 and translocates to the nucleus. It has also been hypothesized that the AhR
translocates to the nucleus and forms a complex with HSP90 and other
co-chaperones. There are a few reports about the direct association or
dissociation of AhR and HSP90 due to difficulties in purifying AhR. We
constructed and purified the PAS domain from AhR. Binding of the AhR-PAS domain
to ß-NF affinity resin suggested that it possesses ligand-binding affinity. We
demonstrated that the AhR-PAS domain binds to HSP90 and the association is not
affected by ligand binding. The ligand 17-DMAG inhibited binding of HSP90 to
GST-PAS. In an immunoprecipitation assay, HSP90 was co-immunoprecipitated with
AhR both in the presence or absence of ligand. Endogenous AhR decreased in the
cytoplasm and increased in the nucleus of HeLa cells 15 min after treatment with 
ligand. These results suggested that the ligand-bound AhR is translocated to
nucleus while in complex with HSP90. We used an in situ proximity ligation assay 
to confirm whether AhR was translocated to the nucleus alone or together with
HSP90. HSP90 was co-localized with AhR after the nuclear translocation. It has
been suggested that the ligand-bound AhR was translocated to the nucleus with
HSP90. Activated AhR acts as a transcription factor, as shown by the
transcription induction of the gene CYP1A1 8 h after treatment with ß-NF.

PMCID: PMC4208086
PMID: 25349783  [PubMed]


132. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jan;100(1):E30-40. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2385.

Impaired fetoplacental angiogenesis in growth-restricted fetuses with abnormal
umbilical artery doppler velocimetry is mediated by aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT).

Su EJ(1), Xin H, Yin P, Dyson M, Coon J, Farrow KN, Mestan KK, Ernst LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology (E.J.S., H.X., P.Y., M.D., J.C.),
Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine and/or Division of Reproductive Science in
Medicine, and Department of Pathology (L.M.E.), Northwestern University Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611; and Department of Pediatrics
(K.N.F., K.K.M.), Division of Neonatology, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine and Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60611.

CONTEXT: Fetal growth restriction with abnormal umbilical artery Doppler
velocimetry (FGRadv), reflective of elevated fetoplacental vascular resistance,
is associated with increased risks of fetal morbidity and mortality even in
comparison to those of growth-restricted fetuses with normal placental blood
flow. One major cause of this abnormally elevated fetoplacental vascular
resistance is the aberrantly formed, thin, elongated villous vessels that are
seen in FGRadv placentas.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to determine the role of fetoplacental
endothelial cells (ECs) in angiogenesis in normal pregnancies and in those
complicated by FGRadv.
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: Human placental specimens were obtained from FGRadv and 
gestational age-matched, appropriately grown control pregnancies for EC
isolation/culture and for immunohistochemical studies. Additional mechanistic
studies were performed on ECs isolated from subjects with term, uncomplicated
pregnancies.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: We evaluated tube formation and differential angiogenic
gene expression in FGRadv and control ECs, and we used ECs from uncomplicated
pregnancies to further elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which angiogenesis
is impaired in FGRadv pregnancies.
RESULTS: Tube formation assays showed that FGRadv ECs demonstrate fewer branch
points and total length compared with those from gestational age-matched
controls, and this defect was not rescued by exposure to hypoxia. FGRadv ECs also
demonstrated lower aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)
expression. ARNT knockdown resulted in suppression of key angiogenic genes
including vascular endothelial growth factor A expression and led to deficient
tube formation.
CONCLUSIONS: ARNT expression in the placental vasculature mediates key angiogenic
expression and fetoplacental EC angiogenesis, and low ARNT expression in FGRadv
ECs appears to be a key factor in deficient angiogenesis. This, in turn, results 
in malformed thin villous vessels that structurally contribute to the abnormally 
elevated fetoplacental vascular resistance that is associated with high morbidity
and mortality in fetal growth restriction.

PMCID: PMC4283004
PMID: 25343232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Clin Invest. 2014 Nov;124(11):4795-806. doi: 10.1172/JCI76737. Epub 2014 Oct
20.

Cardiac-specific ablation of ARNT leads to lipotoxicity and cardiomyopathy.

Wu R, Chang HC, Khechaduri A, Chawla K, Tran M, Chai X, Wagg C, Ghanefar M, Jiang
X, Bayeva M, Gonzalez F, Lopaschuk G, Ardehali H.

Patients with type 2 diabetes often present with cardiovascular complications;
however, it is not clear how diabetes promotes cardiac dysfunction. In murine
models, deletion of the gene encoding aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator
(ARNT, also known as HIF1ß) in the liver or pancreas leads to a diabetic
phenotype; however, the role of ARNT in cardiac metabolism is unknown. Here, we
determined that cardiac-specific deletion of Arnt in adult mice results in rapid 
development of cardiomyopathy (CM) that is characterized by accumulation of lipid
droplets. Compared with hearts from ARNT-expressing mice, ex vivo analysis of
ARNT-deficient hearts revealed a 2-fold increase in fatty acid (FA) oxidation as 
well as a substantial increase in the expression of PPARa and its target genes.
Furthermore, deletion of both Arnt and Ppara preserved cardiac function, improved
survival, and completely reversed the FA accumulation phenotype, indicating that 
PPARa mediates the detrimental effects of Arnt deletion in the heart. Finally, we
determined that ARNT directly regulates Ppara expression by binding to its
promoter and forming a complex with HIF2a. Together, these findings suggest that 
ARNT is a critical regulator of myocardial FA metabolism and that its deletion
leads to CM and an increase in triglyceride accumulation through PPARa.

PMCID: PMC4347233
PMID: 25329697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Oncotarget. 2014 Oct 15;5(19):8853-68.

Hypoxia-inducible factors enhance glutamate signaling in cancer cells.

Hu H(1), Takano N(2), Xiang L(2), Gilkes DM(2), Luo W(2), Semenza GL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Predoctoral Training Program in Human Genetics, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. (2)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic
Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.

Signaling through glutamate receptors has been reported in human cancers, but the
molecular mechanisms are not fully delineated. We report that in hepatocellular
carcinoma and clear cell renal carcinoma cells, increased activity of
hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) due to hypoxia or VHL loss-of-function,
respectively, augmented release of glutamate, which was mediated by HIF-dependent
expression of the SLC1A1 and SLC1A3 genes encoding glutamate transporters. In
addition, HIFs coordinately regulated expression of the GRIA2 and GRIA3 genes,
which encode glutamate receptors. Binding of glutamate to its receptors activated
SRC family kinases and downstream pathways, which stimulated cancer cell
proliferation, apoptosis resistance, migration and invasion in different cancer
cell lines. Thus, coordinate regulation of glutamate transporters and receptors
by HIFs was sufficient to activate key signal transduction pathways that promote 
cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC4253402
PMID: 25326682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Toxicol Sci. 2015 Jan;143(1):36-45. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu203. Epub 2014 Sep 29.

Dioxin exposure blocks lactation through a direct effect on mammary epithelial
cells mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor.

Basham KJ(1), Leonard CJ(1), Kieffer C(1), Shelton DN(1), McDowell ME(1), Bhonde 
VR(1), Looper RE(1), Welm BE(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of 
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, Department of Chemistry, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, Utah 84112 and Department of Surgery, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112. (2)*Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer
Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, Department of
Chemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112 and Department of
Surgery, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112 *Department of
Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84112, Department of Chemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
Utah 84112 and Department of Surgery, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah
84112 bryan-welm@omrf.org.

In mammals, lactation is a rich source of nutrients and antibodies for newborn
animals. However, millions of mothers each year experience an inability to
breastfeed. Exposure to several environmental toxicants, including
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), has been strongly implicated in
impaired mammary differentiation and lactation. TCDD and related polyhalogenated 
aromatic hydrocarbons are widespread industrial pollutants that activate the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR). Despite many epidemiological and animal studies, the 
molecular mechanism through which AHR signaling blocks lactation remains unclear.
We employed in vitro models of mammary differentiation to recapitulate
lactogenesis in the presence of toxicants. We demonstrate AHR agonists directly
block milk production in isolated mammary epithelial cells. Moreover, we define a
novel role for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AHRR) in mediating this
response. Our mechanistic studies suggest AHRR is sufficient to block
transcription of the milk gene ß-casein. As TCDD is a prevalent environmental
pollutant that affects women worldwide, our results have important public health 
implications for newborn nutrition.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4274378
PMID: 25265996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Biomed Mater Eng. 2014;24(6):3863-71. doi: 10.3233/BME-141217.

Integrative analysis of the transcriptome and targetome identifies the regulatory
network of miR-16: an inhibitory role against the activation of hepatic stellate 
cells.

Pan Q(1), Guo C(2), Sun C(1), Fan J(3), Fang C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University 200092, 1665 Kong Jiang Rd., Shanghai, China. (2)Digestive
Disease Laboratory and Department of Gastroenterology, Ren Ji Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 200001, 2000 Jiang Yue Rd., Shanghai,
China. (3)Department of Gastroenterology, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 200092, 1665 Kong Jiang Rd., Shanghai, China
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Children' s Digestion and Nutrition 200092, 1665 Kong 
Jiang Rd., Shanghai, China. (4)School of Electronics and Information Engineering,
Tong Ji University, 201804, 4800 Cao An Rd., Shanghai, China.

Hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation is the critical event of liver fibrosis.
Abnormality of miR-16 expression induces their activation. However, the action
model of miR-16 remains to be elucidated because of its multiple-targeted manner.
Here, we report that miR-16 restoration exerted a wide-range impact on
transcriptome (2,082 differentially expressed transcripts) of activated HSCs.
Integrative analysis of both targetome (1,195 targets) and transcriptome
uncovered the miR-16 regulatory network based upon bio-molecular interaction
databases (BIND, BioGrid, Tranfac, and KEGG), cross database searching with
iterative algorithm, Dijkstra's algorithm with greedy method, etc. Eight targets 
in the targetome (Map2k1, Bmpr1b, Nf1, Pik3r3, Ppp2r1a, Prkca, Smad2, and Sos2)
served as key regulatory network nodes that mediate miR-16 action. A set of TFs
(Sp1, Jun, Crebl, Arnt, Fos, and Nf1) was recognized to be the functional layer
of key nodes, which mapped the signal of miR-16 to transcriptome. In result, the 
comprehensive action of miR-16 abrogated transcriptomic characteristics that
determined the phenotypes of activated HSCs, including active proliferation, ECM 
deposition, and apoptosis resistance. Therefore, a multi-layer regulatory network
based upon the integration of targetome and transcriptome may underlie the global
action of miR-16, which suggesting it plays an inhibitory role in HSC activation.

PMID: 25227104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 30;111(39):14295-300. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1209249111. Epub 2014 Sep 15.

Loss of BMAL1 in ovarian steroidogenic cells results in implantation failure in
female mice.

Liu Y(1), Johnson BP(1), Shen AL(1), Wallisser JA(1), Krentz KJ(1), Moran SM(1), 
Sullivan R(2), Glover E(1), Parlow AF(3), Drinkwater NR(1), Schuler LA(4),
Bradfield CA(5).

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, and Carbone Cancer Center, School of
Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison WI 53706;
(2)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, and Carbone Cancer Center, School of
Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison WI 53706;
Research Animal Resources Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706; and. (3)National Hormone and Peptide Program, Harbor-University of
California Los Angeles Medical Center, Torrance, CA 90502. (4)Carbone Cancer
Center, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison WI 53706; Department of Comparative Biosciences, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison WI 53706; (5)McArdle
Laboratory for Cancer Research, and Carbone Cancer Center, School of Medicine and
Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison WI 53706;
bradfield@oncology.wisc.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014 Dec;10(12):701.

The circadian clock plays a significant role in many aspects of female
reproductive biology, including estrous cycling, ovulation, embryonic
implantation, onset of puberty, and parturition. In an effort to link
cell-specific circadian clocks to their specific roles in female reproduction, we
used the promoter that controls expression of Steroidogenic Factor-1 (SF1) to
drive Cre-recombinase-mediated deletion of the brain muscle arnt-like 1 (Bmal1)
gene, known to encode an essential component of the circadian clock
(SF1-Bmal1(-/-)). The resultant SF1-Bmal1(-/-) females display embryonic
implantation failure, which is rescued by progesterone supplementation, or
bilateral or unilateral transplantation of wild-type ovaries into SF1-Bmal1(-/-) 
dams. The observation that the central clock, and many other peripheral clocks,
are fully functional in this model allows the assignment of the implantation
phenotype to the clock in ovarian steroidogenic cells and distinguishes it from
more general circadian related systemic pathology (e.g., early onset arthropathy,
premature aging, ovulation, late onset of puberty, and abnormal estrous cycle).
Our ovarian transcriptome analysis reveals that deletion of ovarian Bmal1
disrupts expression of transcripts associated with the circadian machinery and
also genes critical for regulation of progesterone production, such as
steroidogenic acute regulatory factor (Star). Overall, these data provide a
powerful model to probe the interlocking and synergistic network of the circadian
clock and reproductive systems.

PMCID: PMC4191810
PMID: 25225411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Nov;94(3):728-41. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12796. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

Characterization of Pseudomonas aeruginosa LpxT reveals dual positional lipid A
kinase activity and co-ordinated control of outer membrane modification.

Nowicki EM(1), O'Brien JP, Brodbelt JS, Trent MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas, USA.

Gram-negative bacteria have evolved modification machinery to promote a dynamic
outer membrane in response to a continually fluctuating environment. The kinase
LpxT, for example, adds a phosphate group to the lipid A moiety of some
Gram-negatives including Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica. LpxT activity 
is inhibited under conditions that compromise membrane integrity, resulting
instead in the addition of positively charged groups to lipid A that increase
membrane stability and provide resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptides. We 
have now identified a functional lpxT orthologue in P. aeruginosa. LpxTPa has
unique enzymatic characteristics, as it is able to phosphorylate P. aeruginosa
lipid A at two sites of the molecule. Surprisingly, a previously uncharacterized 
lipid A 4'-dephospho-1-triphosphate species was detected. LpxTPa activity is
inhibited by magnesium independently of lpxTPa transcription. Modulation of
LpxTPa activity is influenced by transcription of the lipid A aminoarabinose
transferase ArnT, known to be activated in response to limiting magnesium. These 
results demonstrate a divergent activity of LpxTPa , and suggest the existence of
a co-ordinated regulatory mechanism that permits adaptation to a changing
environment.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4213358
PMID: 25223756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Mar Pollut Bull. 2014 Nov 15;88(1-2):311-8. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2014.08.025.
Epub 2014 Sep 11.

Molecular biomarkers in grey seals (Halichoerus grypus) to evaluate pollutant
exposure, health and immune status.

Lehnert K(1), Müller S(2), Weirup L(2), Ronnenberg K(2), Pawliczka I(3),
Rosenberger T(4), Siebert U(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Terrestrial and Aquatic Wildlife Research, University of
Veterinary Medicine Hannover, 25761 Büsum, Germany; Institute for Coastal
Research, Helmholtz-Zentrum Geesthacht Centre for Materials and Coastal Research,
21502 Geesthacht, Germany. Electronic address: kristina.lehnert@tiho-hannover.de.
(2)Institute for Terrestrial and Aquatic Wildlife Research, University of
Veterinary Medicine Hannover, 25761 Büsum, Germany. (3)Hel Marine Station,
University of Gdansk, Morska 2, 84-150 Hel, Poland. (4)Seal Centre
Friedrichskoog, An der Seeschleuse 4, 25718 Friedrichskoog, Germany.

Grey seals as top-predators bioaccumulate contaminants and can be considered as
sentinels of eco-system health. Pups are weaned after a short nursing period,
characterised by an enormous lipid transfer and exposure to contaminants. This
study established molecular biomarkers of the xenobiotic metabolism and immune
system to help assess health and immune status. mRNA transcription of AHR, ARNT, 
PPARa and cytokine IL-2 and heat-shock-protein HSP70 was measured in blood of
grey seal pups and adults in rehabilitation and permanent care using RT-qPCR and 
compared to rehabilitating harbour seal pups and haematology values. In pups
highest levels at admission in xenobiotic biomarker, HSP70 and cytokine
transcription may show contaminant exposure via lactation, stress during
abandonment and dehydration. The significant decrease may be linked to diet,
health improvement and adaptation. Adults showed higher levels and more variation
in biomarker transcription and clear species-specific differences between harbour
and grey seal pups were found.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25220314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Feb 1;331(1):200-10. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.08.041. Epub
2014 Sep 9.

Brain and muscle Arnt-like 1 promotes skeletal muscle regeneration through
satellite cell expansion.

Chatterjee S(1), Yin H(2), Nam D(1), Li Y(3), Ma K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Medicine, Houston Methodist
Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Center for Diabetes Research,
Department of Medicine, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA; Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Third Affiliated Hospital, Hebei
Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050051, Hebei, China. (3)Department of Pediatric
Surgery, Center for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, University of
Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Center for
Diabetes Research, Department of Medicine, Houston Methodist Research Institute, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: kma@houstonmethodist.org.

Circadian clock is an evolutionarily conserved timing mechanism governing diverse
biological processes and the skeletal muscle possesses intrinsic functional
clocks. Interestingly, although the essential clock transcription activator,
Brain and muscle Arnt-like 1 (Bmal1), participates in maintenance of muscle mass,
little is known regarding its role in muscle growth and repair. In this report,
we investigate the in vivo function of Bmal1 in skeletal muscle regeneration
using two muscle injury models. Bmal1 is highly up-regulated by cardiotoxin
injury, and its genetic ablation significantly impairs regeneration with markedly
suppressed new myofiber formation and attenuated myogenic induction. A similarly 
defective regenerative response is observed in Bmal1-null mice as compared to
wild-type controls upon freeze injury. Lack of satellite cell expansion accounts 
for the regeneration defect, as Bmal1(-/-) mice display significantly lower
satellite cell number with nearly abolished induction of the satellite cell
marker, Pax7. Furthermore, satellite cell-derived primary myoblasts devoid of
Bmal1 display reduced growth and proliferation ex vivo. Collectively, our results
demonstrate, for the first time, that Bmal1 is an integral component of the
pro-myogenic response that is required for muscle repair. This mechanism may
underlie its role in preserving adult muscle mass and could be targeted
therapeutically to prevent muscle-wasting diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25218946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Chemosphere. 2015 Feb;120:398-406. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.07.099. Epub
2014 Sep 15.

Dose- and time-dependent expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) in PCB-, B[a]P-, and TBT-exposed
intertidal copepod Tigriopus japonicus.

Kim BM(1), Rhee JS(2), Hwang UK(3), Seo JS(4), Shin KH(5), Lee JS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Science, Sungkyunkwan
University, Suwon 440-746, South Korea. (2)Department of Marine Science, College 
of Natural Science, Incheon National University, Incheon 406-772, South Korea.
(3)Marine Ecological Risk Assessment Center, West Sea Fisheries Research
Institute, National Fisheries Research & Development Institute, Incheon 400-420, 
South Korea. (4)Pathology Team, National Fisheries Research & Development
Institute, Busan 619-902, South Korea. (5)Department of Marine Sciences and
Convergent Technology, College of Science and Technology, Hanyang University,
Ansan 426-791, South Korea. (6)Department of Biological Sciences, College of
Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, South Korea. Electronic address:
jslee2@skku.edu.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator
(ARNT) genes from the copepod Tigriopus japonicus (Tj) were cloned to examine
their potential functions in the invertebrate putative AhR-CYP signaling pathway.
The amino acid sequences encoded by the Tj-AhR and Tj-ARNT genes showed high
similarity to homologs of Daphnia and Drosophila, ranging from 68% and 70%
similarity for the AhR genes to 56% for the ARNT genes. To determine whether
Tj-AhR and Tj-ARNT are modulated by environmental pollutants, transcriptional
expression of Tj-AhR and Tj-ARNT was analyzed in response to exposure to five
concentrations of polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB 126) (control, 10, 50, 100, 500
µg L(-1)), benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P) (control, 5, 10, 50, 100 µg L(-1)), and
tributyltin (TBT) (control, 1, 5, 10, 20 µg L(-1)) 24h after exposure. A
time-course experiment (0, 3, 6, 12, 24h) was performed to analyze mRNA
expression patterns after exposure to PCB, B[a]P, and TBT. T. japonicus exhibited
dose-dependent and time-dependent upregulation of Tj-AhR and Tj-ARNT in response 
to pollutant exposure, and the degree of expression was dependent on the
pollutant, suggesting that pollutants such as PCB, B[a]P, and TBT modulate
expression of Tj-AhR and Tj-ARNT genes in the putative AhR-CYP signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25216468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Cell Biol. 2014 Sep 15;206(6):751-62. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201312062. Epub 2014 Sep
8.

Concentration of Sec12 at ER exit sites via interaction with cTAGE5 is required
for collagen export.

Saito K(1), Yamashiro K(2), Shimazu N(2), Tanabe T(2), Kontani K(2), Katada T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
ksaito@mol.f.u-tokyo.ac.jp. (2)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-0033, Japan.

Mechanisms for exporting variably sized cargo from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
using the same machinery remain poorly understood. COPII-coated vesicles, which
transport secretory proteins from the ER to the Golgi apparatus, are typically
60-90 nm in diameter. However, collagen, which forms a trimeric structure that is
too large to be accommodated by conventional transport vesicles, is also known to
be secreted via a COPII-dependent process. In this paper, we show that Sec12, a
guanine-nucleotide exchange factor for Sar1 guanosine triphosphatase, is
concentrated at ER exit sites and that this concentration of Sec12 is
specifically required for the secretion of collagen VII but not other proteins.
Furthermore, Sec12 recruitment to ER exit sites is organized by its direct
interaction with cTAGE5, a previously characterized collagen cargo receptor
component, which functions together with TANGO1 at ER exit sites. These findings 
suggest that the export of large cargo requires high levels of guanosine
triphosphate-bound Sar1 generated by Sec12 localized at ER exit sites.

© 2014 Saito et al.

PMCID: PMC4164946
PMID: 25202031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Cell Commun Signal. 2014 Jul 24;12:48. doi: 10.1186/s12964-014-0048-8.

AhR and Arnt differentially regulate NF-<U+03BA>B signaling and chemokine responses in
human bronchial epithelial cells.

Øvrevik J, Låg M, Lecureur V, Gilot D, Lagadic-Gossmann D, Refsnes M, Schwarze
PE, Skuland T, Becher R, Holme JA.

BACKGROUND: The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) has gradually emerged as a
regulator of inflammation in the lung and other tissues. AhR may interact with
the p65-subunit of the nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B transcription factors, but reported
outcomes of AhR/NF-<U+03BA>B-interactions are conflicting. Some studies suggest that AhR
possess pro-inflammatory activities while others suggest that AhR may be
anti-inflammatory. The present study explored the impact of AhR and its binding
partner AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt) on p65-activation and two differentially 
regulated chemokines, CXCL8 (IL-8) and CCL5 (RANTES), in human bronchial
epithelial cells (BEAS-2B).
RESULTS: Cells were exposed to CXCL8- and CCL5-inducing chemicals, 1-nitropyrene 
(1-NP) and 1-aminopyrene (1-AP) respectively, or the synthetic double-stranded
RNA analogue, polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (Poly I:C) which induced both
chemokines. Only CXCL8, and not CCL5, appeared to be p65-dependent. Yet,
constitutively active unligated AhR suppressed both CXCL8 and CCL5, as shown by
siRNA knock-down and the AhR antagonist a-naphthoflavone. Moreover, AhR
suppressed activation of p65 by TNF-a and Poly I:C as assessed by
luciferase-assay and p65-phosphorylation at serine 536, without affecting basal
p65-activity. In contrast, Arnt suppressed only CXCL8, but did not prevent the
p65-activation directly. However, Arnt suppressed expression of the NF-<U+03BA>B-subunit
RelB which is under transcriptional regulation by p65. Furthermore, AhR-ligands
alone at high concentrations induced a moderate CXCL8-response, without affecting
CCL5, but suppressed both CXCL8 and CCL5-responses by Poly I:C.
CONCLUSION: AhR and Arnt may differentially and independently regulate
chemokine-responses induced by both inhaled pollutants and pulmonary infections. 
Constitutively active, unligated AhR suppressed the activation of p65, while Arnt
may possibly interfere with the action of activated p65. Moreover,
ligand-activated AhR suppressed CXCL8 and CCL5 responses by other agents, but AhR
ligands alone induced CXCL8 responses when given at sufficiently high
concentrations, thus underscoring the duality of AhR in regulation of
inflammation. We propose that AhR-signaling may be a weak activator of
p65-signaling that suppresses p65-activity induced by strong activators of NF-<U+03BA>B,
but that its anti-inflammatory properties also are due to interference with
additional pathways.

PMCID: PMC4222560
PMID: 25201625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Mol Biol. 2015 Jan 16;427(1):67-76. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.08.008. Epub 2014
Aug 23.

The enigmatic cytoplasmic regions of KCNH channels.

Morais-Cabral JH(1), Robertson GA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, 4150-180
Porto, Portugal. Electronic address: jcabral@ibmc.up.pt. (2)Department of
Neuroscience, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health,
Madison, WI 53705, USA.

KCNH channels are expressed across a vast phylogenetic and evolutionary spectrum.
In humans, they function in a wide range of tissues and serve as biomarkers and
targets for diseases such as cancer and cardiac arrhythmias. These channels share
a general architecture with other voltage-gated ion channels but are
distinguished by the presence of an N-terminal PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) domain and a
C-terminal domain with homology to cyclic nucleotide binding domains (referred to
as the CNBh domain). Cytosolic regions outside these domains show little
conservation between KCNH families but are strongly conserved across species
within a family, likely reflecting variability that confers specificity to
individual channel types. PAS and CNBh domains participate in channel gating, but
at least twice in evolutionary history, the PAS domain has been lost and it is
omitted by alternate transcription to create a distinct channel subunit in one
family. In this focused review, we present current knowledge of the structure and
function of these cytosolic regions, discuss their evolution as modular domains
and provide our perspective on the important questions moving forward.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4277939
PMID: 25158096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Biochemistry. 2014 Sep 16;53(36):5810-9. doi: 10.1021/bi500244m. Epub 2014 Sep 2.

Crystal structures of the F and pSLT plasmid TraJ N-terminal regions reveal
similar homodimeric PAS folds with functional interchangeability.

Lu J(1), Wu R, Adkins JN, Joachimiak A, Glover JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta , Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2H7,
Canada.

In the F family of conjugative plasmids, TraJ is an essential transcriptional
activator of the tra operon that encodes most of the proteins required for
conjugation. Here we report for the first time the X-ray crystal structures of
the TraJ N-terminal domains from the prototypic F plasmid (TraJF(11-130)) and
from the Salmonella virulence plasmid pSLT (TraJpSLT(1-128)). Both structures
contain similar Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) folds, which further homodimerize through the 
N-terminal helix and the structurally conserved ß-sheet of the PAS fold from each
protomer. Mutational analysis reveals that the observed dimeric interface is
critical for TraJF transcriptional activation, indicating that dimerization of
TraJ is required for its in vivo function. TraJ is specific in activating its
cognate tra operon promoter; however, heterologous PAS domains from pSLT and R100
TraJ can functionally replace the TraJF PAS domain, suggesting that the allelic
specificity of TraJ is solely mediated by the region C-terminal to the PAS
domain.

PMCID: PMC4165441
PMID: 25148268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Oct;10(4):1800-12. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2465. Epub 2014 Aug 7.

Functional analysis of the mRNA profile of neutrophil gelatinase-associated
lipocalin overexpression in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma using multiple
bioinformatic tools.

Wu BL(1), Li CQ(1), Du ZP(2), Zhou F(1), Xie JJ(1), Luo LW(3), Wu JY(1), Zhang
PX(1), Xu LY(4), Li EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shantou University Medical
College, Shantou, Guangdong 515041, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pathology,
Shantou Central Hospital, Affiliated Shantou Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, 
Shantou, Guangdong 515041, P.R. China. (3)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, Guangzhou Higher
Education Mega Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510000, P.R. China. (4)Institute of
Oncologic Pathology, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong
515041, P.R. China.

Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) is a member of the lipocalin
superfamily; dysregulated expression of NGAL has been observed in several benign 
and malignant diseases. In the present study, differentially expressed genes, in 
comparison with those of control cells, in the mRNA expression profile of EC109
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) cells following NGAL overexpression
were analyzed by multiple bioinformatic tools for a comprehensive understanding. 
A total of 29 gene ontology (GO) terms associated with immune function, chromatin
structure and gene transcription were identified among the differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) in NGAL overexpressing cells. In addition to the detected 
GO categories, the results from the functional annotation chart revealed that the
differentially expressed genes were also associated with 101 functional
annotation category terms. A total of 59 subpathways associated locally with the 
differentially expressed genes were identified by subpathway analysis, a markedly
greater total that detected by traditional pathway enrichment analysis only.
Promoter analysis indicated that the potential transcription factors Snail,
deltaEF1, Mycn, Arnt, MNB1A, PBF, E74A, Ubx, SPI1 and GATA2 were unique to the
downregulated DEG promoters, while bZIP910, ZNF42 and SOX9 were unique for the
upregulated DEG promoters. In conclusion, the understanding of the role of NGAL
overexpression in ESCC has been improved through the present bioinformatic
analysis.

PMCID: PMC4148386
PMID: 25109818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Arch Toxicol. 2015 Aug;89(8):1329-36. doi: 10.1007/s00204-014-1321-8. Epub 2014
Aug 1.

Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor by the widely used Src family kinase 
inhibitor 4-amino-5-(4-chlorophenyl)-7-(dimethylethyl)pyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidine
(PP2).

Frauenstein K(1), Tigges J, Soshilov AA, Kado S, Raab N, Fritsche E, Haendeler J,
Denison MS, Vogel CF, Haarmann-Stemmann T.

Author information: 
(1)IUF - Leibniz Research Institute for Environmental Medicine, Auf'm Hennekamp
50, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Small molecular weight protein kinase inhibitors are frequently used tools to
unravel the complex network of cellular signal transduction under certain
physiological and pathophysiological
conditions. 4-amino-5-(4-chlorophenyl)-7-(dimethylethyl)pyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidine
(PP2) is a widely used compound to block the activity of Src family kinases, the 
major group of non-receptor tyrosine kinases, which trigger multiple cellular
signaling pathways. Here, we show that PP2 induces cytochrome P450 1A1 mRNA
expression and enzyme activity in a dose-dependent manner in human HepG2 hepatoma
cells and NCTC 2544 keratinocytes. By means of reporter gene assays, RNA
interference, electrophoretic mobility shift assay, and competitive
ligand-binding assay, we further demonstrate that PP2 is a ligand for the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), an intracellular chemosensor that regulates
xenobiotic metabolism, environmental stress responses, and immune functions. Upon
ligand-dependent activation, the AHR translocates into the nucleus and dimerizes 
with the AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) to modulate the expression of its target
genes. In addition, AHR activation is frequently accompanied by an activation of 
the tyrosine kinase c-Src, resulting in stimulation of cell-surface receptors and
downstream signal transduction. As PP2 activates the AHR/ARNT pathway by
simultaneously blocking c-Src-mediated alternative signaling routes, this
compound may be a suitable tool to study the contribution of the different
AHR-dependent signaling pathways to biological processes and adverse outcomes. On
the other hand, the unexpected property of PP2 to stimulate AHR/ARNT signaling
should be carefully taken into account in future investigations in order to avoid
a false interpretation of experimental results and molecular interrelations.

PMCID: PMC4454626 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25082669  [PubMed - in process]


148. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 12;289(37):25822-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.558379. Epub
2014 Jul 29.

Multiple interactions between cytoplasmic domains regulate slow deactivation of
Kv11.1 channels.

Ng CA(1), Phan K(1), Hill AP(1), Vandenberg JI(2), Perry MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute and St. Vincent's Clinical
School, University of New South Wales, Darlinghurst, New South Wales 2010,
Australia. (2)From the Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute and St. Vincent's 
Clinical School, University of New South Wales, Darlinghurst, New South Wales
2010, Australia j.vandenberg@victorchang.edu.au.

The intracellular domains of many ion channels are important for fine-tuning
their gating kinetics. In Kv11.1 channels, the slow kinetics of channel
deactivation, which are critical for their function in the heart, are largely
regulated by the N-terminal N-Cap and Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domains, as well as the 
C-terminal cyclic nucleotide-binding homology (cNBH) domain. Here, we use mutant 
cycle analysis to probe for functional interactions between the N-Cap/PAS domains
and the cNBH domain. We identified a specific and stable charge-charge
interaction between Arg(56) of the PAS domain and Asp(803) of the cNBH domain, as
well an additional interaction between the cNBH domain and the N-Cap, both of
which are critical for maintaining slow deactivation kinetics. Furthermore, we
found that positively charged arginine residues within the disordered region of
the N-Cap interact with negatively charged residues of the C-linker domain.
Although this interaction is likely more transient than the PAS-cNBD interaction,
it is strong enough to stabilize the open conformation of the channel and thus
slow deactivation. These findings provide novel insights into the slow
deactivation mechanism of Kv11.1 channels.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4162183
PMID: 25074935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 28;9(7):e103304. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103304.
eCollection 2014.

Silencing of hypoxia-inducible factor-1ß induces anti-tumor effects in hepatoma
cell lines under tumor hypoxia.

Choi SH(1), Chung AR(1), Kang W(2), Park JY(2), Lee MS(3), Hwang SW(3), Kim do
Y(2), Kim SU(2), Ahn SH(4), Kim S(5), Han KH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 plus project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Yonsei Liver Cancer Special Clinic, Yonsei
University Health System, Seoul, Korea; Liver Cirrhosis Clinical Research Center,
Yonsei University Health System, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Premed, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (4)Brain Korea 21 plus project for 
Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Department 
of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Yonsei
Liver Cancer Special Clinic, Yonsei University Health System, Seoul, Korea; Liver
Cirrhosis Clinical Research Center, Yonsei University Health System, Seoul,
Korea. (5)Brain Korea 21 plus project for Medical Science, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Liver Cirrhosis Clinical Research Center,
Yonsei University Health System, Seoul, Korea.

Dimerization of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 beta (HIF-1ß) [aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)] with HIF-1a is involved in various aspects 
of cancer biology, including proliferation and survival under hypoxic conditions.
We investigated the in vitro mechanism by which silencing of HIF-1ß leads to the 
suppression of tumor cell growth and cellular functions. Various hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) cell lines (Huh-7, Hep3B, and HepG2) were transfected with small 
interfering RNA (siRNA) against HIF-1ß (siHIF-1ß) and cultured under hypoxic
conditions (1% O2 for 24 h). The expression levels of HIF-1ß, HIF-1a, and growth 
factors were examined by immunoblotting. Tumor growth was measured using the
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay, and tumor
activity was measured by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end
labeling, tumor cell invasion, and migration assays. Under hypoxic conditions,
silencing of HIF-1ß expression suppressed tumor cell growth and regulated the
expression of tumor growth-related factors, such as vascular endothelial growth
factor, epidermal growth factor, and hepatocyte growth factor. Suppression of
tumor cell invasion and migration was also demonstrated in HIF-1ß-silenced HCC
cell lines. Silencing of HIF-1ß expression may induce anti-tumor effects under
hypoxic conditions in HCC cell lines.

PMCID: PMC4113399
PMID: 25068796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 12;289(37):25925-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.567628. Epub
2014 Jul 25.

Liver clock protein BMAL1 promotes de novo lipogenesis through insulin-mTORC2-AKT
signaling.

Zhang D(1), Tong X(1), Arthurs B(1), Guha A(1), Rui L(1), Kamath A(1), Inoki
K(1), Yin L(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109. (2)From the Department of
Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48109 Leiyin@umich.edu.

The clock protein BMAL1 (brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1) participates in
circadian regulation of lipid metabolism, but its contribution to insulin
AKT-regulated hepatic lipid synthesis is unclear. Here we used both Bmal1(-/-)
and acute liver-specific Bmal1-depleted mice to study the role of BMAL1 in
refeeding-induced de novo lipogenesis in the liver. Both global deficiency and
acute hepatic depletion of Bmal1 reduced lipogenic gene expression in the liver
upon refeeding. Conversely, Bmal1 overexpression in mouse liver by adenovirus was
sufficient to elevate the levels of mRNA of lipogenic enzymes. Bmal1(-/-) primary
mouse hepatocytes displayed decreased levels of de novo lipogenesis and lipogenic
enzymes, supporting the notion that BMAL1 regulates lipid synthesis in
hepatocytes in a cell-autonomous manner. Both refed mouse liver and
insulin-treated primary mouse hepatocytes showed impaired AKT activation in the
case of either Bmal1 deficiency or Bmal1 depletion by adenoviral shRNA. Restoring
AKT activity by a constitutively active mutant of AKT nearly normalized de novo
lipogenesis in Bmal1(-/-) hepatocytes. Finally, Bmal1 deficiency or knockdown
decreased the protein abundance of RICTOR, the key component of the mTORC2
complex, without affecting the gene expression of key factors of insulin
signaling. Thus, our study uncovered a novel metabolic function of hepatic BMAL1 
that promotes de novo lipogenesis via the insulin-mTORC2-AKT signaling during
refeeding.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4162191
PMID: 25063808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2014 Dec;21(24):14226-31. doi:
10.1007/s11356-014-3321-x. Epub 2014 Jul 26.

Role of AHR, AHRR and ARNT in response to dioxin-like PCBs in Spaurus aurata.

Calò M(1), Licata P, Bitto A, Lo Cascio P, Interdonato M, Altavilla D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, University of Messina, Italy, Polo SS
Annunziata, 98168, Messina, Italy.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) mediates a variety of biological responses to
ubiquitous dioxin and PCB dioxin-like. AHR together with ARNT, AHRR, represent a 
novel basic helix-loop-helix/PAS family of transcriptional regulators. Their
interplay may affect the xenobiotic response. The aim of this study was to
investigate, by histological, immunohistochemical investigations and western-blot
analysis, the expression of AHR, ARNT and AHRR in liver of seabrem (Spaurus
aurata) after exposure at different time to dioxin-like PCB126 in order to deep
the knowledge about their specific role. The findings showed a significant
increase of AHR and ARNT expression in juvenile fishes after 12 h than control
group. The induction of AHR and ARNT is also significant at 24 and 72 hours
compared to the control group. Furthemore, induction of AHRR expression has
proved to increase both 12 h but this induction does not seem significant to 24
and 72 hours. The most important data of this work is that the induction of AHRR,
when the action of the toxic persistence substances, as dioxin and PCB-126, it is
not enough to reduce AHR signaling and thus its hyperactivation leads to toxic
effects in seabrem (Spaurus aurata). All this confirms the importance of AHR
ligands as new class of drugs that can be directed against severe disease such as
cancer.

PMID: 25060310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2014 Jul 25;2:85. doi: 10.1186/s40478-014-0085-y.

Genetic drivers of metastatic dissemination in sonic hedgehog medulloblastoma.

Jenkins NC, Kalra RR, Dubuc A, Sivakumar W, Pedone CA, Wu X, Taylor MD, Fults
DW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Clinical Neurosciences Center, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, 175 North Medical Drive East, Salt Lake City 84132, UT, USA. 
daniel.fults@hsc.utah.edu.

Leptomeningeal dissemination (LMD), the metastatic spread of tumor cells via the 
cerebrospinal fluid to the brain and spinal cord, is an ominous prognostic sign
for patients with the pediatric brain tumor medulloblastoma. The need to reduce
the risk of LMD has driven the development of aggressive treatment regimens,
which cause disabling neurotoxic side effects in long-term survivors.
Transposon-mediated mutagenesis studies in mice have revealed numerous candidate 
metastasis genes. Understanding how these genes drive LMD will require functional
assessment using in vivo and cell culture models of medulloblastoma. We analyzed 
two genes that were sites of frequent transposon insertion and highly expressed
in human medulloblastomas: Arnt (aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator) 
and Gdi2 (GDP dissociation inhibitor 2). Here we show that ectopic expression of 
Arnt and Gdi2 promoted LMD in mice bearing Sonic hedgehog (Shh)-induced
medulloblastomas. We overexpressed Arnt and Gdi2 in a human medulloblastoma cell 
line (DAOY) and an immortalized, nontransformed cell line derived from mouse
granule neuron precursors (SHH-NPD) and quantified migration, invasiveness, and
anchorage-independent growth, cell traits that are associated with metastatic
competence in carcinomas. In SHH-NPD cells. Arnt and Gdi2 stimulated all three
traits. In DAOY cells, Arnt had the same effects, but Gdi2 stimulated
invasiveness only. These results support a mechanism whereby Arnt and Gdi2 cause 
cells to detach from the primary tumor mass by increasing cell motility and
invasiveness. By conferring to tumor cells the ability to proliferate without
surface attachment, Arnt and Gdi2 favor the formation of stable colonies of cells
capable of seeding the leptomeninges.

PMCID: PMC4149244
PMID: 25059231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Chem Neuroanat. 2014 Nov;61-62:64-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jchemneu.2014.07.001. Epub
2014 Jul 10.

Differential distribution of hypoxia-inducible factor 1-beta (ARNT or ARNT2) in
mouse substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area.

Dela Cruz JA(1), Schmidt-Kastner R(2), Stevens JA(3), Steinbusch HW(3), Rutten
BP(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Mental Health and Neuroscience (MHeNs), Faculty of Health, Medicine 
and Life Sciences, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands;
Department of Psychology, Neuropsychology Doctoral Subprogram, The City
University of New York (CUNY) Graduate Center, New York, NY, USA. (2)School of
Mental Health and Neuroscience (MHeNs), Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life
Sciences, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands; C.E.
Schmidt College of Medicine, Florida Atlantic University (FAU), Boca Raton, FL,
USA. (3)School of Mental Health and Neuroscience (MHeNs), Faculty of Health,
Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht,
Netherlands. (4)School of Mental Health and Neuroscience (MHeNs), Faculty of
Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University Medical Center,
Maastricht, Netherlands. Electronic address: b.rutten@maastrichtuniversity.nl.

Hypoxia has been proposed as a mechanism underlying gene-environment interactions
in the neurodevelopmental model of schizophrenia, and hypoxia-inducible factor 1 
(HIF-1) could mediate the interactions. In the current study, we analyzed the
HIF-1 beta subunit, as formed by aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT) or ARNT2, in the mouse substantia nigra (SN) and the ventral tegmental
area (VTA). We performed immunohistochemical studies of ARNT and ARNT2 in the
adult mouse brain, and colocalization analyses, with specific emphasis on
dopaminergic cells, i.e. tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunoreactive cells.
Bioinformatic analyses identified shared protein partners for ARNT and ARNT2.
ARNT immunoreactivity showed widespread neuronal labeling without overt regional 
specificity. We observed co-localization of ARNT and TH in the SN compacta and
VTA. Nuclei strongly labeled for ARNT2 were observed in the SN reticulata, while 
only weak immunoreactivity for ARNT2 was found in TH-immunoreactive neurons in SN
compacta and VTA. Stereological analysis showed that ARNT was preferentially
expressed in dopaminergic neurons in SN compacta and VTA. Nuclei strongly labeled
for ARNT2 were present in neocortex and CA1 of hippocampus. Differential
expression of ARNT and ARNT2 in dopaminergic neurons may relate to the
vulnerability of distinct dopaminergic projections to hypoxia and to functional
vulnerability in schizophrenia and other neuropsychiatric disorders.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25017895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Ginekol Pol. 2014 May;85(5):348-53.

The influence of soybean extract on the expression level of selected drug
transporters, transcription factors and cytochrome P450 genes encoding phase I
drug-metabolizing enzymes.

Bogacz A, Bartkowiak-Wieczorek J, Mikolajczak PL, Rakowska-Mrozikiewicz B,
Grzeskowiak E, Wolski H, Czerny B, Mrozikiewicz PM.

OBJECTIVE: Soybean phytoestrogens, such as genistein and daidzein, reduce
climacteric symptoms and the risk of certain chronic diseases such as cancer and 
cardiovascular diseases. Despite their widespread use in functional foods and
dietary supplements, there is very little data available on their safety and
herb-drug interactions, especially with antineoplastic agents. Hence, the aim of 
our study was to assess the effects of soybean extracts on the expression level
of CYP genes and their transcriptional factors. We also investigated the effect
of soybean on the mRNA level of transporters, such as P-glycoprotein (MDRI) and
multidrug resistance-associated proteins (MRP1, MRP2).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Wistar rats were fed a standardized soybean extract (100
mg/kg, p.o.). cDNA was synthesized from total RNA isolated from different tissues
(liver and intestinal epithelium) using reverse transcription. Gene expression
level was analyzed by RT-PCR method.
RESULTS: We demonstrated a significant increase of CYP1A1 mRNA level (by 89%, p =
0.002 and 125%, p = 0.004) as compared with the control group. An increase of AHR
and CAR expression after 10 days was also observed (by 60%, p < 0.001 and 52%, p 
> 0.05, respectively). Additionally an inductive effect for CYP2D1 by 22% (p =
0.008), Mdr1a by 267% (p < 0.0001), Mdr2b by 86% (p < 0.00001), Mrp1 by 9-fold (p
< 0.0001), Mrp2 by 83% (p < 0.0001) in the liver and for Mrp2 by 35% (p < 0.001) 
in the intestinal epithelium, was evaluated. A significant decrease of mRNA level
was observed for CYP3A1 (human CYP3A4) in the liver and Mdr1b in the intestinal
epithelium. Moreove, we also showed a slight decrease in the amount of mRNA for
CAR, PXR and ARNT after 3 days.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that Glycine max may change the expression level
of CYPs, especially CYP3A4 and CYP1A 7, involved in biotransformation of
xenobiotics (drugs, procarcinogens) and may participate in clinically significant
interactions with drugs metabolized by these enzymes. Moreover an increase of
CYP1A1 (homologue to human CYPIA 1) mRNA level may not only reduce the
carcinogenicity of foreign compounds, but may also activate some compounds to
their carcinogenicity In case of transporters, it is considered that an increase 
of their expression in the body may lead to increased fetoprotection. Also, it
may reduce both, the exposure of sensitive tissues (e.g. brain, placenta) to
xenobiotics and treatment effectiveness of certain diseases. Hence, the search
for a safe substance that could effectively modulate transporter activity
especially in the treatment of certain hormone -dependent disorders, e.g.
osteoporosis and breast cancer occurring mainly in postmenopausal period,
continues.

PMID: 25011215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Jul 10;5:e1322. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.295.

Prolyl-4-hydroxylase 2 enhances hypoxia-induced glioblastoma cell death by
regulating the gene expression of hypoxia-inducible factor-a.

Sun W(1), Jelkmann W(1), Depping R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, Center for Structural and Cell Biology in Medicine,
University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany.

Oxygen deprivation (hypoxia) is a common feature of solid tumors in advanced
stages. The primary cellular transcriptional responses to hypoxia are mainly
mediated by the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF). HIF consists
of an oxygen-labile a-subunit (HIF-1a, -2a) and a stable ß-subunit (ARNT).
Prolyl-4-hydroxylase 2 (PHD2) is known as an important mediator of the
oxygen-dependent degradation of HIF-a subunits. As HIF-a subunits are not
confirmed to be the only substrates of PHD2, it is unknown whether PHD2 regulates
HIF-1a and HIF-2a by interacting with other intracellular molecules. In this
study, we found that in the glioblastoma cells, PHD2 maintains the gene
expression of HIF-1a in dependence of nuclear factor <U+03BA>B and suppresses the gene
expression of HIF-2a through HIF-1a. The PHD2-mediated degradation of HIF-1a and 
HIF-2a seems less important. Furthermore, PHD2 enhances hypoxia-induced
glioblastoma cell death by modulating the expression of the HIF target genes
glucose transporter 1, vascular endothelial growth factor-A and Bcl-2 binding
protein 3. Our findings show that PHD2 inhibits the adaptation of glioblastoma
cells to hypoxia by regulating the HIF-a subunits in a non-canonical way.
Modulation of PHD2 activity might be considered as a new way to inhibit
glioblastoma progression.

PMCID: PMC4123088
PMID: 25010988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Feb;135(2):454-61. doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.283. Epub 2014
Jul 7.

Hypoxia-inducible factors regulate filaggrin expression and epidermal barrier
function.

Wong WJ(1), Richardson T(2), Seykora JT(3), Cotsarelis G(3), Simon MC(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA 
[2] Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (2)1] Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (3)Department of Dermatology, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (4)1]
Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA [2]
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA [3] Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Feb;135(2):331-3.

A functional epidermal skin barrier requires the formation of a cornified
envelope from terminally differentiating keratinocytes. During this process,
multiple genetic and environmental signals coordinately regulate protein
expression and tissue differentiation. Here we describe a critical role for
hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) in the regulation of filaggrin expression and
skin barrier formation. Similar to other mammalian tissues, fetal epidermis in
mice is normally O2 deprived. Simultaneous deletion of Hif1a and Hif2a in murine 
epidermis revealed defects in keratinocyte terminal differentiation and epidermal
barrier formation. Mice lacking Hif1a and Hif2a in the epidermis exhibited dry
flaky skin, impaired permeability barrier, and enhanced sensitivity to cutaneous 
allergens. These defects were correlated with stratum granulosum attenuation and 
reduced filaggrin expression. Hypoxic treatment of primary keratinocytes induced 
filaggrin (Flg) gene expression in a HIF1a- and HIF2a-dependent manner,
suggesting that one mechanism by which Hif1a and Hif2a loss causes epidermal
barrier defects in mice lies in Flg dysregulation. Therefore, low O2 tension is
an essential component of the epidermal environment that contributes to skin
development and function.

PMCID: PMC4286527
PMID: 24999590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2014 Aug 15;307(4):C349-57. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00306.2013. Epub 2014 Jul 2.

Reduction of ARNT in myeloid cells causes immune suppression and delayed wound
healing.

Scott C(1), Bonner J(2), Min D(2), Boughton P(3), Stokes R(4), Cha KM(4), Walters
SN(5), Maslowski K(6), Sierro F(7), Grey ST(5), Twigg S(8), McLennan S(8), Gunton
JE(9).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Transcription Factors Group, Department of Immunology and
Inflammation, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia; Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia; (2)Department of Endocrinology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, 
New South Wales, Australia; (3)St. George Clinical School, St. George Hospital,
Kogarah, New South Wales, Australia; Department of Biomedical Engineering,
University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; (4)Diabetes and
Transcription Factors Group, Department of Immunology and Inflammation, Garvan
Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; (5)Department 
of Immunology and Inflammation, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia; (6)Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland; (7)Liver Immunology, Centenary Institute, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia; (8)Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia; Department of Endocrinology, Royal Prince Alfred
Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; (9)Diabetes and Transcription
Factors Group, Department of Immunology and Inflammation, Garvan Institute of
Medical Research, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; Faculty of Medicine,
University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; St. Vincent's Clinical 
School, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; and
Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia jenny.gunton@sydney.edu.au j.gunton@garvan.org.au.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is a transcription factor
that binds to partners to mediate responses to environmental signals. To
investigate its role in the innate immune system, floxed ARNT mice were bred with
lysozyme M-Cre recombinase animals to generate lysozyme M-ARNT (LAR) mice with
reduced ARNT expression. Myeloid cells of LAR mice had altered mRNA expression
and delayed wound healing. Interestingly, when the animals were rendered
diabetic, the difference in wound healing between the LAR mice and their
littermate controls was no longer present, suggesting that decreased myeloid cell
ARNT function may be an important factor in impaired wound healing in diabetes.
Deferoxamine (DFO) improves wound healing by increasing hypoxia-inducible
factors, which require ARNT for function. DFO was not effective in wounds of LAR 
mice, again suggesting that myeloid cells are important for normal wound healing 
and for the full benefit of DFO. These findings suggest that myeloid ARNT is
important for immune function and wound healing. Increasing ARNT and, more
specifically, myeloid ARNT may be a therapeutic strategy to improve wound
healing.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4137137
PMID: 24990649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jul 15;111(28):10179-84. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1403096111. Epub 2014 Jun 30.

Crystal structure of the photosensing module from a red/far-red light-absorbing
plant phytochrome.

Burgie ES(1), Bussell AN(1), Walker JM(1), Dubiel K(1), Vierstra RD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706
vierstra@wisc.edu.

Many aspects of plant photomorphogenesis are controlled by the phytochrome (Phy) 
family of bilin-containing photoreceptors that detect red and far-red light by
photointerconversion between a dark-adapted Pr state and a photoactivated Pfr
state. Whereas 3D models of prokaryotic Phys are available, models of their plant
counterparts have remained elusive. Here, we present the crystal structure of the
photosensing module (PSM) from a seed plant Phy in the Pr state using the PhyB
isoform from Arabidopsis thaliana. The PhyB PSM crystallized as a head-to-head
dimer with strong structural homology to its bacterial relatives, including a
5(Z)syn, 10(Z)syn, 15(Z)anti configuration of the phytochromobilin chromophore
buried within the cGMP phosphodiesterase/adenylyl cyclase/FhlA (GAF) domain, and 
a well-ordered hairpin protruding from the Phy-specific domain toward the bilin
pocket. However, its Per/Arnt/Sim (PAS) domain, knot region, and helical spine
show distinct structural differences potentially important to signaling. Included
is an elongated helical spine, an extended ß-sheet connecting the GAF domain and 
hairpin stem, and unique interactions between the region upstream of the PAS
domain knot and the bilin A and B pyrrole rings. Comparisons of this structure
with those from bacterial Phys combined with mutagenic studies support a toggle
model for photoconversion that engages multiple features within the PSM to
stabilize the Pr and Pfr end states after rotation of the D pyrrole ring. Taken
together, this Arabidopsis PhyB structure should enable molecular insights into
plant Phy signaling and provide an essential scaffold to redesign their
activities for agricultural benefit and as optogenetic reagents.

PMCID: PMC4104915
PMID: 24982198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Arch Dermatol Res. 2014 Nov;306(9):769-79. doi: 10.1007/s00403-014-1481-7. Epub
2014 Jun 26.

Role of AhR/ARNT system in skin homeostasis.

Furue M(1), Takahara M, Nakahara T, Uchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Kyushu University, Maidashi 3-1-1, Higashiku,
Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan, furue@dermatol.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that
binds to structurally diverse synthetic and naturally occurring chemicals
including dioxins, flavonoids, tryptophan photoproducts, and Malassezia
metabolites. Upon binding to its ligands, cytoplasmic AhR translocates to the
nucleus, heterodimerizes with aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT), and mediates numerous biological and toxicological effects by inducing
the transcription of various AhR-responsive genes. AhR ligation controls
oxidation/antioxidation, epidermal barrier function, photo-induced response,
melanogenesis, and innate immunity. This review summarizes recent advances in the
understanding of the regulatory mechanisms of skin homeostasis mediated by the
AhR/ARNT system.

PMCID: PMC4220966
PMID: 24966027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2014 Sep;350(3):589-604. doi: 10.1124/jpet.114.213793. Epub
2014 Jun 19.

Brexpiprazole I: in vitro and in vivo characterization of a novel
serotonin-dopamine activity modulator.

Maeda K(1), Sugino H(2), Akazawa H(2), Amada N(2), Shimada J(2), Futamura T(2),
Yamashita H(2), Ito N(2), McQuade RD(2), Mørk A(2), Pehrson AL(2), Hentzer M(2), 
Nielsen V(2), Bundgaard C(2), Arnt J(2), Stensbøl TB(2), Kikuchi T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Qs' Research Institute, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Tokushima, Japan
(K.M., H.S., H.A., N.A., J.S., T.F., H.Y., N.I., T.K.); Otsuka Pharmaceutical
Development & Commercialization, Princeton, New Jersey (R.D.M.); Neuroscience
Drug Discovery, H. Lundbeck A/S, Valby, Denmark (A.M., M.H., V.N., C.B., J.A.,
T.B.S.); and Lundbeck Research USA, Paramus, New Jersey (A.L.P.)
Maeda.Kenji@otsuka.jp. (2)Qs' Research Institute, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.
Tokushima, Japan (K.M., H.S., H.A., N.A., J.S., T.F., H.Y., N.I., T.K.); Otsuka
Pharmaceutical Development & Commercialization, Princeton, New Jersey (R.D.M.);
Neuroscience Drug Discovery, H. Lundbeck A/S, Valby, Denmark (A.M., M.H., V.N.,
C.B., J.A., T.B.S.); and Lundbeck Research USA, Paramus, New Jersey (A.L.P.).

Brexpiprazole (OPC-34712,
7-{4-[4-(1-benzothiophen-4-yl)piperazin-1-yl]butoxy}quinolin-2(1H)-one) is a
novel drug candidate in clinical development for psychiatric disorders with high 
affinity for serotonin, dopamine, and noradrenaline receptors. In particular, it 
bound with high affinity (Ki < 1 nM) to human serotonin 1A (h5-HT1A)-, h5-HT2A-, 
long form of human D2 (hD2L)-, ha1B-, and ha2C-adrenergic receptors. It displayed
partial agonism at h5-HT1A and hD2 receptors in cloned receptor systems and
potent antagonism of h5-HT2A receptors and ha1B/2C-adrenoceptors. Brexpiprazole
also had affinity (Ki < 5 nM) for hD3-, h5-HT2B-, h5-HT7-, ha1A-, and
ha1D-adrenergic receptors, moderate affinity for hH1 (Ki = 19 nM), and low
affinity for hM1 receptors (Ki > 1000 nM). Brexpiprazole potently bound to rat
5-HT2A and D2 receptors in vivo, and ex vivo binding studies further confirmed
high 5-HT1A receptor binding potency. Brexpiprazole inhibited DOI
(2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine)-induced head twitches in rats, suggestive of
5-HT2A antagonism. Furthermore, in vivo D2 partial agonist activity of
brexpiprazole was confirmed by its inhibitory effect on reserpine-induced DOPA
accumulation in rats. In rat microdialysis studies, brexpiprazole slightly
reduced extracellular dopamine in nucleus accumbens but not in prefrontal cortex,
whereas moderate increases of the dopamine metabolites, homovanillic acid and
DOPAC (3,4-dihydroxy-phenyl-acetic acid), in these areas also suggested in vivo
D2 partial agonist activity. In particular, based on a lower intrinsic activity
at D2 receptors and higher binding affinities for 5-HT1A/2A receptors than
aripiprazole, brexpiprazole would have a favorable antipsychotic potential
without D2 receptor agonist- and antagonist-related adverse effects. In
conclusion, brexpiprazole is a serotonin-dopamine activity modulator with a
unique pharmacology, which may offer novel treatment options across a broad
spectrum of central nervous system disorders.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 24947465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2014 Sep;350(3):605-14. doi: 10.1124/jpet.114.213819. Epub 
2014 Jun 19.

Brexpiprazole II: antipsychotic-like and procognitive effects of a novel
serotonin-dopamine activity modulator.

Maeda K(1), Lerdrup L(2), Sugino H(2), Akazawa H(2), Amada N(2), McQuade RD(2),
Stensbøl TB(2), Bundgaard C(2), Arnt J(2), Kikuchi T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Qs' Research Institute, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Tokushima, Japan
(K.M., H.S., H.A., N.A., T.K.); Otsuka Pharmaceutical Development &
Commercialization, Princeton, New Jersey (R.D.M.); and Neuroscience Drug
Discovery, H. Lundbeck A/S, Valby, Denmark (L.L., T.B.S., C.B., J.A.)
Maeda.Kenji@otsuka.jp. (2)Qs' Research Institute, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.
Tokushima, Japan (K.M., H.S., H.A., N.A., T.K.); Otsuka Pharmaceutical
Development & Commercialization, Princeton, New Jersey (R.D.M.); and Neuroscience
Drug Discovery, H. Lundbeck A/S, Valby, Denmark (L.L., T.B.S., C.B., J.A.).

Erratum in
    J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2014 Dec;351(3):686-7.

Brexpiprazole (OPC-34712,
7-{4-[4-(1-benzothiophen-4-yl)piperazin-1-yl]butoxy}quinolin-2(1H)-one) is a
novel serotonin-dopamine activity modulator with partial agonist activity at
serotonin 1A (5-HT1A) and D2/3 receptors, combined with potent antagonist effects
on 5-HT2A, a1B-, and a2C-adrenergic receptors. Brexpiprazole inhibited
conditioned avoidance response (ED50 = 6.0 mg/kg), apomorphine- or
d-amphetamine-induced hyperactivity (ED50 = 2.3 and 0.90, respectively), and
apomorphine-induced stereotypy (ED50 = 2.9) in rats at clinically relevant D2
receptor occupancies. Brexpiprazole also potently inhibited apomorphine-induced
eye blinking in monkeys. The results suggest that brexpiprazole has antipsychotic
potential. Brexpiprazole induced catalepsy (ED50 = 20) well above clinically
relevant D2 receptor occupancies, suggesting a low risk for extrapyramidal side
effects. Subchronic treatment with phencyclidine (PCP) induced cognitive
impairment in both novel object recognition (NOR) and attentional set-shifting
(ID-ED) tests in rats. Brexpiprazole reversed the PCP-induced cognitive
impairment in the NOR test at 1.0 and 3.0 mg/kg, and in the ID-ED test at 1.0
mg/kg. However, aripiprazole (10 mg/kg) was ineffective in both tests, despite
achieving relevant D2 occupancies. In the NOR test, the 5-HT1A agonist buspirone 
and the 5-HT2A antagonist M100907
[(R)-(2,3-dimethoxyphenyl)[1-(4-fluorophenethyl)piperidin-4-yl]methanol]
partially but significantly reversed PCP-induced impairment. Furthermore, the
effect of brexpiprazole was reversed by cotreatment with the 5-HT1A antagonist
WAY100635
(N-[2-[4-(2-methoxyphenyl)-1-piperazinyl]ethyl]-N-2-pyridinylcyclohexanecarboxami
de maleate). The results indicate that brexpiprazole has antipsychotic-like
activity and robust efficacy in relevant models of cognitive impairment
associated with schizophrenia. The effects of brexpiprazole in the cognitive
tests are superior to those of aripiprazole. We propose that the pharmacologic
profile of brexpiprazole be based on its balanced effects on 5-HT1A, D2, and
5-HT2A receptors, with possible modulating activity through additional monoamine 
receptors.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 24947464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 18;450(1):324-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.112. Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Lipoic acid entrains the hepatic circadian clock and lipid metabolic proteins
that have been desynchronized with advanced age.

Keith D(1), Finlay L(1), Butler J(1), Gómez L(2), Smith E(2), Moreau R(1), Hagen 
T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, United States. (2)Linus
Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, United States; Biochemistry
Biophysics Department, Oregon State University, United States. (3)Linus Pauling
Institute, Oregon State University, United States; Biochemistry Biophysics
Department, Oregon State University, United States. Electronic address:
Tory.Hagen@oregonstate.edu.

It is well established that lipid metabolism is controlled, in part, by circadian
clocks. However, circadian clocks lose temporal precision with age and correlates
with elevated incidence in dyslipidemia and metabolic syndrome in older adults.
Because our lab has shown that lipoic acid (LA) improves lipid homeostasis in
aged animals, we hypothesized that LA affects the circadian clock to achieve
these results. We fed 24 month old male F344 rats a diet supplemented with 0.2%
(w/w) LA for 2 weeks prior to sacrifice and quantified hepatic circadian clock
protein levels and clock-controlled lipid metabolic enzymes. LA treatment caused 
a significant phase-shift in the expression patterns of the circadian clock
proteins Period (Per) 2, Brain and Muscle Arnt-Like1 (BMAL1), and Reverse
Erythroblastosis virus (Rev-erb) ß without altering the amplitude of protein
levels during the light phase of the day. LA also significantly altered the
oscillatory patterns of clock-controlled proteins associated with lipid
metabolism. The level of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) a was 
significantly increased and acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) and fatty acid synthase 
(FAS) were both significantly reduced, suggesting that the LA-supplemented aged
animals are in a catabolic state. We conclude that LA remediates some of the
dyslipidemic processes associated with advanced age, and this mechanism may be at
least partially through entrainment of circadian clocks.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4147855
PMID: 24944020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 18;450(1):261-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.107. Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Overexpression of ERß is sufficient to inhibit hypoxia-inducible factor-1
transactivation.

Park C(1), Lee Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, College of Life Science, Institute
of Biotechnology, Sejong University, Kwangjingu, Kunjadong, Seoul 143-747,
Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, College of Life
Science, Institute of Biotechnology, Sejong University, Kwangjingu, Kunjadong,
Seoul 143-747, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: yjlee@sejong.ac.kr.

Estrogen receptor (ER) ß is predicted to play an important role in the prevention
of breast cancer development and progression. We have previously shown that ERß
suppresses hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)-1-mediated transcription through aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) degradation via ubiquitination
processes. In this study, we attempted to examine the effect of ERß specific
ligand on HIF-1 inhibition in ERß positive PC3 cells and ERß transfected MCF-7
cells. ERß specific agonist diarylpropionitrile (DPN) stimulated estrogen
response element (ERE)-luciferase activity in a similar fashion to estradiol in
PC3 cells. We observed that DPN down-regulates the ARNT protein levels leading to
an attenuation of hypoxia-induced hypoxia response element (HRE)-driven
luciferase reporter gene activation in PC3 cells. Treatment of DPN reduced
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression and co-treatment with ERß
specific antagonist PHTPP abrogated the effect in PC3 cells. We then examined the
effect of DPN in ERß transfected MCF-7 cells. HIF-1 transcriptional activity
repression by ERß was not further reduced by DPN, as examined by HRE-driven
luciferase assays. Expression of ERß significantly decreased VEGF secretion and
ARNT expression under hypoxic conditions. However, DPN did not additionally
affect this suppression in MCF-7 cells transfected with ERß. This result shows
that unliganded ERß is sufficient to inhibit HIF-1 in systems of overexpression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24938129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 13;9(6):e100057. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100057.
eCollection 2014.

Molecular characterisation, evolution and expression of hypoxia-inducible factor 
in Aurelia sp.1.

Wang G(1), Yu Z(2), Zhen Y(3), Mi T(3), Shi Y(4), Wang J(1), Wang M(5), Sun S(5).

Author information: 
(1)College Marine Life Science, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, Shandong, P. 
R. China. (2)Key Laboratory of Marine Chemistry Theory and Engineering, Ministry 
of Education, Qingdao, Shandong, P. R. China; College of Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, Shandong, P. R. China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Marine Environment and Ecology, Ministry of Education, Qingdao,
Shandong, P. R. China; College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Ocean
University of China, Qingdao, Shandong, P. R. China. (4)College of Environmental 
Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, Shandong, P. R.
China. (5)Key Laboratory of Marine Ecology and Environmental Sciences, Institute 
of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, Shandong, P. R. China.

The maintenance of physiological oxygen homeostasis is mediated by
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), a key transcriptional factor of the PHD-HIF
system in all metazoans. However, the molecular evolutionary origin of this
central physiological regulatory system is not well characterized. As the
earliest eumetazoans, Cnidarians can be served as an interesting model for
exploring the HIF system from an evolutionary perspective. We identified the
complete cDNA sequence of HIF-1a (ASHIF) from the Aurelia sp.1, and the predicted
HIF-1a protein (pASHIF) was comprised of 674 amino acids originating from 2,025
bp nucleotides. A Pairwise comparison revealed that pASHIF not only possessed
conserved basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domains but also
contained the oxygen dependent degradation (ODD) and the C-terminal
transactivation domains (C-TAD), the key domains for hypoxia regulation. As
indicated by sequence analysis, the ASHIF gene contains 8 exons interrupted by 7 
introns. Western blot analysis indicated that pASHIF that existed in the polyps
and medusa of Aurelia. sp.1 was more stable for a hypoxic response than normoxia.

PMCID: PMC4057343
PMID: 24926666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 12;9(6):e99242. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099242. eCollection
2014.

An increase in reactive oxygen species by deregulation of ARNT enhances
chemotherapeutic drug-induced cancer cell death.

Shieh JM(1), Shen CJ(2), Chang WC(3), Cheng HC(4), Chan YY(5), Huang WC(2), Chang
WC(6), Chen BK(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC; 
The Center of General Education, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and Science,
Tainan, Taiwan, ROC. (2)Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction,
College of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 
Taiwan, ROC. (3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, and Master Program for
Clinical Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoproteomics, School of Pharmacology, Taipei 
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical
University-Wanfang Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (4)Institute of Biochemistry,
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC. (5)Department of
Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan,
Taiwan, ROC. (6)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (7)Institute of Bioinformatics
and Biosignal Transduction, College of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National
Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC; Department of Pharmacology, College
of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC; Graduate
Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

BACKGROUND: Unique characteristics of tumor microenvironments can be used as
targets of cancer therapy. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT) is an important mediator of tumor progression. However, the functional
role of ARNT in chemotherapeutic drug-treated cancer remains unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we found that knockdown of ARNT in cancer
cells reduced the proliferation rate and the transformation ability of those
cells. Moreover, cisplatin-induced cell apoptosis was enhanced in ARNT-deficient 
cells. Expression of ARNT also decreased in the presence of cisplatin through
proteasomal degradation pathway. However, ARNT level was maintained in
cisplatin-treated drug-resistant cells, which prevented cell from apoptosis.
Interestingly, reactive oxygen species (ROS) dramatically increased when ARNT was
knocked down in cancer cells, enhancing cisplatin-induced apoptosis. ROS promoted
cell death was inhibited in cells treated with the ROS scavenger,
N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggested that the anticancer activity of
cisplatin is attributable to its induction of the production of ROS by ARNT
degradation. Targeting ARNT could be a potential strategy to eliminate drug
resistance in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4055634
PMID: 24921657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 12;9(6):e99172. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099172. eCollection
2014.

Daily rhythmicity of clock gene transcripts in atlantic cod fast skeletal muscle.

Lazado CC(1), Kumaratunga HP(1), Nagasawa K(1), Babiak I(1), Giannetto A(2),
Fernandes JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biosciences and Aquaculture, University of Nordland, Bodø, Norway. 
(2)Faculty of Biosciences and Aquaculture, University of Nordland, Bodø, Norway; 
Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Messina,
Messina, Italy.

The classical notion of a centralized clock that governs circadian rhythmicity
has been challenged with the discovery of peripheral oscillators that enable
organisms to cope with daily changes in their environment. The present study
aimed to identify the molecular clock components in Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua)
and to investigate their daily gene expression in fast skeletal muscle. Atlantic 
cod clock genes were closely related to their orthologs in teleosts and
tetrapods. Synteny was conserved to varying degrees in the majority of the 18
clock genes examined. In particular, aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator-like 2 (arntl2), RAR-related orphan receptor A (rora) and timeless
(tim) displayed high degrees of conservation. Expression profiling during the
early ontogenesis revealed that some transcripts were maternally transferred,
namely arntl2, cryptochrome 1b and 2 (cry1b and cry2), and period 2a and 2b
(per2a and per2b). Most clock genes were ubiquitously expressed in various
tissues, suggesting the possible existence of multiple peripheral clock systems
in Atlantic cod. In particular, they were all detected in fast skeletal muscle,
with the exception of neuronal PAS (Per-Arnt-Single-minded) domain-containing
protein (npas1) and rora. Rhythmicity analysis revealed 8 clock genes with daily 
rhythmic expression, namely arntl2, circadian locomotor output cycles kaput
(clock), npas2, cry2, cry3 per2a, nuclear receptor subfamily 1, group D, member 1
(nr1d1), and nr1d2a. Transcript levels of the myogenic genes myogenic factor 5
(myf5) and muscleblind-like 1 (mbnl1) strongly correlated with clock gene
expression. This is the first study to unravel the molecular components of
peripheral clocks in Atlantic cod. Taken together, our data suggest that the
putative clock system in fast skeletal muscle of Atlantic cod has regulatory
implications on muscle physiology, particularly in the expression of genes
related to myogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4062345
PMID: 24921252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 11;9(6):e99214. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099214. eCollection
2014.

A TRIP230-retinoblastoma protein complex regulates hypoxia-inducible
factor-1a-mediated transcription and cancer cell invasion.

Labrecque MP(1), Takhar MK(1), Jagdeo JM(1), Tam KJ(1), Chiu C(1), Wang TY(1),
Prefontaine GG(1), Cox ME(2), Beischlag TV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British
Columbia, Canada. (2)Department of Urologic Sciences, The Vancouver Prostate
Center, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Localized hypoxia in solid tumors activates transcriptional programs that promote
the metastatic transformation of cells. Like hypoxia-inducible
hyper-vascularization, loss of the retinoblastoma protein (Rb) is a trait common 
to advanced stages of tumor progression in many metastatic cancers. However, no
link between the role of Rb and hypoxia-driven metastatic processes has been
established. We demonstrated that Rb is a key mediator of the hypoxic response
mediated by HIF1a/ß, the master regulator of the hypoxia response, and its
essential co-activator, the thyroid hormone receptor/retinoblastoma-interacting
protein (TRIP230). Furthermore, loss of Rb unmasks the full co-activation
potential of TRIP230. Using small inhibitory RNA approaches in vivo, we
established that Rb attenuates the normal physiological response to hypoxia by
HIF1a. Notably, loss of Rb results in hypoxia-dependent biochemical changes that 
promote acquisition of an invasive phenotype in MCF7 breast cancer cells. In
addition, Rb is present in HIF1a-ARNT/HIF1ß transcriptional complexes associated 
with TRIP230 as determined by co-immuno-precipitation, GST-pull-down and ChIP
assays. These results demonstrate that Rb is a negative modulator of
hypoxia-regulated transcription by virtue of its direct effects on the HIF1
complex. This work represents the first link between the functional ablation of
Rb in tumor cells and HIF1a-dependent transcriptional activation and invasion.

PMCID: PMC4053355
PMID: 24919196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Aug 15;20(16):4349-60. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0494. 
Epub 2014 Jun 10.

Kidney cancer is characterized by aberrant methylation of tissue-specific
enhancers that are prognostic for overall survival.

Hu CY(1), Mohtat D(1), Yu Y(1), Ko YA(2), Shenoy N(1), Bhattacharya S(1),
Izquierdo MC(2), Park AS(2), Giricz O(1), Vallumsetla N(1), Gundabolu K(1), Ware 
K(3), Bhagat TD(1), Suzuki M(1), Pullman J(3), Liu XS(4), Greally JM(1), Susztak 
K(5), Verma A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York. (2)Renal Electrolyte and
Hypertension Division, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (3)Department of Pathology, Montefiore Medical
Center, New York, New York. (4)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts. (5)Renal Electrolyte and Hypertension
Division, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. amit.verma@einstein.yu.edu ksusztak@mail.med.upenn.edu. (6)Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York. amit.verma@einstein.yu.edu
ksusztak@mail.med.upenn.edu.

PURPOSE: Even though recent studies have shown that genetic changes at enhancers 
can influence carcinogenesis, most methylomic studies have focused on changes at 
promoters. We used renal cell carcinoma (RCC), an incurable malignancy associated
with mutations in epigenetic regulators, as a model to study genome-wide patterns
of DNA methylation at a high resolution.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Analysis of cytosine methylation status of 1.3 million CpGs 
was determined by the HELP assay in RCC and healthy microdissected renal tubular 
controls.
RESULTS: We observed that the RCC samples were characterized by widespread
hypermethylation that preferentially affected gene bodies. Aberrant methylation
was particularly enriched in kidney-specific enhancer regions associated with
H3K4Me1 marks. Various important underexpressed genes, such as SMAD6, were
associated with aberrantly methylated, intronic enhancers, and these changes were
validated in an independent cohort. MOTIF analysis of aberrantly hypermethylated 
regions revealed enrichment for binding sites of AP2a, AHR, HAIRY, ARNT, and HIF1
transcription factors, reflecting contributions of dysregulated hypoxia signaling
pathways in RCC. The functional importance of this aberrant hypermethylation was 
demonstrated by selective sensitivity of RCC cells to low levels of decitabine.
Most importantly, methylation of enhancers was predictive of adverse prognosis in
405 cases of RCC in multivariate analysis. In addition, parallel copy-number
analysis from MspI representations demonstrated novel copy-number variations that
were validated in an independent cohort of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study is the first high-resolution methylome analysis of RCC,
demonstrates that many kidney-specific enhancers are targeted by aberrant
hypermethylation, and reveals the prognostic importance of these epigenetic
changes in an independent cohort.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4424050
PMID: 24916699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 2014 Oct;66(8):377-82. doi: 10.1016/j.etp.2014.05.005. Epub
2014 Jun 7.

PCB 126 perturbs hypoxia-induced HIF-1a activity and glucose consumption in human
HepG2 cells.

Vorrink SU(1), Sarsour EH(2), Olivier AK(3), Robertson LW(4), Goswami PC(1),
Domann FE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Human Toxicology, The University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of 
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, The University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA, USA. (4)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Human Toxicology,
The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Occupational and
Environmental Health, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(5)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Human Toxicology, The University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Pathology, The University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA, USA. Electronic address: frederick-domann@uiowa.edu.

Aerobic organisms strongly depend on the availability of oxygen for respiration
and countless other metabolic processes to maintain cellular homeostasis. Under
certain conditions, the amount of available oxygen can be limited. To support
survival in environments with limited oxygen supply, hypoxia-inducible factors
(HIFs) reprogram vital components of cellular metabolism. HIF-1a is an important 
mediator of acute and adaptive responses to hypoxic stress. Interestingly, the
heterodimeric partner required by HIF-1a to function as transcription factor,
known as ARNT, is also an essential part of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
transcription factor complex. Thus, via ARNT a crosstalk exists between these two
pathways that might affect HIF-1a-mediated processes. In this study we sought to 
assess the effect of the AhR agonist PCB 126 on HIF-1a activity as well as on
HIF-1a-regulated targets involved in cellular metabolism in human HepG2 cells.
Our results show that PCB 126 reduced HIF-1a localization to the nucleus.
Furthermore, in an in vivo setting, rats exposed to parenteral PCB 126 also
displayed reduced hepatocyte nuclear localization of HIF-1a. Additionally, HepG2 
cells exposed to PCB 126 displayed reduced hypoxia-regulated HRE-luciferase
reporter gene expression as well as a reduction in glucose consumption in
conditions of hypoxia. In summary, this study reveals that HIF-1a-regulated
cellular metabolic processes are negatively affected by PCB 126 which might
ultimately affect adaptive responses and cell survival in hypoxic environments.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4143452
PMID: 24916446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Endocrinology. 2014 Sep;155(9):3597-609. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1017. Epub 2014 Jun
10.

Hypothalamic molecular changes underlying natural reproductive senescence in the 
female rat.

Kermath BA(1), Riha PD, Woller MJ, Wolfe A, Gore AC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Neuroscience (B.A.K., A.C.G.), Division of Pharmacology and
Toxicology (P.D.R., A.C.G.), and Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology
(A.C.G.), The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712; Department of
Biology (M.J.W.), University of Wisconsin-Whitewater, Whitewater, Wisconsin
53190; and Department of Pediatrics (A.W.), Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore Maryland 21287.

The role of the hypothalamus in female reproductive senescence is unclear. Here
we identified novel molecular neuroendocrine changes during the natural
progression from regular reproductive cycles to acyclicity in middle-aged female 
rats, comparable with the perimenopausal progression in women. Expression of 48
neuroendocrine genes was quantified within three hypothalamic regions: the
anteroventral periventricular nucleus, the site of steroid positive feedback onto
GnRH neurons; the arcuate nucleus (ARC), the site of negative feedback and
pulsatile GnRH release; and the median eminence (ME), the site of GnRH secretion.
Surprisingly, the majority of changes occurred in the ARC and ME, with few
effects in anteroventral periventricular nucleus. The overall pattern was
increased mRNA levels with chronological age and decreases with reproductive
cycle status in middle-aged rats. Affected genes included transcription factors
(Stat5b, Arnt, Ahr), sex steroid hormone receptors (Esr1, Esr2, Pgr, Ar),
steroidogenic enzymes (Sts, Hsd17b8), growth factors (Igf1, Tgfa), and
neuropeptides (Kiss1, Tac2, Gnrh1). Bionetwork analysis revealed region-specific 
correlations between genes and hormones. Immunohistochemical analyses of
kisspeptin and estrogen receptor-a in the ARC demonstrated age-related decreases 
in kisspeptin cell numbers as well as kisspeptin-estrogen receptor-a dual-labeled
cells. Taken together, these results identify unexpectedly strong roles for the
ME and ARC during reproductive decline and highlight fundamental differences
between middle-aged rats with regular cycles and all other groups. Our data
provide evidence of decreased excitatory stimulation and altered hormone feedback
with aging and suggest novel neuroendocrine pathways that warrant future study.
Furthermore, these changes may impact other neuroendocrine systems that undergo
functional declines with age.

PMCID: PMC4138577
PMID: 24914937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Annu Rev Biochem. 2014;83:191-219. doi: 10.1146/annurev-biochem-060713-035644.

Interactive features of proteins composing eukaryotic circadian clocks.

Crane BR(1), Young MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York 14853; email: bc69@cornell.edu.

Research into the molecular mechanisms of eukaryotic circadian clocks has
proceeded at an electrifying pace. In this review, we discuss advances in our
understanding of the structures of central molecular players in the timing
oscillators of fungi, insects, and mammals. A series of clock protein structures 
demonstrate that the PAS (Per/Arnt/Sim) domain has been used with great variation
to formulate the transcriptional activators and repressors of the clock. We
discuss how posttranslational modifications and external cues, such as light,
affect the conformation and function of core clock components. Recent
breakthroughs have also revealed novel interactions among clock proteins and new 
partners that couple the clock to metabolic and developmental pathways. Overall, 
a picture of clock function has emerged wherein conserved motifs and structural
platforms have been elaborated into a highly dynamic collection of interacting
molecules that undergo orchestrated changes in chemical structure, conformational
state, and partners.

PMID: 24905781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Open Biol. 2014 Jun;4(6):140023. doi: 10.1098/rsob.140023.

Mutational analysis of dimeric linkers in peri- and cytoplasmic domains of
histidine kinase DctB reveals their functional roles in signal transduction.

Liu J(1), Yang J(1), Wen J(1), Yang Y(1), Wei X(1), Zhang X(2), Wang YP(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, College of Life
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Centre for Structural Biology, Imperial College
London, London SW7 2AZ, UK xiaodong.zhang@imperial.ac.uk. (3)State Key Laboratory
of Protein and Plant Gene Research, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, 
Beijing 100871, People's Republic of China wangyp@pku.edu.cn.

Membrane-associated histidine kinases (HKs) in two-component systems respond to
environmental stimuli by autophosphorylation and phospho-transfer. HK typically
contains a periplasmic sensor domain that regulates the cytoplasmic kinase domain
through a conserved cytoplasmic linker. How signal is transduced from the
ligand-binding site across the membrane barrier remains unclear. Here, we analyse
two linker regions of a typical HK, DctB. One region connects the first
transmembrane helix with the periplasmic Per-ARNT-Sim domains, while the other
one connects the second transmembrane helix with the cytoplasmic kinase domains. 
We identify a leucine residue in the first linker region to be essential for the 
signal transduction and for maintaining the delicate balance of the dimeric
interface, which is key to its activities. We also show that the other linker,
belonging to the S-helix coiled-coil family, plays essential roles in signal
transduction inside the cell. Furthermore, by combining mutations with opposing
activities in the two regions, we show that these two signalling transduction
elements are integrated to produce a combined effect on the final activity of
DctB.

PMCID: PMC4077058
PMID: 24898140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;34(16):3013-23. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00324-14. Epub 2014 Jun 
2.

Hypoxia-inducible factor/MAZ-dependent induction of caveolin-1 regulates colon
permeability through suppression of occludin, leading to hypoxia-induced
inflammation.

Xie L(1), Xue X(1), Taylor M(1), Ramakrishnan SK(1), Nagaoka K(1), Hao C(1),
Gonzalez FJ(2), Shah YM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. (2)Laboratory of Metabolism, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (3)Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA Department of
Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA shahy@umich.edu.

Caveolae are specialized microdomains on membranes that are critical for signal
transduction, cholesterol transport, and endocytosis. Caveolin-1 (CAV1) is a
multifunctional protein and a major component of caveolae. Cav1 is directly
activated by hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF). HIFs are heterodimers of an
oxygen-sensitive a subunit, HIF1a or HIF2a, and a constitutively expressed ß
subunit, aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT). Whole-genome
expression analysis demonstrated that Cav1 is highly induced in mouse models of
constitutively activated HIF signaling in the intestine. Interestingly, Cav1 was 
increased only in the colon and not in the small intestine. Currently, the
mechanism and role of HIF induction of CAV1 in the colon are unclear. In mouse
models, mice that overexpressed HIF1a or HIF2a specifically in intestinal
epithelial cells demonstrated an increase in Cav1 gene expression in the colon
but not in the duodenum, jejunum, or ileum. HIF2a activated the Cav1 promoter in 
a HIF response element-independent manner. myc-associated zinc finger (MAZ)
protein was essential for HIF2a activation of the Cav1 promoter. Hypoxic
induction of CAV1 in the colon was essential for intestinal barrier integrity by 
regulating occludin expression. This may provide an additional mechanism by which
chronic hypoxia can activate intestinal inflammation.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4135598
PMID: 24891620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2014 May;1318:71-80. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12464.

Circadian endocrine rhythms: the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and its
actions.

Nicolaides NC(1), Charmandari E, Chrousos GP, Kino T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Diabetes, First Department of
Pediatrics, University of Athens Medical School, "Aghia Sophia" Children's
Hospital, Athens, Greece; Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Clinical
Research Center, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens,
Greece.

The stress system effectively restores the internal balance--or homeostasis--of
living organisms in the face of random external or internal changes, the
stressors. This highly complex system helps organisms to provide a series of
neuroendocrine responses to stressors--the stress response--through coordinated
activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the locus
coeruleus/norepinephrine autonomic nervous systems. In addition to stressors,
life is influenced by daily light/dark changes due to the 24-h rotation of Earth.
To adjust to these recurrent day/night cycles, the biological clock system
employs the heterodimer of transcription factors circadian locomotor output cycle
kaput/brain-muscle-arnt-like protein 1 (CLOCK/BMAL1), along with a set of other
transcription factors, to regulate the circadian pattern of gene expression.
Interestingly, the stress system, through the HPA axis, communicates with the
clock system; therefore, any uncoupling or dysregulation could potentially cause 
several disorders, such as metabolic, autoimmune, and mood disorders. In this
review, we discuss the biological function of the two systems, their
interactions, and the clinical implications of their dysregulation or uncoupling.

© 2014 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMCID: PMC4104011
PMID: 24890877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Eur J Cancer. 2014 Aug;50(12):2142-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2014.05.006. Epub 2014
Jun 2.

Transport and Golgi organisation protein 1 is a novel tumour progressive factor
in oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Sasahira T(1), Kirita T(2), Yamamoto K(2), Ueda N(2), Kurihara M(3), Matsushima
S(1), Bhawal UK(4), Bosserhoff AK(5), Kuniyasu H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Nara Medical University, 840 Shijo-cho,
Kashihara 634-8521, Japan. (2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nara 
Medical University, 840 Shijo-cho, Kashihara 634-8521, Japan. (3)Department of
Molecular Pathology, Nara Medical University, 840 Shijo-cho, Kashihara 634-8521, 
Japan; Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nara Medical University, 840
Shijo-cho, Kashihara 634-8521, Japan. (4)Department of Molecular Pathology, Nara 
Medical University, 840 Shijo-cho, Kashihara 634-8521, Japan; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at
Matsudo, Matsudo, Japan. (5)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany. (6)Department of Molecular Pathology, Nara Medical
University, 840 Shijo-cho, Kashihara 634-8521, Japan. Electronic address:
cooninh@zb4.so-net.ne.jp.

Transport and Golgi organisation protein 1 (TANGO), also known as MIA3, belongs
to the melanoma inhibitory activity (MIA) gene family. Although MIA acts as an
oncogene, MIA2 and TANGO have a tumour-suppressive function in several
malignancies; accordingly, the role and function of the MIA gene family in
tumours remain controversial. Here the roles of TANGO were investigated in oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). We analysed expression and function of TANGO in
human OSCC cell lines. TANGO expression was also examined in 171 cases of primary
OSCC by immunohistochemistry and statistically assessed the correlation between
TANGO positivity and the clinicopathological parameters including vessel density.
By TANGO knockdown in OSCC cells, the growth and invasion were repressed and
apoptosis was induced. Activities of platelet-derived growth factor beta
polypeptide (PDGFB) and Neuropilin2 were inhibited by TANGO knockdown. TANGO
immunoreactivity was detected in 35.1% (60/171) cases of OSCC. TANGO expression
was strongly associated with tumour progression, nodal metastasis, clinical stage
and number of blood or lymph vessels in OSCC. Patients showing TANGO-expression
fared significantly worse disease-free survival than cases without TANGO
expression. These findings suggest that TANGO might promote angiogenesis and
lymphangiogenesis by upregulation of PDGFB and Neuropilin2 in OSCC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24889917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. PLoS One. 2014 May 30;9(5):e98435. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098435. eCollection
2014.

Deletion of ARNT (Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator) in ß-cells
causes islet transplant failure with impaired ß-cell function.

Lalwani A(1), Stokes RA(2), Lau SM(3), Gunton JE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Transcription Factors Group, Garvan Institute of Medical Research
(GIMR), Sydney, Australia; Faculty of Medicine, Westmead Hospital, University of 
Sydney, Sydney, Australia. (2)Diabetes and Transcription Factors Group, Garvan
Institute of Medical Research (GIMR), Sydney, Australia. (3)Diabetes and
Transcription Factors Group, Garvan Institute of Medical Research (GIMR), Sydney,
Australia; St Vincent's Clinical School, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia. (4)Diabetes and Transcription Factors Group, Garvan Institute of
Medical Research (GIMR), Sydney, Australia; Faculty of Medicine, Westmead
Hospital, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; St Vincent's Clinical School, 
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia; Department of Diabetes and
Endocrinology, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Replacing ß-cells by islet-transplantation can cure type 1 diabetes, 
but up to 70% of ß-cells die within 10 days of transplantation. ARNT (Aryl
hydrocarbon Receptor Nuclear Translocator) regulates ß-cell function, and
potentially survival. Lack of ARNT impairs the ability of ß-cells to respond to
physiological stress and potentiates the onset of diabetes, but the exact role of
ARNT in graft outcome is unknown.
AIM: To investigate the effect of ß-cell deletion of ARNT on graft outcomes.
METHODS: Islets were isolated from donor mice which had ß-cell specific
ARNT-deletion (ß-ARNT) or littermate floxed controls. The islets were
transplanted into diabetic SCID recipients in ratios of (a) 3 donors: 1
recipient, (b) 1 donor: 1 recipient or (c) ½ of the islets from 1 donor: 1
recipient. After 28 days, the kidney containing the graft was removed
(nephrectomy) to exclude regeneration of the endogenous pancreas.
RESULTS: In the supra-physiological-mass model (3:1), both groups achieved
reasonable glycaemia, with slightly higher levels in ß-ARNT-recipients. In
adequate-mass model (1:1), ß-ARNT recipients had poor glucose control versus
floxed-control recipients and versus the ß-ARNT donors. In the low-ß-cell-mass
model (½:1) ß-ARNT transplants completely failed, whereas controls had good
outcomes. Unexpectedly, there was no difference in the graft insulin content or
ß-cell mass between groups indicating that the defect was not due to early
altered ß-cell survival.
CONCLUSION: Outcomes for islet transplants lacking ß-cell ARNT were poor, unless 
markedly supra-physiological masses of islets were transplanted. In the 1:1
transplant model, there was no difference in ß-cell volume. This is surprising
because transplants of islets lacking one of the ARNT-partners HIF-1a have
increased apoptosis and decreased islet volume. ARNT also partners HIF-2a and AhR
(aryl hydrocarbon receptor) to form active transcriptional complexes, and further
work to understand the roles of HIF-2a and AhR in transplant outcomes is needed.

PMCID: PMC4039512
PMID: 24878748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Biol Reprod. 2014 Jun;90(6):135. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.115634. Epub 2014
May 22.

HIF1 activity in granulosa cells is required for FSH-regulated Vegfa expression
and follicle survival in mice.

Rico C(1), Dodelet-Devillers A(1), Paquet M(1), Tsoi M(1), Lapointe E(1),
Carmeliet P(2), Boerboom D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Reproduction Animale, Université de Montréal,
St-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada. (2)Laboratory of Angiogenesis and Neurovascular
Link, Vesalius Research Center, VIB, Leuven, Belgium Laboratory of Angiogenesis
and Neurovascular Link, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Belgium. (3)Centre de 
Recherche en Reproduction Animale, Université de Montréal, St-Hyacinthe, Québec, 
Canada derek.boerboom@umontreal.ca.

Recent evidence has suggested that vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA)
is an important regulator of ovarian follicle development and survival. Both LH
and FSH regulate Vegfa expression in granulosa cells and signal via the
transcription factor hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF1). To further study the
mechanism of action of HIF1 in the regulation of Vegfa, we studied
Vegfa(delta/delta) mice, which lack a hypoxia response element in the Vegfa
promoter. Granulosa cells from Vegfa(delta/delta) mice failed to respond to FSH
or LH with an increase in Vegfa mRNA expression in vitro, and granulosa cells
isolated from eCG-treated immature Vegfa(delta/delta) mice had significantly
lower Vegfa mRNA levels compared to controls. However, normal Vegfa mRNA levels
were detected in the granulosa cells from immature Vegfa(delta/delta) mice
following hCG treatment. Vegfa(delta/delta) females produced infrequent litters, 
and their pups died shortly after birth. Ovaries from Vegfa(delta/delta) mice
were much smaller than controls and contained few antral follicles and corpora
lutea. Antral follicles numbers were decreased by nearly 50% in ovaries from
Vegfa(delta/delta) mice relative to controls, and 74% of antral follicles in
Vegfa(delta/delta) ovaries were atretic. Serum progesterone levels in adult
Vegfa(delta/delta) females were significantly lower, apparently reflecting
reduced numbers of corpora lutea. This study demonstrates for the first time the 
requirement of HIF1 for FSH-regulated Vegfa expression in vivo and that HIF1 acts
via a single hypoxia response element in the Vegfa promoter to exert its
regulatory functions. Our findings also further define the physiological role of 
VEGFA in follicle development.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 24855100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Jul 15;25(14):2199-215. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-10-0631. Epub
2014 May 21.

A comprehensive protein-protein interactome for yeast PAS kinase 1 reveals direct
inhibition of respiration through the phosphorylation of Cbf1.

DeMille D(1), Bikman BT(2), Mathis AD(3), Prince JT(3), Mackay JT(1), Sowa SW(1),
Hall TD(1), Grose JH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Brigham Young University,
Provo, UT 84602. (2)Department of Physiology and Developmental Biology, Brigham
Young University, Provo, UT 84602. (3)Department of Chemistry, Brigham Young
University, Provo, UT 84602. (4)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology,
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT 84602 julianne_grose@byu.edu.

Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) kinase is a sensory protein kinase required for glucose
homeostasis in yeast, mice, and humans, yet little is known about the molecular
mechanisms of its function. Using both yeast two-hybrid and copurification
approaches, we identified the protein-protein interactome for yeast PAS kinase 1 
(Psk1), revealing 93 novel putative protein binding partners. Several of the Psk1
binding partners expand the role of PAS kinase in glucose homeostasis, including 
new pathways involved in mitochondrial metabolism. In addition, the interactome
suggests novel roles for PAS kinase in cell growth (gene/protein expression,
replication/cell division, and protein modification and degradation), vacuole
function, and stress tolerance. In vitro kinase studies using a subset of 25 of
these binding partners identified Mot3, Zds1, Utr1, and Cbf1 as substrates.
Further evidence is provided for the in vivo phosphorylation of Cbf1 at T211/T212
and for the subsequent inhibition of respiration. This respiratory role of PAS
kinase is consistent with the reported hypermetabolism of PAS kinase-deficient
mice, identifying a possible molecular mechanism and solidifying the evolutionary
importance of PAS kinase in the regulation of glucose homeostasis.

© 2014 DeMille et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for
Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4091833
PMID: 24850888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Med. 2014 May 27;20:215-20. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2014.00032.

Hypoxia-inducible aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) (HIF-1ß):
is it a rare exception?

Mandl M(1), Depping R(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Lübeck, Center for Structural and Cell Biology in Medicine,
Institute of Physiology, Lübeck, Germany.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), also designated as
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1ß, plays a pivotal role in the adaptive responses
to (micro-)environmental stresses such as dioxin exposure and oxygen deprivation 
(hypoxia). ARNT belongs to the group of basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH)-Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) transcription factors, which act as heterodimers. ARNT 
serves as a common binding partner for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) as
well as HIF-a subunits. HIF-a proteins are regulated in an oxygen-dependent
manner, whereas ARNT is generally regarded as constitutively expressed, meaning
that neither the arnt mRNA nor the protein level is influenced by hypoxia
(despite the name HIF-1ß). However, there is emerging evidence that tumor cells
derived from different entities are able to upregulate ARNT, especially under low
oxygen tension in a cell-specific manner. The objective of this review is
therefore to highlight and summarize current knowledge regarding the
hypoxia-dependent upregulation of ARNT, which is in sharp contrast to the general
point of view described in the literature. Elucidating the mechanism behind this 
rare cellular attribute will help us to gain new insights into HIF biology and
might provide new strategies for anti-cancer therapeutics. In conclusion,
putative treatment effects on ARNT should be taken into account while studying
the HIF pathway. This step is of great importance when ARNT is intended to serve 
as a loading control or as a reference.

PMCID: PMC4069271
PMID: 24849811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Elife. 2014 May 19;3:e02784. doi: 10.7554/eLife.02784.

SLY1 and Syntaxin 18 specify a distinct pathway for procollagen VII export from
the endoplasmic reticulum.

Nogueira C(1), Erlmann P(1), Villeneuve J(1), Santos AJ(1), Martínez-Alonso E(2),
Martínez-Menárguez JÁ(2), Malhotra V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG),
Barcelona, Spain Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain. (2)Department 
of Cellular Biology and Histology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Murcia,
Murcia, Spain. (3)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Center for Genomic
Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona,
Spain Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain
vivek.malhotra@crg.eu.

TANGO1 binds and exports Procollagen VII from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In 
this study, we report a connection between the cytoplasmic domain of TANGO1 and
SLY1, a protein that is required for membrane fusion. Knockdown of SLY1 by siRNA 
arrested Procollagen VII in the ER without affecting the recruitment of COPII
components, general protein secretion, and retrograde transport of the
KDEL-containing protein BIP, and ERGIC53. SLY1 is known to interact with the
ER-specific SNARE proteins Syntaxin 17 and 18, however only Syntaxin 18 was
required for Procollagen VII export. Neither SLY1 nor Syntaxin 18 was required
for the export of the equally bulky Procollagen I from the ER. Altogether, these 
findings reveal the sorting of bulky collagen family members by TANGO1 at the ER 
and highlight the existence of different export pathways for secretory cargoes
one of which is mediated by the specific SNARE complex containing SLY1 and
Syntaxin 18.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02784.001.

Copyright © 2014, Nogueira et al.

PMCID: PMC4054776
PMID: 24842878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Genes Dev. 2014 May 15;28(10):1101-10. doi: 10.1101/gad.237511.114.

CaMKII is essential for the cellular clock and coupling between morning and
evening behavioral rhythms.

Kon N(1), Yoshikawa T(2), Honma S(2), Yamagata Y(3), Yoshitane H(1), Shimizu
K(1), Sugiyama Y(1), Hara C(1), Kameshita I(4), Honma K(2), Fukada Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Graduate School of Science, The University of
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan; (2)Department of Chronomedicine, Center 
for Cooperative Projects, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo 060-8638, Japan; (3)Department of Information Physiology, National
Institute for Physiological Sciences, The Graduate University for Advanced
Studies (SOKENDAI), Okazaki 444-8787, Japan; (4)Department of Life Sciences,
Faculty of Agriculture, Kagawa University, Miki-cho, Kagawa 761-0795, Japan.

Daily behavioral rhythms in mammals are governed by the central circadian clock, 
located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). The behavioral rhythms persist even
in constant darkness, with a stable activity time due to coupling between two
oscillators that determine the morning and evening activities. Accumulating
evidence supports a prerequisite role for Ca(2+) in the robust oscillation of the
SCN, yet the underlying molecular mechanism remains elusive. Here, we show that
Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) activity is essential for 
not only the cellular oscillation but also synchronization among oscillators in
the SCN. A kinase-dead mutation in mouse CaMKIIa weakened the behavioral
rhythmicity and elicited decoupling between the morning and evening activity
rhythms, sometimes causing arrhythmicity. In the mutant SCN, the right and left
nuclei showed uncoupled oscillations. Cellular and biochemical analyses revealed 
that Ca(2+)-calmodulin-CaMKII signaling contributes to activation of
E-box-dependent gene expression through promoting dimerization of circadian
locomotor output cycles kaput (CLOCK) and brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1
(BMAL1). These results demonstrate a dual role of CaMKII as a component of
cell-autonomous clockwork and as a synchronizer integrating circadian behavioral 
activities.

© 2014 Kon et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4035538
PMID: 24831701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Chem Biol Interact. 2014 Jul 25;218:82-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2014.05.001. Epub
2014 May 10.

Regulatory crosstalk and interference between the xenobiotic and hypoxia sensing 
pathways at the AhR-ARNT-HIF1a signaling node.

Vorrink SU(1), Domann FE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Human Toxicology, The University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (2)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Human
Toxicology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Radiation
Oncology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. Electronic address:
frederick-domann@uiowa.edu.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that mediates many of the responses to toxic environmental chemicals such as TCDD
or dioxin-like PCBs. To regulate gene expression, the AhR requires its binding
partner, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT). ARNT is also 
required by the hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a), a crucial regulator of
responses to conditions of reduced oxygen. The important role of ARNT in both the
AhR and HIF-1a signaling pathways establishes a meaningful foundation for a
possible crosstalk between these two vitally important signaling pathways. This
crosstalk might lead to interference between the two signaling pathways and thus 
might play a role in the variety of cellular responses after exposure to AhR
ligands and reduced oxygen availability. This review focuses on studies that have
analyzed the effect of low oxygen environments and hypoxia-mimetic agents on AhR 
signaling and conversely, the effect of AhR ligands, with a special emphasis on
PCBs, on HIF-1a signaling. We highlight studies that assess the role of ARNT,
elucidate the mechanism of the crosstalk, and discuss the physiological
implications for exposure to AhR-inducing compounds in the context of hypoxia.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4091760
PMID: 24824450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Biochem J. 2014 Aug 1;461(3):403-12. doi: 10.1042/BJ20131618.

Characterization of human variants in obesity-related SIM1 protein identifies a
hot-spot for dimerization with the partner protein ARNT2.

Sullivan AE(1), Raimondo A(1), Schwab TA(1), Bruning JB(1), Froguel P, Farooqi
IS(2), Peet DJ(1), Whitelaw ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)*School of Molecular and Biomedical Science (Biochemistry) and Centre for
Molecular Pathology, University of Adelaide, Adelaide 5005, South Australia,
Australia. (2)<U+2225>University of Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories, Wellcome 
Trust-MRC Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2
0QQ, U.K.

The bHLH (basic helix-loop-helix) PAS (Per/Arnt/Sim) transcription factor SIM1
(single-minded 1) is important for development and function of regions of the
hypothalamus that regulate energy homoeostasis and the feeding response.
Low-activity SIM1 variants have been identified in individuals with severe
early-onset obesity, but the underlying molecular causes of impaired function are
unknown. In the present study we assess a number of human SIM1 variants with
reduced activity and determine that impaired function is frequently due to
defects in dimerization with the essential partner protein ARNT2 (aryl
hydrocarbon nuclear translocator 2). Equivalent variants generated in the highly 
related protein SIM2 (single-minded 2) produce near-identical impaired function
and dimerization defects, indicating that these effects are not unique to the
structure of SIM1. On the basis of these data, we predict that other select SIM1 
and SIM2 variants reported in human genomic databases will also be deficient in
activity, and identify two new low-activity SIM1 variants (V290E and V326F)
present in the population. The cumulative data is used in homology modelling to
make novel observations about the dimerization interface between the PAS domains 
of SIM1 and ARNT2, and to define a mutational 'hot-spot' in SIM1 that is critical
for protein function.

PMID: 24814368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Biochem J. 2014 Aug 1;461(3):391-402. doi: 10.1042/BJ20140066.

Hypoxia-inducible regulation of placental BOK expression.

Luo D(1), Caniggia I, Post M.

Author information: 
(1)*Physiology and Experimental Medicine Program, Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BOK (BCL-2-related ovarian killer) is a member of the pro-apoptotic BCL-2 family 
that is highly expressed in the human placenta. BOK excess causes increased
trophoblast autophagy and apoptosis in pre-eclampsia, a pathological condition of
hypoxia and oxidative stress. In the present study, we identified an HRE
(hypoxia-response element) at the junction of exon-1 and intron-1 (+229 to +279) 
in the human BOK gene, as well as an antisense transcript driven by a promoter
located in intron-2. The isolated BOK-HRE bound hypoxia-inducible HIF
(hypoxia-inducible factor) proteins in vitro as well as in trophoblastic JEG3
cells and was functional in its natural position as well as in front of a
heterologous promoter. Being a reverted repeat, the BOK-HRE functioned in both
orientations. This directionless feature of the BOK-HRE facilitates hypoxia
regulation via HIF of both BOK and its antisense transcript as demonstrated by
RNAi knockdown of the HIF system. Although the antisense transcript was expressed
in several human carcinoma cell lines, including choriocarcinoma-derived JEG3
cells, no antisense-regulated mechanism for BOK expression was noted. Taken
together, these findings indicate that hypoxia-induced expression of BOK in
placental cells is regulated via HIF and is not affected by its antisense
transcript.

PMID: 24806027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Arch Toxicol. 2015 Mar;89(3):393-404. doi: 10.1007/s00204-014-1261-3. Epub 2014
Apr 29.

Progesterone, as well as 17ß-estradiol, is important for regulating AHR battery
homoeostasis in the rat uterus.

Rataj F(1), Möller FJ, Jähne M, Hönscheid P, Zierau O, Vollmer G, Kretzschmar G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Physiology and Endocrinology, Institute for Zoology, Technische
Universität Dresden, 01062, Dresden, Germany.

Several studies indicate that the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), which plays an
important role in mediating the toxicity of many industrial chemicals, plays an
important role in the physiology of female reproductive tract organs. This makes 
it likely that the AHR and additional components of the AHR signalling pathway
are under the control of female sex steroids. In a previous study, we could
already demonstrate the regulation of many members of the AHR battery by
17ß-estradiol (E2) in the uterus of rats. In this study, we addressed the
potential role of progesterone (P4) in this context. In a comparative approach
using ovariectomized rats which were treated for 3 days with either vehicle
control, E2, progesterone (P4) or the combination of both hormones in addition to
sham-operated animals, we could demonstrate that in addition to E2, P4 is also an
important factor in regulating AHR signalling in the rat uterus. P4 has effects
similar to E2 on uterine Ahr, Arnt and Arnt2 mRNA levels, resulting in a
downregulation of these genes, while the E2-mediated downregulation of key AHR
response genes Cyp1a1, Gsta2 and Ugt1 is completely antagonized by P4. As with
E2, P4 leads to an increase in uterine AHR levels, especially in the endometrial 
epithelium despite the decrease in corresponding mRNA levels. This indicates a
complex gene-specific regulatory network involving E2, P4 and possibly AHR itself
to maintain all components of the AHR signalling cascade at the required levels
during all stages of the oestrous cycle and pregnancy.

PMID: 24777823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Apr 16;15(4):6475-87. doi: 10.3390/ijms15046475.

Functional analysis of the dioxin response elements (DREs) of the murine CYP1A1
gene promoter: beyond the core DRE sequence.

Li S(1), Pei X(2), Zhang W(3), Xie HQ(4), Zhao B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100085, China. shuaizhangli@126.com. (2)Research Center for
Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China.
peixinhui@gmail.com. (3)Foreign Economic Cooperation Office, Ministry of
Environmental Protection, Beijing 100035, China. zhang.wen@mepfeco.org.cn.
(4)Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100085, China. qhxie@rcees.ac.cn. (5)Research Center for
Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China.
binzhao@rcees.ac.cn.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor
that mediates the biological and toxicological effects of halogenated aromatic
hydrocarbons, such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). When activated 
by dioxin, the cytosolic AhR protein complex translocates into the nucleus and
dimerizes with the ARNT (Ah receptor nuclear translocator) protein. The
heteromeric ligand:AhR/Arnt complex then recognizes and binds to its specific DNA
recognition site, the dioxin response element (DRE). DREs are located upstream of
cytochrome P4501A1 (CYP1A1) and other AhR-responsive genes, and binding of the
AhR complex stimulates their transcription. Although CYP1A1 expression has been
used as the model system to define the biochemical and molecular mechanism of AhR
action, there is still limited knowledge about the roles of each of the seven
DREs located in the CYP1A1 promoter. These seven DREs are conserved in mouse,
human and rat. Deletion analysis showed that a single DRE at -488 was enough to
activate the transcription. Truncation analysis demonstrated that the DRE at site
-981 has the highest transcriptional efficiency in response to TCDD. This result 
was verified by mutation analysis, suggesting that the conserved DRE at site -981
could represent a significant and universal AhR regulatory element for CYP1A1.
The reversed substituted intolerant core sequence (5'-GCGTG-3' or 5'-CACGC-3') of
seven DREs reduced the transcriptional efficiency, which illustrated that the
adjacent sequences of DRE played a vital role in activating transcription. The
core DRE sequence (5'-TNGCGTG-3') tends to show a higher transcriptional level
than that of the core DRE sequence (5'-CACGCNA-3') triggered by TCDD.
Furthermore, in the core DRE (5'-TNGCGTG-3') sequence, when "N" is thymine or
cytosine (T or C), the transcription efficiency was stronger compared with that
of the other nucleotides. The effects of DRE orientation, DRE adjacent sequences 
and the nucleotide "N" in the core DRE (5'-TNGCGTG-3') sequence on the
AhR-regulated CYP1A1 transcription in response to TCDD were studied
systematically, and our study laid a good foundation for further investigation
into the AhR-dependent transcriptional regulation triggered by dioxin and
dioxin-like compounds.

PMCID: PMC4013641
PMID: 24743890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Thromb Haemost. 2014 Aug;112(2):271-5. doi: 10.1160/TH13-11-0910. Epub 2014 Apr
17.

Whole blood thrombin generation in Bmal1-deficient mice.

Ninivaggi M, Kelchtermans H, Kuijpers MJ, Hemmeryckx B, Heemskerk JW, Lindhout T,
Hoylaerts MF, de Laat B(1).

Author information: 
(1)B. de Laat, PhD, Synapse bv, Oxfordlaan 70, 6229 EV Maastricht, The
Netherlands, Tel.: +31 43 3885895, Fax: +31 43 3884159, E-mail:
b.delaat@thrombin.com.

The Calibrated Automated Thrombogram (CAT) assay that measures thrombin
generation (TG) in platelet-poor and -rich plasma, is increasingly being
recognised as a more sensitive tool to determine the overall function of the
haemostatic system. We developed a method enabling the measurement of TG in a
small aliquot of blood. The objective was to validate this assay in mouse blood
and to examine the rate and extent of TG in a mouse model of premature aging. TG 
was assayed in blood from 20- to 28-week-old brain and muscle ARNT-like protein-1
(Bmal1)-deficient (knockout, KO) mice and wild-type (WT) littermates. Bmal1-KO
mice are known to display symptoms of premature aging. TG was initiated by adding
calcium, tissue factor and a thrombin specific substrate. After TG, the samples
were prepared for scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The intra-assay variations 
(%) in mouse blood of the endogenous thrombin potential (ETP), peak height, lag
time, time-to-peak and velocity index were 10% or less (n=24). We found that
Bmal1-KO mice have a significantly (p<0.001) higher ETP (437 ± 7 nM.min; mean ±
SD, n=7) when compared with WT mice (ETP=220 ± 45 nM.min; mean ± SD, n=5). The
peak heights also differed significantly (p=0.027). By applying SEM we found that
Bmal1 deficient mice display a denser fibrin network with smaller pores compared 
to WT mice. In conclusion, the whole blood TG assay in mice revealed to be
reproducible. As a proof-of-principle we have shown that the whole blood TG assay
is capable of detecting a prothrombotic phenotype in Bmal1-KO mice.

PMID: 24740693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 15;9(4):e94986. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094986. eCollection
2014.

Protein dynamics of the HIF-2a PAS-B domain upon heterodimerization and ligand
binding.

Masetti M(1), Falchi F(1), Recanatini M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, Alma Mater Studiorum-Università di
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Hypoxia-Inducible Factor (HIF) transcription factors are heterodimeric proteins
involved in the regulation of oxygen homeostatis. Their upregulation has been
related to several tumors with a remarkably poor clinical outcome. The recent
discovery of a druggable cavity in the HIF-2a PAS-B domain has opened an
unprecedented opportunity for targeting the HIF-2a transcription factor in view
of pharmaceutical strategies. Coincidentally, a novel compound able to
selectively disrupt the HIF heterodimerization with a submicromolar activity has 
been reported. In this work, we investigated the molecular mechanisms responsible
for the inhibition by comparing the dynamical features of the HIF-2a PAS-B
monomer and the HIF-2a PAS-B/HIF-1ß PAS-B complex, in the ligand-bound and
-unbound states. Plain and biased Molecular Dynamics were used to characterize
the differential conformational changes both structurally and energetically.

PMCID: PMC3988133
PMID: 24736273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 May;42(9):5765-75. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku225. Epub 2014 Apr
11.

The E3 ubiquitin ligase UBE3A is an integral component of the molecular circadian
clock through regulating the BMAL1 transcription factor.

Gossan NC(1), Zhang F(1), Guo B(1), Jin D(1), Yoshitane H(2), Yao A(3), Glossop
N(1), Zhang YQ(3), Fukada Y(2), Meng QJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester,
M13 9PT, UK. (2)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of
Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. (3)Institute of Genetics and
Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(4)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester,
M13 9PT, UK Qing-Jun.Meng@manchester.ac.uk.

Post-translational modifications (such as ubiquitination) of clock proteins are
critical in maintaining the precision and robustness of the evolutionarily
conserved circadian clock. Ubiquitination of the core clock transcription factor 
BMAL1 (brain and muscle Arnt-like 1) has recently been reported. However, it
remains unknown whether BMAL1 ubiquitination affects circadian pacemaking and
what ubiquitin ligase(s) is involved. Here, we show that activating UBE3A (by
expressing viral oncogenes E6/E7) disrupts circadian oscillations in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts, measured using PER2::Luc dynamics, and rhythms in
endogenous messenger ribonucleic acid and protein levels of BMAL1.
Over-expression of E6/E7 reduced the level of BMAL1, increasing its
ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. UBE3A could bind to and degrade BMAL1
in a ubiquitin ligase-dependent manner. This occurred both in the presence and
absence of E6/E7. We provide in vitro (knockdown/over-expression in mammalian
cells) and in vivo (genetic manipulation in Drosophila) evidence for an
endogenous role of UBE3A in regulating circadian dynamics and rhythmic locomotor 
behaviour. Together, our data reveal an essential and conserved role of UBE3A in 
the regulation of the circadian system in mammals and flies and identify a novel 
mechanistic link between oncogene E6/E7-mediated cell transformation and
circadian (BMAL1) disruption.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4027211
PMID: 24728990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Dermatol Sci. 2014 Jul;75(1):16-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2014.03.004. Epub
2014 Mar 25.

Resveratrol inhibition of human keratinocyte proliferation via SIRT1/ARNT/ERK
dependent downregulation of aquaporin 3.

Wu Z(1), Uchi H(2), Morino-Koga S(3), Shi W(4), Furue M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Shanghai First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai, China; Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (2)Department of
Dermatology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
Japan; Research and Clinical Center for Yusho and Dioxin, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan. Electronic address: uchihir@dermatol.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan. (4)Department of Dermatology, Shanghai First People's
Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China. (5)Department of
Dermatology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
Japan; Research and Clinical Center for Yusho and Dioxin, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Aquaporin 3 (AQP3) is the predominant aquaporin in the skin and is
overexpressed in hyperplastic epidermal disorders. Upregulation of AQP3
contributes to keratinocyte proliferation and epidermal hyperplasia. Resveratrol,
a natural polyphenol, has an anti-proliferative effect on normal human epidermal 
keratinocytes (NHEKs), but its exact mechanism remains largely unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the ability and mechanism of resveratrol to affect the 
proliferation and the AQP3 expression in NHEKs.
METHODS: NHEKs treated with resveratrol were analyzed. BrdU incorporation assay, 
real-time PCR, Western blotting and RNA interference using small interfering RNA 
were employed.
RESULTS: At non-toxic concentrations (less than 40µM), resveratrol inhibited the 
proliferation of NHEKs. Resveratrol inhibited the ERK phosphorylation and the
AQP3 expression with reciprocal upregulation of ARNT expression in a
concentration-dependent manner. The inhibitory effects of resveratrol on the ERK 
phosphorylation and the AQP3 expression were canceled by transfection of siRNA
for ARNT, but not by that for AhR. Furthermore, the induction effect of
resveratrol on ARNT expression was canceled after SIRT1 was knocked down in
NHEKs.
CONCLUSION: Resveratrol inhibited NHEK proliferation by downregulating the
expression of AQP3 in an SIRT1/ARNT/ERK dependent fashion. This novel mechanism
may facilitate drug innovation for hyperplastic skin disorders.

Copyright © 2014 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24726500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2014 May;7(5):502-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jcmg.2014.03.002.
Epub 2014 Apr 9.

Noninvasive risk stratification of patients with transthyretin amyloidosis.

Kristen AV(1), Scherer K(2), Buss S(2), aus dem Siepen F(2), Haufe S(3), Bauer
R(2), Hinderhofer K(4), Giannitsis E(2), Hardt S(2), Haberkorn U(3), Katus HA(2),
Steen H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Angiology, and Respiratory Medicine, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
Arnt.Kristen@med.uni-heidelberg.de. (2)Department of Cardiology, Angiology, and
Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany. (4)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2014 May;7(5):511-4.

OBJECTIVES: We sought to evaluate noninvasive parameters by electrocardiography, 
echocardiography, technetium-99m-3,3-diphosphono-1,2-propanodicarboxylic acid
((99m)Tc-DPD) scintigraphy, and cardiac magnetic resonance for the prediction of 
all-cause mortality in patients with cardiac transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTR).
BACKGROUND: ATTR may present with highly variable symptoms, including
polyneuropathy and cardiomyopathy, the latter being associated with a poor
outcome. However, data on noninvasive risk stratification of ATTR are limited.
METHODS: A total of 70 patients with ATTR were evaluated by echocardiography,
cardiac biomarkers, and (99m)Tc-DPD scintigraphy. Cardiac magnetic resonance was 
performed in 30 patients. Echocardiographic findings and plasma levels of
biomarkers were correlated with results of quantitative analysis of scintigraphy 
using a region-of-interest technique (whole-body as well as heart tracer
retention). Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was performed to
calculate a cutoff value of (99m)Tc-DPD scintigraphy for heart retention for the 
diagnosis of cardiac amyloid involvement with the highest sensitivity and
specificity. Univariate and multivariate analyses were performed in patients with
cardiac involvement (n = 60) to determine noninvasive predictors of all-cause
mortality.
RESULTS: Scintigraphy findings correlated with morphological (interventricular
septum thickness, left ventricular hypertrophy index) as well as functional
(mitral annular systolic velocity, mitral/tricuspid annular plane systolic
excursion) findings, cardiac biomarkers, renal function, and late gadolinium
enhancement. The ROC-derived cutoff for the detection of cardiac amyloidosis by
scintigraphic heart tracer retention was 4.8%. Univariate Cox regression revealed
N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide, troponin T, mitral annular plane
systolic excursion, and left ventricular hypertrophy index as predictors of
all-cause mortality. However, on multivariate analysis, troponin T remained the
only independent predictor of survival. The ROC-derived cutoff value of troponin 
T predicting all-cause mortality with the highest sensitivity (80.0%) and
specificity (68.7%) was 0.0375 ng/l.
CONCLUSIONS: Quantitative analysis of tracer retention is capable of
characterizing the severity of cardiac involvement in ATTR. By multivariate
analysis, troponin T remained the only independent predictor of survival.

Copyright © 2014 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24726252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Genome Res. 2014 Aug;24(8):1308-15. doi: 10.1101/gr.171876.113. Epub 2014 Apr 10.

Whole-genome sequencing of six dog breeds from continuous altitudes reveals
adaptation to high-altitude hypoxia.

Gou X(1), Wang Z(2), Li N(3), Qiu F(4), Xu Z(5), Yan D(6), Yang S(6), Jia J(7),
Kong X(6), Wei Z(8), Lu S(6), Lian L(6), Wu C(3), Wang X(6), Li G(6), Ma T(6),
Jiang Q(6), Zhao X(6), Yang J(6), Liu B(5), Wei D(5), Li H(2), Yang J(6), Yan
Y(6), Zhao G(6), Dong X(6), Li M(6), Deng W(6), Leng J(6), Wei C(9), Wang C(10), 
Mao H(6), Zhang H(3), Ding G(2), Li Y(11).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yunnan Agricultural University,
Kunming 650201, China; College of Animal Science and Technology/State Key
Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100094, 
China; (2)Key Laboratory of Systems Biology, Shanghai Institute for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; Shanghai Center
for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai Industrial Technology Institute, Shanghai
201203, China; (3)College of Animal Science and Technology/State Key Laboratory
for Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100094, China;
(4)Shanghai Center for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai Industrial Technology 
Institute, Shanghai 201203, China; EG Information Technology Enterprise (EGI),
Encode Genomics Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Shanghai 200235, China; (5)EG
Information Technology Enterprise (EGI), Encode Genomics Biotechnology Co., Ltd.,
Shanghai 200235, China; (6)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yunnan
Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, China; (7)Shanghai Center for
Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai Industrial Technology Institute, Shanghai
201203, China; (8)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest
Agricultural and Forestry University, Yangling 712100, China; (9)Shanghai Center 
for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai Industrial Technology Institute, Shanghai
201203, China; School of Life Science and Technology, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai 200240, China; (10)National Center for Protein Science
Shanghai, National Facility for Protein Science in Shanghai, Institute of
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China; (11)Key Laboratory of Systems Biology, Shanghai Institute for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; Shanghai Center
for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai Industrial Technology Institute, Shanghai
201203, China; School of Life Science and Technology, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai 200240, China; School of Life Science and Technology,
Shanghai Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China.

The hypoxic environment imposes severe selective pressure on species living at
high altitude. To understand the genetic bases of adaptation to high altitude in 
dogs, we performed whole-genome sequencing of 60 dogs including five breeds
living at continuous altitudes along the Tibetan Plateau from 800 to 5100 m as
well as one European breed. More than 150× sequencing coverage for each breed
provides us with a comprehensive assessment of the genetic polymorphisms of the
dogs, including Tibetan Mastiffs. Comparison of the breeds from different
altitudes reveals strong signals of population differentiation at the locus of
hypoxia-related genes including endothelial Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain protein 1
(EPAS1) and beta hemoglobin cluster. Notably, four novel nonsynonymous mutations 
specific to high-altitude dogs are identified at EPAS1, one of which occurred at 
a quite conserved site in the PAS domain. The association testing between EPAS1
genotypes and blood-related phenotypes on additional high-altitude dogs reveals
that the homozygous mutation is associated with decreased blood flow resistance, 
which may help to improve hemorheologic fitness. Interestingly, EPAS1 was also
identified as a selective target in Tibetan highlanders, though no amino acid
changes were found. Thus, our results not only indicate parallel evolution of
humans and dogs in adaptation to high-altitude hypoxia, but also provide a new
opportunity to study the role of EPAS1 in the adaptive processes.

© 2014 Gou et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4120084
PMID: 24721644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Parasitology. 2014 May;141(6):777-87. doi: 10.1017/S0031182013002175.

Functional study of a genetic marker allele associated with resistance to Ascaris
suum in pigs.

Skallerup P(1), Thamsborg SM(1), Jørgensen CB(2), Enemark HL(3), Yoshida A(4),
Göring HH(5), Fredholm M(2), Nejsum P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology and Aquatic Diseases, Department of Veterinary Disease Biology,
University of Copenhagen, Dyrlægevej 100, DK-1870 Frederiksberg C, Denmark.
(2)Genetics and Bioinformatics, Department of Veterinary Clinical and Animal
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Grønnegårdsvej 3, DK-1870 Frederiksberg C,
Denmark. (3)Section for Bacteriology, Pathology and Parasitology, National
Veterinary Institute, Bülowsvej 27, DK-1870 Frederiksberg C, Denmark.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Division of Parasitology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Miyazaki, Japan. (5)Texas Biomedical Research Institute, 
7620 N. W. Loop 410, San Antonio, TX, USA.

Two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP TXNIP and SNP ARNT), both on chromosome 
4, have been reported to be associated with roundworm (Ascaris suum) burden in
pigs. In the present study, we selected pigs with two SNP TXNIP genotypes (AA; n 
= 24 and AB; n = 24), trickle-infected them with A. suum from 8 weeks of age
until necropsy 8 weeks later, and tested the hypothesis that pigs with the AA
genotype would have higher levels of resistance than pigs of AB genotype. We used
different indicators of resistance (worm burden, fecal egg counts (FEC), number
of liver white spots and A. suum-specific serum IgG antibody levels). Pigs of the
AA genotype had lower mean macroscopic worm burden (2.4 vs 19.3; P = 0.06), lower
mean total worm burden (26.5 vs 70.1; P = 0.09) and excreted fewer A. suum eggs
at week 8 PI (mean number of eggs/g feces: 238 vs 1259; P = 0.14) than pigs of
the AB genotype, as expected based on prior associations. The pigs were also
genotyped at another locus (SNP ARNT) which showed a similar trend. This study
provides suggestive evidence that resistant pigs may be selected using a genetic 
marker, TXNIP, and provides further support to the quantitative trait locus on
chromosome 4.

PMID: 24709292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biol Chem. 2014 May 16;289(20):13782-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.531277. Epub
2014 Apr 2.

Role of the cytoplasmic N-terminal Cap and Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain in
trafficking and stabilization of Kv11.1 channels.

Ke Y(1), Hunter MJ(2), Ng CA(1), Perry MD(1), Vandenberg JI(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Mark Cowley Lidwill Research Program in Cardiac Electrophysiology,
Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, 405 Liverpool Street and St. Vincent's
Clinical School, University of New South Wales, Victoria Street, Darlinghurst,
New South Wales 2010, Australia. (2)From the Mark Cowley Lidwill Research Program
in Cardiac Electrophysiology, Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, 405
Liverpool Street and. (3)From the Mark Cowley Lidwill Research Program in Cardiac
Electrophysiology, Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, 405 Liverpool Street 
and St. Vincent's Clinical School, University of New South Wales, Victoria
Street, Darlinghurst, New South Wales 2010, Australia
j.vandenberg@victorchang.edu.au.

The N-terminal cytoplasmic region of the Kv11.1a potassium channel contains a
Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain that is essential for the unique slow deactivation
gating kinetics of the channel. The PAS domain has also been implicated in the
assembly and stabilization of the assembled tetrameric channel, with many
clinical mutants in the PAS domain resulting in reduced stability of the domain
and reduced trafficking. Here, we use quantitative Western blotting to show that 
the PAS domain is not required for normal channel trafficking nor for
subunit-subunit interactions, and it is not necessary for stabilizing assembled
channels. However, when the PAS domain is present, the N-Cap amphipathic helix
must also be present for channels to traffic to the cell membrane. Serine scan
mutagenesis of the N-Cap amphipathic helix identified Leu-15, Ile-18, and Ile-19 
as residues critical for the stabilization of full-length proteins when the PAS
domain is present. Furthermore, mutant cycle analysis experiments support recent 
crystallography studies, indicating that the hydrophobic face of the N-Cap
amphipathic helix interacts with a surface-exposed hydrophobic patch on the core 
of the PAS domain to stabilize the structure of this critical gating domain. Our 
data demonstrate that the N-Cap amphipathic helix is critical for channel
stability and trafficking.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4022852
PMID: 24695734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. BMC Med Genet. 2014 Mar 27;15:37. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-15-37.

NPAS3 variants in schizophrenia: a neuroimaging study.

Bernier D(1), Macintyre G, Bartha R, Hanstock CC, McAllindon D, Cox D, Purdon S, 
Aitchison KJ, Rusak B, Tibbo PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada.
dcbernie@dal.ca.

BACKGROUND: This research is a one-site neuroimaging component of a two-site
genetic study involving patients with schizophrenia at early and later stages of 
illness. Studies support a role for the neuronal Per-Arnt-Sim 3 (NPAS3) gene in
processes that are essential for normal brain development. Specific NPAS3
variants have been observed at an increased frequency in schizophrenia. In
humans, NPAS3 protein was detected in the hippocampus from the first trimester of
gestation. In addition, NPAS3 protein levels were reduced in the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex of some patients with schizophrenia. Npas3 knockout mice
display behavioural, neuroanatomical and structural changes with associated
severe reductions in neural precursor cell proliferation in the hippocampal
dentate gyrus. This study will evaluate the hypothesis that the severe reductions
in neural precursor cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus will be present to
some degree in patients carrying schizophrenia-associated NPAS3 variants and less
so in other patients.
METHODS/DESIGN: Patients enrolled in the larger genetic study (n = 150) will be
invited to participate in this neuroimaging arm. The genetic data will be used to
ensure a sample size of 45 participants in each genetic subgroup of patients
(with and without NPAS3 variants). In addition, we will recruit 60 healthy
controls for acquisition of normative data. The following neuroimaging measures
will be acquired from the medial temporal region: a) an index of the
microcellular environment; b) a macro-structural volumetric measure of the
hippocampus; and c) concentration levels of N-acetylaspartate, a marker of
neuronal health.
DISCUSSION: This study will help to establish the contribution of the NPAS3 gene 
and its variants to brain tissue abnormalities in schizophrenia. Given the
genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity of the disorder and the large variation in
outcomes, the identification of biological subgroups may in future support
tailoring of treatment approaches in order to optimize recovery.

PMCID: PMC3986669
PMID: 24674381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Exp Ther Med. 2014 Apr;7(4):1045-1049. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Decreased expression of neuronal Per-Arnt-Sim domain protein 4 gene in the
hippocampus of a post-stroke depression rat model.

Zhang Z(1), Fei P(2), Mu J(3), Wang H(2), Li W(4), Song J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Xinxiang Medical University, Xinxiang, Henan 453002, P.R. China ; Department of
Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xinxiang Medical University,
Xinxiang, Henan 453002, P.R. China. (2)Department of Neurology, The Second
Affiliated Hospital of Xinxiang Medical University, Xinxiang, Henan 453002, P.R. 
China ; The Henan Key Lab of Biological Psychiatry, Xinxiang Medical University, 
Xinxiang, Henan 453002, P.R. China. (3)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine, The 
Second Affiliated Hospital of Xinxiang Medical University, Xinxiang, Henan
453002, P.R. China ; The Henan Key Lab of Biological Psychiatry, Xinxiang Medical
University, Xinxiang, Henan 453002, P.R. China. (4)The Henan Key Lab of
Biological Psychiatry, Xinxiang Medical University, Xinxiang, Henan 453002, P.R. 
China.

Neuronal Per-Arnt-Sim domain protein 4 (NPAS4) is important in regulating
transcription and function in the limbic system and in brain development.
Post-stroke depression (PSD) is a common complication following a stroke.
Furthermore, organic damage as a result of a stroke affects the restoration of
nerve function and indicates that hippocampal neural activity may be associated
with PSD. A PSD rat model was established via a middle cerebral artery occlusion 
procedure, which was combined with isolation and chronic unexpected mild stress, 
and was used to investigate the expression of the NPAS4 gene in the hippocampus. 
The neurological deficit and behavior were evaluated and NPAS4 mRNA expression
was measured by semi-quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction; furthermore, the association with cognitive impairment was analyzed.
The PSD rats displayed neuropsychopathic disorders and the NPAS4 mRNA expression 
levels in the hippocampus were significantly lower in the depression and PSD
groups compared with the control group. Therefore, the present study identified
that NPAS4 expression was decreased in the hippocampus of PSD rats.

PMCID: PMC3964933
PMID: 24669275  [PubMed]


197. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;801:275-81. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-3209-8_35.

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)/vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
signaling in the retina.

Kurihara T(1), Westenskow PD, Friedlander M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute,
10550 N. Torrey Pines Rd. La Jolla, 92014, San Diego, CA, USA,
kurihara@scripps.edu.

Over a span of two decades, it has become increasingly clear that vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) plays an important role in the pathogenesis of
retinal diseases including age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and diabetic
retinopathy (DR). Based on these observations, anti-VEGF therapies are being
developed and approved for clinical use in the treatment of neovascular eye
diseases. Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) are transcriptional factors that are
stabilized and activated under hypoxic conditions and induce expression of gene
products, including VEGF, that are required for cell survival under hypoxia. Here
we discuss recent findings from our lab and others that define roles of the
HIF-VEGF axis in the retina.

PMID: 24664708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Int J Oncol. 2014 May;44(5):1699-706. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2336. Epub 2014 Mar
11.

Short-term treatment with glucosamine hydrochloride specifically downregulates
hypoxia-inducible factor-1a at the protein level in YD-8 human tongue cancer
cells.

Jo JR(1), Park YK(1), Jang BC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, Keimyung University,
Dalseo-gu 704-701, Republic of Korea.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a tumor angiogenic transcription factor
composed of an a and ß subunit. We investigated the effect of glucosamine
hydrochloride (GS-HCl) on the expression of HIF-1a and HIF-1ß in serum-treated
YD-8 human tongue cancer cells. While long-term (24 h) treatment with GS-HCl
strongly repressed the expression of HIF-1a and HIF-1ß at both the protein and
mRNA levels, short-term (4 h) GS-HCl treatment inhibited HIF-1a at the protein
level. Short-term GS-HCl treatment also decreased phosphorylation of p70S6K and
S6, translation-related proteins. However, the results of subsequent
pharmacological inhibition and protein stability analyses indicated that HIF-1a
protein downregulation induced by short-term GS-HCl treatment was not through
modulation of the mTOR/p70S6K/S6 signaling pathways, the 26S proteasomal and
lysosomal activities and HIF-1a protein stability. Importantly, our further
analyses identified that HIF-1a protein downregulation induced by short-term
GS-HCl treatment was blunted by exogenous administration of the citric acid cycle
metabolites citrate and 2-oxoglutarate, but not the glycolytic end byproducts
pyruvate and lactate. These findings demonstrate firstly that short-term GS
treatment selectively downregulates HIF-1a at the protein level in YD-8 cells via
interference of production of the citric acid cycle metabolites. It is proposed
that short-term GS-HCl exposure may be applied for the treatment of oral tumors
with high expression of HIF-1a.

PMID: 24626348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Cancer. 2014 Mar 11;13:54. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-54.

Regulation of CDKN2B expression by interaction of Arnt with Miz-1--a basis for
functional integration between the HIF and Myc gene regulatory pathways.

Aesoy R(1), Gradin K, Aasrud KS, Hoivik EA, Ruas JL, Poellinger L, Bakke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Jonas Lies vei 91, N-5009
Bergen, Norway. Reidun.Asoy@biomed.uib.no.

BACKGROUND: Hypoxia- and Myc-dependent transcriptional regulatory pathways are
frequently deregulated in cancer cells. These pathways converge in many cellular 
responses, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are unclear.
METHODS: The ability of Miz-1 and Arnt to interact was identified in a yeast
two-hybrid screen. The mode of interaction and the functional consequences of
complex formation were analyzed by diverse molecular biology methods, in vitro.
Statistical analyses were performed by Student's t-test and ANOVA.
RESULTS: In the present study we demonstrate that the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (Arnt), which is central in hypoxia-induced signaling, forms
a complex with Miz-1, an important transcriptional regulator in Myc-mediated
transcriptional repression. Overexpression of Arnt induced reporter gene activity
driven by the proximal promoter of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2B gene 
(CDKN2B), which is an established target for the Myc/Miz-1 complex. In contrast, 
mutated forms of Arnt, that were unable to interact with Miz-1, had reduced
capability to activate transcription. Moreover, repression of Arnt reduced
endogenous CDKN2B expression, and chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated that
Arnt interacts with the CDKN2B promoter. The transcriptional activity of Arnt was
counteracted by Myc, but not by a mutated variant of Myc that is unable to
interact with Miz-1, suggesting mutually exclusive interaction of Arnt and Myc
with Miz-1. Our results also establish CDKN2B as a hypoxia regulated gene, as
endogenous CDKN2B mRNA and protein levels were reduced by hypoxic treatment of
U2OS cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data reveal a novel mode of regulation by protein-protein
interaction that directly ties together, at the transcriptional level, the Myc-
and hypoxia-dependent signaling pathways and expands our understanding of the
roles of hypoxia and cell cycle alterations during tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3984710
PMID: 24618291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Mol Microbiol. 2014 May;92(3):586-97. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12577. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

The PAS domain-containing histidine kinase RpfS is a second sensor for the
diffusible signal factor of Xanthomonas campestris.

An SQ(1), Allan JH, McCarthy Y, Febrer M, Dow JM, Ryan RP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Microbiology, Colleges of Life Sciences, University of
Dundee, Dundee, UK.

A cell-cell signalling system mediated by the fatty acid signal DSF controls the 
virulence of Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris (Xcc) to plants. The synthesis
and recognition of the DSF signal depends upon different Rpf proteins. DSF signal
generation requires RpfF whereas signal perception and transduction depends upon 
the sensor RpfC and regulator RpfG. Detailed analyses of the regulatory roles of 
different Rpf proteins have suggested the occurrence of further sensors for DSF. 
Here we have used a mutagenesis approach coupled with high-resolution
transcriptional analysis to identify XC_2579 (RpfS) as a second sensor for DSF in
Xcc. RpfS is a complex sensor kinase predicted to have multiple Per/Arnt/Sim
(PAS) domains, a histidine kinase domain and a C-terminal receiver (REC) domain. 
Isothermal calorimetry showed that DSF bound to the isolated N-terminal PAS
domain with a Kd of 1.4<U+2009>µM. RpfS controlled expression of a sub-set of genes
distinct from those controlled by RpfC to include genes involved in type IV
secretion and chemotaxis. Mutation of XC_2579 was associated with a reduction in 
virulence of Xcc to Chinese Radish when assayed by leaf spraying but not by leaf 
inoculation, suggesting a role for RpfS-controlled factors in the epiphytic phase
of the disease cycle.

© 2014 The Authors. Molecular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4159695
PMID: 24617591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. FASEB J. 2014 Jun;28(6):2517-24. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-244079. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

HIF-2a/ARNT complex regulates hair development via induction of p21(Waf1/Cip1)
and p27(Kip1).

Imamura Y(1), Tomita S(2), Imanishi M(3), Kihira Y(3), Ikeda Y(3), Ishizawa K(4),
Tsuchiya K(4), Tamaki T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Graduate
School of Advanced Sciences, Hiroshima University, Higashihiroshima City, Japan; 
and yukoima@hiroshima-u.ac.jp. (2)Division of Molecular Pharmacology, Tottori
University Faculty of Medicine, Yonago, Japan. (3)Department of Pharmacology and.
(4)Department of Medical Pharmacology, Institute of Health Biosciences,
University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan;

The hypoxia-inducible factors HIF-1a or HIF-2a form heterodimeric complexes with 
the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT). HIF-1a/ARNT and
HIF-2a/ARNT complexes activate hypoxia-inducible genes that play critical roles
in angiogenesis, anaerobic metabolism, and other processes in response to O2
deprivation. HIF-2a is known to regulate the function and/or differentiation of
stem cells by activating the POU domain transcription factor Oct4; however, the
precise underlying mechanism is unknown. This study examined the role of
HIF-2a/ARNT in hair development using conditional-knockout mice, in which Arnt
was specifically deleted in keratinocytes. In wild-type mice, HIF-2a and ARNT
were highly expressed in the precortex above the hair matrix, an area containing 
differentiating stem cells. An analysis of hair size and type in these mice
showed that loss of ARNT decreased the production of zigzag hairs, corresponding 
to reduced expression of HIF-2a and induction of the mammalian cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitors p21(Waf1/Cip1) and p27 (Kip1). The results suggest that the
HIF-2a/ARNT complex regulates hair follicle differentiation via induction of
p21(Waf1/Cip1) and possibly p27(Kip1), as p27(Kip1) expression was not altered in
ARNT knockout mice. The findings provide insight into a possible mechanism
underlying hair growth disorders and can be useful for future studies on hair
follicle response to insults, such as chemotherapy and ionizing radiation.

© FASEB.

PMID: 24599965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2014 Mar;70(Pt 3):863-76. doi:
10.1107/S1399004713033634. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

Multi-PAS domain-mediated protein oligomerization of PpsR from Rhodobacter
sphaeroides.

Heintz U(1), Meinhart A(1), Winkler A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Mechanisms, Max Planck Institute for Medical
Research, Heidelberg, Germany.

Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domains are essential modules of many multi-domain signalling 
proteins that mediate protein interaction and/or sense environmental stimuli.
Frequently, multiple PAS domains are present within single polypeptide chains,
where their interplay is required for protein function. Although many isolated
PAS domain structures have been reported over the last decades, only a few
structures of multi-PAS proteins are known. Therefore, the molecular mechanism of
multi-PAS domain-mediated protein oligomerization and function is poorly
understood. The transcription factor PpsR from Rhodobacter sphaeroides is such a 
multi-PAS domain protein that, in addition to its three PAS domains, contains a
glutamine-rich linker and a C-terminal helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif. Here, 
crystal structures of two N-terminally and C-terminally truncated PpsR variants
that comprise a single (PpsRQ-PAS1) and two (PpsRN-Q-PAS1) PAS domains,
respectively, are presented and the multi-step strategy required for the phasing 
of a triple PAS domain construct (PpsR<U+0394>HTH) is illustrated. While parts of the
biologically relevant dimerization interface can already be observed in the two
shorter constructs, the PpsR<U+0394>HTH structure reveals how three PAS domains enable
the formation of multiple oligomeric states (dimer, tetramer and octamer),
highlighting that not only the PAS cores but also their a-helical extensions are 
essential for protein oligomerization. The results demonstrate that the long
helical glutamine-rich linker of PpsR results from a direct fusion of the N-cap
of the PAS1 domain with the C-terminal extension of the N-domain that plays an
important role in signal transduction.

PMCID: PMC3949515
PMID: 24598755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Arch Oral Biol. 2014 Apr;59(4):434-9. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2014.02.003.
Epub 2014 Feb 11.

IL-1 and TNF-a regulation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) expression in HSY
human salivary cells.

Drozdzik A(1), Dziedziejko V(2), Kurzawski M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Dentistry, Pomeranian Medical University, Powstancow
Wlkp 72, 70-111, Szczecin, Poland. Electronic address: agdro@pum.edu.pl.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Pomeranian Medical University,
Powstancow Wlkp 72, 70-111, Szczecin, Poland. (3)Department of Pharmacology,
Pomeranian Medical University, Powstancow Wlkp 72, 70-111, Szczecin, Poland.

OBJECTIVES: Recent findings demonstrate that nuclear receptor - aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor (AhR) may play an important role in the pathogenesis of Sjögren's
syndrome (SS) via involvement in Epstein-Barr virus reactivation. In that study a
reporter system was used. Therefore, it was decided to define AhR expression in
human salivary cell line (HSY) and its functional regulators.
DESIGN: The expression and functional regulation of AhR was studied in HSY cells.
The cells were incubated with dioxin (TCDD) - AhR model inducer, IL-1 and TNF-a. 
qRT-PCR was applied to assess the expression of AHR, AHRR (AhR repressor), ARNT
(AhR nuclear translocator) as well as AhR dependent genes: CYP1A1 and CYP1B1.
Enzymatic activity of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 was evaluated using luciferin-labelled
CYPs substrate.
RESULTS: In general, dioxin did not significantly influence the expression of AHR
and ARNT, but reduced AHRR level. AhR dependent gene expression, i.e. CYP1A1 and 
CYP1B1 increased gradually with TCDD incubation time. TNF-a significantly induced
AHR along with CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 expression. IL-1ß did not affect AHR expression,
and had minimal effects on CYP1 mRNA levels. Exposure of HSY cells to TCDD
resulted in time-dependent induction of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 enzymatic activity.
CONCLUSIONS: This study documents functional expression of AhR in HSY as well as 
induction of AhR and its dependent genes by TNF-a.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 24565903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Bacteriol. 2014 May;196(9):1741-52. doi: 10.1128/JB.00029-14. Epub 2014 Feb 21.

The PhoU protein from Escherichia coli interacts with PhoR, PstB, and metals to
form a phosphate-signaling complex at the membrane.

Gardner SG(1), Johns KD, Tanner R, McCleary WR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Brigham Young University,
Provo, Utah, USA.

Robust growth in many bacteria is dependent upon proper regulation of the
adaptive response to phosphate (Pi) limitation. This response enables cells to
acquire Pi with high affinity and utilize alternate phosphorous sources. The
molecular mechanisms of Pi signal transduction are not completely understood.
PhoU, along with the high-affinity, Pi-specific ATP-binding cassette transporter 
PstSCAB and the two-component proteins PhoR and PhoB, is absolutely required for 
Pi signaling in Escherichia coli. Little is known about the role of PhoU and its 
function in regulation. We have demonstrated using bacterial two-hybrid analysis 
and confirmatory coelution experiments that PhoU interacts with PhoR through its 
PAS (Per-ARNT-Sim) domain and that it also interacts with PstB, the cytoplasmic
component of the transporter. We have also shown that the soluble form of PhoU is
a dimer that binds manganese and magnesium. Alteration of highly conserved
residues in PhoU by site-directed mutagenesis shows that these sites play a role 
in binding metals. Analysis of these phoU mutants suggests that metal binding may
be important for PhoU membrane interactions. Taken together, these results
support the hypothesis that PhoU is involved in the formation of a signaling
complex at the cytoplasmic membrane that responds to environmental Pi levels.

PMCID: PMC3993317
PMID: 24563032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Structure. 2014 Apr 8;22(4):602-11. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2014.01.008. Epub 2014 Feb
20.

Nitric oxide-induced conformational changes in soluble guanylate cyclase.

Underbakke ES(1), Iavarone AT(2), Chalmers MJ(3), Pascal BD(3), Novick S(3),
Griffin PR(3), Marletta MA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA. (2)Department of Chemistry and California Institute for Quantitative
Biosciences, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter,
FL 33458, USA. (4)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic address: marletta@scripps.edu.

Comment in
    Structure. 2014 Apr 8;22(4):512-4.

Soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) is the primary mediator of nitric oxide (NO)
signaling. NO binds the sGC heme cofactor stimulating synthesis of the second
messenger cyclic-GMP (cGMP). As the central hub of NO/cGMP signaling pathways,
sGC is important in diverse physiological processes such as vasodilation and
neurotransmission. Nevertheless, the mechanisms underlying NO-induced cyclase
activation in sGC remain unclear. Here, hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass
spectrometry (HDX-MS) was employed to probe the NO-induced conformational changes
of sGC. HDX-MS revealed NO-induced effects in several discrete regions. NO
binding to the heme-NO/O2-binding (H-NOX) domain perturbs a signaling surface
implicated in Per/Arnt/Sim (PAS) domain interactions. Furthermore, NO elicits
striking conformational changes in the junction between the PAS and helical
domains that propagate as perturbations throughout the adjoining helices.
Ultimately, NO binding stimulates the catalytic domain by contracting the active 
site pocket. Together, these conformational changes delineate an allosteric
pathway linking NO binding to activation of the catalytic domain.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4001857
PMID: 24560804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Mol Cells. 2014 Jan;37(1):43-50. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2014.2250. Epub 2014 Jan 
27.

HIF-1-dependent induction of Jumonji domain-containing protein (JMJD) 3 under
hypoxic conditions.

Lee HY(1), Choi K, Oh H, Park YK, Park H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, University of Seoul, Seoul 130-743, Korea.

Jumonji domain-containing proteins (JMJD) catalyze the oxidative demethylation of
a methylated lysine residue of histones by using O2, a-ketoglutarate, vitamin C, 
and Fe(II). Several JMJDs are induced by hypoxic stress to compensate their
presumed reduction in catalytic activity under hypoxia. In this study, we showed 
that an H3K27me3 specific histone demethylase, JMJD3 was induced by
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1a/ß under hypoxia and that treatment with
Clioquinol, a HIF-1a activator, increased JMJD3 expression even under normoxia.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analyses showed that both HIF-1a and its
dimerization partner HIF-1ß/Arnt occupied the first intron region of the mouse
JMJD3 gene, whereas the HIF-1a/ß heterodimer bound to the upstream region of the 
human JMJD3, indicating that human and mouse JMJD3 have hypoxia-responsive
regulatory regions in different locations. This study shows that both mouse and
human JMJD3 are induced by HIF-1.

PMCID: PMC3907005
PMID: 24552709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Toxicol Sci. 2014 May;139(1):121-32. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu027. Epub 2014 Feb
11.

The Ah receptor recruits IKKa to its target binding motifs to phosphorylate
serine-10 in histone H3 required for transcriptional activation.

Kurita H(1), Schnekenburger M, Ovesen JL, Xia Y, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental Genetics,
University of Cincinnati, College of Medicine, 3223 Eden Avenue, Cincinnati, OH
45267.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) activation by xenobiotic ligands such as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is key to their toxicity. Following
activation and nuclear translocation, AHR heterodimerizes with the AHR nuclear
translocator (ARNT) and binds to AHR response elements (AhREs) in the enhancer of
target genes, of which Cyp1a1 is the prototype. Previously, we showed that
concomitant with AHR binding, histone H3 in the Cyp1a1 enhancer-promoter AhRE
cluster became phosphorylated in serine-10 (H3S10), suggesting that the
ligand-activated AHR recruited one or more kinases to the enhancer chromatin to
phosphorylate this residue. To test this hypothesis, we used mouse hepatoma
Hepa-1c1c7 cells and their c35 mutant derivative, lacking a functional AHR, to
search for candidate kinases that would phosphorylate H3S10 in an AHR dependent
manner. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation with antibodies to a comprehensive
set of protein kinases, we identified three kinases, I<U+03BA>B kinase a (IKKa), mitogen
and stress activated protein kinase 1 (MSK1), and mitogen and stress activated
protein kinase 2 (MSK2), whose binding to the Cyp1a1 enhancer was significantly
increased by TCDD in Hepa-1c1c7 cells and absent in control c35 cells. Complexes 
of AHR, ARNT, and IKKa could be coimmunoprecipitated from nuclei of TCDD treated 
Hepa-1c1c7 cells and shRNA-mediated IKKa knockdown inhibited both H3S10
phosphorylation in the Cyp1a1 enhancer and the induction of Cyp1a1, Aldh3a1, and 
Nqo1 in TCDD-treated cells. We conclude that AHR recruits IKKa to the promoter of
its target genes and that AHR-mediated H3S10 phosphorylation is a key epigenetic 
requirement for induction of AHR targets. Given the role of H3S10ph in regulation
of chromosome condensation, AHR-IKKa cross-talk may be a mediator of chromatin
remodeling by environmental agents.

PMCID: PMC4038787
PMID: 24519526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Mar 15;88(2):253-65. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.01.021. Epub
2014 Jan 28.

Differential suppression of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator-dependent function by an aryl hydrocarbon receptor PAS-A-derived
inhibitory molecule.

Xie J(1), Huang X(2), Park MS(1), Pham HM(1), Chan WK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, Thomas J. Long School of 
Pharmacy and Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, CA 95211, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Qianfoshan Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong, 250014, China. (3)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, 
Thomas J. Long School of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, University of the Pacific,
Stockton, CA 95211, USA. Electronic address: wchan@pacific.edu.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) heterodimerizes with the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) for transcriptional regulation. We generated
three N-terminal deletion constructs of the human AhR of 12-24 kDa in
size--namely D1, D2, and D3--to suppress the Arnt function. We observed that all 
three deletions interact with the human Arnt with similar affinities. D2, which
contains part of the AhR PAS-A domain and interacts with the PAS-A domain of
Arnt, inhibits the formation of the AhR gel shift complex. D2 suppresses the
3-methylcholanthrene-induced, dioxin response element (DRE)-driven luciferase
activity in Hep3B cells and exogenous Arnt reverses this D2 suppression. D2
suppresses the induction of CYP1A1 at both the message and protein levels in
Hep3B cells; however, the CYP1B1 induction is not affected. D2 suppresses the
recruitment of Arnt to the cyp1a1 promoter but not to the cyp1b1 promoter, partly
because the AhR/Arnt heterodimer binds better to the cyp1b1 DRE than to the
cyp1a1 DRE. Interestingly, D2 has no effect on the cobalt chloride-induced,
hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1)-dependent expression of vegf, aldolase c, and 
ldh-a messages. Our data reveal that the flanking sequences of the DRE contribute
to the binding affinity of the AhR/Arnt heterodimer to its endogenous enhancers
and the function of AhR and HIF-1 can be differentially suppressed by the D2
inhibitory molecule.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3949604
PMID: 24486526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Infect Immun. 2014 Feb;82(2):491-9. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01260-12. Epub 2013 Oct 14.

Enzymatic modification of lipid A by ArnT protects Bordetella bronchiseptica
against cationic peptides and is required for transmission.

Rolin O(1), Muse SJ, Safi C, Elahi S, Gerdts V, Hittle LE, Ernst RK, Harvill ET, 
Preston A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.

Pathogen transmission cycles require many steps: initial colonization, growth and
persistence, shedding, and transmission to new hosts. Alterations in the membrane
components of the bacteria, including lipid A, the membrane anchor of
lipopolysaccharide, could affect any of these steps via its structural role
protecting bacteria from host innate immune defenses, including antimicrobial
peptides and signaling through Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). To date, lipid A has 
been shown to affect only the within-host dynamics of infection, not the
between-host dynamics of transmission. Here, we investigate the effects of lipid 
A modification in a mouse infection and transmission model. Disruption of the
Bordetella bronchiseptica locus (BB4268) revealed that ArnT is required for
addition of glucosamine (GlcN) to B. bronchiseptica lipid A. ArnT modification of
lipid A did not change its TLR4 agonist activity in J774 cells, but deleting arnT
decreased resistance to killing by cationic antimicrobial peptides, such as
polymyxin B and ß-defensins. In the standard infection model, mutation of arnT
did not affect B. bronchiseptica colonization, growth, persistence throughout the
respiratory tract, recruitment of neutrophils to the nasal cavity, or shedding of
the pathogen. However, the number of bacteria necessary to colonize a host (50%
infective dose [ID50]) was 5-fold higher for the arnT mutant. Furthermore, the
arnT mutant was defective in transmission between hosts. These results reveal
novel functions of the ArnT lipid A modification and highlight the sensitivity of
low-dose infections and transmission experiments for illuminating aspects of
infectious diseases between hosts. Factors such as ArnT can have important
effects on the burden of disease and are potential targets for interventions that
can interrupt transmission.

PMCID: PMC3911393
PMID: 24478065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Am J Hematol. 2014 May;89(5):566-7. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23680. Epub 2014 Feb 28.

Deregulation of AhR function by the human acute leukemia TEL-ARNT fusion protein.

Nguyen-Khac F(1), Della Valle V, Lopez RG, Ghysdael J, Bernard OA.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Hématologie Biologique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France;
INSERM U872, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France; UPMC, Paris,
France.

PMID: 24469860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 17;9(1):e85768. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085768. eCollection
2014.

Human variants in the neuronal basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH/PAS)
transcription factor complex NPAS4/ARNT2 disrupt function.

Bersten DC(1), Bruning JB(1), Peet DJ(1), Whitelaw ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science (Biochemistry), and Australian
Research Council Special Research Centre for the Molecular Genetics of
Development, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Neuronal Per-Arnt-Sim homology (PAS) Factor 4 (NPAS4) is a neuronal
activity-dependent transcription factor which heterodimerises with ARNT2 to
regulate genes involved in inhibitory synapse formation. NPAS4 functions to
maintain excitatory/inhibitory balance in neurons, while mouse models have shown 
it to play roles in memory formation, social interaction and neurodegeneration.
NPAS4 has therefore been implicated in a number of neuropsychiatric or
neurodegenerative diseases which are underpinned by defects in
excitatory/inhibitory balance. Here we have explored a broad set of
non-synonymous human variants in NPAS4 and ARNT2 for disruption of NPAS4
function. We found two variants in NPAS4 (F147S and E257K) and two variants in
ARNT2 (R46W and R107H) which significantly reduced transcriptional activity of
the heterodimer on a luciferase reporter gene. Furthermore, we found that
NPAS4.F147S was unable to activate expression of the NPAS4 target gene BDNF due
to reduced dimerisation with ARNT2. Homology modelling predicts F147 in NPAS4 to 
lie at the dimer interface, where it appears to directly contribute to
protein/protein interaction. We also found that reduced transcriptional
activation by ARNT2 R46W was due to disruption of nuclear localisation. These
results provide insight into the mechanisms of NPAS4/ARNT dimerisation and
transcriptional activation and have potential implications for cognitive
phenotypic variation and diseases such as autism, schizophrenia and dementia.

PMCID: PMC3894988
PMID: 24465693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cell Prolif. 2013 Dec;46(6):644-53. doi: 10.1111/cpr.12075.

Roles of brain and muscle ARNT-like 1 and Wnt antagonist Dkk1 during osteogenesis
of bone marrow stromal cells.

He Y(1), Chen Y, Zhao Q, Tan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Orthodontic Centre, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, 610041, China; State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, 610041, China.

OBJECTIVES: Many studies have demonstrated that the clock gene, brain and muscle 
ARNT-like 1 (Bmal1), is directly related to bone ageing by affecting age-related 
changes to mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). As a main developmental signal, Wnt may
play an important role in this process. Here, we have aimed to elucidate whether 
Bmal1 positively regulates osteogenesi via Wnt pathways.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Bone marrow stromal cells were cultured in basic and in
osteo-induction medium with Wnt signalling inhibitor Dkk1 and Bmal1 transfection.
Proliferation and osteogenesis of MSCs, expression of Bmal1 and activation of Wnt
signalling were investigated by flow cytometry, senescence-associated
ß-galactosidase (SA-ß-gal) staining, real-time quantitative PCR and western blot 
analysis.
RESULTS: Expression of Bmal1 (specially after 7 days osteo-induction), activation
of Wnt signalling and osteo-related factors fell significantly during
osteo-induction after Dkk1 addition. When cellular Bmal1 was increased by
transfection, osteogenesis inhibition by Dkk1 was rescued to a certain extent
with activation of Wnt signalling. However, Dkk1 did not significantly affect
proliferation or senescence of MSCs during early periods of culture.
CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrated that Bmal1 and Wnt signalling may have a 
synergistic effect at a particular stage of osteogenesis. Inhibition of Wnt
signalling did not greatly affect ageing of MSCs through early passages.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24460718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(12):7221-7.

Comprehensive bioinformation analysis of the mRNA profile of fascin knockdown in 
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Wu BL(1), Luo LW, Li CQ, Xie JJ, Du ZP, Wu JY, Zhang PX, Xu LY, Li EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shantou University Medical
College, Guangzhou, China E-mail : lyxu@stu.edu.cn, nmli@stu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Fascin, an actin-bundling protein forming actin bundles including
filopodia and stress fibers, is overexpressed in multiple human epithelial
cancers including esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). Previously we
conducted a microarray experiment to analyze fascin knockdown by RNAi in ESCC.
METHOD: In this study, the differentially expressed genes from mRNA expression
profilomg of fascin knockdown were analyzed by multiple bioinformatics methods
for a comprehensive understanding of the role of fascin.
RESULTS: Gene Ontology enrichment found terms associated with cytoskeleton
organization, including cell adhesion, actin filament binding and actin
cytoskeleton, which might be related to fascin function. Except GO categories,
the differentially expressed genes were annotated by 45 functional categories
from the Functional Annotation Chart of DAVID. Subpathway analysis showed
thirty-nine pathways were disturbed by the differentially expressed genes,
providing more detailed information than traditional pathway enrichment analysis.
Two subpathways derivated from regulation of the actin cytoskeleton were shown.
Promoter analysis results indicated distinguishing sequence patterns and
transcription factors in response to the co-expression of downregulated or
upregulated differentially expressed genes. MNB1A, c-ETS, GATA2 and Prrx2
potentially regulate the transcription of the downregulated gene set, while
Arnt-Ahr, ZNF42, Ubx and TCF11-MafG might co-regulate the upregulated genes.
CONCLUSIONS: This multiple bioinformatic analysis helps provide a comprehensive
understanding of the roles of fascin after its knockdown in ESCC.

PMID: 24460279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Toxicol. 2013;2013:279829. doi: 10.1155/2013/279829. Epub 2013 Dec 5.

The Aryl-Hydrocarbon Receptor Protein Interaction Network (AHR-PIN) as Identified
by Tandem Affinity Purification (TAP) and Mass Spectrometry.

Tappenden DM(1), Hwang HJ(2), Yang L(3), Thomas RS(3), Lapres JJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI 48824-1319, USA ; Center for Integrative Toxicology, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, MI 48824-1319, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824-1319,
USA ; Center for Mitochondrial Science and Medicine, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI 48824-1319, USA. (3)The Hamner Institutes for Health Sciences,
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. (4)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824-1319, USA ; 
Center for Integrative Toxicology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
48824-1319, USA ; Center for Mitochondrial Science and Medicine, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, MI 48824-1319, USA.

The aryl-hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), a ligand activated PAS superfamily
transcription factor, mediates most, if not all, of the toxicity induced upon
exposure to various dioxins, dibenzofurans, and planar polyhalogenated biphenyls.
While AHR-mediated gene regulation plays a central role in the toxic response to 
dioxin exposure, a comprehensive understanding of AHR biology remains elusive.
AHR-mediated signaling starts in the cytoplasm, where the receptor can be found
in a complex with the heat shock protein of 90<U+2009>kDa (Hsp90) and the
immunophilin-like protein, aryl-hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP).
The role these chaperones and other putative interactors of the AHR play in the
toxic response is not known. To more comprehensively define the AHR-protein
interaction network (AHR-PIN) and identify other potential pathways involved in
the toxic response, a proteomic approach was undertaken. Using tandem affinity
purification (TAP) and mass spectrometry we have identified several novel protein
interactions with the AHR. These interactions physically link the AHR to proteins
involved in the immune and cellular stress responses, gene regulation not
mediated directly via the traditional AHR:ARNT heterodimer, and mitochondrial
function. This new insight into the AHR signaling network identifies possible
secondary signaling pathways involved in xenobiotic-induced toxicity.

PMCID: PMC3870133
PMID: 24454361  [PubMed]


215. Hepatology. 2014 Jun;59(6):2196-206. doi: 10.1002/hep.26992. Epub 2014 Apr 25.

CLOCK/BMAL1 regulates circadian change of mouse hepatic insulin sensitivity by
SIRT1.

Zhou B(1), Zhang Y, Zhang F, Xia Y, Liu J, Huang R, Wang Y, Hu Y, Wu J, Dai C,
Wang H, Tu Y, Peng X, Wang Y, Zhai Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

The protein deacetylase, sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), involved in regulating hepatic
insulin sensitivity, shows circadian oscillation and regulates the circadian
clock. Recent studies show that circadian misalignment leads to insulin
resistance (IR); however, the underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. Here, we
show that CLOCK and brain and muscle ARNT-like protein 1 (BMAL1), two core
circadian transcription factors, are correlated with hepatic insulin sensitivity.
Knockdown of CLOCK or BMAL1 induces hepatic IR, whereas their ectopic expression 
attenuates hepatic IR. Moreover, circadian change of insulin sensitivity is
impaired in Clock mutant, liver-specific Bmal1 knockout (KO) or Sirt1 KO mice,
and CLOCK and BMAL1 are required for hepatic circadian expression of SIRT1.
Further studies show that CLOCK/BMAL1 binds to the SIRT1 promoter to enhance its 
expression and regulates hepatic insulin sensitivity by SIRT1. In addition,
constant darkness-induced circadian misalignment in mice decreases hepatic BMAL1 
and SIRT1 levels and induces IR, which can be dramatically reversed by
resveratrol.CONCLUSION: These findings offer new insights for coordination of the
circadian clock and metabolism in hepatocytes by circadian regulation of hepatic 
insulin sensitivity via CLOCK/BMAL1-dependent SIRT1 expression and provide a
potential application of resveratrol for combating circadian misalignment-induced
metabolic disorders.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 24442997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Bone. 2014 Apr;61:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.12.026. Epub 2014 Jan 2.

Glucocorticoids mediate circadian timing in peripheral osteoclasts resulting in
the circadian expression rhythm of osteoclast-related genes.

Fujihara Y(1), Kondo H(2), Noguchi T(3), Togari A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, Aichi Gakuin University,
Japan; Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, Aichi Gakuin
University, Japan. (2)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, Aichi
Gakuin University, Japan. (3)Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry,
Aichi Gakuin University, Japan. (4)Department of Pharmacology, School of
Dentistry, Aichi Gakuin University, Japan. Electronic address:
togariaf@dpc.aichi-gakuin.ac.jp.

Circadian rhythms are prevalent in bone metabolism. However, the molecular
mechanisms involved are poorly understood. Recently, we suggested that output
signals from the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) are transmitted from the master
circadian rhythm to peripheral osteoblasts through ß-adrenergic and
glucocorticoid signaling. In this study, we examined how the master circadian
rhythm is transmitted to peripheral osteoclasts and the role of clock gene in
osteoclast. Mice were maintained under 12-hour light/dark periods and sacrificed 
at Zeitgeber times 0, 4, 8, 12, 16 and 20. mRNA was extracted from femur
(cancellous bone) and analyzed for the expression of osteoclast-related genes and
clock genes. Osteoclast-related genes such as cathepsin K (CTSK) and nuclear
factor of activated T-cells, cytoplasmic 1 (NFATc1) showed circadian rhythmicity 
like clock genes such as period 1 (PER1), PER2 and brain and muscle Arnt-like
protein 1 (BMAL1). In an in vitro study, not ß-agonist but glucocorticoid
treatment remarkably synchronized clock and osteoclast-related genes in cultured 
osteoclasts. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay showed the interaction
between BMAL1 proteins and promoter region of CTSK and NFATc1. To examine whether
endogenous glucocorticoids influence the osteoclast circadian rhythms, mice were 
adrenalectomized (ADX) and maintained under 12-hour light/dark periods at least
two weeks before glucocorticoid injection. A glucocorticoid injection restarted
the circadian expression of CTSK and NFATc1 in ADX mice. These results suggest
that glucocorticoids mediate circadian timing to peripheral osteoclasts and
osteoclast clock contributes to the circadian expression of osteoclast-related
genes such as CTSK and NFATc1.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24389417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2014 Feb;3(2):135-40. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2013-0134. Epub
2013 Dec 26.

Targeting the hypoxia-sensing pathway in clinical hematology.

Forristal CE(1), Levesque JP.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology Group, Mater Research Institute-University of Queensland,
Woolloongabba, Queensland, Australia.

Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) are oxygen-sensitive transcription factors
regulated by oxygen-dependent prolyl hydroxylase domain (PHD) enzymes and are key
to cell adaptation to low oxygen. The hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) niche in the 
bone marrow is highly heterogeneous in terms of microvasculature and thus oxygen 
concentration. The importance of hypoxia and HIFs in the hematopoietic
environment is becoming increasingly recognized. Many small compounds that
inhibit PHDs have been developed, enabling HIFs to be pharmacologically
stabilized in an oxygen-independent manner. The use of PHD inhibitors for
therapeutic intervention in hematopoiesis is being increasingly investigated. PHD
inhibitors are well established to increase erythropoietin production to correct 
anemia in hemodialysis patients. Pharmacological stabilization of HIF-1a protein 
with PHD inhibitors is also emerging as an important regulator of HSC
proliferation and self-renewal. Administration of PHD inhibitors increases
quiescence and decreases proliferation of HSCs in the bone marrow in vivo,
thereby protecting them from high doses of irradiation and accelerating
hematological recovery. Recent findings also show that stabilization of HIF-1a
increases mobilization of HSCs in response to granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor and plerixafor, suggesting that PHD inhibitors could be useful agents to
increase mobilization success in patients requiring transplantation. These
findings highlight the importance of the hypoxia-sensing pathway and HIFs in
clinical hematology.

PMCID: PMC3925058
PMID: 24371328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Int J Cardiol. 2014 Feb 1;171(2):e16-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.11.131. Epub
2013 Dec 7.

Skeletal scintigraphy in patients with transthyretin-related amyloidosis.

Kristen AV(1), Altland K(2), Katus HA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Angiology, and Respiratory Medicine, Im Neuenheimer 
Feld 410, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
Arnt_Kristen@med.uni-heidelberg.de. (2)Institute of Human Genetics, Giessen
University, Schlangenzahl 14, 35392 D-Giessen, Germany. (3)Department of
Cardiology, Angiology, and Respiratory Medicine, Im Neuenheimer Feld 410, D-69120
Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment on
    Int J Cardiol. 2013 Oct 12;168(5):4988-9.

PMID: 24360159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014 Feb 1;274(3):408-16. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2013.12.002. Epub 2013 Dec 16.

Hypoxia perturbs aryl hydrocarbon receptor signaling and CYP1A1 expression
induced by PCB 126 in human skin and liver-derived cell lines.

Vorrink SU(1), Severson PL(2), Kulak MV(3), Futscher BW(2), Domann FE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Human Toxicology, The University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, The
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. (3)Department of Surgery, The University 
of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (4)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Human
Toxicology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Radiation
Oncology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Surgery, The 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. Electronic address:
frederick-domann@uiowa.edu.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is an important mediator of toxic responses
after exposure to xenobiotics including 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) and dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). Activation of AhR
responsive genes requires AhR dimerization with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT), a heterodimeric partner also shared by the
hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) protein. TCDD-stimulated AhR transcriptional
activity can be influenced by hypoxia; however, it less well known whether
hypoxia interferes with AhR transcriptional transactivation in the context of
PCB-mediated AhR activation in human cells. Elucidation of this interaction is
important in liver hepatocytes which extensively metabolize ingested PCBs and
experience varying degrees of oxygen tension during normal physiologic function. 
This study was designed to assess the effect of hypoxia on AhR transcriptional
responses after exposure to 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 126). Exposure
to 1% O2 prior to PCB 126 treatment significantly inhibited CYP1A1 mRNA and
protein expression in human HepG2 and HaCaT cells. CYP1A1 transcriptional
activation was significantly decreased upon PCB 126 stimulation under conditions 
of hypoxia. Additionally, hypoxia pre-treatment reduced PCB 126 induced AhR
binding to CYP1 target gene promoters. Importantly, ARNT overexpression rescued
cells from the inhibitory effect of hypoxia on XRE-luciferase reporter activity. 
Therefore, the mechanism of interference of the signaling crosstalk between the
AhR and hypoxia pathways appears to be at least in part dependent on ARNT
availability. Our results show that AhR activation and CYP1A1 expression induced 
by PCB 126 were significantly inhibited by hypoxia and hypoxia might therefore
play an important role in PCB metabolism and toxicity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3919493
PMID: 24355420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Clin Pharmacol. 2013 Dec 9;5:185-92. doi: 10.2147/CPAA.S53151. eCollection 2013.

Cytochrome P450 3A4*22, PPAR-a, and ARNT polymorphisms and clopidogrel response.

Kreutz RP(1), Owens J(2), Jin Y(2), Nystrom P(2), Desta Z(2), Kreutz Y(2), Breall
JA(3), Li L(4), Chiang C(4), Kovacs RJ(3), Flockhart DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Krannert Institute of Cardiology, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA ; Division of
Clinical Pharmacology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana, USA. (2)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA. (3)Krannert Institute of Cardiology,
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA. (4)Center for Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana,
USA.

Recent candidate gene studies using a human liver bank and in vivo validation in 
healthy volunteers identified polymorphisms in cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 gene
(CYP3A4*22), Ah-receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-a (PPAR-a) genes that are associated with the
CYP3A4 phenotype. We hypothesized that the variants identified in these genes may
be associated with altered clopidogrel response, since generation of clopidogrel 
active metabolite is, partially mediated by CYP3A activity. Blood samples from
211 subjects, of mixed racial background, with established coronary artery
disease, who had received clopidogrel, were analyzed. Platelet aggregation was
determined using light transmittance aggregometry (LTA). Genotyping for
CYP2C19*2, CYP3A4*22, PPAR-a (rs4253728, rs4823613), and ARNT (rs2134688) variant
alleles was performed using Taqman® assays. CYP2C19*2 genotype was associated
with increased on-treatment platelet aggregation (adenosine diphosphate 20 µM;
P=0.025). No significant difference in on-treatment platelet aggregation, as
measured by LTA during therapy with clopidogrel, was demonstrated among the
different genotypes of CYP3A4*22, PPAR-a, and ARNT. These findings suggest that
clopidogrel platelet inhibition is not influenced by the genetic variants that
have previously been associated with reduced CYP3A4 activity.

PMCID: PMC3862586
PMID: 24353446  [PubMed]


221. Gene. 2014 Feb 25;536(2):348-56. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.11.072. Epub 2013 Dec
12.

The variant hERG/R148W associated with LQTS is a mutation that reduces current
density on co-expression with the WT.

Mechakra A(1), Vincent Y(1), Chevalier P(2), Millat G(3), Ficker E(4),
Jastrzebski M(5), Poulin H(6), Pouliot V(6), Chahine M(6), Christé G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurocardiologie, EA4612, Université Lyon 1, Lyon F-69003,
France. (2)Laboratoire de Neurocardiologie, EA4612, Université Lyon 1, Lyon
F-69003, France; Unité de Rythmologie, Centre National de Référence des Troubles 
du Rythme d'Origine Héréditaire, Hôpital Cardiovasculaire et Pneumologique L.
Pradel, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon F-69003, France. (3)Laboratoire de
Neurocardiologie, EA4612, Université Lyon 1, Lyon F-69003, France; Laboratoire de
Cardiogénétique, Centre de Biologie Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon F-69003,
France. (4)MetroHealth Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, USA. (5)Department of
Cardiology and Hypertension, University Hospital, Kracow, Poland. (6)Le Centre de
Recherche en neuroscience, Institut Universitaire en Santé Mentale de Québec and 
Department of Medicine, Laval University, Québec, Canada. (7)Laboratoire de
Neurocardiologie, EA4612, Université Lyon 1, Lyon F-69003, France. Electronic
address: georges.christe@inserm.fr.

BACKGROUND: A variant of the ether-à-go-go related channel (hERG), p.Arg148Trp
(R148W) was found at heterozygous state in two infants who died from sudden
infant death syndrome (SIDS), one with documented prolonged QTc and Torsade de
Pointes (TdP), and in an adult woman with QTc >500 ms, atrioventricular block and
TdP. This variant was previously reported in cases of severe ventricular
arrhythmia but very rarely in control subjects. Its classification as mutation or
polymorphism awaited electrophysiological characterization.
METHODS: The properties of this N-terminal, proximal domain, hERG variant were
explored in Xenopus oocytes injected with the same amount of RNA encoding for
either hERG/WT or hERG/R148W or their equimolar mixture. The human ventricular
cell (TNNP) model was used to test the effects of changes in hERG current.
RESULTS: R148W alone produced a current similar to the WT (369 ± 76 nA (mean ±
SEM), n=13 versus 342 ± 55 nA in WT, n=13), while the co-expression of 1/2 WT+1/2
R148W lowered the current by 29% versus WT (243 ± 35 nA, n=13, p<0.05). The
voltage dependencies of steady-state activation and inactivation were not changed
in the variant alone or in co-expression with the WT. The time constants of fast 
recovery from inactivation and of fast and slow deactivation analyzed between
-120 and +20 mV were not changed. The voltage-dependent distribution of the
current amplitudes among fast-, slow- and non-deactivating fractions was
unaltered. A 6.6% increase in APD90 from 323.5 ms to 345 ms was observed using
the human cardiac ventricular myocyte model.
CONCLUSIONS: Such a decrease in hERG current as evidenced here when co-expressing
the hERG/R148W variant with the WT may have predisposed to the observed long QT
syndrome and associated TdP. Therefore, the heterozygous carriers of hERG/R148W
may be at risk of cardiac sudden death.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24334129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jan 10;443(2):598-603. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.12.020. Epub 2013 Dec 11.

GSK3ß negatively regulates HIF1a mRNA stability via nucleolin in the MG63
osteosarcoma cell line.

Cheng DD(1), Zhao HG(2), Yang YS(3), Hu T(1), Yang QC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopeadics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth
People's Hospital, Shanghai 200233, China. (2)Department of Vascular Surgery,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai
200011, China. (3)Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074,
China. (4)Department of Orthopeadics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated
Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai 200233, China. Electronic address:
tjyqc@163.com.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF1a) is a transcription factor involved in the
growth, invasion and metastasis of malignant tumors. Glycogen synthase kinase 3
beta (GSK3ß) is a protein kinase involved in a variety of signaling pathways,
such as the Wnt and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways; this kinase can affect tumor progress through
the regulation of transcription factor expression and apoptosis. Recent studies
showed that GSK3ß was involved in the expression of HIF1a. However, the effect of
GSK3ß on HIF1a expression in osteosarcoma cells remains unknown. To understand
the relationship between GSK3ß and HIF1a comprehensively, small RNA interference 
techniques, Western blot analyses, quantitative real-time PCR analyses and
luciferase assays were used in our study. Experimental data revealed that
inhibition of GSK3ß could increase HIF1a protein levels and expression of its
target genes by increasing the stability of the HIF1a mRNA, not by affecting the 
HIF1a protein stability, and that this process could be mediated by nucleolin.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24333432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2014 Apr;38(4):980-93. doi: 10.1111/acer.12325. Epub 2013
Dec 13.

Chronic ethanol consumption modulates growth factor release, mucosal cytokine
production, and microRNA expression in nonhuman primates.

Asquith M(1), Pasala S, Engelmann F, Haberthur K, Meyer C, Park B, Grant KA,
Messaoudi I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathobiology and Immunology , Oregon National Primate Research
Center, Oregon Health and Science University, Beaverton, Oregon.

BACKGROUND: Chronic alcohol consumption has been associated with enhanced
susceptibility to both systemic and mucosal infections. However, the exact
mechanisms underlying this enhanced susceptibility remain incompletely
understood.
METHODS: Using a nonhuman primate model of ethanol (EtOH) self-administration, we
examined the impact of chronic alcohol exposure on immune homeostasis, cytokine, 
and growth factor production in peripheral blood, lung, and intestinal mucosa
following 12 months of chronic EtOH exposure.
RESULTS: EtOH exposure inhibited activation-induced production of growth factors 
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF),
and vascular-endothelial growth factor (VEGF) by peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC). Moreover, EtOH significantly reduced the frequency of colonic Th1
and Th17 cells in a dose-dependent manner. In contrast, we did not observe
differences in lymphocyte frequency or soluble factor production in the lung of
EtOH-consuming animals. To uncover mechanisms underlying reduced growth factor
and Th1/Th17 cytokine production, we compared expression levels of microRNAs in
PBMC and intestinal mucosa. Our analysis revealed EtOH-dependent up-regulation of
distinct microRNAs in affected tissues (miR-181a and miR-221 in PBMC; miR-155 in 
colon). Moreover, we were able to detect reduced expression of the transcription 
factors STAT3 and ARNT, which regulate expression of VEGF, G-CSF, and HGF and
contain targets for these microRNAs. To confirm and extend these observations,
PBMC were transfected with either mimics or antagomirs of miR-181 and miR-221,
and protein levels of the transcription factors and growth factors were
determined. Transfection of microRNA mimics led to a reduction in both STAT3/ARNT
as well as VEGF/HGF/G-CSF levels. The opposite outcome was observed when microRNA
antagomirs were transfected.
CONCLUSIONS: Chronic EtOH consumption significantly disrupts both peripheral and 
mucosal immune homeostasis, and this dysregulation may be mediated by changes in 
microRNA expression.

Copyright © 2013 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMCID: PMC3984381
PMID: 24329418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Biochemistry. 2013 Dec 23;52(51):9237-45. doi: 10.1021/bi401100a. Epub 2013 Dec
10.

Chimeric hERG channels containing a tetramerization domain are functional and
stable.

Hausammann GJ(1), Grütter MG.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry, University of Zürich ,
Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zürich, Switzerland.

Biochemical and detailed structural information of human ether-a-go-go-related
gene (hERG) potassium channels are scarce but are a prerequisite to understand
the unwanted interactions of hERG with drugs and the effect of mutations that
lead to long QT syndrome. Despite the huge interest in hERG, to our knowledge,
procedures that provide a purified, functional, and tetrameric hERG channel are
not available. Here, we describe hybrid hERG molecules, termed chimeric hERG
channels, in which the N-terminal Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain is deleted and the
C-terminal C-linker as well as the cyclic nucleotide binding domain (CNBD)
portion is replaced by an artificial tetramerization domain. These chimeric hERG 
channels can be overexpressed in HEK cells, solubilized in detergent, and
purified as tetramers. When expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes, the chimeric
channels exhibit efficient trafficking to the cell surface, whereas a hERG
construct lacking the PAS and C-linker/CNBD domains is retained in the cytoplasm.
The chimeric hERG channels retain essential hERG functions such as
voltage-dependent gating and inhibition by astemizole and the scorpion toxin
BeKm-1. The chimeric channels are thus powerful tools for helping to understand
the contribution of the cytoplasmic hERG domains to the gating process and are
suitable for in vitro biochemical and structural studies.

PMID: 24325597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Jan;12(1):296-308. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.11.007. Epub 2013 
Nov 16.

Pluripotency factors and Polycomb Group proteins repress aryl hydrocarbon
receptor expression in murine embryonic stem cells.

Ko CI(1), Wang Q(1), Fan Y(1), Xia Y(1), Puga A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental Genetics,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3223 Eden Avenue, Cincinnati, OH
45267, USA. (2)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental
Genetics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3223 Eden Avenue,
Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. Electronic address: Alvaro.Puga@uc.edu.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a transcription factor and environmental
sensor that regulates expression of genes involved in drug-metabolism and cell
cycle regulation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses, Ahr ablation in mice
and studies with orthologous genes in invertebrates suggest that AHR may also
play a significant role in embryonic development. To address this hypothesis, we 
studied the regulation of Ahr expression in mouse embryonic stem cells and their 
differentiated progeny. In ES cells, interactions between OCT3/4, NANOG, SOX2 and
Polycomb Group proteins at the Ahr promoter repress AHR expression, which can
also be repressed by ectopic expression of reprogramming factors in hepatoma
cells. In ES cells, unproductive RNA polymerase II binds at the Ahr transcription
start site and drives the synthesis of short abortive transcripts. Activation of 
Ahr expression during differentiation follows from reversal of repressive marks
in Ahr promoter chromatin, release of pluripotency factors and PcG proteins,
binding of Sp factors, establishment of histone marks of open chromatin, and
engagement of active RNAPII to drive full-length RNA transcript elongation. Our
results suggest that reversible Ahr repression in ES cells holds the gene poised 
for expression and allows for a quick switch to activation during embryonic
development.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3896086
PMID: 24316986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2013 Dec;69(Pt 12):1316-21.
doi: 10.1107/S1744309113029199. Epub 2013 Nov 28.

Coiled-coil dimerization of the LOV2 domain of the blue-light photoreceptor
phototropin 1 from Arabidopsis thaliana.

Halavaty AS(1), Moffat K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

A key role in signal transduction and dimerization mediated by Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS)
domains is played by a-helical linkers that flank the structurally similar a/ß
cores of these domains. However, crystal-packing forces and the different
construct lengths and sequences of the PAS domains influence the final length and
orientation of the linkers relative to the core and create uncertainty in the
exact mechanism of the linker function. Thus, structural characterization and
comparison of the linkers within isolated PAS-domain constructs and/or
full-length PAS-containing proteins is important for clarification of the
mechanism. The plant blue-light photoreceptors phototropins possess two
N-terminal flavin mononucleotide-based light, oxygen or voltage (LOV) domains
(LOV1 and LOV2) that comprise a subclass of the PAS family and one C-terminal
serine/threonine kinase domain whose enzymatic activity is regulated by blue
light. The dark-adapted state crystal structures of the Arabidopsis thaliana
phototropin 1 and phototropin 2 LOV1-domain constructs flanked by an N-terminal
A'a helix and the structure of the phototropin 2 core LOV2 domain are known.
Here, the crystal structure of the A. thaliana phototropin 1 LOV2 domain has been
determined in its dark-adapted state. The core is flanked by an N-terminal A'a
helix and a C-terminal Ja helix similar to those in the previously reported
structure of Avena sativa phototropin 1 LOV2. In contrast to the monomeric
A. sativa LOV2, A. thaliana LOV2 is a dimer in which two A'a helices adopt a
scissor-like orientation at the dimer interface and form a short a-helical coiled
coil. The Ja helix predominantly interacts with the ß-sheet and plays a role in
coiled-coil formation and dimerization.

PMCID: PMC3855711
PMID: 24316821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Toxicol Sci. 2014 Mar;138(1):89-103. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kft274. Epub 2013 Dec 3.

Zinc finger nuclease-mediated knockout of AHR or ARNT in human breast cancer
cells abolishes basal and ligand-dependent regulation of CYP1B1 and
differentially affects estrogen receptor a transactivation.

Ahmed S(1), Wang A, Celius T, Matthews J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.

In this study, we used zinc finger nuclease-mediated knockout of the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) or AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) in MCF7 and AHR
knockout in MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells to investigate cross talk among 
AHR, ARNT, and estrogen receptor a (ERa). Knockout of AHR or ARNT prevented the
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-dependent induction of all AHR target 
genes examined. Knockout of AHR or ARNT also significantly reduced basal
cytochrome P4501B1 (CYP1B1) expression levels, which were restored with
overexpression of either protein but not with a DNA binding-deficient AHR mutant.
Basal and TCDD-, 17ß-estradiol (E2)-, or TCDD + E2-dependent recruitment of AHR, 
ARNT, ERa, NCoA3, and RNA polymerase II to CYP1B1 as well as CYP1B1 mRNA levels
were abolished in MCF7-AHR((ko)) and MDA-MB-231 AHR(ko) cells. However, reduced
but significant E2-dependent recruitment of ERa, NCoA3, and RNA polymerase II to 
CYP1B1 and weak increases in CYP1B1 mRNA levels were observed in MCF7 ARNT((ko)) 
cells. Interestingly, E2-dependent increases in trefoil factor 1, but not growth 
regulation by estrogen in breast cancer 1 (GREB1) mRNA levels, were dependent on 
ARNT expression. Moreover, the TCDD-dependent increases in the proteolytic
degradation of ERa were prevented by the loss of AHR or ARNT. Our data show that 
AHR and ARNT play critical roles in the basal, TCDD, and E2-induced regulation of
CYP1B1 but also reveal distinct roles for both proteins in ERa transactivation.

PMID: 24299737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Dev Genes Evol. 2014 Feb;224(1):13-24. doi: 10.1007/s00427-013-0458-4. Epub 2013 
Nov 29.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) in the cnidarian Nematostella vectensis:
comparative expression, protein interactions, and ligand binding.

Reitzel AM(1), Passamaneck YJ, Karchner SI, Franks DG, Martindale MQ, Tarrant AM,
Hahn ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA, USA,
areitze2@uncc.edu.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a member of the basic
helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-Sim (bHLH-PAS) family of transcription factors and has 
diverse roles in development, physiology, and environmental sensing in bilaterian
animals. Studying the expression of conserved genes and function of proteins in
outgroups to protostomes and deuterostomes assists in understanding the antiquity
of gene function and deciphering lineage-specific differences in these bilaterian
clades. We describe the developmental expression of AHR from the sea anemone
Nematostella vectensis and compare its expression with three other members of the
bHLH-PAS family (AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT), Cycle, and a
proto-Single-Minded/Trachealess). NvAHR expression was highest early in the
larval stage with spatial expression in the basal portion of the ectoderm that
became increasingly restricted to the oral pole with concentrated expression in
tentacles of the juvenile polyp. The other bHLH-PAS genes showed a divergent
expression pattern in later larval stages and polyps, in which gene expression
was concentrated in the aboral end, with broader expression in the endoderm later
in development. In co-immunoprecipitation assays, we found no evidence for
heterodimerization of AHR with ARNT, contrary to the conservation of this
specific interaction in all bilaterians studied to date. Similar to results with 
other invertebrate AHRs but in contrast to vertebrate AHRs, NvAHR failed to bind 
two prototypical xenobiotic AHR ligands (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin,
ß-naphthoflavone). Together, our data suggest that AHR's original function in
Eumetazoa likely involved developmental patterning, potentially of neural tissue.
The role of heterodimerization in the function of AHR may have arisen after the
cnidarian-bilaterian ancestor. The absence of xenobiotic binding to NvAHR further
supports a hypothesis for a derived role of this protein in chemical sensing
within the chordates.

PMCID: PMC3915718
PMID: 24292160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2014 Jan;35(1):111-39. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2013.11.003.
Epub 2013 Nov 25.

Sex differences in circadian timing systems: implications for disease.

Bailey M(1), Silver R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Columbia University, United States. Electronic
address: mrb2225@columbia.edu. (2)Department of Psychology, Columbia University, 
United States; Department of Psychology, Barnard College, United States;
Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center,
United States. Electronic address: QR@columbia.edu.

Virtually every eukaryotic cell has an endogenous circadian clock and a
biological sex. These cell-based clocks have been conceptualized as oscillators
whose phase can be reset by internal signals such as hormones, and external cues 
such as light. The present review highlights the inter-relationship between
circadian clocks and sex differences. In mammals, the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN) serves as a master clock synchronizing the phase of clocks throughout the
body. Gonadal steroid receptors are expressed in almost every site that receives 
direct SCN input. Here we review sex differences in the circadian timing system
in the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis (HPG), the
hypothalamic-adrenal-pituitary (HPA) axis, and sleep-arousal systems. We also
point to ways in which disruption of circadian rhythms within these systems
differs in the sexes and is associated with dysfunction and disease.
Understanding sex differentiated circadian timing systems can lead to improved
treatment strategies for these conditions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4041593
PMID: 24287074  [PubMed - in process]


230. IUBMB Life. 2013 Nov;65(11):921-9. doi: 10.1002/iub.1219. Epub 2013 Nov 7.

PAS kinase: a nutrient sensing regulator of glucose homeostasis.

DeMille D(1), Grose JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Brigham Young University,
Provo, UT.

Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) kinase (PASK, PASKIN, and PSK) is a member of the group of
nutrient sensing protein kinases. These protein kinases sense the energy or
nutrient status of the cell and regulate cellular metabolism appropriately. PAS
kinase responds to glucose availability and regulates glucose homeostasis in
yeast, mice, and man. Despite this pivotal role, the molecular mechanisms of PAS 
kinase regulation and function are largely unknown. This review focuses on what
is known about PAS kinase, including its conservation from yeast to man,
identified substrates, associated phenotypes and role in metabolic disease.

© 2013 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMCID: PMC4081539
PMID: 24265199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Nat Rev Cancer. 2013 Dec;13(12):827-41. doi: 10.1038/nrc3621.

bHLH-PAS proteins in cancer.

Bersten DC(1), Sullivan AE, Peet DJ, Whitelaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science (Biochemistry) and the Centre for
Molecular Pathology, University of Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia.

Mammalian basic HLH (helix-loop-helix)-PER-ARNT-SIM (bHLH-PAS) proteins are
heterodimeric transcription factors that sense and respond to environmental
signals (such as pollutants) or to physiological signals (for example, hypoxia
and circadian rhythms) through their two PAS domains. PAS domains form a generic 
three-dimensional fold, which commonly contains an internal cavity capable of
small-molecule binding and outer surfaces adept at protein-protein interactions. 
These proteins are important in several pro-tumour and antitumour pathways and
their activities can be modulated by both natural metabolites and
oncometabolites. Recently determined structures and successful small-molecule
screening programmes are now providing new opportunities to discover selective
agonists and antagonists directed against this multitasking family of
transcription factors.

PMID: 24263188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2014 May;61(5):933-5. doi: 10.1002/pbc.24865. Epub 2013 Nov
19.

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia in a child: a challenging diagnosis in pediatric
oncology practice.

Demir HA(1), Bayhan T, Üner A, Kurtulan O, Karakus E, Emir S, Özyörük D, Ceylaner
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Ankara Children's Hematology 
Oncology Education and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia/lymphoma (CLL) is an extremely rare disease during
childhood. We report a 16-year-old female who presented with lymphadenopathies
and she was diagnosed as T cell lymphoblastic lymphoma. Her chemotherapy response
was minimal and clinical findings were unusual. Therefore, her biopsy specimen
was re-examined and diagnosis was changed to CLL. Chemotherapy protocol including
fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, rituximab was administrated and good response was 
observed. In our patient deletion at 1q21.2 region that includes aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) gene was detected via comparative genomic
hybridization method. ARNT gene deletion may be a new mutation in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia development.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24249660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2014 Jan;350(2):154-60. doi: 10.1111/1574-6968.12329. Epub
2013 Dec 2.

PSK1 regulates expression of SOD1 involved in oxidative stress tolerance in
yeast.

Huang M(1), Xu Q, Mitsui K, Xu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Quanzhou Medical College, Quanzhou, Fujian, China; The Second Department of
Biochemistry, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Medicine and Engineering,
University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan.

The Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domain serine/threonine kinase PAS kinase is involved in
energy flux and protein synthesis. In yeast, PSK1 and PSK2 are two partially
redundant PASK homologs. We recently generated PSK2 deletion mutant and showed
that Psk2 acts as a nutrient-sensing protein kinase to modulate Ultradian
clock-coupled respiratory oscillation in yeast. Here, we show that deletion of
PSK1 increased the sensitivity of yeast cells to oxidative stress (H2 O2
treatment) and partially inhibited cell growth; however, the growth of the
PSK2-deleted mutant was similar to that of the wild type. Superoxide dismutase-1 
(SOD1) mRNA and protein levels were lower in PSK1-deletion mutant than the wild
type. The mRNA levels of stress response genes CTT1, HSP104, ATH1, NTH1 and SOD2 
were similar in both the PSK1-deleted mutant and wild-type yeast. Furthermore,
intracellular accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) was noted in
PSK1-deleted mutant. These results suggest that PSK1 induces SOD1 expression to
protect against oxidative stress in yeast.

© 2013 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by John Wiley 
& Sons Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24236444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Leuk Res. 2013 Dec;37(12):1750-6. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.10.010. Epub 2013
Oct 22.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) modulates the
antioxidant response in AML cells.

Gu C(1), Gonzalez J, Zhang T, Kamel-Reid S, Wells RA.

Author information: 
(1)The J. Douglas Crashley MDS Research Laboratory, Sunnybrook Research
Institute, 2075 Bayview Avenue, Toronto, ON M4N 3M5, Canada.

We observed AML cell lines vary in their sensitivity to induction of apoptosis by
troglitazone (TG), which induces apoptosis through the generation of
intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS). TG-resistant cell lines had
increased abundance of ARNT transcripts and protein. Expression of ARNT in
TG-sensitive cells made these cells resistant to both TG and daunorubicin.
ARNT-expressing cells had increased expression of SOD2 and Nrf2 transcripts and
elevated intracellular GSH concentration. Our results indicate that ARNT
expression in AML cells augments antioxidant response and confers resistance to
ROS inducers. This suggests ARNT may modulate ROS signaling and drug response in 
AML.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24220583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Toxicol Sci. 2013;38(6):903-12.

Effects of transovarian exposure to p,p'-DDT and p,p'-DDE on avian reproduction
using Japanese quails.

Kamata R(1), Shiraishi F, Takahashi S, Shimizu A, Nakajima D, Kageyama S, Sasaki 
T, Temma K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Environmental Risk, National Institute for Environmental
Studies.

In the 1950s to 1970s developed countries reported declines in populations of
raptorial and fish-eating birds and dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) and its
metabolites were considered causative substances because they accumulated
significantly in the tissues of wild birds and animals. However, except for the
estrogenic effects of o,p'-DDT, a minor component of commercial DDT, there has
been no compelling evidence that DDT directly affects avian reproductive systems.
To assess the possible impact of DDT on development and reproduction of birds,
exposure experiments to the major component of commercial DDT, p,p'-DDT, and its 
persistent metabolite, p,p'-dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (DDE), were
performed using Japanese quail (Coturnix japonica) eggs; the test substances (3
to 100 µg/g) were injected into the yolk prior to incubation, and hatched chicks 
were raised to adulthood. p,p'-DDT had no significant effects on the morphology
and function of the reproductive systems, although the hatchability of treated
eggs was reduced at the highest dose (100 µg/g). High doses of p,p'-DDE slightly 
enhanced the eggshell forming ability of female quails; eggshell mass and
thickness were increased at 30 µg/g or more although no morphological changes
were observed in the oviduct. Transcriptions of the CYP11A1 gene in the ovaries, 
and of AHR and ARNT in the livers, of adult females were significantly increased 
at 3 µg/g or more of p,p'-DDT. Except for low hatchability, transovarian exposure
to p,p'-DDT or p,p'-DDE did not markedly impair the avian reproductive systems,
but the hormonal actions of these compounds are likely to change reproductive and
hepatic functions even after maturation.

PMID: 24213010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Gene. 2014 Jan 25;534(2):256-64. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.10.048. Epub 2013 Nov
7.

Cloning, characterization, hypoxia and heat shock response of hypoxia inducible
factor-1 (HIF-1) from the small abalone Haliotis diversicolor.

Cai X(1), Huang Y(1), Zhang X(1), Wang S(1), Zou Z(1), Wang G(1), Wang Y(2),
Zhang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for the East China Sea, Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries College, Jimei University, Xiamen 361021, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for the East China Sea, Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries College, Jimei University, Xiamen 361021, China.
Electronic address: ylwang@jmu.edu.cn. (3)Department of Natural Sciences and
Mathematics, State University of New York at Cobleskill, NY 12043, USA.
Electronic address: zhangziping@hotmail.com.

In this study, hypoxia inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) and hypoxia inducible
factor-1ß (HIF-1ß) from small abalone Haliotis diversicolor were cloned. The cDNA
of H. diversicolor HIF-1a (HdHIF-1a) is 2,833 bp encoding a protein of 711aa and 
H. diversicolor HIF-1ß (HdHIF-1ß) is 1919 bp encoding a protein of 590aa. Similar
to other species' HIF-1, HdHIF-1 has one basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain and
two Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domains, and HdHIF-1a has a oxygen-dependent degradation
domain (ODDD) with two proline hydroxylation motifs and a C-terminal
transactivation domain (C-TAD) with an asparagine hydroxylation motif. Under
normoxic conditions, HdHIF-1a and HdHIF-1ß mRNAs were constitutively present in
all examined tissues. Under hypoxia (2.0mg/L DO at 25°C) stress, HdHIF-1a
expression was up-regulated in gills at 4h, 24h and 96 h, and in hemocytes at 24h
and 96 h, while HdHIF-1ß remained relatively constant. Under thermal stress
(31°C), HdHIF-1a expression was significantly increased in gills at 4h, and
hemocytes at 0 h and 4 h, while HdHIF-1ß expression still remained relatively
constant. These results suggested that HIF-1a may play an important role in
adaption to poor environment in H. diversicolor.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24211325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Cell. 2013 Nov 7;155(4):793-806. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.026.

RNA-methylation-dependent RNA processing controls the speed of the circadian
clock.

Fustin JM(1), Doi M, Yamaguchi Y, Hida H, Nishimura S, Yoshida M, Isagawa T,
Morioka MS, Kakeya H, Manabe I, Okamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Department of System Biology,
Kyoto University, 46-29 Yoshida-Shimo-Adachi-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501,
Japan.

Comment in
    Cell. 2013 Nov 7;155(4):740-1.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2014 Jan;15(1):3.

The eukaryotic biological clock involves a negative transcription-translation
feedback loop in which clock genes regulate their own transcription and that of
output genes of metabolic significance. While around 10% of the liver
transcriptome is rhythmic, only about a fifth is driven by de novo transcription,
indicating mRNA processing is a major circadian component. Here, we report that
inhibition of transmethylation reactions elongates the circadian period. RNA
sequencing then reveals methylation inhibition causes widespread changes in the
transcription of the RNA processing machinery, associated with m(6)A-RNA
methylation. We identify m(6)A sites on many clock gene transcripts and show that
specific inhibition of m(6)A methylation by silencing of the m(6)A methylase
Mettl3 is sufficient to elicit circadian period elongation and RNA processing
delay. Analysis of the circadian nucleocytoplasmic distribution of clock genes
Per2 and Arntl then revealed an uncoupling between steady-state pre-mRNA and
cytoplasmic mRNA rhythms when m(6)A methylation is inhibited.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24209618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 24;8(10):e77419. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077419.
eCollection 2013.

Beta-cell ARNT is required for normal glucose tolerance in murine pregnancy.

Lau SM(1), Cha KM, Karunatillake A, Stokes RA, Cheng K, McLean M, Cheung NW,
Gonzalez FJ, Gunton JE.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Transcription Factors Group, Garvan Institute of Medical
Research, Sydney, Australia ; Prince of Wales Clinical School, Faculty of
Medicine, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

AIMS: Insulin secretion increases in normal pregnancy to meet increasing demands.
Inability to increase beta-cell function results in gestational diabetes mellitus
(GDM). We have previously shown that the expression of the transcription factor
ARNT (Aryl-hydrocarbon Receptor Nuclear Translocator) is reduced in the islets of
humans with type 2 diabetes. Mice with a beta-cell specific deletion of ARNT
(ß-ARNT mice) have impaired glucose tolerance secondary to defective insulin
secretion. We hypothesised that ARNT is required to increase beta-cell function
during pregnancy, and that ß-ARNT mice would be unable to compensate for the
beta-cell stress of pregnancy. The aims of this study were to investigate the
mechanisms of ARNT regulation of beta-cell function and glucose tolerance in
pregnancy.
METHODS: ß-ARNT females were mated with floxed control (FC) males and FC females 
with ß-ARNT males.
RESULTS: During pregnancy, ß-ARNT mice had a marked deterioration in glucose
tolerance secondary to defective insulin secretion. There was impaired beta-cell 
proliferation in late pregnancy, associated with decreased protein and mRNA
levels of the islet cell-cycle regulator cyclinD2. There was also reduced
expression of Irs2 and G6PI. In contrast, in control mice, pregnancy was
associated with a 2.1-fold increase in ARNT protein and a 1.6-fold increase in
cyclinD2 protein, and with increased beta-cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Islet ARNT increases in normal murine pregnancy and beta-cell ARNT
is required for cyclinD2 induction and increased beta-cell proliferation in
pregnancy.

PMCID: PMC3812008
PMID: 24204824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Aquat Toxicol. 2013 Nov 15;144-145:162-71. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2013.09.031.
Epub 2013 Oct 17.

An investigation of endocrine disrupting effects and toxic mechanisms modulated
by benzo[a]pyrene in female scallop Chlamys farreri.

Tian S(1), Pan L, Sun X.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Mariculture, Ministry of Education, Ocean University of 
China, Qingdao 266003, PR China.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the endocrine disrupting effects
induced by benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P) and explore the underlying mechanisms in
mollusks. In this study, sexually mature female Chlamys farreri were exposed to
benzo[a]pyrene for 10 days at four different concentrations as 0, 0.025, 0.5 and 
10 µg/L. Sex steroids were identified and quantified by electrochemiluminescence 
immunoassay (ECLIA) method and results showed that exposure to B[a]P exerts great
suppression on 17ß-estradiol, testosterone production and disrupts progesterone
levels in ovary. Transcription of genes were detected and measured by real-time
RT-PCR. It showed that at day 10 B[a]P inhibited 3 ß-HSD, CYP17 and 17ß-HSD mRNA 
expression in a dose-dependent manner, which suggests that they could be
potential targets of B[a]P that disrupt steroidogenic machinery. Moreover, 0.025 
µg/L B[a]P activated transcription of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), AHR
nuclear translocator (ARNT), CYP1A1 and estrogen receptor (ER), while 10 µg/L
B[a]P suppressed all of them. The consistency of their responses to B[a]P
exposure implies that AHR action may be involved in invertebrate CYP regulation
and ER transcription despite of unknown mechanisms. Additionally, B[a]P exposure 
could induce ovarian impairment and developmental delay in C. farreri. Overall,
sensitivity of C. farreri to endocrine disruption and toxicity suggests that C.
farreri is a suitable species for study of endocrine-disrupting effects in marine
invertebrates. This study will form a solid basis for a realistic extrapolation
of endocrine disrupting effects across taxonomic groups and phyla.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24185101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Oncol Rep. 2014 Jan;31(1):95-102. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2820. Epub 2013 Oct 25.

Increased metastatic potential of residual carcinoma after transarterial
embolization in rat with McA-RH7777 hepatoma.

Wang GZ(1), Fang ZT, Zhang W, Qu XD, Qian S, Liu R, Wang JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Interventional Radiology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, P.R. China.

Transarterial chemoembolization represents a first-line non-curative therapy for 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), although the biological changes in the remaining 
cancer after embolization are not completely understood. In the present study, we
examined whether transarterial embolization (TAE) enhances the metastatic
potential of residual HCC and investigated the mechanisms underlying
embolization. The hepatoma cell line McA-RH7777, which is marked by green
fluorescent protein (GFP), was used in the study. The invasion of cells cultured 
under hypoxia and normoxia was observed using the Transwell assay. Twenty male
buffalo rats were implanted with GFP transfected McA-RH7777 tumors in the left
lateral lobe of the liver. After laparotomy and retrograde placement of a
catheter into the gastroduodenal artery (on the 14th day after implantation), TAE
using lipiodol (0.2 ml/kg) was performed. Tumor volumes were measured before and 
after treatment using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Lung metastases were
observed using fluorescence imaging, and the molecular changes of residual tumor 
cells were evaluated by western blotting or immunohistochemistry. The invasion
assays indicated that the number of invading hypoxic cells was significantly
higher than that of normoxic cells (30.2 ± 2.46 vs. 20.4 ± 1.89, P=0.013).
Accompanying an increase in hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) expression, the 
metastatic potential of tumor cells following hypoxia or TAE was enhanced. This
enhanced metastatic potential was indicated by a significant reduction in the
expression of E-cadherin and an upregulation of N-cadherin and vimentin
expression. The number of lung metastases in the TAE group was 19.20 ± 1.76,
whereas this number was 11.30 ± 1.54 in the control group, which represented a
statistically significant difference (P=0.003). In conclusion, hypoxia in the
residual tumor after TAE can increase the invasiveness and metastatic potential
of HCC and may be responsible for the failure of TAE.

PMID: 24173823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Toxicol Sci. 2014 Jan;137(1):102-13. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kft234. Epub 2013 Oct
17.

Nucleotide specificity of DNA binding of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor:ARNT
complex is unaffected by ligand structure.

DeGroot DE(1), Denison MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis,
California 95616.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that mediates the toxic and biological effects of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD, dioxin) and a wide variety of
structurally diverse ligands through its ability to translocate into the nucleus 
and bind to a specific DNA recognition site (the dioxin-responsive element [DRE])
adjacent to responsive genes. Although the sequence of the DRE is well defined,
several reports suggested that the nucleotide specificity of AhR DNA binding may 
vary depending on the structure of its bound ligand. Given the potential
toxicological significance of this hypothesis, an unbiased
DNA-selection-and-PCR-amplification approach was utilized to directly determine
whether binding and activation of the AhR by structurally diverse agonists alter 
its nucleotide specificity of DNA binding. Guinea pig hepatic cytosolic AhR
activated in vitro by equipotent concentrations of TCDD, 3-methylcholanthrene,
ß-naphthoflavone, indirubin, L-kynurenine, or YH439 was incubated with a pool of 
DNA oligonucleotides containing a 15-base pair variable region consisting of all 
possible nucleotides. The AhR-bound oligonucleotides isolated by
immunoprecipitation were PCR amplified and used in subsequent rounds of
selection. Sequence analysis of a total of 196 isolated oligonucleotides revealed
that each ligand-activated AhR:ARNT complex only bound to DRE-containing DNA
oligonucleotides; no non-DRE-containing DNA oligonucleotides were identified.
These results demonstrate that the binding and activation of the AhR by
structurally diverse agonists do not appear to alter its nucleotide specificity
of DNA binding and suggest that stimulation of gene expression mediated by direct
DNA binding of ligand-activated AhR:ARNT complexes is DRE dependent.

PMCID: PMC3924043
PMID: 24136190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Atherosclerosis. 2013 Nov;231(1):136-40. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2013.08.031. Epub 2013 Sep 12.

Meta-analysis identifies robust association between SNP rs17465637 in MIA3 on
chromosome 1q41 and coronary artery disease.

Li X(1), Huang Y, Yin D, Wang D, Xu C, Wang F, Yang Q, Wang X, Li S, Chen S,
Xiong X, Huang Y, Zhao Y, Wang L, Zhu X, Su Z, Zhou B, Zhang Y, Wang L, Chang L, 
Xu C, Li H, Ke T, Ren X, Cheng X, Yang Y, Liao Y, Tu X, Wang QK.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education, Cardio-X 
Institute, College of Life Science and Technology and Center for Human Genome
Research, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Several large-scale meta-GWAS identified significant association between SNP
rs17465637 in the MIA3 gene and coronary artery disease (CAD) in the European
ancestry populations. However, three follow-up replication studies in the Chinese
populations yielded inconsistent results. In order to unequivocally determine
whether SNP rs17465637 is associated with CAD, we performed an independent case
control association study in the Chinese Han population and a follow-up large
scale meta-analysis for SNP rs17465637. Our study included 2503 CAD patients and 
2920 non-CAD controls of the Chinese Han origin. A significant association was
found between SNP rs17465637 and CAD (P = 0.01, OR = 1.11). Meta-analysis
included 7263 CAD patients and 8347 controls combined from five Asian
populations. The association between SNP rs17465637 and CAD became highly
significant (P = 4.97 × 10(-5), OR = 1.11). Similar analysis also identified
significant association between SNP rs17465637 and MI (2424 cases vs.
6,536controls; P = 5.00 × 10(-3), OR = 1.10). We conclude that SNP rs17465637 in 
MIA3 is indeed a genetic risk factor for CAD across different ethnic populations.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24125424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2013 Dec 1;194:326-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.09.021.
Epub 2013 Oct 8.

Sesquiterpene action, and morphogenetic signaling through the ortholog of
retinoid X receptor, in higher Diptera.

Jones D(1), Jones G, Teal PE.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40504,
USA. Electronic address: djones@uky.edu.

Morphogenetic signaling by small terpenoid hormones is a common feature of both
vertebrate and invertebrate development. Most attention on insect developmental
signaling by small terpenoids has focused on signaling by juvenile hormone
through bHLH-PAS proteins (e.g., the MET protein), especially as that signaling
axis intersects with ecdysteroid action through the receptor EcR. However, a
series of endocrine and pharmacological studies on pupariation in cyclorrhaphous 
Diptera have remained persistently refractory to explanation with the above
two-axis model. Recently, the terpenoid compound methyl farnesoate has been
physicochemically demonstrated to exist in circulation at physiological
concentrations, in several mecopterid orders, including Diptera. In addition, it 
has also been recently demonstrated that the receptor to which methyl farnesoate 
binds with nanomolar affinity (ultraspiracle, an ortholog of retinoid X receptor)
requires a functioning ligand binding pocket to sustain the morphogenetic
transition to puparium formation. This review evaluates endocrine and
pharmacological evidence for developmental pathways reached by methyl farnesoate 
action, and assesses the participation of the retinoid X receptor ligand pocket
in signal transduction to those developmental endpoints.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24120505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2014 Jun 20;20(18):2997-3006. doi: 10.1089/ars.2013.5671. 
Epub 2014 Jan 3.

Transcriptional control of antioxidant defense by the circadian clock.

Patel SA(1), Velingkaar NS, Kondratov RV.

Author information: 
(1)Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences Department, Center for Gene 
Regulation in Health and Disease, Cleveland State University , Cleveland, Ohio.

SIGNIFICANCE: The circadian clock, an internal timekeeping system, is implicated 
in the regulation of metabolism and physiology, and circadian dysfunctions are
associated with pathological changes in model organisms and increased risk of
some diseases in humans.
RECENT ADVANCES: Data obtained in different organisms, including humans, have
established a tight connection between the clock and cellular redox signaling
making it among the major candidates for a link between the circadian system and 
physiological processes.
CRITICAL ISSUES: In spite of the recent progress in understanding the importance 
of the circadian clock in the regulation of reactive oxygen species homeostasis, 
molecular mechanisms and key regulators are mostly unknown.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS: Here we review, with an emphasis on transcriptional control,
the circadian-clock-dependent control of oxidative stress response system as a
potential mechanism in age-associated diseases. We will discuss the roles of the 
core clock components such as brain and muscle ARNT-like 1, Circadian Locomotor
Output Cycles Kaput, the circadian-clock-controlled transcriptional factors such 
as nuclear factor erythroid-2-related factor, and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor and circadian clock control chromatin modifying
enzymes from sirtuin family in the regulation of cellular and organism
antioxidant defense.

PMCID: PMC4038985
PMID: 24111970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Traffic. 2014 Jan;15(1):104-21. doi: 10.1111/tra.12124. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

Longin and GAF domains: structural evolution and adaptation to the subcellular
trafficking machinery.

De Franceschi N(1), Wild K, Schlacht A, Dacks JB, Sinning I, Filippini F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Bioinformatics Unit, Department of Biology, University
of Padova, Padova, Italy; Current address: Centre for Biotechnology, University
of Turku, Turku, Finland.

Endomembrane trafficking is one of the most prominent cytological features of
eukaryotes. Given their widespread distribution and specialization, coiled-coil
domains, coatomer domains, small GTPases and Longin domains are considered
primordial 'building blocks' of the membrane trafficking machineries. Longin
domains are conserved across eukaryotes and were likely to be present in the Last
Eukaryotic Common Ancestor. The Longin fold is based on the a-ß-a sandwich
architecture and a unique topology, possibly accounting for the special
adaptation to the eukaryotic trafficking machinery. The ancient Per ARNT Sim
(PAS) and cGMP-specific phosphodiesterases, Adenylyl cyclases and FhlA (GAF)
family domains show a similar architecture, and the identification of prokaryotic
counterparts of GAF domains involved in trafficking provides an additional
connection for the endomembrane system back into the pre-eukaryotic world.
Proteome-wide, comparative bioinformatic analyses of the domains reveal three
binding regions (A, B and C) mediating either specific or conserved
protein-protein interactions. While the A region mediates intra- and
inter-molecular interactions, the B region is involved in binding small GTPases, 
thus providing an evolutionary connection among major building blocks in the
endomembrane system. Finally, we propose that the peculiar interaction surface of
the C region of the Longin domain allowed it to extensively integrate into the
endomembrane trafficking machinery in the earliest stages of building the
eukaryotic cell.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24107188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Cardiovasc Res. 2014 Jan 1;101(1):69-77. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvt226. Epub 2013 Oct
4.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1-induced G protein-coupled receptor 35 expression is an
early marker of progressive cardiac remodelling.

Ronkainen VP(1), Tuomainen T, Huusko J, Laidinen S, Malinen M, Palvimo JJ,
Ylä-Herttuala S, Vuolteenaho O, Tavi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute of Biomedicine and Biocenter Oulu,
University of Oulu, FI-90014, Oulu, Finland.

AIMS: G protein-coupled receptor 35 (GPR35) has been characterized to be one of
the genes that are up-regulated in human heart failure. Since mechanisms
controlling GPR35 expression are not known, we investigated the regulation of
GPR35 gene and protein expression in cardiac myocytes and in the mouse models of 
cardiac failure.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In cardiac myocytes, GPR35 gene expression was found to be
exceptionally sensitive to hypoxia and induced by hypoxia-inducible factor-1
(HIF-1) activation. HIF-1-dependent regulation was established by genetic
(HIF-1/VP16, Inhibitory Per/Arnt/Sim domain protein) and chemical
[desferrioxamine (DFO)] modulation of the HIF-1 pathway and further confirmed by 
mutation analysis of the GPR35 promoter and by demonstrating direct binding of
endogenous HIF-1 to the gene promoter. Hypoxia increased the number and density
of GPR35 receptors on the cardiomyocyte cell membranes. Chemical GPR35 agonist
Zaprinast caused GPR35 activation and receptor internalization in cardiac
myocytes. In addition, overexpressed GPR35 disrupted actin cytoskeleton
arrangement and caused morphological changes in cultured cardiomyocytes. GPR35
gene and protein expressions were also induced in mouse models of cardiac
failure; the acute phase of myocardial infarction and during the compensatory and
decompensatory phase of pressure-load induced cardiac hypertrophy.
CONCLUSIONS: Cardiac expression of GPR35 is regulated by hypoxia through
activation of HIF-1. The expression of GPR35 in mouse models of cardiac
infarction and pressure load suggests that GPR35 could be used as an early marker
of progressive cardiac failure.

PMID: 24095869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Biochem. 2013 Dec;154(6):561-7. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvt088. Epub 2013 Oct 3.

Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of IPAS by its unique nuclear import and export
signals unshared with other HIF-3a splice variants.

Torii S(1), Sakaki K, Otomo M, Saka K, Yasumoto K, Sogawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku 
University, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

Inhibitory Per/Arnt/Sim (PAS) domain protein (IPAS) is a splice variant of
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-3a, and possesses two entirely different
functions. One is as a transcriptional repressor against HIF-dependent hypoxic
gene activation. The other is as a pro-apoptotic factor by direct binding to the 
pro-survival protein Bcl-xL and its related proteins on mitochondria. Presently, 
the regulatory mechanism that determines the intracellular distribution of IPAS
to fulfill each of the two functions is unknown. As a first step towards
elucidation of the mechanism, nucleocytoplasmic transport signals of IPAS were
explored. A bipartite-like nuclear localization signal (NLS) was found in the
N-terminal region by the deletion and mutation analysis of EGFP-IPAS. In
addition, the helix-loop-helix domain showed weak nuclear import/retention
activity. A leptomycin B-sensitive nuclear export signal (NES) was localized in
the C-terminal region of the protein. A proline-rich region supported the NES
activity. These NLS and NES are not carried by the other variants of HIF-3a due
to differential exon usage. These results strongly suggest that IPAS is a
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein.

PMID: 24092767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Toxicol Lett. 2013 Nov 25;223(2):183-91. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2013.09.014. Epub 
2013 Sep 30.

Dexamethasone accelerates degradation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and
suppresses CYP1A1 induction in placental JEG-3 cell line.

Stejskalova L(1), Rulcova A, Vrzal R, Dvorak Z, Pavek P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Translation Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and
Dentistry, Palacky University in Olomouc, Hnevotiska 5, 779 00 Olomouc, Czech
Republic; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Charles
University in Prague, Heyrovskeho 1203, Hradec Kralove 500 05, Czech Republic.

The JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cell line has been proposed as a model cell line of
human placental trophoblast for induction studies via aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AHR). We examined whether glucocorticoid dexamethasone influences AHR-mediated
induction of CYP1A1 enzyme in the JEG-3 cell line. We found that dexamethasone
dose- and time-dependently suppresses CYP1A1 transactivation in gene reporter
assays, CYP1A1 mRNA induction, and upregulation of 7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase
(EROD) activity by 3-methylcholanthrene (MC) and
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in JEG-3 cells. Co-transfection of
JEG-3 cells with glucocorticoid receptor (GR) expression construct and treatment 
with dexamethasone abolished the effect of MC on CYP1A1 promoter construct in
transient transfection gene reporter assays. RU486, a GR antagonist, suppressed
the effect of dexamethasone on MC-induced transactivation of AHR responsive
reporter constructs. We also found that dexamethasone stimulates both
ligand-dependent and ligand-independent degradation of AHR but not of aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) protein in JEG-3 cells. In
experiments with proteasome inhibitors MG132 and bortezomib, we found that the
degradation is not sensitive to proteasome inhibition in JEG-3. We can conclude
that dexamethasone suppresses AHR-mediated CYP1A1 induction in JEG-3 cells
through the unique mechanism of AHR-GR crosstalk, which involves accelerated
degradation of AHR.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24091107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2013;32(4):849-58. doi: 10.1159/000354487. Epub 2013 Sep
20.

The Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Nuclear Translocator (ARNT/HIF-1ß) is influenced by
hypoxia and hypoxia-mimetics.

Wolff M(1), Jelkmann W, Dunst J, Depping R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologie, Center for Structural and Cell Biology in Medicine, 
Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Nuclear Translocator (ARNT, HIF-1ß) is 
a member of the basic-Helix-Loop-Helix PER/ARNT/SIM (bHLH/PAS) protein family and
a vital transcriptional regulator regarding development and physiological
adaptation processes. ARNT is discussed to be linked with cancer, and other
diseases. ARNT is known to be translocated into the cell nucleus, where
accumulation of the protein takes place. ARNT is a heterodimerisation partner of 
the xenobiotic ligand activated Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor (AhR), the Single
Minded proteins (SIM), the cardiovascular helix-loop-helix factor 1 and the
Hypoxia Inducible Factor proteins (HIF-a). ARNT is obligatory for HIF-1, HIF-2
and HIF-3 binding to DNA. Whereas degradation of the HIF-a subunits is suppressed
by hypoxia, ARNT is generally regarded as constitutively expressed in excess
within the cell, and stabilisation is commonly thought to be oxygen-independent. 
However, we provide evidence that the regulation of ARNT is far more complex. The
aim of our study was to reevaluate the regulation of ARNT expression.
METHODS: We examined cell lines of different origin like MCF-7 and T47D (human
breast cancer), HeLa (human cervix carcinoma), Hep3B and HepG2 (human hepatoma), 
Kelly (human neuroblastoma), REPC (human kidney) and Cos7 (primary primate
kidney) cells. We used immunoblot analysis, densitometry, RT-PCR and transient
transfection.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Our results show that ARNT protein levels are influenced 
by hypoxia and hypoxia mimetics such as cobalt(II)-chloride (CoCl2) and
dimethyloxalylglycine (DMOG) in a cell line specific manner. We demonstrate that 
this effect might be triggered by HIF-1a which plays an important role in the
process of stabilizing ARNT in hypoxia.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 24081025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Mol Metab. 2013 May 10;2(3):184-93. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2013.05.002.
eCollection 2013.

Role of the circadian clock gene Per2 in adaptation to cold temperature.

Chappuis S(1), Ripperger JA, Schnell A, Rando G, Jud C, Wahli W, Albrecht U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Unit of Biochemistry, University of Fribourg,
Switzerland.

Adaptive thermogenesis allows mammals to resist to cold. For instance, in brown
adipose tissue (BAT) the facultative uncoupling of the proton gradient from ATP
synthesis in mitochondria is used to generate systemic heat. However, this system
necessitates an increase of the Uncoupling protein 1 (Ucp1) and its activation by
free fatty acids. Here we show that mice without functional Period2 (Per2) were
cold sensitive because their adaptive thermogenesis system was less efficient.
Upon cold-exposure, Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) induced Per2 in the BAT.
Subsequently, PER2 as a co-activator of PPARa increased expression of Ucp1. PER2 
also increased Fatty acid binding protein 3 (Fabp3), a protein important to
transport free fatty acids from the plasma to mitochondria to activate UCP1.
Hence, in BAT PER2 is important for the coordination of the molecular response of
mice exposed to cold by synchronizing UCP1 expression and its activation.

PMCID: PMC3773826
PMID: 24049733  [PubMed]


251. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Oct 1;110(40):16021-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1305980110. Epub 2013 Sep 16.

A positive feedback loop links circadian clock factor CLOCK-BMAL1 to the basic
transcriptional machinery.

Lande-Diner L(1), Boyault C, Kim JY, Weitz CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

Circadian clocks in mammals are built on a negative feedback loop in which the
heterodimeric transcription factor circadian locomotor output cycles kaput
(CLOCK)-brain, muscle Arnt-like 1 (BMAL1) drives the expression of its own
inhibitors, the PERIOD and CRYPTOCHROME proteins. Reactivation of CLOCK-BMAL1
occurs at a specific time several hours after PERIOD and CRYPTOCHROME protein
turnover, but the mechanism underlying this process is unknown. We found that
mouse BMAL1 complexes include TRAP150 (thyroid hormone receptor-associated
protein-150; also known as THRAP3). TRAP150 is a selective coactivator for
CLOCK-BMAL1, which oscillates under CLOCK-BMAL1 transcriptional control. TRAP150 
promotes CLOCK-BMAL1 binding to target genes and links CLOCK-BMAL1 to the
transcriptional machinery at target-gene promoters. Depletion of TRAP150 caused
low-amplitude, long-period rhythms, identifying it as a positive clock element.
The activity of TRAP150 defines a positive feedback loop within the clock and
provides a potential mechanism for timing the reactivation of circadian
transcription.

PMCID: PMC3791755
PMID: 24043798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mar Environ Res. 2013 Dec;92:43-51. doi: 10.1016/j.marenvres.2013.08.010. Epub
2013 Aug 27.

Immune-relevant and new xenobiotic molecular biomarkers to assess anthropogenic
stress in seals.

Weirup L(1), Müller S, Ronnenberg K, Rosenberger T, Siebert U, Lehnert K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Terrestrial and Aquatic Wildlife Research, University of
Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Foundation, 25761 Büsum, Germany.

Harbour seals as top predators and indicators for ecosystem health are exposed to
increasing pressure caused by anthropogenic activities in their marine
environment. After their lactation period of about 24 days pups are weaned and
left to hunt on their own. Little is known about the development of their immune 
system and a better understanding of anthropogenic impacts on the general health 
and immune system of harbour seal pups is needed. mRNA transcription of six
immuno-relevant biomarkers was analysed in 13 abandoned harbour seal pups from
the North Sea, fostered at the Seal Centre Friedrichskoog, Germany. RNAlater
blood samples were taken at admission, day 22 and before release and analysed
using RT-qPCR. Significant differences in HSP70, cytokine IL-2 and xenobiotic
biomarkers AHR, ARNT and PPARa transcription were found between admission, during
rehabilitation and before release. Highest levels at admission may result from
dehydration, handling, transport and contaminant exposure via lactation. The
significant decrease is linked to health improvement, feeding and adaptation. The
increase before release is suspected to be due to infection pressure and
contaminant exposure from feeding on fish. Molecular biomarkers are a sensitive
tool to evaluate health and pollutant exposure and useful to serve as early
warning indicators, monitoring and case-by-case tool for marine mammals in human 
care and the wild.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24025588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 11;288(41):29345-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.506139. Epub
2013 Sep 3.

Charting the signal trajectory in a light-oxygen-voltage photoreceptor by random 
mutagenesis and covariance analysis.

Gleichmann T(1), Diensthuber RP, Möglich A.

Author information: 
(1)From the Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institut für Biologie,
Biophysikalische Chemie, Invalidenstraße 42, 10115 Berlin, Germany.

Modular signal receptors empower organisms to process environmental stimuli into 
adequate physiological responses. At the molecular level, a sensor module
receives signals and processes the inherent information into changes of
biological activity of an effector module. To better understand the molecular
bases underpinning these processes, we analyzed signal reception and processing
in the dimeric light-oxygen-voltage (LOV) blue light receptor YF1 that serves as 
a paradigm for the widespread Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) signal receptors. Random
mutagenesis identifies numerous YF1 variants in which biological activity is
retained but where light regulation is abolished or inverted. One group of
variants carries mutations within the LOV photosensor that disrupt proper
coupling of the flavin-nucleotide chromophore to the protein scaffold. Another
larger group bears mutations that cluster at the dyad interface and disrupt
signal transmission to two coaxial coiled-coils that connect to the effector.
Sequence covariation implies wide conservation of structural and mechanistic
motifs, as also borne out by comparison to several PAS domains in which mutations
leading to disruption of signal transduction consistently map to confined regions
broadly equivalent to those identified in YF1. Not only do these data provide
insight into general mechanisms of signal transduction, but also they establish
concrete means for customized reprogramming of signal receptors.

PMCID: PMC3795236
PMID: 24003219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Nov;33(21):4346-56. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00698-13. Epub 2013 Sep 
3.

Structure and dimerization properties of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor PAS-A
domain.

Wu D(1), Potluri N, Kim Y, Rastinejad F.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Signaling and Disease Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research
Institute, Orlando, Florida, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor
that binds to xenobiotics and responds by regulating the expression of gene
programs required for detoxification and metabolism. AHR and its
heterodimerization partner aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) 
belong to the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) family of
transcription factors. Here we report the 2.55-Å-resolution crystal structure of 
the mouse AHR PAS-A domain, which represents the first AHR-derived protein
structure. The AHR PAS-A domain forms a helix-swapped homodimer in the crystal
and also in solution. Through a detailed mutational analysis of all interface
residues, we identified several hydrophobic residues that are important for AHR
dimerization and function. Our crystallographic visualization of AHR PAS-A
dimerization leads us to propose a mode of heterodimerization with ARNT that is
supported by both biochemical and cell-based data. Our studies also highlight the
residues of other mammalian bHLH-PAS proteins that are likely involved in their
homo- or heterodimerization.

PMCID: PMC3811902
PMID: 24001774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2013 Nov 1;305(9):H1397-404. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00304.2013. Epub 2013 Aug 30.

LQT2 nonsense mutations generate trafficking defective NH2-terminally truncated
channels by the reinitiation of translation.

Stump MR(1), Gong Q, Zhou Z.

Author information: 
(1)Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health and Science University,
Portland, Oregon.

The human ether-a-go-go-related gene (hERG) encodes a voltage-activated K(+)
channel that contributes to the repolarization of the cardiac action potential.
Long QT syndrome type 2 (LQT2) is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by
mutations in hERG, and patients with LQT2 are susceptible to severe ventricular
arrhythmias. We have previously shown that nonsense and frameshift LQT2 mutations
caused a decrease in mutant mRNA by the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD)
pathway. The Q81X nonsense mutation was recently found to be resistant to NMD.
Translation of Q81X is reinitiated at Met(124), resulting in the generation of
NH2-terminally truncated hERG channels with altered gating properties. In the
present study, we identified two additional NMD-resistant LQT2 nonsense
mutations, C39X and C44X, in which translation is reinitiated at Met(60).
Deletion of the first 59 residues of the channel truncated nearly one-third of
the highly structured Per-Arnt-Sim domain and resulted in the generation of
trafficking-defective proteins and a complete loss of hERG current. Partial
deletion of the Per-Arnt-Sim domain also resulted in the accelerated degradation 
of the mutant channel proteins. The coexpression of mutant and wild-type channels
did not significantly disrupt the function and trafficking properties of
wild-type hERG. Our present findings indicate that translation reinitiation may
generate trafficking-defective as well as dysfunctional channels in patients with
LQT2 premature termination codon mutations that occur early in the coding
sequence.

PMCID: PMC3840246
PMID: 23997099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Nov 15;273(1):90-9. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2013.08.017.
Epub 2013 Aug 28.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor and glucocorticoid receptor interact to activate
human metallothionein 2A.

Sato S(1), Shirakawa H, Tomita S, Tohkin M, Gonzalez FJ, Komai M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nutrition, Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Tohoku
University, Sendai 981-8555, Japan. Electronic address: satosho@rs.tus.ac.jp.

Although the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and glucocorticoid receptor (GR)
play essential roles in mammalian development, stress responses, and other
physiological events, crosstalk between these receptors has been the subject of
much debate. Metallothioneins are classic glucocorticoid-inducible genes that
were reported to increase upon treatment with AHR agonists in rodent tissues and 
cultured human cells. In this study, the mechanism of human metallothionein 2A
(MT2A) gene transcription activation by AHR was investigated. Cotreatment with
3-methylcholanthrene and dexamethasone, agonists of AHR and GR respectively,
synergistically increased MT2A mRNA levels in HepG2 cells. MT2A induction was
suppressed by RNA interference against AHR or GR. Coimmunoprecipitation
experiments revealed a physical interaction between AHR and GR proteins.
Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicated that AHR was recruited
to the glucocorticoid response element in the MT2A promoter. Thus, we provide a
novel mechanism whereby AHR modulates expression of human MT2A via the
glucocorticoid response element and protein-protein interactions with GR.

© 2013.

PMID: 23994556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jan;1840(1):106-12. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.08.012.
Epub 2013 Aug 24.

Modulation of Dcytb (Cybrd 1) expression and function by iron, dehydroascorbate
and Hif-2a in cultured cells.

Luo X(1), Hill M, Johnson A, Latunde-Dada GO.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Nutritional Sciences Division, King's College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Duodenal cytochrome b (Dcytb) is a mammalian plasma ferric reductase 
enzyme that catalyses the reduction of ferric to ferrous ion in the process of
iron absorption. The current study investigates the relationship between Dcytb,
iron, dehydroascorbate (DHA) and Hif-2a in cultured cell lines.
METHODS: Dcytb and Hif-2a protein expression was analysed by Western blot
technique while gene regulation was determined by quantitative PCR. Functional
analyses were carried out by ferric reductase and (59)Fe uptake assays.
RESULTS: Iron and dehydroascorbic acid treatment of cells inhibited Dcytb mRNA
and protein expression. Desferrioxamine also enhanced Dcytb mRNA level after
cells were treated overnight. Dcytb knockdown in HuTu cells resulted in reduced
mRNA expression and lowered reductase activity. Preloading cells with DHA (to
enhance intracellular ascorbate levels) did not stimulate reductase activity
fully in Dcytb-silenced cells, implying a Dcytb-dependence of ascorbate-mediated 
ferrireduction. Moreover, Hif-2a knockdown in HuTu cells led to a reduction in
reductase activity and iron uptake.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, this study shows the functional regulation of Dcytb 
reductase activity by DHA and Hif-2a.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Dcytb is a plasma membrane protein that accepts electrons
intracellularly from DHA/ascorbic acid for ferrireduction at the apical surface
of cultured cells and enterocytes.

© 2013.

PMID: 23981688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Nature. 2013 Sep 19;501(7467):444-8. doi: 10.1038/nature12487. Epub 2013 Aug 25.

The structural mechanism of KCNH-channel regulation by the eag domain.

Haitin Y(1), Carlson AE, Zagotta WN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

The KCNH voltage-dependent potassium channels (ether-à-go-go, EAG; EAG-related
gene, ERG; EAG-like channels, ELK) are important regulators of cellular
excitability and have key roles in diseases such as cardiac long QT syndrome type
2 (LQT2), epilepsy, schizophrenia and cancer. The intracellular domains of KCNH
channels are structurally distinct from other voltage-gated channels. The
amino-terminal region contains an eag domain, which is composed of a Per-Arnt-Sim
(PAS) domain and a PAS-cap domain, whereas the carboxy-terminal region contains a
cyclic nucleotide-binding homology domain (CNBHD), which is connected to the pore
through a C-linker domain. Many disease-causing mutations localize to these
specialized intracellular domains, which underlie the unique gating and
regulation of KCNH channels. It has been suggested that the eag domain may
regulate the channel by interacting with either the S4-S5 linker or the CNBHD.
Here we present a 2<U+2009>Å resolution crystal structure of the eag domain-CNBHD
complex of the mouse EAG1 (also known as KCNH1) channel. It displays extensive
interactions between the eag domain and the CNBHD, indicating that the regulatory
mechanism of the eag domain primarily involves the CNBHD. Notably, the structure 
reveals that a number of LQT2 mutations at homologous positions in human ERG, in 
addition to cancer-associated mutations in EAG channels, localize to the eag
domain-CNBHD interface. Furthermore, mutations at the interface produced marked
effects on channel gating, demonstrating the important physiological role of the 
eag domain-CNBHD interaction. Our structure of the eag domain-CNBHD complex of
mouse EAG1 provides unique insights into the physiological and pathophysiological
mechanisms of KCNH channels.

PMCID: PMC3910112
PMID: 23975098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Biophys J. 2013 Aug 20;105(4):1027-36. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.07.010.

Investigating models of protein function and allostery with a widespread
mutational analysis of a light-activated protein.

Zayner JP(1), Antoniou C, French AR, Hause RJ Jr, Sosnick TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA.

To investigate the relationship between a protein's sequence and its biophysical 
properties, we studied the effects of more than 100 mutations in Avena sativa
light-oxygen-voltage domain 2, a model protein of the Per-Arnt-Sim family. The
A. sativa light-oxygen-voltage domain 2 undergoes a photocycle with a
conformational change involving the unfolding of the terminal helices. Whereas
selection studies typically search for winners in a large population and fail to 
characterize many sites, we characterized the biophysical consequences of
mutations throughout the protein using NMR, circular dichroism, and
ultraviolet/visible spectroscopy. Despite our intention to introduce highly
disruptive substitutions, most had modest or no effect on function, and many
could even be considered to be more photoactive. Substitutions at evolutionarily 
conserved sites can have minimal effect, whereas those at nonconserved positions 
can have large effects, contrary to the view that the effects of mutations,
especially at conserved positions, are predictable. Using predictive models, we
found that the effects of mutations on biophysical function and allostery reflect
a complex mixture of multiple characteristics including location, character,
electrostatics, and chemistry.

Copyright © 2013 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC3752136
PMID: 23972854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Andrology. 2013 Sep;1(5):723-30. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2013.00116.x.

Analysis of DNA damage after human sperm cryopreservation in genes crucial for
fertilization and early embryo development.

Valcarce DG(1), Cartón-García F, Riesco MF, Herráez MP, Robles V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and INDEGSAL, University of León, Spain.

Sperm cryopreservation is widely used in clinic for insemination, in vitro
fertilization and other procedures such as intracytoplasmic sperm injection. The 
assessment after freezing/thawing of spermatozoa viability, motility and
sometimes DNA integrity (mainly using fragmentation assays) has been considered
enough to guarantee the safety and effectiveness of the technique. However, it is
known that, even when fragmentation is absent, a significant DNA damage could be 
detected in some genome regions. This is particularly important considering that,
during the last years, several studies have pointed out the importance of key
paternal genes in early embryo development. In this study, using normozoospermic 
donors, we present a candidate gene approach in which we quantify the number of
lesions produced by freezing/thawing over key genes (PRM1, BIK, FSHB, PEG1/MEST, 
ADD1, ARNT, UBE3A, SNORD116/PWSAS) using quantitative PCR. Our results
demonstrated that the cryopreservation protocol used, which is routinely employed
in clinic, produced DNA lesions. The genes studied are differentially affected by
the process, and genome regions related to Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes
were among the most damaged: SNORD116/PWSAS (4.56 ± 1.84 lesions/10 kb) and UBE3A
(2.22 ± 1.3 lesions/10 kb). To check if vitrification protocols could reduce
these lesions, another experiment was carried out studying some of those genes
with higher differences in the first study (FSHB, ADD1, ARNT and SNORD116/PWSAS).
The number of lesions was not significantly reduced compared to cryopreservation.
These results could be relevant for the selection of the most adequate available 
cryopreservation protocol in terms of the number of lesions that produced over
key genes, when no differences with other traditional techniques for DNA
assessment could be detected.

© 2013 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMID: 23970451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Oct;8(4):1017-22. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1643. Epub 2013 Aug 16.

hClock gene expression in human colorectal carcinoma.

Wang L(1), Chen B, Wang Y, Sun N, Lu C, Qian R, Hua L.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Skills Learning Center, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200032, P.R. China.

In this study, we aimed to investigate changes in the expression of human Clock
(hClock), a gene at the core of the circadian gene family, in colorectal
carcinomas (CRCs) and to discuss the possible effects. Previous studies have
revealed that the disruption of circadian rhythms is one of the endogenous
factors that contribute to the initiation and development of CRCs. However, the
underlying molecular changes to the circadian genes associated with CRCs have not
been explored. Immunofluorescence and quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(qPCR) analysis of the hCLOCK protein and gene expression were performed in 30
cases of CRC. The hCLOCK protein was expressed in all specimens obtained from 30 
CRC patients. Higher levels of hCLOCK expression were observed in human CRC
tissues compared with the paired non-cancerous tissues. hCLOCK expression was
significantly higher in poorly differentiated, or late-stage, Dukes' grade tumors
and in 64.3% of tumor cases with lymph node metastasis. The hClock gene was
expressed in all specimens. A significantly higher expression of hClock was found
in human CRC cases compared with paired non-cancerous tissues. There was a strong
positive linear correlation between hClock gene expression and protein expression
in human CRCs. A strong positive linear correlation was also found between hClock
gene expression and ARNT, HIF-1a and VEGF expression in human CRCs. There was no 
significant correlation between hClock and Bak, Bax, Bid, tumor necrosis factor
receptor I (TNFR I) and TNFR II. The circadian gene hClock was stably expressed
in human colorectal mucosa and was important in regulating the expression of
downstream clock-controlled genes. hCLOCK may interact with HIF-1a/ARNT and
activate VEGF to stimulate tumor angiogenesis and metastasis.

PMID: 23970287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Gene. 2013 Nov 10;530(2):222-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.08.024. Epub 2013 Aug
18.

Novel alternative splice variants of chicken NPAS3 are expressed in the
developing central nervous system.

Shin J(1), Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences and Ewha Research Center for Systems Biology, Ewha
Womans University, Seoul 120-750, Korea.

We report isolation of novel splice variants of chicken Neuronal Per-Arnt-Sim
domain protein 3 (cNPAS3) gene distinct from the previously predicted cNPAS3 at
the 5' end. Newly identified cNPAS3 splice variants feature N-terminus coding
sequences with high degrees of homology to human NPAS3 (hNAPS3). We also show
that the alternative splicing pattern of NPAS3 is conserved between chicken and
human. RNA in situ hybridization indicated that the expression of cNPAS3 in the
developing central nervous system (CNS) is limited to the ventricular zone and
only partially overlaps with that of chicken Reelin (cReelin), the only known
regulatory target gene of NPAS3 in the adult brain. Overexpression of cNPAS3 by
in ovo electroporation had little effect on the expression of Sox2, a marker for 
neural precursors, or of Isl1/2, a marker for early differentiating motor
neurons. Taken together with the little effect of cNPAS3 overexpression on
cReelin, it is noted that the function of NPAS3 in the developing CNS remains to 
be determined. Still, identification of proper cDNA sequences for cNPAS3 should
represent a solid beginning of the understanding process.

© 2013.

PMID: 23962688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Arch Dermatol Res. 2013 Oct;305(8):755-61. doi: 10.1007/s00403-013-1403-0. Epub
2013 Aug 18.

The clock gene brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1) is involved in hair
growth.

Watabe Y(1), Tomioka M, Watabe A, Aihara M, Shimba S, Inoue H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stem Cell Therapy (Endowed Chair by ANGFA Co.), St. Marianna
University School of Medicine, 2-16-1 Sugao, Miyamae, Kawasaki, 216-8511, Japan, 
y.watabe@marianna-u.ac.jp.

It is known that baldness caused by androgenetic alopecia is involved with
androgen and the androgen receptor. Furthermore, it has been reported that
testosterone secretion follows a circadian rhythm. Therefore, we hypothesized
that a relationship exists between androgen-induced alopecia and biological
rhythm. The mammalian circadian rhythm is controlled by several clock genes.
Brain and muscle aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like protein-1
(BMAL1), one of the clock genes, is a transcription factor that plays central
roles in the regulation of circadian rhythms. In this study, we investigated the 
influence of BMAL1 on hair follicle functions and hair growth. Mice deficient in 
BMAL1 expression exhibited a delay in hair regrowth after shaving. In hair
follicles of mouse vibrissa, expression of Bmal1 and other clock genes was found 
to be rhythmic. Knockdown of BMAL1 in human follicle dermal papilla cells
resulted in modulation of expression of several hair growth-related genes.
Therefore, we concluded that expression of clock genes in hair follicles is
linked to the circadian rhythm and that BMAL1 can regulate hair growth.

PMID: 23955654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Int J Immunogenet. 2014 Feb;41(1):54-62. doi: 10.1111/iji.12080. Epub 2013 Aug
16.

Polymorphism in cathelicidin gene (CAMP) that alters Hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF-1a::ARNT) binding is not associated with tuberculosis.

López Campos GN(1), Velarde Félix JS, Sandoval Ramírez L, Cázares Salazar S,
Corona Nakamura AL, Amaya Tapia G, Prado Montes de Oca E.

Author information: 
(1)In silico Laboratory, Pharmaceutical and Medical Biotechnology Unit, Research 
Center in Technology and Design Assistance of Jalisco State (CIATEJ, AC),
National Council of Science and Technology, Guadalajara, Mexico.

Polymorphisms in the CAMP gene (cathelicidin) have not been tested in
tuberculosis susceptibility. We tested polymorphisms rs9844812 (HIF-1a::ARNT
binding site) and rs56122065 (CAMP) plus rs1800972 (DEFB1). SNP rs1800972 was
associated with extrapulmonary tuberculosis (EPTB) in a codominant model
(genotype CG, P = 0.037, OR 4.82; 95% CI: 0.92-47.42; statistical power, 82%),
but not PTB (P = 0.101) in a Mexican population.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23953711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Protein Sci. 2013 Oct;22(10):1439-44. doi: 10.1002/pro.2331. Epub 2013 Sep 7.

Crystal structure of the Alpha subunit PAS domain from soluble guanylyl cyclase.

Purohit R(1), Weichsel A, Montfort WR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Arizona, Tucson,
Arizona, 85721.

Soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) is a heterodimeric heme protein of  150 kDa and 
the primary nitric oxide receptor. Binding of NO stimulates cyclase activity,
leading to regulation of cardiovascular physiology and providing attractive
opportunities for drug discovery. How sGC is stimulated and where candidate drugs
bind remains unknown. The a and ß sGC chains are each composed of Heme-Nitric
Oxide Oxygen (H-NOX), Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS), coiled-coil and cyclase domains. Here, 
we present the crystal structure of the a1 PAS domain to 1.8 Å resolution. The
structure reveals the binding surfaces of importance to heterodimer function,
particularly with respect to regulating NO binding to heme in the ß1 H-NOX
domain. It also reveals a small internal cavity that may serve to bind ligands or
participate in signal transduction.

© 2013 The Protein Society.

PMCID: PMC3795502
PMID: 23934793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Chronobiol Int. 2013 Nov;30(9):1135-43. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2013.805762. Epub
2013 Aug 8.

Sex differences in the circadian variation of cytochrome p450 genes and
corresponding nuclear receptors in mouse liver.

Lu YF(1), Jin T, Xu Y, Zhang D, Wu Q, Zhang YK, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Basic Pharmacology of Guizhou, Zunyi Medical College , Zunyi
, China .

Sex differences and circadian variation are two major factors that affect the
expression of drug-processing genes. This study aimed to examine sex differences 
in the circadian variation of hepatic cytochrome P450 (Cyp) genes and
corresponding nuclear receptors. Adult mice were acclimated to environmentally
controlled facilities for 2 wks, and livers were collected every 4<U+2009>h during a
24-h period. Total RNA and protein were isolated and subjected to real-time
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blot
analysis. The mRNA expression of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and
AhR-regulated Cyp1a1 and Cyp1a2 were higher in females and higher during the
light phase. The mRNA expression of constitutive and rostane receptor (CAR) and
CYP2B10 protein was female-predominant and higher in the dark phase. Pregnane X
receptor (PXR) peaked around 18:00<U+2009>h, but PXR-regulated Cyp3a11 and Cyp3a25 were 
higher at 10:00<U+2009>h, without apparent sex dimorphism at protein levels. Peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor-a (PPARa), Cyp4a10, and Cyp4a14 were higher in
females and peaked between 14:00 and 18:00<U+2009>h. The mRNA levels of farnesoid X
receptor (FXR), Cyp7a1, and Cyp27a1 peaked around 18:00<U+2009>h and CYP7A1 protein was 
higher during the dark phase and higher in females. Cyp7b1(male-predominant) and 
Cyp2a4 (female-predominant) both showed circadian variation. Circadian variation 
of hepatic clock genes such as nuclear receptor Rev-erba, cryptochrome 1 (Cry1), 
and brain muscle ARNT-like protein 1 (Bmal1) showed distinct patterns. Sex
differences and circadian rhythmicity of Cyp genes and corresponding nuclear
receptors exist in mouse liver that could impact xenobiotic metabolism and
toxicity at different times of the day.

PMID: 23926955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2013 Sep;158(3):173-80. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpc.2013.07.004. Epub 2013 Jul 31.

Acute exposure to offshore produced water has an effect on stress- and secondary 
stress responses in three-spined stickleback Gasterosteus aculeatus.

Knag AC(1), Taugbøl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Bergen, P.O. Box 7803, N-5020 Bergen,
Norway. Electronic address: anne.knag@bio.uib.no.

Pollution is one of today's greatest problems, and the release of contaminants
into the environment can cause adverse changes in vitally important biological
pathways. In this study, we exposed three-spined stickleback Gasterosteus
aculeatus to produced water (PW), i.e. wastewater from offshore petroleum
production. PW contains substances such as alkylphenols (APs) and aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) known to induce toxicant stress and endocrine disruption in a
variety of organisms. Following exposure to PW, a standardized confinement
treatment was applied as a second stressor (PW-stress), testing how fish already 
under stress from the pollutant would respond to an additional stressor. The
endpoint for analysis was a combination of blood levels of cortisol and glucose, 
in addition to transcribed levels of a set of genes related to toxicant stress,
endocrine disruption and general stress. The findings of this study indicate that
low doses of PW do not induce vitellogenin in immature female stickleback, but do
cause an upregulation of cytochrome (CYP1A) and UDP-glucuronsyltransferase
(UDP-GT), two biomarkers related to toxicant stress. However, when the second
stressor was applied, both genes were downregulated, indicating that the
confinement exposure had a suppressive effect on the expression of toxicant
biomarkers (CYP1A and UDP-GT). Further, two of the stress related genes, heat
shock protein 90 (HSP90) and stress-induced phosphoprotein (STIP), were
upregulated in both PW- and PW-stress-treatment, but not in the water control
confinement treatment, indicating that PW posed as a larger stress-factor than
confinement for these genes. The confinement stressor caused an increased level
of glucose in both control and PW-treated fish, indicating hyperglycemia, a
commonly reported stress response in fish.

© 2013.

PMID: 23916882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Ethnopharmacol. 2013 Oct 7;149(3):601-12. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.07.030. Epub 
2013 Aug 1.

Chinese herbal medicine-derived compounds for cancer therapy: a focus on
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Hu Y(1), Wang S, Wu X, Zhang J, Chen R, Chen M, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Institute of
Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Macau 999078, China.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) as the major
histological subtype of primary liver cancer remains one of the most common
malignancies worldwide. Due to the complicated molecular pathogenesis of HCC, the
option for effective systemic treatment is quite limited. There exists a critical
need to explore and evaluate possible alternative strategies for effective
control of HCC. With a long history of clinical use, Chinese herbal medicine
(CHM) is emerging as a noticeable choice for its multi-level, multi-target and
coordinated intervention effects against HCC. With the aids of phytochemistry and
molecular biological approaches, in the past decades many CHM-derived compounds
have been carefully studied through both preclinical and clinical researches and 
have shown great potential in novel anti-HCC natural product development. The
present review aimed at providing the most recent developments on anti-HCC
compounds derived from CHM, especially their underlying pharmacological
mechanisms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A systematic search of anti-HCC compounds from CHM was
carried out focusing on literatures published both in English (PubMed, Scopus,
Web of Science and Medline) and in Chinese academic databases (Wanfang and CNKI
database).
RESULTS: In this review, we tried to give a timely and comprehensive update about
the anti-HCC effects and targets of several representative CHM-derived compounds,
namely curcumin, resveratrol, silibinin, berberine, quercetin, tanshinone II-A
and celastrol. Their mechanisms of anti-HCC behaviors, potential side effects or 
toxicity and future research directions were discussed.
CONCLUSION: Herbal compounds derived from CHM are of much significance in
devising new drugs and providing unique ideas for the war against HCC. We propose
that these breakthrough findings may have important implications for targeted-HCC
therapy and modernization of CHM.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 23916858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Mol Pharmacol. 2013 Oct;84(4):591-602. doi: 10.1124/mol.113.087197. Epub 2013 Aug
1.

Expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator enhances cisplatin
resistance by upregulating MDR1 expression in cancer cells.

Chan YY(1), Kalpana S, Chang WC, Chang WC, Chen BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan (Y.-Y.C., S.K., B.-K.C.); Department of Clinical
Pharmacology and Master Program for Clinical Pharmacogenomics and
Pharmacoproteomics, School of Pharmacology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
Taiwan (W.-Chi.C.); Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, 
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (W.-Cha.C.); Department of Pharmacy,
Taipei Medical University-Wanfang Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan (W.-Chi.C.); and
Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, College of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan (B.-K.C.).

The identification of molecular pathways in cancer cells is important for
understanding the cells' underlying biology and for designing effective cancer
therapies. We demonstrate that the expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT) is critical during the development of cisplatin
resistance. The reduced expression of ARNT was correlated with cisplatin-induced 
cell death in drug-sensitive cells. In addition, suppression of ARNT reversed the
characteristics of cisplatin-resistant cells, making these cells
cisplatin-sensitive, and significantly enhanced caspase-3 activation, DNA
fragmentation, and apoptosis. The inhibition of colony formation, regulated by
cisplatin, was more significant in ARNT-knockdown cells than in parental cells.
In a xenograft analysis of severe combined immunodeficiency mice, cisplatin also 
efficiently inhibited ARNT-deficient c4 tumors but not ARNT-containing vT2 tumor 
formation. Furthermore, the downregulation of multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1)
expression and retention of drugs in cells caused by suppression of ARNT,
resulting in the resensitization of drug-resistant cells to cisplatin, was
observed. When overexpressed, ARNT interacted with Sp1 to enhance the expression 
of MDR1 through Sp1-binding sites on the MDR1 promoter, resulting in a reversal
of the effect of cisplatin on cell death. In addition, ARNT-induced MDR1
expression was inhibited in Sp1-knockdown cells. These results reveal previously 
unrecognized, multifaceted functions of ARNT in establishing the drug-resistant
properties of cancer cells by the upregulation of MDR1, highlighting ARNT's
potential as a therapeutic target in an important subset of cancers.

PMID: 23907215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. BMC Genomics. 2013 Jul 31;14:524. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-524.

Reductive evolution and the loss of PDC/PAS domains from the genus
Staphylococcus.

Shah N(1), Gaupp R, Moriyama H, Eskridge KM, Moriyama EN, Somerville GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Nebraska,
Lincoln, NE 68588-0115, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain represents a ubiquitous structural fold
that is involved in bacterial sensing and adaptation systems, including several
virulence related functions. Although PAS domains and the subclass of
PhoQ-DcuS-CitA (PDC) domains have a common structure, there is limited amino acid
sequence similarity. To gain greater insight into the evolution of PDC/PAS
domains present in the bacterial kingdom and staphylococci in specific, the
PDC/PAS domains from the genomic sequences of 48 bacteria, representing 5 phyla, 
were identified using the sensitive search method based on HMM-to-HMM comparisons
(HHblits).
RESULTS: A total of 1,007 PAS domains and 686 PDC domains distributed over 1,174 
proteins were identified. For 28 Gram-positive bacteria, the distribution,
organization, and molecular evolution of PDC/PAS domains were analyzed in greater
detail, with a special emphasis on the genus Staphylococcus. Compared to other
bacteria the staphylococci have relatively fewer proteins (6-9) containing
PDC/PAS domains. As a general rule, the staphylococcal genomes examined in this
study contain a core group of seven PDC/PAS domain-containing proteins consisting
of WalK, SrrB, PhoR, ArlS, HssS, NreB, and GdpP. The exceptions to this rule are:
1) S. saprophyticus lacks the core NreB protein; 2) S. carnosus has two
additional PAS domain containing proteins; 3) S. epidermidis, S. aureus, and S.
pseudintermedius have an additional protein with two PDC domains that is
predicted to code for a sensor histidine kinase; 4) S. lugdunensis has an
additional PDC containing protein predicted to be a sensor histidine kinase.
CONCLUSIONS: This comprehensive analysis demonstrates that variation in PDC/PAS
domains among bacteria has limited correlations to the genome size or
pathogenicity; however, our analysis established that bacteria having a motile
phase in their life cycle have significantly more PDC/PAS-containing proteins. In
addition, our analysis revealed a tremendous amount of variation in the number of
PDC/PAS-containing proteins within genera. This variation extended to the
Staphylococcus genus, which had between 6 and 9 PDC/PAS proteins and some of
these appear to be previously undescribed signaling proteins. This latter point
is important because most staphylococcal proteins that contain PDC/PAS domains
regulate virulence factor synthesis or antibiotic resistance.

PMCID: PMC3734008
PMID: 23902280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Neurobiol Aging. 2013 Dec;34(12):2768-76. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.06.014. Epub 2013 Jul 17.

Reduced neuroplasticity in aged rats: a role for the neurotrophin brain-derived
neurotrophic factor.

Calabrese F(1), Guidotti G, Racagni G, Riva MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, Universita' degli
Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.

Aging is a physiological process characterized by a significant reduction of
neuronal plasticity that might contribute to the functional defects observed in
old subjects. Even if the neurobiological mechanisms that contribute to such
impairment remain largely unknown, a role for neurotrophic molecules, such as the
neurotrophin brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), has been postulated. On
this basis, the purpose of this study was to provide a detailed investigation of 
the BDNF system, at transcriptional and translational levels, in the ventral and 
dorsal hippocampus and in the prefrontal cortex of middle-aged and old rats,
compared with in adult animals. The expression of major players in BDNF
regulation and response, including the transcription factors, calcium-responsive 
transcription factor, cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) responsive
element-binding protein (CREB), and neuronal Per Arnt Sim (PAS) domain protein 4,
and the high-affinity receptor tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB), was also
analyzed. Our results demonstrate that the BDNF system is affected at different
levels in aged rats with global impairment including reduced transcription,
impaired protein synthesis and processing, and decreased activation of the TrkB
receptors. These modifications might contribute to the cognitive deficits
associated with aging and suggest that pharmacological strategies aimed at
restoring reduced neurotrophism might be useful to counteract age-related
cognitive decline.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23870838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Oct 15;272(2):503-18. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2013.06.024. Epub 2013 Jul 13.

Knockout of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor results in distinct hepatic and renal
phenotypes in rats and mice.

Harrill JA(1), Hukkanen RR, Lawson M, Martin G, Gilger B, Soldatow V, Lecluyse
EL, Budinsky RA, Rowlands JC, Thomas RS.

Author information: 
(1)The Hamner Institute for Health Sciences, Institute for Chemical Safety
Sciences, RTP, NC 27709, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
which plays a role in the development of multiple tissues and is activated by a
large number of ligands, including 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). In
order to examine the roles of the AHR in both normal biological development and
response to environmental chemicals, an AHR knockout (AHR-KO) rat model was
created and compared with an existing AHR-KO mouse. AHR-KO rats harboring either 
2-bp or 29-bp deletion mutation in exon 2 of the AHR were created on the
Sprague-Dawley genetic background using zinc-finger nuclease (ZFN) technology.
Rats harboring either mutation type lacked expression of AHR protein in the
liver. AHR-KO rats were also insensitive to thymic involution, increased hepatic 
weight and the induction of AHR-responsive genes (Cyp1a1, Cyp1a2, Cyp1b1, Ahrr)
following acute exposure to 25 µg/kg TCDD. AHR-KO rats had lower basal expression
of transcripts for these genes and also accumulated ~30-45-fold less TCDD in the 
liver at 7 days post-exposure. In untreated animals, AHR-KO mice, but not AHR-KO 
rats, had alterations in serum analytes indicative of compromised hepatic
function, patent ductus venosus of the liver and persistent hyaloid arteries in
the eye. AHR-KO rats, but not AHR-KO mice, displayed pathological alterations to 
the urinary tract: bilateral renal dilation (hydronephrosis), secondary medullary
tubular and uroepithelial degenerative changes and bilateral ureter dilation
(hydroureter). The present data indicate that the AHR may play significantly
different roles in tissue development and homeostasis and toxicity across rodent 
species.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23859880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Biochem Pharmacol. 2013 Sep 1;86(5):561-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.07.004. Epub 
2013 Jul 12.

The emerging roles of AhR in physiology and immunity.

Hao N(1), Whitelaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science (Biochemistry), The University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia. nan.hao@adelaide.edu.au

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is traditionally defined as a transcriptional
regulator involved in adaptive xenobiotic response, however, emerging evidence
supports physiological functions of AhR in normal cell development and immune
response. The role of AhR in immunomodulation is multi-dimensional. On the one
hand, activation of AhR by TCDD and other ligands leads to profound
immunosuppression, potentially via skewed Th1/Th2 cell balance toward Th1
dominance, and boosted Treg cell differentiation. On the other hand, activation
of AhR can also induce Th17 cell polarization and increase the severity of
autoimmune disease. In addition to T lymphocytes, the AhR also appears to play a 
vital role in B cell maturation, and regulates the activity of macrophages,
dendritic cells and neutrophils following lipopolysaccharide challenge or
influenza virus infection. In these scenarios, activation of AhR is associated
with decreased host response and reduced survival. Furthermore, gene knock out
studies suggest that AhR is indispensable for the postnatal maintenance of
intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes and skin-resident dendritic epidermal
gamma delta T cells, providing a potential link between AhR and gut immunity and 
wound healing. It is well accepted that the magnitude and the type of immune
response is dependent on the local cytokine milieu and the AhR appears to be one 
of the key factors involved in the fine turning of this cytokine balance.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23856287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 23;288(34):24825-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.495945. Epub
2013 Jul 12.

Per-Arnt-Sim kinase regulates pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1 protein stability
via phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase 3ß in pancreatic ß-cells.

Semache M(1), Zarrouki B, Fontés G, Fogarty S, Kikani C, Chawki MB, Rutter J,
Poitout V.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Diabetes Research Center, CRCHUM, Quebec City H1W4A4, Canada.

In pancreatic ß-cells, glucose induces the binding of the transcription factor
pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1 (PDX-1) to the insulin gene promoter to activate
insulin gene transcription. At low glucose levels, glycogen synthase kinase 3ß
(GSK3ß) is known to phosphorylate PDX-1 on C-terminal serine residues, which
triggers PDX-1 proteasomal degradation. We previously showed that the
serine/threonine Per-Arnt-Sim domain-containing kinase (PASK) regulates insulin
gene transcription via PDX-1. However, the mechanisms underlying this regulation 
are unknown. In this study, we aimed to identify the role of PASK in the
regulation of PDX-1 phosphorylation, protein expression, and stability in
insulin-secreting cells and isolated rodent islets of Langerhans. We observed
that glucose induces a decrease in overall PDX-1 serine phosphorylation and that 
overexpression of WT PASK mimics this effect. In vitro, PASK directly
phosphorylates GSK3ß on its inactivating phosphorylation site Ser(9).
Overexpression of a kinase-dead (KD), dominant negative version of PASK blocks
glucose-induced Ser(9) phosphorylation of GSK3ß. Accordingly, GSK3ß Ser(9)
phosphorylation is reduced in islets from pask-null mice. Overexpression of WT
PASK or KD GSK3ß protects PDX-1 from degradation and results in increased PDX-1
protein abundance. Conversely, overexpression of KD PASK blocks glucose-induction
of PDX-1 protein. We conclude that PASK phosphorylates and inactivates GSK3ß,
thereby preventing PDX-1 serine phosphorylation and alleviating GSK3ß-mediated
PDX-1 protein degradation in pancreatic ß-cells.

PMCID: PMC3750177
PMID: 23853095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Neuromolecular Med. 2013 Sep;15(3):570-92. doi: 10.1007/s12017-013-8243-0. Epub
2013 Jul 12.

3-methylcholanthrene induces neurotoxicity in developing neurons derived from
human CD34+Thy1+ stem cells by activation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor.

Singh AK(1), Kashyap MP, Kumar V, Tripathi VK, Yadav DK, Khan F, Jahan S, Khanna 
VK, Yadav S, Pant AB.

Author information: 
(1)In Vitro Toxicology Laboratory, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, 
Post Box: 80, MG Marg, Lucknow, 226001, India.

Developing neurons, derived from the human umbilical cord blood stem cells
(hUCBSCs), were investigated for their stage-specific responses against
3-methylcholanthrene (MC), a well-known polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon.
Three-dimensional (3D) molecular docking demonstrates the strong hydrogen bonding
and hydrophobic interactions of MC with amino acids of aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
(AHR) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) within 4 Å and
subsequent inhibition of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB),
a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Protein-protein docking also confirms that
induced levels of AHR inhibit the neurogenesis-related transcription factor
(CREB) with maximum docking scores. In concurrence with in silico data, MC
exposure significantly up regulates the expression and activity of AHR, CYP1A1
and glutathione S-transferase P1-1 (GSTP1-1) and down regulates the expression of
CREB, AMPA and NMDA receptors in hUCBSC-derived neuronal cells at various
maturity (0, 2, 4, 8 days of differentiation). MC-mediated significant down
regulation in the expression of stage-specific neuronal markers (Nestin, neural
cell adhesion molecule-NCAM, synaptophysin-SYP, CREB, AMPA and
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit 2A-NR2A) was also noticed in cells all
through the differentiation. Data identify the possible interference of MC in
neuronal transmission and neurogenesis.

PMID: 23846855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2112. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3112.

The ARNT-STAT3 axis regulates the differentiation of intestinal intraepithelial
TCRaß<U+207A>CD8aa<U+207A> cells.

Nakajima K(1), Maekawa Y, Kataoka K, Ishifune C, Nishida J, Arimochi H, Kitamura 
A, Yoshimoto T, Tomita S, Nagahiro S, Yasutomo K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology & Parasitology, Institute of Health Biosciences, The 
University of Tokushima Graduate School, 3-18-15 Kuramoto, Tokushima 770-8503,
Japan.

Intestinal intraepithelial T cells contribute to the regulation of inflammatory
responses in the intestine; however, the molecular basis for their development
and maintenance is unknown. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor complexes with the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) and senses environmental
factors, including gut microbiota. Here, we identify ARNT as a critical regulator
of the differentiation of TCRaß(+)CD8aa(+) intestinal intraepithelial T cells.
Mice deficient in either ARNT or aryl hydrocarbon receptor show a greater than-
eight-fold reduction in the number of TCRaß(+)CD8aa(+) intestinal intraepithelial
T cells. The number of TCRaß(+)CD8aa(+) intestinal intraepithelial T cells is
increased by treatment with an aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonist in germ-free
mice and is decreased by antibiotic treatment. The Arnt-deficient precursors of
TCRaß(+)CD8aa(+) intestinal intraepithelial T cells express low amounts of STAT3 
and fail to differentiate towards the TCRaß(+)CD8aa(+) cell fate after IL-15
stimulation, a deficiency that is overcome by overexpression of Stat3. These data
demonstrate that the ARNT-STAT3 axis is a critical regulator of TCRaß(+)CD8aa(+) 
intestinal intraepithelial T-cell development and differentiation.

PMID: 23836150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Aug 2;437(3):440-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.06.098. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Aromatic hydrocarbon receptor inhibits lysophosphatidic acid-induced vascular
endothelial growth factor-A expression in PC-3 prostate cancer cells.

Wu PY(1), Lin YC, Lan SY, Huang YL, Lee H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a lipid growth factor with multiple biological
functions and has been shown to stimulate cancer cell secretion of vascular
endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) and trigger angiogenesis. Hypoxia-inducible 
factor-1 (HIF-1), a heterodimer consisting of HIF-1a and HIF-1ß (also known as
aromatic hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)) subunits, is an
important regulator of angiogenesis in prostate cancer (PC) through the
enhancement of VEGF-A expression. In this study, we first confirmed the ability
of LPA to induce VEGF-A expression in PC-3 cells and then validated that
LPA-induced VEGF-A expression was regulated by HIF-1a and ARNT through
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activation. Aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), a 
receptor for dioxin-like compounds, functions as a transcription factor through
dimerization with ARNT and was found to inhibit prostate carcinogenesis and
vanadate-induced VEGF-A production. Since ARNT is a common dimerization partner
of AHR and HIF-1a, we hypothesized that AHR might suppress LPA-induced VEGF-A
expression in PC-3 cells by competing with HIF-1a for ARNT. Here we demonstrated 
that overexpression and ligand activation of AHR inhibited HIF-1-mediated VEGF-A 
induction by LPA treatment of PC-3 cells. In conclusion, our results suggested
that AHR activation may inhibit LPA-induced VEGF-A expression in PC-3 cells by
attenuating HIF-1a signaling, and subsequently, suppressing angiogenesis and
metastasis of PC. These results suggested that AHR presents a potential
therapeutic target for the prevention of PC metastasis.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23831623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 25;8(6):e67643. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067643. Print 2013.

Genomic signatures predict poor outcome in undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcomas 
and leiomyosarcomas.

Silveira SM(1), Villacis RA, Marchi FA, Barros Filho Mde C, Drigo SA, Neto CS,
Lopes A, da Cunha IW, Rogatto SR.

Author information: 
(1)Neogene Laboratory, A. C. Camargo Cancer Center, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Undifferentiated high-grade pleomorphic sarcomas (UPSs) display aggressive
clinical behavior and frequently develop local recurrence and distant metastasis.
Because these sarcomas often share similar morphological patterns with other
tumors, particularly leiomyosarcomas (LMSs), classification by exclusion is
frequently used. In this study, array-based comparative genomic hybridization
(array CGH) was used to analyze 20 UPS and 17 LMS samples from untreated
patients. The LMS samples presented a lower frequency of genomic alterations
compared with the UPS samples. The most frequently altered UPS regions involved
gains at 20q13.33 and 7q22.1 and losses at 3p26.3. Gains at 8q24.3 and 19q13.12
and losses at 9p21.3 were frequently detected in the LMS samples. Of these
regions, gains at 1q21.3, 11q12.2-q12.3, 16p11.2, and 19q13.12 were significantly
associated with reduced overall survival times in LMS patients. A multivariate
analysis revealed that gains at 1q21.3 were an independent prognostic marker of
shorter survival times in LMS patients (HR<U+200A>=<U+200A>13.76; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.019). Although the copy
number profiles of the UPS and LMS samples could not be distinguished using
unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis, one of the three clusters
presented cases associated with poor prognostic outcome (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.022). A relative
copy number analysis for the ARNT, SLC27A3, and PBXIP1 genes was performed using 
quantitative real-time PCR in 11 LMS and 16 UPS samples. Gains at 1q21-q22 were
observed in both tumor types, particularly in the UPS samples. These findings
provide strong evidence for the existence of a genomic signature to predict poor 
outcome in a subset of UPS and LMS patients.

PMCID: PMC3692486
PMID: 23825676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Dermatol Sci. 2013 Oct;72(1):9-15. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2013.04.031. Epub
2013 Jun 13.

Reduction of CC-chemokine ligand 5 by aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligands.

Morino-Koga S(1), Uchi H, Tsuji G, Takahara M, Kajiwara J, Hirata T, Furue M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated
transcription factor that recognizes a large number of xenobiotics, such as
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), dioxins, and some endogenous ligands.
Despite numerous investigations targeting AhR ligands, the precise physiological 
role of AhR remains unknown.
OBJECTIVE: We explored novel AhR target genes, especially focused on inflammatory
chemokine.
METHODS: We treated (1) HaCaT, a human keratinocyte cell line, (2) normal human
epidermal keratinocytes (NHEKs), and (3) mouse primary keratinocytes with AhR
ligands, such as 6-formylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole (FICZ; endogenous ligand) and
benzo[a]pyrene (BaP; exogenous ligand). Then, we detected mRNA and protein of
chemokine using quantitative RT-PCR and ELISA. We next clarified the relationship
between AhR and chemokine expression using AhR siRNA. In addition, we measured
serum chemokine levels in patients with Yusho disease (oil disease), who were
accidentally exposed to dioxins in the past.
RESULTS: We identified CC-chemokine ligand 5 (CCL5), a key mediator in the
development of inflammatory responses, as the AhR target gene. AhR ligands (FICZ 
and BaP) significantly reduced CCL5 mRNA and protein expression in HaCaT cells.
These effects were observed in NHEKs and mouse primary keratinocytes. AhR
knockdown with siRNA restored CCL5 inhibition by AhR ligands. In addition, AhR
ligands exhibited a dose-dependent suppression of CCL5 production induced by
Th1-derived cytokines. Finally, serum levels of CCL5 in patients with Yusho
disease, were significantly lower than in controls.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that CCL5 is a target gene for AhR, and might
be associated with the pathology of dioxin exposure.

Copyright © 2013 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23810773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2013 Sep 1;537(1):31-8. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2013.06.001.
Epub 2013 Jun 22.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacts with nuclear factor erythroid 2-related
factor 2 to mediate induction of NAD(P)H:quinoneoxidoreductase 1 by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Wang L(1), He X, Szklarz GD, Bi Y, Rojanasakul Y, Ma Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, School of Public Health, 
Wuhan University, China. may21thwlp@163.com

NAD(P)H:quinoneoxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) belongs to a group of the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) battery of drug-metabolizing enzymes that are characteristically
induced by both AhR agonists and nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2
(Nrf2) activators. We have previously reported that induction of Nqo1 by the AhR 
agonist 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in hepa1c1c7 cells involves
Nrf2 (Ma et al., Biochem J 377, 205-213, 2004). Here we analyzed the molecular
mechanism of induction. Induction required AhR and its DNA-binding partner Arnt
because induction was not observed in AhR or Arnt-defective cells, but induction 
was restored upon reconstitution of the variant cells with functional AhR or
Arnt. Induction also required Nrf2, as induction by benzo[a]pyrene was lost in
the liver of Nrf2 knockout mice similarly to induction by butyl hydroxyanisol,
demonstrating a cross-interaction between the AhR and Nrf2 pathways for induction
in vivo. TCDD increased the protein level and induced the nuclear accumulation of
Nrf2 with a delayed kinetics compared with activation of AhR. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed that TCDD recruited both AhR and Nrf2 to the Nqo1
promoter enhancer region containing a DRE and an ARE in time-dependent manners.
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that, in addition to AhR-Arnt
binding, TCDD induced an interaction between AhR and Nrf2 as well as Keap1. The
findings reveal that TCDD induces multi protein complexes to mediate
cross-interaction between the AhR and Nrf2 pathways, uncovering a novel
mechanistic aspect of gene regulation by environmental chemicals through AhR and 
Nrf2.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4597779
PMID: 23800876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Jul 17;135(28):10418-25. doi: 10.1021/ja402993u. Epub 2013
Jul 9.

A cyclic peptide inhibitor of HIF-1 heterodimerization that inhibits hypoxia
signaling in cancer cells.

Miranda E(1), Nordgren IK, Male AL, Lawrence CE, Hoakwie F, Cuda F, Court W, Fox 
KR, Townsend PA, Packham GK, Eccles SA, Tavassoli A.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom.

Hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a heterodimeric transcription factor that
acts as the master regulator of cellular response to reduced oxygen levels, thus 
playing a key role in the adaptation, survival, and progression of tumors. Here
we report cyclo-CLLFVY, identified from a library of 3.2 million cyclic
hexapeptides using a genetically encoded high-throughput screening platform, as
an inhibitor of the HIF-1a/HIF-1ß protein-protein interaction in vitro and in
cells. The identified compound inhibits HIF-1 dimerization and transcription
activity by binding to the PAS-B domain of HIF-1a, reducing HIF-1-mediated
hypoxia response signaling in a variety of cell lines, without affecting the
function of the closely related HIF-2 isoform. The reported cyclic peptide
demonstrates the utility of our high-throughput screening platform for the
identification of protein-protein interaction inhibitors, and forms the starting 
point for the development of HIF-1 targeted cancer therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3715890
PMID: 23796364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Bacteriol. 2013 Sep;195(17):3827-33. doi: 10.1128/JB.00498-13. Epub 2013 Jun
21.

PdeB, a cyclic Di-GMP-specific phosphodiesterase that regulates Shewanella
oneidensis MR-1 motility and biofilm formation.

Chao L(1), Rakshe S, Leff M, Spormann AM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Civil & Environmental Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, California, USA.

Shewanella oneidensis MR-1, a gammaproteobacterium with respiratory versatility, 
forms biofilms on mineral surfaces through a process controlled by the cyclic
dinucleotide messenger c-di-GMP. Cellular concentrations of c-di-GMP are
maintained by proteins containing GGDEF and EAL domains, which encode diguanylate
cyclases for c-di-GMP synthesis and phosphodiesterases for c-di-GMP hydrolysis,
respectively. The S. oneidensis MR-1 genome encodes several GGDEF and EAL domain 
proteins (50 and 31, respectively), with a significant fraction (~10) predicted
to be multidomain (e.g., GGDEF-EAL) enzymes containing an additional Per-Arnt-Sim
(PAS) sensor domain. However, the biochemical activities and physiological
functions of these multidomain enzymes remain largely unknown. Here, we present
genetic and biochemical analyses of a predicted PAS-GGDEF-EAL domain-containing
protein, SO0437, here named PdeB. A pdeB deletion mutant exhibited decreased
swimming motility and increased biofilm formation under rich growth medium
conditions, which was consistent with an increase in intracellular c-di-GMP. A
mutation inactivating the EAL domain also produced similar swimming and biofilm
phenotypes, indicating that the increase in c-di-GMP was likely due to a loss in 
phosphodiesterase activity. Therefore, we also examined the enzymatic activity of
purified PdeB and found that the protein exhibited phosphodiesterase activity via
the EAL domain. No diguanylate cyclase activity was observed. In addition to the 
motility and biofilm phenotypes, transcriptional profiling by DNA microarray
analysis of biofilms of pdeB (in-frame deletion and EAL) mutant cells revealed
that expression of genes involved in sulfate uptake and assimilation were
repressed. Addition of sulfate to the growth medium resulted in significantly
less motile pdeB mutants. Together, these results indicate a link between
c-di-GMP metabolism, S. oneidensis MR-1 biofilm development, and sulfate
uptake/assimilation.

PMCID: PMC3754596
PMID: 23794617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Chem Biol Interact. 2013 Sep 5;205(1):63-71. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2013.06.008. Epub
2013 Jun 19.

Validating reference genes within a mouse model system of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) toxicity.

Prokopec SD(1), Buchner NB, Fox NS, Chong LC, Mak DY, Watson JD, Petronis A,
Pohjanvirta R, Boutros PC.

Author information: 
(1)Informatics and Bio-Computing Platform, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research,
Toronto, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) is the "gold-standard" technique
for measuring mRNA abundances. To correctly compare samples and generate
biologically valid results, qPCR data usually require comprehensive normalization
to account for sample content variation between reactions. The most common
normalization approaches use one or more endogenous controls (reference or
house-keeping genes) to adjust the measured levels of experimental genes
appropriately. Ideal reference genes are those that display minimal variation
across experimental conditions, and thus can vary widely across different
biological systems. In particular, toxicogenomic studies of
transcriptionally-disruptive toxins, like 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD), require careful consideration of reference genes.
RESULTS: We examined seven candidate reference genes in 199 mice varying in
genotype and time/dose of TCDD exposure. We assessed gene-stability in four ways:
(1) the variance of the raw Cq values across biological replicates, (2) the
fold-change from basal mRNA levels following treatment, (3) the inter- and
intra-group stability evaluated using the NormFinder algorithm, (4) the
comparative <U+0394>Cq method for each candidate gene. Univariate analyses showed Hprt
and Eef1a1 are the two most stable individual reference genes. It has been
suggested that using multiple genes would produce a more consistent normalization
factor; multivariate analysis was performed using NormFinder. In general,
stability increased with the number of genes used, but specific gene-combinations
synergized.
CONCLUSIONS: We have validated seven reference genes for use in analyzing mRNA
abundances in mouse models of TCDD toxicity. The use of multiple reference genes 
increases stability, providing more consistent normalization and more reliable
results. The number of reference genes used should be maximized, based on
experimental capabilities (platform, sample availability, etc.). Our results show
the benefit of validating reference genes using multiple methods prior to
generating large biological datasets.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 23791969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Neurosci. 2013 Jun 19;33(25):10362-73. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5682-12.2013.

Necdin controls proliferation and apoptosis of embryonic neural stem cells in an 
oxygen tension-dependent manner.

Huang Z(1), Fujiwara K, Minamide R, Hasegawa K, Yoshikawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Regulation of Neuronal Development, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Neural stem cells (NSCs) reside in vivo in hypoxic environments, and NSC
proliferation is enhanced in vitro under hypoxic conditions. Various adaptive
responses to hypoxia are mediated by hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs), a family
of basic helix-loop-helix Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) transcription factors. Necdin, a
MAGE (melanoma antigen) family protein, is expressed abundantly in postmitotic
neurons and possesses potent antimitotic and antiapoptotic activities. We here
report that hypoxia induces degradation of the necdin protein in primary NSCs by 
HIF-mediated ubiquitin-proteasome system. Necdin was expressed in primary NSCs
prepared from the ganglionic eminences of mouse embryos. Hypoxia enhanced
neurosphere formation of NSCs, in which the necdin protein level was
significantly reduced. Primary NSCs prepared from necdin-deficient mice exhibited
higher rates of proliferation and apoptosis than those from wild-type mice in
normoxia, whereas there were no significant differences in the proliferation and 
apoptosis rates between necdin-deficient and wild-type NSCs in hypoxia. HIF-2a
was predominantly expressed in hypoxic NSCs, where expression of HIF-responsive
genes was upregulated. HIF-2a interacted with necdin via its PAS domain, which
enhanced necdin ubiquitination. Lentivirus-mediated expression of the PAS domain 
in primary NSCs promoted necdin degradation and enhanced NSC proliferation in
normoxia, whereas a small-molecule inhibitor of HIF-2a translation stabilized the
necdin protein and reduced NSC proliferation in hypoxia. These results suggest
that oxygen tension regulates the necdin protein level in NSCs through
HIF-2a-mediated proteasomal degradation to modulate their proliferation and
apoptosis.

PMID: 23785149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Clin Invest. 2013 Jul;123(7):3042-50. doi: 10.1172/JCI68016. Epub 2013 Jun 17.

Rare variants in single-minded 1 (SIM1) are associated with severe obesity.

Ramachandrappa S(1), Raimondo A, Cali AM, Keogh JM, Henning E, Saeed S, Thompson 
A, Garg S, Bochukova EG, Brage S, Trowse V, Wheeler E, Sullivan AE, Dattani M,
Clayton PE, Datta V, Bruning JB, Wareham NJ, O'Rahilly S, Peet DJ, Barroso I,
Whitelaw ML, Farooqi IS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories and NIHR Cambridge
Biomedical Research Centre, Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2013 Aug 1;123(8):3635. Datta, Vippan [corrected to Datta, Vipan].

Single-minded 1 (SIM1) is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor involved 
in the development and function of the paraventricular nucleus of the
hypothalamus. Obesity has been reported in Sim1 haploinsufficient mice and in a
patient with a balanced translocation disrupting SIM1. We sequenced the coding
region of SIM1 in 2,100 patients with severe, early onset obesity and in 1,680
controls. Thirteen different heterozygous variants in SIM1 were identified in 28 
unrelated severely obese patients. Nine of the 13 variants significantly reduced 
the ability of SIM1 to activate a SIM1-responsive reporter gene when studied in
stably transfected cells coexpressing the heterodimeric partners of SIM1 (ARNT or
ARNT2). SIM1 variants with reduced activity cosegregated with obesity in extended
family studies with variable penetrance. We studied the phenotype of patients
carrying variants that exhibited reduced activity in vitro. Variant carriers
exhibited increased ad libitum food intake at a test meal, normal basal metabolic
rate, and evidence of autonomic dysfunction. Eleven of the 13 probands had
evidence of a neurobehavioral phenotype. The phenotypic similarities between
patients with SIM1 deficiency and melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) deficiency
suggest that some of the effects of SIM1 deficiency on energy homeostasis are
mediated by altered melanocortin signaling.

PMCID: PMC3696558
PMID: 23778139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Sleep Med. 2013 Sep;14(9):883-7. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2013.04.007. Epub 2013 Jun 
13.

Genetic polymorphisms in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-signaling pathway and
sleep disturbances in middle-aged women.

Ziv-Gal A(1), Flaws JA, Mahoney MM, Miller SR, Zacur HA, Gallicchio L.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, USA.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine if selected genetic polymorphisms in the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)-signaling pathway and circadian locomotor output
cycles kaput (CLOCK) are associated with insomnia and early awakening in
middle-aged women.
METHODS: Women aged 45 to 54years (n=639) were recruited into a middle-aged
health study and agreed to complete questionnaires and donate blood samples.
Questionnaires were used to assess sleep outcomes. Blood samples were processed
for genotyping for the selected polymorphisms: AHR (rs2066853), AHR repressor
(AHRR) (rs2292596), aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT) (rs2228099), and
CLOCK (rs1801260). Data were analyzed using multivariable logistic regression.
RESULTS: Women heterozygous for the AHRR alleles (GC) had decreased odds of
insomnia compared to women homozygous for the AHRR_C allele (adjusted odds ratio 
[aOR], 0.69; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.49-0.96). Women with at least one of
the AHRR_G or CLOCK_C alleles had significantly decreased odds of insomnia
compared to women homozygous for the AHRR_C and CLOCK_T alleles (aOR, 0.64; 95%
CI, 0.43-0.96). Additionally, women homozygous for the AHRR_G and CLOCK_C alleles
had significantly decreased odds of insomnia compared to women homozygous for the
AHRR_C and CLOCK_T alleles (aOR, 0.56; 95% CI, 0.35-0.89). None of the selected
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) or combinations of SNPs were significantly
associated with early awakening.
CONCLUSIONS: Selected genetic polymorphisms in the AHR-signaling pathway (i.e.,
AHRR) and CLOCK may play a role in decreasing the risk for experiencing insomnia 
during the menopausal transition.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3750063
PMID: 23768840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Nov 1;22(21):2815-24. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0596. Epub 2013 
Jul 12.

Hypoxia and trophoblast differentiation: a key role for PPAR<U+03B3>.

Tache V(1), Ciric A, Moretto-Zita M, Li Y, Peng J, Maltepe E, Milstone DS, Parast
MM.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of California , Davis,
Sacramento, California.

Tissue oxygen tension regulates differentiation of multiple types of stem cells. 
In the placenta, hypoxia has been associated with abnormal trophoblast
differentiation and placental insufficiency syndromes of preeclampsia (PE) and
intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) is a ligand-activated transcription factor involved in many
cellular processes, including differentiation. We have previously shown that
PPAR<U+03B3>-null trophoblast stem (TS) cells show a defect in differentiation to
labyrinthine trophoblast, instead differentiating preferentially to trophoblast
giant cells (TGC). Since PPAR<U+03B3> is known to be regulated by hypoxia in adipose
tissue, we hypothesized that there may be a link between oxygen tension, PPAR<U+03B3>
expression, and trophoblast differentiation. We found that hypoxia reduced PPAR<U+03B3> 
expression by a mechanism independent of both hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) and 
histone deacetylases (HDACs). In addition, PPAR<U+03B3> partially rescued
hypoxia-induced inhibition of labyrinthine differentiation in wild-type TS cells 
but was not required for hypoxia-induced inhibition of TGC differentiation.
Finally, we show that induction of labyrinthine trophoblast differentiation by
HDAC inhibitor treatment is independent of both PPAR<U+03B3> and Gcm1. We propose a
model with two pathways for labyrinthine trophoblast differentiation of TS cells,
one of which is dependent on PPAR<U+03B3> and inhibited by hypoxia. Since hypoxia is
associated with PE and IUGR, we propose that PPAR<U+03B3> may at least partially mediate
hypoxia-induced placental insufficiency and as such may be a promising
therapeutic target for these disorders.

PMCID: PMC3804243
PMID: 23767827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Control Release. 2013 Dec 10;172(2):484-94. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.05.021.
Epub 2013 Jun 3.

Hypoxia as a target for tissue specific gene therapy.

Rhim T(1), Lee DY, Lee M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, College of Engineering, Hanyang University,
Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea.

Hypoxia is a hallmark of various ischemic diseases such as ischemic heart
disease, ischemic limb, ischemic stroke, and solid tumors. Gene therapies for
these diseases have been developed with various therapeutic genes including
growth factors, anti-apoptotic genes, and toxins. However, non-specific
expression of these therapeutic genes may induce dangerous side effects in the
normal tissues. To avoid the side effects, gene expression should be tightly
regulated in an oxygen concentration dependent manner. The hypoxia inducible
promoters and enhancers have been evaluated as a transcriptional regulation tool 
for hypoxia inducible gene therapy. The hypoxia inducible UTRs were also used in 
gene therapy for spinal cord injury as a translational regulation strategy. In
addition to transcriptional and translational regulations, post-translational
regulation strategies have been developed using the HIF-1a ODD domain. Hypoxia
inducible transcriptional, translational, and post-translational regulations are 
useful for tissue specific gene therapy of ischemic diseases. In this review,
hypoxia inducible gene expression systems are discussed and their applications
are introduced.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23742881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2013;157(23):A5725.

[Pharmacogenetics and the treatment of addiction].

[Article in Dutch]

Schellekens A(1).

Author information: 
(1)UMC St Radboud, afd. Psychiatrie, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
arnt.schellekens@gmail.com

This article describes the current scientific knowledge regarding pharmacogenetic
predictors of treatment outcome for substance-dependent patients. PubMed was
searched for articles on pharmacogenetics and addiction. This search yielded 53
articles, of which 27 were selected. The most promising pharmacogenetic findings 
are related to the treatment of alcohol dependence. Genetic variation in the
µ-opioid receptor (OPRM1) and the serotonin transporter (5-HTTLPR) appear to be
associated with treatment outcomes for naltrexone and ondansetron, respectively. 
Genetic variation in CYP2D6 is related to efficacy of methadone treatment for
opiate dependence. Pharmacogenetics may help explain the great inter-individual
variation in treatment response. In the future, treatment matching, based on
genetic characteristics of individual patients, could lead to a 'personalized
medicine' approach. Pharmacogenetic matching of naltrexone in alcohol-dependent
carriers of the OPRM1 G-allele currently seems most promising.

PMID: 23739600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Chronobiol Int. 2013 Jul;30(6):796-810. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2013.766204. Epub
2013 Jun 5.

Circadian-clock system in mouse liver affected by insulin resistance.

Yang SC(1), Tseng HL, Shieh KR.

Author information: 
(1)General Education Center, Tzu Chi College of Technology, Hualien, Taiwan.

Circadian rhythms are exhibited in the physiological and behavioral processes of 
all mammals; they are generated by intracellular levels of circadian oscillators,
which are named as a set of circadian-clock genes. These genes compose the
transcriptional/translational feedback loops to regulate not only circadian
rhythmicity, but also energy metabolism. Previous studies have shown that obesity
and diabetes cause the dysregulation of the circadian-clock system, and vice
versa. However, some diabetes subjects are lean with insulin resistance and the
mechanisms of insulin resistance without obesity are much less well known.
Therefore, whether insulin resistance alone is enough to influence the expression
of circadian-clock genes is uncertain. This study employs a neonatal
streptozotocin (STZ)-treated paradigm in mice to model the molecular and
physiological progress of nonobese insulin resistance. A single injection of STZ 
into 2-d-old male C57BL/6 mice induces nonobese, hyperglycemic and
hyperinsulinemic conditions, and the levels of gene expression in the liver by a 
real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction are then measured. Although the 
levels of Bmal1 (brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1), Per2 (period 2), and Cry1
(cryptochrome 1) mRNA expression in the liver change during the progress of
insulin resistance conditions, the gene expression patterns still show circadian 
rhythmicity. This study suggests that changes in the hepatic circadian-clock gene
expression mark an early event in the metabolic disruption associated with
insulin resistance. Furthermore, 2<U+2009>wks of treatment with the thiazolidinedione,
pioglitazone, fully resolve the dysfunction in metabolic parameters and the
changes in circadian-clock gene expression from early insulin resistance
conditions. These results indicate that the circadian-clock system is sensitive
to insulin resistance, and that treatment with thiazolidinediones can resolve
changes in the circadian-clock system in a timely manner. Thus, strengthening the
peripheral circadian-clock system may counteract the adverse physiological
consequences in the metabolic syndrome.

PMID: 23738904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. PLoS One. 2013 May 29;8(5):e65382. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065382. Print 2013.

Low- and high-volume of intensive endurance training significantly improves
maximal oxygen uptake after 10-weeks of training in healthy men.

Tjønna AE(1), Leinan IM, Bartnes AT, Jenssen BM, Gibala MJ, Winett RA, Wisløff U.

Author information: 
(1)K.G. Jebsen Center for Exercise in Medicine at Department of Circulation and
Medical Imaging, Trondheim, Norway. arnt.e.tjonna@ntnu.no

Regular exercise training improves maximal oxygen uptake (VO2max), but the
optimal intensity and volume necessary to obtain maximal benefit remains to be
defined. A growing body of evidence suggests that exercise training with
low-volume but high-intensity may be a time-efficient means to achieve health
benefits. In the present study, we measured changes in VO2max and traditional
cardiovascular risk factors after a 10 wk. training protocol that involved three 
weekly high-intensity interval sessions. One group followed a protocol which
consisted of 4×4 min at 90% of maximal heart rate (HRmax) interspersed with 3 min
active recovery at 70% HRmax (4-AIT), the other group performed a single bout
protocol that consisted of 1×4 min at 90% HRmax (1-AIT). Twenty-six inactive but 
otherwise healthy overweight men (BMI: 25-30, age: 35-45 y) were randomized to
either 1-AIT (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>11) or 4-AIT (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>13). After training, VO2max increased by 10% 
(~5.0 mL·kg(-1)·min(-1)) and 13% (~6.5 mL·kg(-1)·min(-1)) after 1-AIT and 4-AIT, 
respectively (group difference, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.08). Oxygen cost during running at a
sub-maximal workload was reduced by 14% and 13% after 1-AIT and 4-AIT,
respectively. Systolic blood pressure decreased by 7.1 and 2.6 mmHg after 1-AIT
and 4-AIT respectively, while diastolic pressure decreased by 7.7 and 6.1 mmHg
(group difference, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.84). Both groups had a similar ~5% decrease in fasting
glucose. Body fat, total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, and ox-LDL cholesterol
only were significantly reduced after 4-AIT. Our data suggest that a single bout 
of AIT performed three times per week may be a time-efficient strategy to improve
VO2max and reduce blood pressure and fasting glucose in previously inactive but
otherwise healthy middle-aged individuals. The 1-AIT type of exercise training
may be readily implemented as part of activities of daily living and could easily
be translated into programs designed to improve public health.TRIAL REGISTRATION:
ClinicalTrials.govNCT00839579.

PMCID: PMC3667025
PMID: 23734250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Int J Cancer. 2013 Dec 15;133(12):2769-80. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28297. Epub 2013 Jul 
5.

Knockdown of aberrantly upregulated aryl hydrocarbon receptor reduces tumor
growth and metastasis of MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cell line.

Goode GD(1), Ballard BR, Manning HC, Freeman ML, Kang Y, Eltom SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cancer Biology, Meharry Medical College,
Nashville, TN.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a ligand-activated transcription factor that
belongs to the basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) superfamily of
transcription factors, mediates toxic response induced by environmental chemicals
such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). AhR is expressed at high levels
in several human breast carcinoma cell lines in direct correlation with the
degree of their malignancy. Recent studies suggest a possible role for AhR in
cancer independent of PAH. Therefore, we established stable AhR knockdown cells
of the human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 and analyzed their tumorigenic
properties in in vitro and in vivo model systems. In addition we analyzed their
response to radiation and chemotherapeutic treatment. AhR knockdown attenuated
these cells tumorigenic properties in vitro including proliferation, anchorage
independent growth, migration and apoptosis and reduced orthotopic xenograft
tumor growth and lung metastasis in vivo. Notably, we observed that AhR knockdown
enhanced radiation-induced apoptosis as well as significantly decreased cell
clonogenic survival. Furthermore, AhR knockdown in MDA-MB-231 cells sensitized
them to paclitaxel treatment, evident by a decrease in the required cytotoxic
dose. Subsequent analysis revealed AhR knockdown significantly reduced
phosphorylation of AKT, which impacts cell proliferation and survival.
Apoptosis-focused gene expression analyses revealed an altered expression of
genes regulating apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 cells. Collectively, our data identify
AhR as a potential novel therapeutic target in the treatment of metastatic breast
cancer.

Copyright © 2013 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3797219
PMID: 23733406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Aug;41(14):6992-7008. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt447. Epub 2013 
May 30.

Prospero-related homeobox 1 (Prox1) functions as a novel modulator of retinoic
acid-related orphan receptors a- and <U+03B3>-mediated transactivation.

Takeda Y(1), Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Intramural Research, Cell Biology Section, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, 111 T.W. Alexander 
Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

In this study, we identify Prospero-related homeobox 1 (Prox1) as a novel
co-repressor of the retinoic acid-related orphan receptors, RORa and ROR<U+03B3>. Prox1 
interacts directly with ROR<U+03B3> and RORa and negatively regulates their
transcriptional activity. The AF2 domain of RORs is essential for the
interaction, whereas Prox1 interacts with RORs through either its 28 amino acids 
N-terminal region or its C-terminal prospero-like domain. ROR<U+03B3> antagonists
stabilize the interaction between ROR<U+03B3> and Prox1. The homeodomain and the
interaction through the prospero-like domain of Prox1 are critical for its
repression of ROR transcriptional activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis demonstrated that in liver, Prox1 is recruited to the ROR response
element sites of the clock genes, brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1 (Bmal1),
neuronal PAS domain protein 2 (Npas2) and cryptochrome 1 (Cry1), as part of the
same complex as RORs. Knockdown of Prox1 by siRNAs in human hepatoma Huh-7 cells 
increased the expression of ROR<U+03B3> and several ROR-target genes, along with
increased histone acetylation at these ROR response element sites. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing analysis suggests that Prox1 is a potential ROR
target gene in liver, which is supported by the regulation of the rhythmic
expression of Prox1 by ROR<U+03B3>. Our data suggest that Prox1 is part of a feedback
loop that negatively regulates the transcriptional control of clock and metabolic
networks by RORs.

PMCID: PMC3737549
PMID: 23723244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Biochem J. 2013 Aug 15;454(1):69-77. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130328.

Trafficking defects in PAS domain mutant Kv11.1 channels: roles of reduced domain
stability and altered domain-domain interactions.

Ke Y(1), Ng CA, Hunter MJ, Mann SA, Heide J, Hill AP, Vandenberg JI.

Author information: 
(1)Mark Cowley Lidwill Research Program in Cardiac Electrophysiology, Victor
Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Darlinghurst, NSW 2010, Australia.

Loss of Kv11.1 potassium channel function is the underlying cause of pathology in
long-QT syndrome type 2, one of the commonest causes of sudden cardiac death in
the young. Previous studies have identified the cytosolic PAS (Per/Arnt/Sim)
domain as a hotspot for mutations that cause Kv11.1 trafficking defects. To
investigate the underlying basis of this observation, we have quantified the
effect of mutants on domain folding as well as interactions between the PAS
domain and the remainder of the channel. Apart from R56Q, all mutants impaired
the thermostability of the isolated PAS domain. Six mutants, located in the
vicinity of a hydrophobic patch on the PAS domain surface, also affected binding 
of the isolated PAS domain to an N-terminal truncated hERG (human
ether-a-go-go-related gene) channel. Conversely, four other surface mutants
(C64Y, T65P, A78P and I96T) and one buried mutant (L86R) did not prevent the
isolated PAS domain binding to the truncated channels. Our results highlight a
critical role for interactions between the PAS domain and the remainder of the
channel in the hERG assembly and that mutants that affect PAS domain interactions
with the remainder of the channel have a more severe trafficking defect than that
caused by domain unfolding alone.

PMID: 23721480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2013;67(3):1487-95. doi: 10.1007/s12013-013-9650-4.

AGR2 expression is regulated by HIF-1 and contributes to growth and angiogenesis 
of glioblastoma.

Hong XY(1), Wang J, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, China-Japan Union Hospital Affiliated to Jilin
University, Changchun, 130031, China.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) tumors are the most common type of brain tumors
characterized by extensive angiogenesis that is mostly orchestrated by tumor
hypoxia. The hypoxia induced factor-1 (HIF-1) transcriptional complex is the
"master control switch" for hypoxia. Dysregulation of anterior gradient protein 2
(AGR2) expression is associated with tumor growth and metastasis. Whether AGR2 is
a hypoxia-responsive factor and affects tumor progression via angiogenesis
remains unknown. Here, we show that GBM cell lines, U87 and LN18, exhibited
enhanced hypoxic responses compared with control normal human astrocytes, and a
corresponding HIF-1-dependent increase in AGR2 mRNA and protein. Recombinant AGR2
and conditioned medium from GBM cells induced human umbilical vein endothelial
cell (HUVEC) migration and tube formation, which were abrogated by anti-AGR2
neutralizing antibodies. Expression of the HIF-1a oxygen-dependent degradation
domain mutant in cells resulted in elevated AGR2 levels and an increased ability 
to induce HUVEC migration and tube formation in vitro and enhanced growth and
vascularity of tumor xenografts in vivo, which were prevented by AGR2 knockdown. 
Taken together, these results indicate that AGR2 expression is regulated by HIF-1
and plays an important role in control of glioblastoma growth and vascularity.
Our findings suggest that inhibiting AGR2 may represent a new therapeutic target 
for anti-angiogenic cancer treatment.

PMID: 23712868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Gene. 2013 Sep 10;526(2):155-63. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.05.004. Epub 2013 May
22.

Prolonged fasting activates hypoxia inducible factors-1a, -2a and -3a in a
tissue-specific manner in northern elephant seal pups.

Soñanez-Organis JG(1), Vázquez-Medina JP, Crocker DE, Ortiz RM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Natural Sciences, University of California, Merced, 5200 N Lake
Road, Merced, CA 95343, USA. josegpeso@gmail.com

Hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) are important regulators of energy homeostasis
and cellular adaptation to low oxygen conditions. Northern elephant seals are
naturally adapted to prolonged periods (1-2 months) of food deprivation (fasting)
which result in metabolic changes that may activate HIF-1. However, the effects
of prolonged fasting on HIFs are not well defined. We obtained the full-length
cDNAs of HIF-1a and HIF-2a, and partial cDNA of HIF-3a in northern elephant seal 
pups. We also measured mRNA and nuclear protein content of HIF-1a, -2a, -3a in
muscle and adipose during prolonged fasting (1, 3, 5 & 7 weeks), along with mRNA 
expression of HIF-mediated genes, LDH and VEGF. HIF-1a, -2a and -3a are 2595,
2852 and 1842 bp and encode proteins of 823, 864 and 586 amino acid residues with
conserved domains needed for their function (bHLH and PAS) and regulation (ODD
and TAD). HIF-1a and -2a mRNA expression increased 3- to 5-fold after 7 weeks of 
fasting in adipose and muscle, whereas HIF-3a increased 5-fold after 7 weeks of
fasting in adipose. HIF-2a protein expression was detected in nuclear fractions
from adipose and muscle, increasing approximately 2-fold, respectively with
fasting. Expression of VEGF increased 3-fold after 7 weeks in adipose and muscle,
whereas LDH mRNA expression increased 12-fold after 7 weeks in adipose. While the
3 HIFa genes are expressed in muscle and adipose, only HIF-2a protein was
detectable in the nucleus suggesting that HIF-2a may contribute more
significantly in the up-regulation of genes involved in the metabolic adaptation 
during fasting in the elephant seal.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3729614
PMID: 23707926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Cell Signal. 2013 Sep;25(9):1895-903. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.05.018. Epub
2013 May 21.

Enhanceosomes as integrators of hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) and other
transcription factors in the hypoxic transcriptional response.

Pawlus MR(1), Hu CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Graduate Program, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Hypoxia is a prevalent attribute of the solid tumor microenvironment that
promotes the expression of genes through posttranslational modifications and
stabilization of alpha subunits (HIF1a and HIF2a) of hypoxia-inducible factors
(HIFs). Despite significant similarities, HIF1 (HIF1a/ARNT) and HIF2 (HIF2a/ARNT)
activate common as well as unique target genes and exhibit different functions in
cancer biology. More surprisingly, accumulating data indicates that the HIF1-
and/or HIF2-mediated hypoxia responses can be oncogenic as well as tumor
suppressive. While the role of HIF in the hypoxia response is well established,
recent data support the concept that HIF is necessary, but not sufficient for the
hypoxic response. Other transcription factors that are activated by hypoxia are
also required for the HIF-mediated hypoxia response. HIFs, other transcription
factors, co-factors and RNA poll II recruited by HIF and other transcription
factors form multifactorial enhanceosome complexes on the promoters of HIF target
genes to activate hypoxia inducible genes. Importantly, HIF1 or HIF2 requires
distinct partners in activating HIF1 or HIF2 target genes. Because HIF
enhanceosome formation is required for the gene activation and distinct functions
of HIF1 and HIF2 in tumor biology, disruption of the HIF1 or HIF2 specific
enhanceosome complex may prove to be a beneficial strategy in tumor treatment in 
which tumor growth is specifically dependent upon HIF1 or HIF2 activity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3700616
PMID: 23707522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Lipids Health Dis. 2013 May 24;12:76. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-12-76.

Cyclic restricted feeding enhances lipid storage in 3 T3-L1 adipocytes.

Hashimoto T, Endo Y.

BACKGROUND: People who skip breakfast have more visceral fat than those who eat
breakfast; however, the mechanism underlying this difference is unclear. In this 
study, we examined 3 T3-L1 adipocytes and assessed 1) whether restricted feeding 
(i.e., "breakfast skipping") alters the cyclic expression of brain and muscle
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)-like protein 1 (BMAL1) and 
lipogenic proteins and 2) whether repeated exposure to growth media at the
time-points with enhanced lipogenic regulatory signals increases de novo
lipogenesis and lipid storage.
METHODS: Differentiated adipocytes were divided into two groups: a control group 
and a restricted feeding group, for which incubation with growth medium from ZT 9
to ZT 12 was withheld.
RESULTS: A bout of restricted feeding disrupted the cyclic expression of BMAL1
protein and increased the expression of lipogenic proteins, such as fatty acid
synthase and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma in adipocytes.
Furthermore, the repeated exposure to growth media at the time-points with
enhanced lipogenic regulatory signals increased de novo lipogenesis and lipid
storage.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that direct disruption of intracellular
molecular clock systems by breakfast skipping and the concurrent changes in the
daily cycle of lipogenic proteins in adipocytes, as a consequence of repeated
nutrition at the time-points with enhanced lipogenic regulatory signals, would
result in increased lipogenesis and lipid storage. These alterations are
important molecular mechanisms underlying augmented adiposity induced by
breakfast skipping.

PMCID: PMC3679985
PMID: 23705949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Nat Immunol. 2013 Jun;14(6):611-8. doi: 10.1038/ni.2607. Epub 2013 May 5.

Natural and inducible TH17 cells are regulated differently by Akt and mTOR
pathways.

Kim JS(1), Sklarz T, Banks LB, Gohil M, Waickman AT, Skuli N, Krock BL, Luo CT,
Hu W, Pollizzi KN, Li MO, Rathmell JC, Birnbaum MJ, Powell JD, Jordan MS,
Koretzky GA.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Retraction in
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Oct;15(10):996.

Natural T helper 17 (nTH17) cells are a population of interleukin 17
(IL-17)-producing cells that acquire effector function in the thymus during
development. Here we demonstrate that the serine/threonine kinase Akt has a
critical role in regulating nTH17 cell development. Although Akt and the
downstream mTORC1-ARNT-HIFa axis were required for generation of inducible TH17
(iTH17) cells, nTH17 cells developed independently of mTORC1. In contrast, mTORC2
and inhibition of Foxo proteins were critical for development of nTH17 cells.
Moreover, distinct isoforms of Akt controlled the generation of TH17 cell
subsets, as deletion of Akt2, but not of Akt1, led to defective generation of
iTH17 cells. These findings define mechanisms regulating nTH17 cell development
and reveal previously unknown roles of Akt and mTOR in shaping subsets of T
cells.

PMCID: PMC3711189
PMID: 23644504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jul;41(12):6161-74. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt307. Epub 2013
Apr 24.

Glucocorticoid-mediated Period2 induction delays the phase of circadian rhythm.

Cheon S(1), Park N, Cho S, Kim K.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Korea.

Glucocorticoid (GC) signaling synchronizes the circadian rhythm of individual
peripheral cells and induces the expression of circadian genes, including Period1
(Per1) and Period2 (Per2). However, no GC response element (GRE) has been
reported in the Per2 promoter region. Here we report the molecular mechanisms of 
Per2 induction by GC signaling and its relevance to the regulation of circadian
timing. We found that GC prominently induced Per2 expression and delayed the
circadian phase. The overlapping GRE and E-box (GE2) region in the proximal Per2 
promoter was responsible for GC-mediated Per2 induction. The GRE in the Per2
promoter was unique in that brain and muscle ARNT-like protein-1 (BMAL1) was
essential for GC-induced Per2 expression, whereas other GRE-containing promoters,
such as Per1 and mouse mammary tumor virus, responded to dexamethasone in the
absence of BMAL1. This specialized regulatory mechanism was mediated by
BMAL1-dependent binding of the GC receptor to GRE in Per2 promoter. When Per2
induction was abrogated by the mutation of the GRE or E-box, the circadian
oscillation phase failed to be delayed compared with that of the wild-type.
Therefore, the current study demonstrates that the rapid Per2 induction mediated 
by GC is crucial for delaying the circadian rhythm.

PMCID: PMC3695510
PMID: 23620290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jun;41(11):5626-38. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt206. Epub 2013
Apr 17.

Reciprocal regulation of the basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim partner
proteins, Arnt and Arnt2, during neuronal differentiation.

Hao N(1), Bhakti VL, Peet DJ, Whitelaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science (Biochemistry), The University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia.

Basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH/PAS) transcription factors function
broadly in development, homeostasis and stress response. Active bHLH/PAS
heterodimers consist of a ubiquitous signal-regulated subunit (e.g.,
hypoxia-inducible factors, HIF-1a/2a/3a; the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, AhR) or
tissue-restricted subunit (e.g., NPAS1/3/4, Single Minded 1/2), paired with a
general partner protein, aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt or 
Arnt2). We have investigated regulation of the neuron-enriched Arnt paralogue,
Arnt2. We find high Arnt/Arnt2 ratios in P19 embryonic carcinoma cells and ES
cells are dramatically reversed to high Arnt2/Arnt on neuronal differentiation.
mRNA half-lives of Arnt and Arnt2 remain similar in both parent and neuronal
differentiated cells. The GC-rich Arnt2 promoter, while heavily methylated in
Arnt only expressing hepatoma cells, is methylation free in P19 and ES cells,
where it is bivalent with respect to active H3K4me3 and repressive H3K27me3
histone marks. Typical of a 'transcription poised' developmental gene, H3K27me3
repressive marks are removed from Arnt2 during neuronal differentiation. Our data
are consistent with a switch to predominant Arnt2 expression in neurons to allow 
specific functions of neuronal bHLH/PAS factors and/or to avoid neuronal bHLH/PAS
factors from interfering with AhR/Arnt signalling.

PMCID: PMC3675461
PMID: 23599003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Jun;27(6):979-89. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1366. Epub 2013 Apr
18.

Npas4 is activated by melatonin, and drives the clock gene Cry1 in the ovine pars
tuberalis.

West A(1), Dupré SM, Yu L, Paton IR, Miedzinska K, McNeilly AS, Davis JR, Burt
DW, Loudon AS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

Seasonal mammals integrate changes in the duration of nocturnal melatonin
secretion to drive annual physiologic cycles. Melatonin receptors within the
proximal pituitary region, the pars tuberalis (PT), are essential in regulating
seasonal neuroendocrine responses. In the ovine PT, melatonin is known to
influence acute changes in transcriptional dynamics coupled to the onset (dusk)
and offset (dawn) of melatonin secretion, leading to a potential interval-timing 
mechanism capable of decoding changes in day length (photoperiod). Melatonin
offset at dawn is linked to cAMP accumulation, which directly induces
transcription of the clock gene Per1. The rise of melatonin at dusk induces a
separate and distinct cohort, including the clock-regulated genes Cry1 and Nampt,
but little is known of the up-stream mechanisms involved. Here, we used
next-generation sequencing of the ovine PT transcriptome at melatonin onset and
identified Npas4 as a rapidly induced basic helix-loop-helix Per-Arnt-Sim domain 
transcription factor. In vivo we show nuclear localization of NPAS4 protein in
presumptive melatonin target cells of the PT (a-glycoprotein hormone-expressing
cells), whereas in situ hybridization studies identified acute and transient
expression in the PT of Npas4 in response to melatonin. In vitro, NPAS4 forms
functional dimers with basic helix loop helix-PAS domain cofactors aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), ARNT2, and ARNTL,
transactivating both Cry1 and Nampt ovine promoter reporters. Using a combination
of 5'-deletions and site-directed mutagenesis, we show NPAS4-ARNT transactivation
to be codependent upon two conserved central midline elements within the Cry1
promoter. Our data thus reveal NPAS4 as a candidate immediate early-response gene
in the ovine PT, driving molecular responses to melatonin.

PMCID: PMC3689899
PMID: 23598442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Biomol NMR Assign. 2014 Apr;8(1):165-8. doi: 10.1007/s12104-013-9475-5. Epub 2013
Apr 18.

¹H, ¹³C and ¹5N chemical shift assignments for the N-terminal PAS domain of the
KCNH channel from zebrafish.

Kim YM(1), Li Q, Ng HQ, Yoon HS, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Therapeutics Centre, Agency for Science, Technology and Research,
31 Biopolis Way Nanos, #03-01, Singapore, 138669, Singapore.

The KCNH channels are voltage-gated potassium channels that play important roles 
in heart and nerve cells. The N-terminal region of the KCNH channel contains a
Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain which is important for the channel gating through
interaction with other regions of the channel. To study the solution structure of
the N-terminal PAS domain of the KCNH channel from Zebrafish (zNTD), we
over-expressed and purified zNTD. We report the resonance assignments for zNTD.
The data will allow us to perform structural studies for this domain, which will 
provide insight into its structural basis for the molecular interaction with
other regions of the KCNH channel.

PMID: 23595857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Am J Pathol. 2013 Jun;182(6):2391-406. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.02.039. Epub
2013 Apr 11.

Endothelial GATA-6 deficiency promotes pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Ghatnekar A(1), Chrobak I, Reese C, Stawski L, Seta F, Wirrig E, Paez-Cortez J,
Markiewicz M, Asano Y, Harley R, Silver R, Feghali-Bostwick C, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina, USA.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a chronic and progressive disease
characterized by pulmonary vasculopathy with elevation of pulmonary artery
pressure, often culminating in right ventricular failure. GATA-6, a member of the
GATA family of zinc-finger transcription factors, is highly expressed in
quiescent vasculature and is frequently lost during vascular injury. We
hypothesized that endothelial GATA-6 may play a critical role in the molecular
mechanisms underlying endothelial cell (EC) dysfunction in PAH. Here we report
that GATA-6 is markedly reduced in pulmonary ECs lining both occluded and
nonoccluded vessels in patients with idiopathic and systemic sclerosis-associated
PAH. GATA-6 transcripts are also rapidly decreased in rodent PAH models.
Endothelial GATA-6 is a direct transcriptional regulator of genes controlling
vascular tone [endothelin-1, endothelin-1 receptor type A, and endothelial nitric
oxide synthase (eNOS)], pro-inflammatory genes, CX3CL1 (fractalkine),
5-lipoxygenease-activating protein, and markers of vascular remodeling, including
PAI-1 and RhoB. Mice with the genetic deletion of GATA-6 in ECs (Gata6-KO)
spontaneously develop elevated pulmonary artery pressure and increased vessel
muscularization, and these features are further exacerbated in response to
hypoxia. Furthermore, innate immune cells including macrophages
(CD11b(+)/F4/80(+)), granulocytes (Ly6G(+)/CD45(+)), and dendritic cells
(CD11b(+)/CD11c(+)) are significantly increased in normoxic Gata6-KO mice.
Together, our findings suggest a critical role of endothelial GATA-6 deficiency
in development and disease progression in PAH.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3668018
PMID: 23583651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 23;110(17):6777-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1301934110. Epub 2013 Apr 9.

Higher-order interactions bridge the nitric oxide receptor and catalytic domains 
of soluble guanylate cyclase.

Underbakke ES(1), Iavarone AT, Marletta MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA.

Nitric oxide (NO) signaling pathways mediate diverse physiological functions,
including vasodilation and neurotransmission. Soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC),
the primary NO receptor, triggers downstream signaling cascades by producing the 
second messenger cGMP. NO binds the sGC heme cofactor to stimulate cyclase
activity, yet the molecular mechanisms of cyclase activation remain obscure.
Although structural models of the individual sGC domains are available, the
structure of the full sGC heterodimer is unknown. Understanding the higher-order 
domain architecture of sGC is a prerequisite to elucidating the mechanisms of NO 
activation. We used protein footprinting to map interdomain interaction surfaces 
of the sGC signaling domains. Hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry
revealed direct interactions between the Per/Arnt/Sim domain and the
heme-associated signaling helix of the heme-NO/O2 binding (H-NOX) domain.
Furthermore, interfaces between the H-NOX and catalytic domains were mapped using
domain truncations and full-length sGC. The H-NOX domain buries surfaces of the
a1 catalytic domain proximal to the cyclase active site, suggesting a signaling
mechanism involving NO-induced derepression of catalytic activity. Together, our 
data reveal interdomain interactions responsible for communicating NO occupancy
from H-NOX heme to the catalytic domain active site.

PMCID: PMC3637750
PMID: 23572573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 May 3;434(2):370-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.03.084. Epub 2013 Apr 6.

Clock-controlled output gene Dbp is a regulator of Arnt/Hif-1ß gene expression in
pancreatic islet ß-cells.

Nakabayashi H(1), Ohta Y, Yamamoto M, Susuki Y, Taguchi A, Tanabe K, Kondo M,
Hatanaka M, Nagao Y, Tanizawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Yamaguchi University, Graduate School of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, 
Metabolism, Hematological Sciences and Therapeutics, Department of Bio-Signal
Analysis, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505, Japan.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)/hypoxia inducible factor-1ß
(HIF-1ß) has emerged as a potential determinant of pancreatic ß-cell dysfunction 
and type 2 diabetes in humans. An 82% reduction in Arnt expression was observed
in islets from type 2 diabetic donors as compared to non-diabetic donors.
However, few regulators of Arnt expression have been identified. Meanwhile,
disruption of the clock components CLOCK and BMAL1 is known to result in
hypoinsulinemia and diabetes, but the molecular details remain unclear. In this
study, we identified a novel molecular connection between Arnt and two
clock-controlled output genes, albumin D-element binding protein (Dbp) and E4
binding protein 4 (E4bp4). By conducting gene expression studies using the islets
of Wfs1(-/-) A(y)/a mice that develop severe diabetes due to ß-cell apoptosis, we
demonstrated clock-related gene expressions to be altered in the diabetic mice.
Dbp mRNA decreased by 50%, E4bp4 mRNA increased by 50%, and Arnt mRNA decreased
by 30% at Zeitgever Time (ZT) 12. Mouse pancreatic islets exhibited oscillations 
of clock gene expressions. E4BP4, a D-box negative regulator, oscillated
anti-phase to DBP, a D-box positive regulator. We also found low-amplitude
circadian expression of Arnt mRNA, which peaked at ZT4. Over-expression of DBP
raised both mRNA and protein levels of ARNT in HEK293 and MIN6 cell lines. Arnt
promoter-driven luciferase reporter assay in MIN6 cells revealed that DBP
increased Arnt promoter activity by 2.5-fold and that E4BP4 competitively
inhibited its activation. In addition, on ChIP assay, DBP and E4BP4 directly
bound to D-box elements within the Arnt promoter in MIN6 cells. These results
suggest that in mouse pancreatic islets mRNA expression of Arnt fluctuates
significantly in a circadian manner and that the down-regulation of Dbp and
up-regulation E4bp4 contribute to direct suppression of Arnt expression in
diabetes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23567972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59265. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059265. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

Structural properties of PAS domains from the KCNH potassium channels.

Adaixo R(1), Harley CA, Castro-Rodrigues AF, Morais-Cabral JH.

Author information: 
(1)IBMC, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal.

KCNH channels form an important family of voltage gated potassium channels. These
channels include a N-terminal Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain with unknown function. In
other proteins PAS domains are implicated in cellular responses to environmental 
queues through small molecule binding or involvement in signaling cascades. To
better understand their role we characterized the structural properties of
several channel PAS domains. We determined high resolution structures of PAS
domains from the mouse EAG (mEAG), drosophila ELK (dELK) and human ERG (hERG)
channels and also of the hERG domain without the first nine amino acids. We
analyzed these structures for features connected to ligand binding and signaling 
in other PAS domains. In particular, we have found cavities in the hERG and mEAG 
structures that share similarities with the ligand binding sites from other PAS
domains. These cavities are lined by polar and apolar chemical groups and display
potential flexibility in their volume. We have also found that the hydrophobic
patch on the domain ß-sheet is a conserved feature and appears to drive the
formation of protein-protein contacts. In addition, the structures of the dELK
domain and of the truncated hERG domain revealed the presence of N-terminal
helices. These helices are equivalent to the helix described in the hERG NMR
structures and are known to be important for channel function. Overall, these
channel domains retain many of the PAS domain characteristics known to be
important for cell signaling.

PMCID: PMC3598652
PMID: 23555008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Apr 26;434(1):166-72. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.03.051. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1ß (HIF-1ß) is upregulated in a HIF-1a-dependent manner 
in 518A2 human melanoma cells under hypoxic conditions.

Mandl M(1), Kapeller B, Lieber R, Macfelda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Research, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer
Guertel 18-20, 1090 Vienna, Austria. mmandl@mail.austria.com

Solid tumors include hypoxic areas due to excessive cell proliferation.
Adaptation to low oxygen levels is mediated by the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)
pathway promoting invasion, metastasis, metabolic alterations, chemo-resistance
and angiogenesis. The transcription factor HIF-1, the major player within this
pathway consists of HIF-1a and HIF-1ß. The alpha subunit is continuously degraded
under normoxia and becomes stabilized under reduced oxygen supply. In contrast,
HIF-1ß is generally regarded as constitutively expressed and being present in
excess within the cell. However, there is evidence that the expression of this
subunit is more complex. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of
HIF-1ß in human melanoma cells. Among a panel of five different cell lines, in
518A2 cells exposed to the hypoxia-mimetic cobalt chloride HIF-1ß was rapidly
elevated on protein level. Knockdown experiments performed under cobalt
chloride-exposure and hypoxia revealed that this effect was mediated by HIF-1a.
The non-canonical relationship between these subunits was further confirmed by
pharmacologic inhibition of HIF-1a and by expression of a dominant-negative HIF
mutant. Overexpression of HIF-1a showed a time delay in HIF-1ß induction, thus
arguing for HIF-1ß de novo synthesis rather than protein stabilization by
heterodimerization. A Hen's egg test-chorioallantoic membrane model of
angiogenesis and invasion indicated a local expression of HIF-1ß and implies a
biological relevance of these findings. In summary, this study demonstrates the
HIF-1a-dependent regulation of HIF-1ß under hypoxic conditions for the first
time. The results indicate a novel cell specific mechanism which might prevent
HIF-1ß to become a limiting factor.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23541582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Cell Sci. 2013 May 15;126(Pt 10):2213-24. doi: 10.1242/jcs.120519. Epub 2013
Mar 22.

Brain and muscle Arnt-like 1 is a key regulator of myogenesis.

Chatterjee S(1), Nam D, Guo B, Kim JM, Winnier GE, Lee J, Berdeaux R, Yechoor VK,
Ma K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Medicine, The Methodist Hospital
Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The circadian clock network is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism that imparts
temporal regulation to diverse biological processes. Brain and muscle Arnt-like 1
(Bmal1), an essential transcriptional activator of the clock, is highly expressed
in skeletal muscle. However, whether this key clock component impacts myogenesis,
a temporally regulated event that requires the sequential activation of myogenic 
regulatory factors, is not known. Here we report a novel function of Bmal1 in
controlling myogenic differentiation through direct transcriptional activation of
components of the canonical Wnt signaling cascade, a major inductive signal for
embryonic and postnatal muscle growth. Genetic loss of Bmal1 in mice leads to
reduced total muscle mass and Bmal1-deficient primary myoblasts exhibit
significantly impaired myogenic differentiation accompanied by markedly blunted
expression of key myogenic regulatory factors. Conversely, forced expression of
Bmal1 enhances differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts. This cell-autonomous effect of
Bmal1 is mediated by Wnt signaling as both expression and activity of Wnt
components are markedly attenuated by inhibition of Bmal1, and activation of the 
Wnt pathway partially rescues the myogenic defect in Bmal1-deficient myoblasts.
We further reveal direct association of Bmal1 with promoters of canonical Wnt
pathway genes, and as a result of this transcriptional regulation, Wnt signaling 
components exhibit intrinsic circadian oscillation. Collectively, our study
demonstrates that the core clock gene, Bmal1, is a positive regulator of
myogenesis, which may represent a temporal regulatory mechanism to fine-tune
myocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3672937
PMID: 23525013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Neurosci Lett. 2013 May 10;542:126-30. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.03.009. Epub
2013 Mar 18.

Effect of amphetamine on the clock gene expression in rat striatum.

Wongchitrat P(1), Mukda S, Phansuwan-Pujito P, Govitrapong P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Innovation Development and Technology Transfer, Faculty of Medical 
Technology, Mahidol University, Salaya, Nakornpathom, Thailand.

Drug addicts have severe disruptions in many physiological and behavioral
rhythms, such as the sleep/wake cycle. Interestingly, amphetamine, a
psychostimulant, is able to alter many circadian patterns, which are independent 
of the master biological clock located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. To
increase our understanding of the circadian regulation of amphetamine on clock
gene expression, rats received subcutaneous injections of d-amphetamine and the
clock gene mRNA levels were analyzed using real-time PCR to obtain a daily
profile. In the striatum, acute injection of d-amphetamine did not alter Period
(Per)1, Per2 and Reverse erythroblastosis virus a (Rev-erba) expressions. Chronic
administration shifted the phase of Per1 and Per2 expressions from a nocturnal to
diurnal pattern and advance shifted the peak of Rev-erba in d-amphetamine-treated
animals. In contrast, the rhythm of Brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (Bmal1) 
was shifted from a diurnal to a nocturnal pattern by both acute and chronic
treatments. These results demonstrated that chronic d-amphetamine treatment
altered the expression of clock genes in the striatum. This might further
influence the expression of related gene within the striatum and lead to
behavioral and physiological changes which are associated to drug addiction.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23518151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2013 Jun;345(3):419-29. doi: 10.1124/jpet.113.203786. Epub 
2013 Mar 19.

The tumor suppressor Kruppel-like factor 6 is a novel aryl hydrocarbon receptor
DNA binding partner.

Wilson SR(1), Joshi AD, Elferink CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
301 University Blvd., Galveston, TX, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-mediated basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor of the Per/Arnt/Sim family that regulates adaptive and toxic
responses to a variety of chemical pollutants, including polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons and halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons, most notably
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Ligand activation leads to AhR
nuclear translocation and binding to a xenobiotic response element (XRE) in
association with the Arnt to regulate gene expression. Several recent genome-wide
transcriptional studies identified numerous AhR target genes that lack the
canonical XRE recognition site in the promoter regions. Characterization of one
such target gene, the plasminogen activator inhibitor 1, identified a novel
nonconsensus XRE (NC-XRE) that confers TCDD responsiveness independently of the
Arnt protein. Studies reported here show that the NC-XRE is a recognition site
for the AhR and a new binding partner, the Kruppel-like factor (KLF) family
member KLF6. In vivo chromatin immunoprecipitations and in vitro DNA binding
studies demonstrate that the AhR and KLF6 proteins form an obligatory heterodimer
necessary for NC-XRE binding. Mutational analyses show that the protein-protein
interactions involve the AhR C terminus and KLF6 N terminus, respectively.
Moreover, NC-XRE binding depends on the 5' basic region in KLF6 rather than the
previously characterized zinc finger DNA binding domain. Collectively, the
results unmask a novel AhR signaling mechanism distinct from the canonical
XRE-driven process that will enrich our future understanding of AhR biology.

PMCID: PMC3657114
PMID: 23512538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 26;288(17):11949-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.437764. Epub
2013 Mar 15.

Solution structure of the PAS domain of a thermophilic YybT protein homolog
reveals a potential ligand-binding site.

Tan E(1), Rao F, Pasunooti S, Pham TH, Soehano I, Turner MS, Liew CW, Lescar J,
Pervushin K, Liang ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Structural Biology and Biochemistry, School of Biological
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551.

The Bacillus subtilis protein YybT (or GdpP) and its homologs were recently
established as stress signaling proteins that exert their biological effect by
degrading the bacterial messenger cyclic di-AMP. YybT homologs contain a small
Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domain (~80 amino acids) that can bind b-type heme with 1:1
stoichiometry despite the small size of the domain and the lack of a conserved
heme iron-coordinating residue. We determined the solution structure of the PAS
domain of GtYybT from Geobacillus thermodenitrificans by NMR spectroscopy to
further probe its function. The solution structure confirms that PASGtYybT adopts
the characteristic PAS fold composed of a five-stranded antiparallel ß sheet and 
a few short a-helices. One a-helix and three central ß-strands of PASGtYybT are
noticeably shorter than those of the typical PAS domains. Despite the small size 
of the protein domain, a hydrophobic pocket is formed by the side chains of
nonpolar residues stemming from the ß-strands and a-helices. A set of residues in
the vicinity of the pocket and in the C-terminal region at the dimeric interface 
exhibits perturbed NMR parameters in the presence of heme or zinc protoporphyrin.
Together, the results unveil a compact PAS domain with a potential ligand-binding
pocket and reinforce the view that the PASYybT domains function as regulatory
domains in the modulation of cellular cyclic di-AMP concentration.

PMCID: PMC3636882
PMID: 23504327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Bacteriol. 2013 May;195(10):2349-58. doi: 10.1128/JB.00096-13. Epub 2013 Mar
15.

Role of the PAS sensor domains in the Bacillus subtilis sporulation kinase KinA.

Winnen B(1), Anderson E, Cole JL, King GF, Rowland SL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia,
Queensland, Australia.

Histidine kinases are sophisticated molecular sensors that are used by bacteria
to detect and respond to a multitude of environmental signals. KinA is the major 
histidine kinase required for initiation of sporulation upon nutrient deprivation
in Bacillus subtilis. KinA has a large N-terminal region (residues 1 to 382) that
is uniquely composed of three tandem Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domains that have been
proposed to constitute a sensor module. To further enhance our understanding of
this "sensor" region, we defined the boundaries that give rise to the minimal
autonomously folded PAS domains and analyzed their homo- and heteroassociation
properties using analytical ultracentrifugation, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy, and multiangle laser light scattering. We show that PAS(A)
self-associates very weakly, while PAS(C) is primarily a monomer. In contrast,
PAS(B) forms a stable dimer (K(d) [dissociation constant] of <10 nM), and it
appears to be the main N-terminal determinant of KinA dimerization. Analysis of
KinA mutants deficient for one or more PAS domains revealed a critical role for
PAS(B), but not PAS(A), in autophosphorylation of KinA. Our findings suggest that
dimerization of PAS(B) is important for keeping the catalytic domain of KinA in a
functional conformation. We use this information to propose a model for the
structure of the N-terminal sensor module of KinA.

PMCID: PMC3650535
PMID: 23504013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Scand J Rheumatol. 2013;42(4):276-80. doi: 10.3109/03009742.2013.765031. Epub
2013 Mar 16.

TNF-a modulates expression of the circadian clock gene Per2 in rheumatoid
synovial cells.

Yoshida K(1), Hashiramoto A, Okano T, Yamane T, Shibanuma N, Shiozawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe,
Japan.

OBJECTIVES: To study the effect of tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-a, responsible
for the inflammation and circadian rhythm of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), on the
expression of circadian clock genes in primary cultured human rheumatoid synovial
cells.
METHOD: The expression of circadian clock genes, including circadian locomotor
output cycles kaput (Clock), brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (Bmal1), period
(Per)1/2, and cryptochrome (Cry)1/2, and the proline and acidic amino acid-rich
basic leucine zipper (PAR bZip) genes, a transcriptional activator of Per2,
including D site of albumin promoter binding protein (Dbp), hepatic leukaemia
factor (Hlf), and thyrotroph embryonic factor (Tef), and a transcriptional
repressor of Per2, E4-binding protein 4 (E4bp4), in TNF-a-stimulated synovial
cells was determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The D-box
motifs in the Per2 promoter were mutated by site-directed mutagenesis, and the
promoter activity of the Per2 gene was examined using the luciferase assay.
RESULTS: TNF-a enhanced the mRNA expression of Bmal1 and Cry1 but did not affect 
that of Clock, Per1, or Cry2. However, TNF-a inhibited the mRNA expression of the
Per2 gene, as well as Dbp, Hlf, and Tef, but enhanced the mRNA expression of
E4bp4. Furthermore, TNF-a inhibited the transcriptional activity of the wild-type
Per2 gene in a manner dependent on the D-box 1 and D-box 2 motifs in the Per2
promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: TNF-a modulates the expression of the Per2 gene through the D-box
binding proteins DBP, HLF, TEF, and E4BP4, in rheumatoid synovial cells, and
thereby may contribute to the pathogenesis of RA.

PMID: 23496259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2013 Jul;23(6):464-70. doi: 10.3109/15376516.2013.781254.

Establishment of a cell-free bioassay for detecting dioxin-like compounds.

Wang BJ(1), Wu PY, Lu YC, Chang CH, Lin YC, Tsai TC, Hsu MC, Lee H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

Dioxins are byproducts from incomplete combustion processes and belong to a group
of mostly toxic chemicals known as persistent organic pollutants, and
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is considered to be the most toxic
species of all dioxin-like compounds. Analytical chemical processes are employed 
to determine the specific dioxin content in environmental samples. However,
cost-ineffectiveness and excess time consumption limit their routine utilization.
The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is the major TCDD receptor. Upon binding to
dioxin, the AhR dissociates from Hsp90 and other cofactors. TCDD-bound AhR
subsequently translocates to the nucleus and interacts with the AhR nuclear
translocator (Arnt) to induce signal transduction. Here, we describe a highly
sensitive and cost-effective alternative assay based on detecting stability of
bioluminescence signals. We generated cells that stably co-express Renilla
luciferase tagged-AhR (AhR-RL), Ah receptor-interacting protein (AIP), p23 and
yellow fluorescent protein-tagged Arnt (Arnt-YFP) (AAPA cells) for detection of
dioxin-like compounds. Treatment with 3-methylcholanthrene (3MC), AhR agonist,
enhanced the interaction between AhR and Arnt and avoided proteosomal
degradation. In addition, treatment with 3MC or TCDD stabilized Renilla
luminescence from AhR-RL of AAPA cell-free extracts in a concentration-dependent 
manner. The TCDD detection limit in this cell-free system was as low as
10(-18<U+2009>)M. These results highlight the potential of AAPAA cell-free extracts to
detect dioxin-like pollutants.

PMID: 23477502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e57973. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057973. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Altered subcellular localization of heat shock protein 90 is associated with
impaired expression of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway in dogs.

van Steenbeek FG(1), Spee B, Penning LC, Kummeling A, van Gils IH, Grinwis GC,
Van Leenen D, Holstege FC, Vos-Loohuis M, Rothuizen J, Leegwater PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands. f.g.vansteenbeek@uu.nl

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) mediates biological responses to toxic
chemicals. An unexpected role for AHR in vascularization was suggested when mice 
lacking AHR displayed impaired closure of the ductus venosus after birth, as did 
knockout mice for aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) and aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT). The resulting intrahepatic
portosystemic shunts (IHPSS) are frequently diagnosed in specific dog breeds,
such as the Irish wolfhound. We compared the expression of components of the AHR 
pathway in healthy Irish wolfhounds and dogs with IHPSS. To this end, we analyzed
the mRNA expression in the liver of AHR,AIP, ARNT, and other genes involved in
this pathway, namely, those for aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2 
(ARNT2), hypoxia inducible factor 1alpha (HIF1A), heat shock protein 90AA1
(HSP90AA1), cytochromes P450 (CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1), vascular endothelial
growth factor A (VEGFA), nitric oxide synthesase 3 (NOS3), and endothelin (EDN1).
The observed low expression of AHR mRNA in the Irish wolfhounds is in associated 
with a LINE-1 insertion in intron 2, for which these dogs were homozygous. Down
regulation in Irish wolfhounds was observed for AIP, ARNT2, CYP1A2, CYP1B1 and
HSP90AA1 expression, whereas the expression of HIF1A was increased.
Immunohistochemistry revealed lower levels of AHR, HIF1A, and VEGFA protein in
the nucleus and lower levels of ARNT and HSP90AA1 protein in the cytoplasm of the
liver cells of Irish wolfhounds. The impaired expression of HSP90AA1 could
trigger the observed differences in mRNA and protein levels and therefore explain
the link between two very different functions of AHR: regulation of the closure
of the ductus venosus and the response to toxins.

PMCID: PMC3589449
PMID: 23472125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. PLoS Biol. 2013;11(2):e1001493. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001493. Epub 2013 Feb 
26.

Mechanistic insights revealed by the crystal structure of a histidine kinase with
signal transducer and sensor domains.

Wang C(1), Sang J, Wang J, Su M, Downey JS, Wu Q, Wang S, Cai Y, Xu X, Wu J,
Senadheera DB, Cvitkovitch DG, Chen L, Goodman SD, Han A.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiangan, Xiamen, China.

Two-component systems (TCSs) are important for the adaptation and survival of
bacteria and fungi under stress conditions. A TCS is often composed of a
membrane-bound sensor histidine kinase (SK) and a response regulator (RR), which 
are relayed through sequential phosphorylation steps. However, the mechanism for 
how an SK is switched on in response to environmental stimuli remains obscure.
Here, we report the crystal structure of a complete cytoplasmic portion of an SK,
VicK from Streptococcus mutans. The overall structure of VicK is a long-rod dimer
that anchors four connected domains: HAMP, Per-ARNT-SIM (PAS), DHp, and catalytic
and ATP binding domain (CA). The HAMP, a signal transducer, and the PAS domain,
major sensor, adopt canonical folds with dyad symmetry. In contrast, the dimer of
the DHp and CA domains is asymmetric because of different helical bends in the
DHp domain and spatial positions of the CA domains. Moreover, a conserved
proline, which is adjacent to the phosphoryl acceptor histidine, contributes to
helical bending, which is essential for the autokinase and phosphatase
activities. Together, the elegant architecture of VicK with a signal transducer
and sensor domain suggests a model where DHp helical bending and a CA swing
movement are likely coordinated for autokinase activation.

PMCID: PMC3582566
PMID: 23468592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Jun;1833(6):1378-87. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.02.025. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

MgcRacGAP, a cytoskeleton regulator, inhibits HIF-1 transcriptional activity by
blocking its dimerization.

Lyberopoulou A(1), Mylonis I, Papachristos G, Sagris D, Kalousi A, Befani C,
Liakos P, Simos G, Georgatsou E.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece.

Hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), a dimeric transcription factor of the
bHLH-PAS family, is comprised of HIF-1a, which is inducible by hypoxia and ARNT
or HIF-1ß, which is constitutively expressed. HIF-1 is involved in cellular
homeostasis under hypoxia, in development and in several diseases affected by
oxygen availability, particularly cancer. Since its expression is positively
correlated with poor outcome prognosis for cancer patients, HIF-1 is a target for
pharmaceutical therapy. We have previously shown that male germ cell Rac GTPase
activating protein (MgcRacGAP), a regulator of Rho proteins which are principally
involved in cytoskeletal organization, binds to HIF-1a and inhibits its
transcriptional activity. In this work, we have explored the mechanism of the
MgcRacGAP-mediated HIF-1 inactivation. We show that the Myo domain of MgcRacGAP, 
which is both necessary and sufficient for HIF-1 repression, binds to the PAS-B
domain of HIF-1a. Furthermore MgcRacGAP competes with ARNT for binding to the
HIF-1a PAS-B domain, as shown by in vitro binding pull down assays. In mammalian 
cells, ARNT overexpression can overcome the MgcRacGAP-mediated inhibition and
MgcRacGAP binding to HIF-1a in vivo inhibits its dimerization with ARNT. We
additionally present results indicating that MgcRacGAP binding to HIF-1a is
specific, since it does not affect the transcriptional activity of HIF-2, a close
evolutionary relative of HIF-1 also involved in hypoxia regulation and cancer.
Our results reveal a new mechanism for HIF-1 transcriptional activity regulation,
suggest a novel hypoxia-cytoskeleton link and provide new tools for selective
HIF-1 inhibition.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23458834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Sci Total Environ. 2013 Apr 15;450-451:7-12. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.01.095. Epub 2013 Feb 27.

Modulation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor target genes in circulating lymphocytes
from dairy cows bred in a dioxin-like PCB contaminated area.

Girolami F(1), Spalenza V, Carletti M, Sacchi P, Rasero R, Nebbia C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Pathology, University of Turin, Via Leonardo da Vinci 44,
10095 Grugliasco, Italy. flavia.girolami@unito.it

Animal productions (i.e. fish, eggs, milk and dairy products) represent the major
source of exposure to dioxins, furans, and dioxin-like (DL) polychlorobiphenyls
for humans. The negative effects of these highly toxic and persistent pollutants 
are mediated by the activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) that
elicits the transcriptional induction of several genes, including those involved 
in xenobiotic metabolism. Previously we demonstrated the presence and functioning
of the AHR signaling pathway in primary cultures of bovine blood lymphocytes. The
aim of the present study was to investigate by real time PCR the expression and
the inducibility of selected target genes (i.e. AHR, AHR nuclear translocator
(ARNT), AHR repressor, CYP1A1 and CYP1B1) in uncultured cells from dairy cows
naturally exposed to DL-compounds. The study was carried out on two groups of
animals bred in a highly polluted area and characterized by a different degree of
contamination, as assessed by bulk milk TEQ values, and a control group reared in
an industry free area. Bovine lymphocytes expressed only AHR, ARNT and CYP1B1
genes to a detectable level; moreover, only CYP1B1 expression appeared to be
correlated to TEQ values, being higher in the most contaminated group, and
decreasing along with animal decontamination. Finally, lymphocytes from exposed
cows displayed a lower inducibility of both CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 after the in vitro 
treatment with a specific AHR ligand. In conclusion, our results indicate that
DL-compound contaminated cows may display significant changes in AHR-target gene 
expression of circulating lymphocytes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23454571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Chem Biol Interact. 2013 Apr 25;203(2):401-11. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2013.02.003.
Epub 2013 Feb 27.

A cell-penetrating peptide suppresses the hypoxia inducible factor-1 function by 
binding to the helix-loop-helix domain of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator.

Wang Y(1), Thompson JD, Chan WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, Thomas J. Long School of 
Pharmacy and Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, CA 95211, USA.

The heterodimeric hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) complex is composed of the
hypoxia inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1a) and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT). Activation of the HIF-1 function is essential for
tumor growth and metastasis. We previously showed that transfection of a plasmid 
containing an ARNT-interacting peptide (Ainp1) cDNA suppresses the HIF-1
signaling in Hep3B cells. Here we generated TAT fusion of the Ainp1 peptide
(6His-TAT-Ainp1) to determine whether and how the Ainp1 peptide suppresses the
HIF-1 function. The bacterially expressed 6His-TAT-Ainp1 was purified under
denatured condition and then refolded by limited dialysis. The refolded
6His-TAT-Ainp1 interacts with the helix-loop-helix (HLH) domain of ARNT in a
similar fashion as the native 6His-Ainp1. 6His-TAT-Ainp1 colocalizes with ARNT in
the nucleus of HeLa and Hep3B cells after protein transduction. The transduced
protein reaches the maximum intracellular levels within 2 h while remains
detectable up to 96 h in HeLa cells. At 2 µM concentration, 6His-TAT-Ainp1 is not
cytotoxic in HeLa cells but suppresses the cobalt chloride-activated, hypoxia
responsive enhancer-driven luciferase expression in a dose-dependent manner. In
addition, it decreases the cobalt chloride-dependent induction of the HIF-1
target genes at both the message (vascular endothelial growth factor and aldolase
C) and protein (carbonic anhydrase IX and glucose transporter 1) levels. The
protein levels of HIF-1a and ARNT are not altered in the presence of
6His-TAT-Ainp1. In summary, we provided evidence to support that the Ainp1
peptide directly suppresses the HIF-1 function by interacting with the ARNT HLH
domain, and in turn interfering with the heterodimerization of HIF-1a and ARNT.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3661001
PMID: 23454269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Mar 29;433(1):40-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.02.070. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) dependent regulation of thioredoxin
interacting protein (TXNIP) transcription in hypoxia.

Wong RW(1), Hagen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 117597 Singapore, Singapore.

Thioredoxin interacting protein (TXNIP), first identified as an inhibitor of
thioredoxin, is also a tumor suppressor as well as an inhibitor of lipogenesis.
TXNIP is known to be transcriptionally regulated in response to nutrients such as
glucose and stress signals, including endoplasmic reticulum stress and lactic
acidosis. In this study, we characterized the transcriptional regulation of TXNIP
in response to hypoxia. Using a hepatocellular carcinoma cell line, we have found
that TXNIP mRNA expression is regulated in a biphasic manner in hypoxia whereby
TXNIP expression showed an initial rapid decrease, followed by an increase under 
prolonged hypoxia. Interestingly, we have shown that TXNIP induction in prolonged
hypoxia is independent of the Hypoxia-Inducible Factor (HIF) transcription
factor. The effect of hypoxia on TXNIP expression is mediated via the inhibition 
of the 4E-BP1/eIF4E axis of mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTORC1). Thus, we
found that inhibiting mTORC1-dependent 4E-BP1 phosphorylation mimics the effect
of hypoxia on TXNIP expression. Furthermore, overexpressing eIF4E prevents the
induction of TXNIP in hypoxia. Our results suggest that mTORC1 may be an
important regulator of hypoxia-dependent gene expression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23454121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Protein Sci. 2013 May;22(5):564-76. doi: 10.1002/pro.2237. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Insight into the sporulation phosphorelay: crystal structure of the sensor domain
of Bacillus subtilis histidine kinase, KinD.

Wu R(1), Gu M, Wilton R, Babnigg G, Kim Y, Pokkuluri PR, Szurmant H, Joachimiak
A, Schiffer M.

Author information: 
(1)The Midwest Center for Structural Genomics, Biosciences, Argonne National
Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA.

The Bacillus subtilis KinD signal-transducing histidine kinase is a part of the
sporulation phosphorelay known to regulate important developmental decisions such
as sporulation and biofilm formation. We have determined crystal structures of
the extracytoplasmic sensing domain of KinD, which was copurified and
crystallized with a pyruvate ligand. The structure of a ligand-binding site
mutant was also determined; it was copurified and crystallized with an acetate
ligand. The structure of the KinD extracytoplasmic segment is similar to that of 
several other sensing domains of signal transduction proteins and is composed of 
tandem Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS)-like domains. The KinD ligand-binding site is located
on the membrane distal PAS-like domain and appears to be highly selective; a
single mutation, R131A, abolishes pyruvate binding and the mutant binds acetate
instead. Differential scanning fluorimetry, using a variety of monocarboxylic and
dicarboxylic acids, identified pyruvate, propionate, and butyrate but not
lactate, acetate, or malate as KinD ligands. A recent report found that malate
induces biofilm formation in a KinD-dependent manner. It was suggested that
malate might induce a metabolic shift and increased secretion of the KinD ligand 
of unknown identity. The structure and binding assays now suggests that this
ligand is pyruvate and/or other small monocarboxylic acids. In summary, this
study gives a first insight into the identity of a molecular ligand for one of
the five phosphorelay kinases of B. subtilis.

Copyright © 2013 The Protein Society.

PMCID: PMC3649258
PMID: 23436677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Eur J Neurosci. 2013 Jun;37(11):1875-84. doi: 10.1111/ejn.12163. Epub 2013 Feb
22.

Upregulation of the neuronal Per-Arnt-Sim domain protein 4 (Npas4) in the rat
corticolimbic system following focal cerebral ischemia.

Leong WK(1), Klaric TS, Lin Y, Lewis MD, Koblar SA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science, The University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, SA, Australia.

The neuronal Per-Arnt-Sim domain protein 4 (Npas4) is an important
transcriptional regulator of synaptic plasticity and cognition. The present study
characterises the in vivo neuroanatomical expression pattern of the Npas4 protein
in a rat model of focal cerebral ischemia. Animals were subjected to unilateral
middle cerebral artery occlusion for 2 h, after which the spatiotemporal and
neuronal profiles of Npas4 protein expression were analysed by
immunohistochemistry at different time points post-reperfusion. Focal cerebral
ischemia induced an early, transient and robust upregulation of Npas4 in a brain 
region-dependent manner involving predominantly principal neurons. Interestingly,
we observed a unique differential induction of Npas4 protein expression in
corticolimbic regions of the rat brain that are critically linked to cognition
and emotion. These findings suggest that stroke-induced Npas4 upregulation may be
involved in a transcriptional regulatory program within the corticolimbic
circuitry following an ischemic insult.

© 2013 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing
Ltd.

PMID: 23431968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Biochem J. 2013 May 1;451(3):463-74. doi: 10.1042/BJ20121717.

Mapping of interactions between the N- and C-termini and the channel core in HERG
K+ channels.

de la Peña P(1), Machín A, Fernández-Trillo J, Domínguez P, Barros F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oviedo, 33006 
Oviedo, Spain. pdelapena@uniovi.es

The characteristic gating properties of the HERG [human eag
(ether-a-go-go)-related gene] potassium channel determine its contribution to
cardiac repolarization and in setting the electrical behaviour of a variety of
cells. In the present study we analysed, using a site-directed cysteine and
disulfide chemistry approach, whether the eag/PAS (Per/Arnt/Sim) and proximal
domains at the HERG N-terminus exert a role in controlling the access of the
N-terminal flexible tail to its binding site in the channel core for interaction 
with the gating machinery. Whereas the eag/PAS domain is necessary for disulfide 
bridging, plus the cysteine residues introduced at positions 3 and 542 of the
HERG sequence, the presence of the proximal domain seems to be dispensable. The
state-dependent formation of a disulfide bridge between Cys3 and an endogenous
cysteine residue at position 723 in the C-terminal C-linker suggests that the
N-terminal tail of HERG can also get into close proximity with the C-linker
structures located at the bottom of helix S6. Therefore the intrinsic flexibility
of the N-tail and its proximity to both the S4-S5 loop and the C-linker may
dynamically contribute to the modulation of HERG channel gating.

PMID: 23418776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Genes Nutr. 2013 Sep;8(5):457-63. doi: 10.1007/s12263-013-0333-y. Epub 2013 Feb
17.

Timed high-fat diet in the evening affects the hepatic circadian clock and
PPARa-mediated lipogenic gene expressions in mice.

Wang X(1), Xue J, Yang J, Xie M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow
University, Suzhou, 215123, Jiangsu Province, China.

A long-term high-fat diet may result in a fatty liver. However, whether or not
high-fat diets affect the hepatic circadian clock is controversial. The objective
of this study is to investigate the effects of timed high-fat diet on the hepatic
circadian clock and clock-controlled peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
(PPAR) a-mediated lipogenic gene expressions. Mice were orally administered
high-fat milk in the evening for 4 weeks. The results showed that some hepatic
clock genes, such as Clock, brain-muscle-Arnt-like 1 (Bmal1), Period 2 (Per2),
and Cryptochrome 2 (Cry2) exhibited obvious changes in rhythms and/or amplitudes.
Alterations in the expression of clock genes, in turn, further altered the
circadian rhythm of PPARa expression. Among the PPARa target genes, cholesterol
7a-hydroxylase (CYP7A1), 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase,
low-density lipoprotein receptor, lipoprotein lipase, and diacylglycerol
acyltransferase (DGAT) showed marked changes in rhythms and/or amplitudes. In
particular, significant changes in the expressions of DGAT and CYP7A1 were
observed. The effects of a high-fat diet on the expression of lipogenic genes in 
the liver were accompanied by increased hepatic cholesterol and triglyceride
levels. These results suggest that timed high-fat diets at night could change the
hepatic circadian expressions of clock genes Clock, Bmal1, Per2, and Cry2 and
subsequently alter the circadian expression of PPARa-mediated lipogenic genes,
resulting in hepatic lipid accumulation.

PMCID: PMC3755129
PMID: 23417480  [PubMed]


326. Biochemistry. 2013 Mar 12;52(10):1746-54. doi: 10.1021/bi301722k. Epub 2013 Feb
27.

Specific ligand binding domain residues confer low dioxin responsiveness to AHR1ß
of Xenopus laevis.

Odio C(1), Holzman SA, Denison MS, Fraccalvieri D, Bonati L, Franks DG, Hahn ME, 
Powell WH.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Kenyon College , Gambier, Ohio 43022, United States.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) family protein that
mediates the toxicity of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in
vertebrates. Frogs are remarkably insensitive to TCDD, and AHRs from Xenopus
laevis bind TCDD with low affinity. We sought to identify structural features of 
X. laevis AHR1ß associated with low TCDD sensitivity. Substitution of the entire 
ligand binding domain (LBD) with the corresponding sequence from mouse AHR(b-1)
dramatically increased TCDD responsiveness in transactivation assays. To identify
the amino acid residues responsible, we constructed a comparative model of the
AHR1ß LBD using homologous domains of PAS proteins HIF2a and ARNT. The model
revealed an internal cavity with dimensions similar to those of the putative
binding cavity of mouse AHR(b-1), suggesting the importance of side chain
interactions over cavity size. Of residues with side chains clearly pointing into
the cavity, only two differed from the mouse sequence. When A354, located within 
a conserved ß-strand, was changed to serine, the corresponding mouse residue, the
EC50 for TCDD decreased more than 15-fold. When N325 was changed to serine, the
EC50 decreased 3-fold. When the mutations were combined, the EC50 decreased from 
18.6 to 0.8 nM, the value nearly matching the TCDD sensitivity of mouse AHR.
Velocity sedimentation analysis confirmed that mutant frog AHRs exhibited
correspondingly increased levels of TCDD binding. We also assayed mutant AHRs for
responsiveness to a candidate endogenous ligand, 6-formylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole
(FICZ). Mutations that increased sensitivity to TCDD also increased sensitivity
to FICZ. This comparative study represents a novel approach to discerning
fundamental information about the structure of AHR and its interactions with
biologically important agonists.

PMCID: PMC3669666
PMID: 23394719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Med Chem. 2013 Feb 28;56(4):1739-47. doi: 10.1021/jm301847z. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Development of inhibitors of the PAS-B domain of the HIF-2a transcription factor.

Rogers JL(1), Bayeh L, Scheuermann TH, Longgood J, Key J, Naidoo J, Melito L,
Shokri C, Frantz DE, Bruick RK, Gardner KH, MacMillan JB, Tambar UK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, Texas 75390-9038, United States.

Hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) are heterodimeric transcription factors induced 
in a variety of pathophysiological settings, including cancer. We describe the
first detailed structure-activity relationship study of small molecules designed 
to inhibit HIF-2a-ARNT heterodimerization by binding an internal cavity of the
HIF-2a PAS-B domain. Through a series of biophysical characterizations of
inhibitor-protein interactions (NMR and X-ray crystallography), we have
established the structural requirements for artificial inhibitors of the
HIF-2a-ARNT PAS-B interaction. These results may serve as a foundation for
discovering therapeutic agents that function by a novel mode of action.

PMCID: PMC3676484
PMID: 23363003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Aug;228(8):1745-53. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24331.

TNFa induces expression of HIF-1a mRNA and protein but inhibits hypoxic
stimulation of HIF-1 transcriptional activity in airway smooth muscle cells.

Tsapournioti S(1), Mylonis I, Hatziefthimiou A, Ioannou MG, Stamatiou R,
Koukoulis GK, Simos G, Molyvdas PA, Paraskeva E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Thessaly, Larissa,
Greece.

Airway smooth muscle cells (ASMCs) participate in tissue remodeling
characteristic of airway inflammatory diseases like asthma. Inflammation and
hypoxia pathways are often interconnected and the regulatory subunit of the
hypoxia inducible factor, HIF-1a, has been recently shown to be induced by
cytokines. Here we investigate the effect of individual or combined treatment of 
ASMCs with the inflammatory mediator TNFa and/or hypoxia on the expression of
HIF-1a, HIF-1 targets and inflammation markers. TNFa enhances HIF-1a protein and 
mRNA levels, under both normoxia and hypoxia. TNFa-mediated induction of HIF-1a
gene transcription is repressed by inhibition of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. Despite the
up-regulation of HIF-1a protein, the transcription of HIF-1 target genes remains 
low in the presence of TNFa at normoxia and is even reduced at hypoxia. We show
that the reduction in HIF-1 transcriptional activity by TNFa is due to inhibition
of the interaction of HIF-1a with ARNT and subsequent blocking of its binding to 
HREs. Comparison between hypoxia and TNFa for their effects on the expression of 
inflammatory markers shows significant differences: hypoxia up-regulates the
expression of IL-6, but not RANTES or ICAM, and reduces the induction of VCAM by 
TNFa. Finally, ex vivo treatment of rabbit trachea strips with TNFa increases
HIF-1a protein levels, but reduces the expression of HIF-1 targets under hypoxia.
Overall, TNFa induces HIF-1a mRNA synthesis via an NF-<U+03BA>B dependent pathway but
inhibits binding of HIF-1a to ARNT and DNA, while hypoxia and TNFa have distinct 
effects on ASMC inflammatory gene expression.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23359428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Drug Metab Rev. 2013 Feb;45(1):122-44. doi: 10.3109/03602532.2012.756011.

Nuclear receptors in the cross-talk of drug metabolism and inflammation.

Gerbal-Chaloin S(1), Iankova I, Maurel P, Daujat-Chavanieu M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1040, Montpellier, France. sabine.gerbal-chaloin@inserm.fr

Inflammation and infection have long been known to affect the activity and
expression of enzymes involved in hepatic and extrahepatic drug clearance.
Significant advances have been made to elucidate the molecular mechanisms
underlying the complex cross-talk between inflammation and drug-metabolism
alterations. The emergent role of ligand-activated transcriptional regulators,
belonging to the nuclear receptor (NR) superfamily, is now well established. The 
NRs, pregnane X receptor, constitutive androstane receptor, retinoic X receptor, 
glucocorticoid receptor, and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4, and the basic
helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-Sim family member, aryl hydrocarbon receptor, are the
main regulators of the detoxification function. According to the panel of
mediators secreted during inflammation, a cascade of numerous signaling pathways 
is activated, including nuclear factor kappa B, mitogen-activated protein kinase,
and the Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription pathways.
Complex cross-talk is established between these signaling pathways regulating
either constitutive or induced gene expression. In most cases, a mutual
antagonism between xenosensor and inflammation signaling occurs. This review
focuses on the molecular and cellular mechanisms implicated in this cross-talk.

PMID: 23330545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Proteome Res. 2013 Feb 1;12(2):866-82. doi: 10.1021/pr3009429. Epub 2013 Jan
24.

Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of early alterations in protein
phosphorylation by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Schulz M(1), Brandner S, Eberhagen C, Eckardt-Schupp F, Larsen MR, Andrae U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Toxicology and Pharmacology, Helmholtz Zentrum München,
German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany.

A comprehensive quantitative analysis of changes in protein phosphorylation
preceding or accompanying transcriptional activation by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in 5L rat hepatoma cells was performed
using the SILAC approach. Following exposure of the cells to DMSO or 1 nM TCDD
for 0.5 to 2 h, 5648 phosphorylated peptides corresponding to 2156
phosphoproteins were identified. Eight peptides exhibited a statistically
significantly altered phosphorylation because of TCDD exposure and 22 showed a
regulation factor of = 1.5 in one of the experiments per time point. The vast
majority of the TCCD-induced phosphorylation changes had not been reported
before. The transcription factor ARNT, the obligate partner for gene activation
by the TCDD-bound Ah receptor, exhibited an up-regulation of its Ser77
phosphorylation, a modification known to control the differential binding of ARNT
homodimers and heterodimers to different enhancers suggesting that this
phosphorylation represents a novel mechanism contributing to the alteration of
gene expression by TCDD. Other proteins with altered phosphorylation included,
among others, various transcriptional coregulators previously unknown to
participate in TCDD-induced gene activation, regulators of small GTPases of the
Ras superfamily, UBX domain-containing proteins and the oncogenic protein LYRIC. 
The results open up new directions for research on the molecular mechanisms of
dioxin action and toxicity.

PMID: 23298284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Mol Biol. 2013 Mar 11;425(5):886-901. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.12.011. Epub 2012
Dec 26.

Architecture of the soluble receptor Aer2 indicates an in-line mechanism for PAS 
and HAMP domain signaling.

Airola MV(1), Huh D, Sukomon N, Widom J, Sircar R, Borbat PP, Freed JH, Watts KJ,
Crane BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853, USA.

Bacterial receptors typically contain modular architectures with distinct
functional domains that combine to send signals in response to stimuli. Although 
the properties of individual components have been investigated in many contexts, 
there is little information about how diverse sets of modules work together in
full-length receptors. Here, we investigate the architecture of Aer2, a soluble
gas-sensing receptor that has emerged as a model for PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) and
poly-HAMP (histidine kinase-adenylyl cyclase-methyl-accepting chemotaxis
protein-phosphatase) domain signaling. The crystal structure of the heme-binding 
PAS domain in the ferric, ligand-free form, in comparison to the previously
determined cyanide-bound state, identifies conformational changes induced by
ligand binding that are likely essential for the signaling mechanism. Heme-pocket
alternations share some similarities with the heme-based PAS sensors FixL and
EcDOS but propagate to the Iß strand in a manner predicted to alter PAS-PAS
associations and the downstream HAMP junction within full-length Aer2.
Small-angle X-ray scattering of PAS and poly-HAMP domain fragments of increasing 
complexity allow unambiguous domain assignments and reveal a linear quaternary
structure. The Aer2 PAS dimeric crystal structure fits well within ab initio
small-angle X-ray scattering molecular envelopes, and pulsed dipolar ESR
measurements of inter-PAS distances confirm the crystallographic PAS arrangement 
within Aer2. Spectroscopic and pull-down assays fail to detect direct
interactions between the PAS and HAMP domains. Overall, the Aer2 signaling
mechanism differs from the Escherichia coli Aer paradigm, where side-on PAS-HAMP 
contacts are key. We propose an in-line model for Aer2 signaling, where ligand
binding induces alterations in PAS domain structure and subunit association that 
is relayed through the poly-HAMP junction to downstream domains.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3577987
PMID: 23274111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Fibrogenesis Tissue Repair. 2012 Jun 6;5(Suppl 1):S16. doi:
10.1186/1755-1536-5-S1-S16. eCollection 2012.

Hypoxia-inducible factor signaling in the development of kidney fibrosis.

Haase VH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Departments of Medicine, Molecular
Physiology and Biophysics, and Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN, USA.

A discrepancy between oxygen availability and demand has been found in most
chronic kidney diseases (CKD) irrespective of etiology. This results from a
combination of structural and functional changes that are commonly associated
with the development of fibrosis, which include a reduction in peritubular blood 
flow, luminal narrowing of atherosclerotic vessels, capillary rarefaction and
vascular constriction due to altered expression of vasoactive factors and
signaling molecules (e.g. angiotensin II, endothelin, nitric oxide). Consistent
with decreased renal oxygenation in CKD is the increased expression of the
oxygen-sensitive a-subunit of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1. HIF transcription
factors are members of the Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) family of heterodimeric basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors and consist of an oxygen-sensitive
a-subunit and a constitutively expressed ß-unit, also known as the
aryl-hydrocarbon-receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) or HIF-ß. Recent
experimental evidence suggests that prolonged activation of HIF signaling in
renal epithelial cells enhances maladaptive responses, which lead to fibrosis and
further tissue destruction. Cell type-specific functions of individual HIF
transcription factors and their relevant transcriptional targets are discussed in
the context of renal fibrogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3368791
PMID: 23259746  [PubMed]


333. ACS Chem Biol. 2013 Mar 15;8(3):626-35. doi: 10.1021/cb300604u. Epub 2012 Dec 26.

Regulating the ARNT/TACC3 axis: multiple approaches to manipulating
protein/protein interactions with small molecules.

Guo Y(1), Partch CL, Key J, Card PB, Pashkov V, Patel A, Bruick RK, Wurdak H,
Gardner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biophysics, UT Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines
Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-8816, USA.

For several well-documented reasons, it has been challenging to develop
artificial small molecule inhibitors of protein/protein complexes. Such reagents 
are of particular interest for transcription factor complexes given links between
their misregulation and disease. Here we report parallel approaches to identify
regulators of a hypoxia signaling transcription factor complex, involving the
ARNT subunit of the HIF (Hypoxia Inducible Factor) activator and the TACC3
(Transforming Acidic Coiled Coil Containing Protein 3) coactivator. In one route,
we used in vitro NMR and biochemical screening to identify small molecules that
selectively bind within the ARNT PAS (Per-ARNT-Sim) domain that recruits TACC3,
identifying KG-548 as an ARNT/TACC3 disruptor. A parallel, cell-based screening
approach previously implicated the small molecule KHS101 as an inhibitor of TACC3
signaling. Here, we show that KHS101 works indirectly on HIF complex formation by
destabilizing both TACC3 and the HIF component HIF-1a. Overall, our data identify
small molecule regulators for this important complex and highlight the utility of
pursuing parallel strategies to develop protein/protein inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3600089
PMID: 23240775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cell Res. 2013 Feb;23(2):213-24. doi: 10.1038/cr.2012.170. Epub 2012 Dec 11.

Intermolecular recognition revealed by the complex structure of human CLOCK-BMAL1
basic helix-loop-helix domains with E-box DNA.

Wang Z(1), Wu Y, Li L, Su XD.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, and Biodynamic
Optical Imaging Center (BIOPIC), Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

CLOCK (circadian locomotor output cycles kaput) and BMAL1 (brain and muscle
ARNT-like 1) are both transcription factors of the circadian core loop in
mammals. Recently published mouse CLOCK-BMAL1 bHLH (basic helix-loop-helix)-PAS
(period-ARNT-single-minded) complex structure sheds light on the mechanism for
heterodimer formation, but the structural details of the protein-DNA recognition 
mechanisms remain elusive. Here we have elucidated the crystal structure of human
CLOCK-BMAL1 bHLH domains bound to a canonical E-box DNA. We demonstrate that
CLOCK and BMAL1 bHLH domains can be mutually selected, and that hydrogen-bonding 
networks mediate their E-box recognition. We identified a hydrophobic contact
between BMAL1 Ile80 and a flanking thymine nucleotide, suggesting that
CLOCK-BMAL1 actually reads 7-bp DNA and not the previously believed 6-bp DNA. To 
find potential non-canonical E-boxes that could be recognized by CLOCK-BMAL1, we 
constructed systematic single-nucleotide mutations on the E-box and measured
their relevant affinities. We defined two non-canonical E-box patterns with high 
affinities, AACGTGA and CATGTGA, in which the flanking A7-T7' base pair is
indispensable for recognition. These results will help us to identify functional 
CLOCK-BMAL1-binding sites in vivo and to search for clock-controlled genes.
Furthermore, we assessed the inhibitory role of potential phosphorylation sites
in bHLH regions. We found that the phospho-mimicking mutation on BMAL1 Ser78
could efficiently block DNA binding as well as abolish normal circadian
oscillation in cells. We propose that BMAL1 Ser78 should be a key residue
mediating input signal-regulated transcriptional inhibition for external cues to 
entrain the circadian clock by kinase cascade.

PMCID: PMC3567813
PMID: 23229515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2013 Feb;99(2):151-7. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2012.10.015. Epub 2012 Dec 1.

The major circadian pacemaker ARNT-like protein-1 (BMAL1) is associated with
susceptibility to gestational diabetes mellitus.

Pappa KI(1), Gazouli M, Anastasiou E, Iliodromiti Z, Antsaklis A, Anagnou NP.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Athens School of 
Medicine, Athens, Greece. kpappa@med.uoa.gr

AIMS: Recently a relationship between circadian clock function and the risk for
type 2 diabetes (T2D) has been shown. BMAL1 is a key component of the mammalian
molecular clock. Two SNPs in the BMAL1 gene have been identified to confer T2D
susceptibility. In the present study we investigated for the first time the
association between the BMAL1 gene and the risk for GDM, in a Greek population.
METHODS: We studied 185 women with GDM and 161 non-diabetic controls for BMAL1
polymorphisms. For BMAL1 mRNA expression, peripheral leukocytes were harvested
from 20 GDM and 20 control women, harboring different genotypes for the tested
polymorphisms, using real-time quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: The minor allele (A) of the BMAL1 rs7950226 (G>A) polymorphism was found
to be significantly associated with an increased risk of GDM (P=0.025). Analysis 
of the second BMAL1 rs11022775 (T>C) polymorphism, showed that the C-allele
frequency was strongly increased in women with GDM (P=4.455e-06). The CC genotype
was also significantly overrepresented in GDM vs. controls (P=0.00001).
Additionally, the rs7950226G/rs11022775C and rs7950226A/rs11022775C haplotypes
were also found to be associated with increased susceptibility to GDM.
Furthermore, the expression levels of BMAL1 mRNA were significantly lower in GDM 
patients than in controls.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that the impairment of the BMAL1 clock gene
expression is closely associated with GDM susceptibility.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23206673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Arch Toxicol. 2013 Apr;87(4):681-98. doi: 10.1007/s00204-012-0979-z. Epub 2012
Nov 30.

AhR-mediated changes in global gene expression in rat liver progenitor cells.

Faust D(1), Vondrácek J, Krcmár P, Smerdová L, Procházková J, Hrubá E, Hulinková 
P, Kaina B, Dietrich C, Machala M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, University Medical Center of the Johannes
Gutenberg-University Mainz, Germany.

Although the tumor-promoting effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD), coplanar polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and related compounds in liver
tissue are primarily attributed to the activation of the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR), the underlying molecular mechanisms are still unclear. Liver
progenitor (oval) cells have been suggested to constitute a potential target for 
hepatocarcinogenic chemicals. To better understand AhR-driven pathways, we
analyzed the transcriptional program in response to coplanar PCB 126 in
contact-inhibited rat liver progenitor WB-F344 cells using high-density
microarrays. After 6-h treatment, we identified 145 significantly deregulated
genes considered to be direct AhR-dependent target genes. The number of
differentially regulated genes increased to 658 and 968 genes after 24 and 72 h, 
respectively. Gene ontology analysis revealed that these genes were primarily
involved in drug and lipid metabolism, cell cycle and growth control, cancer
developmental processes, cell-cell communication, and adhesion. Interestingly,
the Wnt and TGF-ß signaling pathways, both being involved in developmental and
tumorigenic processes, belonged to the most affected pathways. AhR- and
ARNT-dependent regulation of selected target genes of interest was then confirmed
using TCDD as a model AhR agonist, together with pharmacological inhibition of
the AhR and by RNA-interference techniques. We demonstrated AhR-dependent
regulation of emerging and novel AhR target genes, such as Fst, Areg, Hbegf,
Ctgf, Btg2, and Foxq1. Among them, the transcription factor Foxq1, recently
suggested to contribute to tumor promotion and/or progression, was found to be
regulated at both mRNA and protein levels by AhR/ARNT activation.

PMID: 23196670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2013 May;23(4):247-54. doi: 10.3109/15376516.2012.745105.
Epub 2013 Jan 15.

Establishment of a bioluminescence-based bioassay for the detection of
dioxin-like compounds.

Wang BJ(1), Liao YF, Tung YT, Yih LH, Hu CC, Lee H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

Dioxin and dioxin-like compounds are among the most prevalent and toxic
environmental pollutants. At present, analytical chemical techniques are
considered the gold standard for detection of dioxins. Here, we describe a highly
sensitive and cost-effective alternative, based on bioluminescence and
bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET). Upon binding to dioxin, aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) dissociates from HSP90 and subsequently translocates
to the nucleus, where it interacts with AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT). We
generated cell lines that stably co-express a fusion protein of AHR and Renilla
luciferase (AHR-RL) and either HSP90 or ARNT tagged with yellow fluorescent
protein (HSP90-YFP or ARNT-YFP). The fluorescent signals of YFP are activated by 
the emission of RL while the interactions between AHR and HSP90 (or ARNT) were
monitored. Application of 3-methylcholanthrene, the AHR agonist, enhances BRET
signals in cells co-expressing AHR-RL, AIP-His, P23-His and ARNT-YFP (AAPA
cells), while suppressing BRET signals in cells co-expressing AHR-RL, AIP-His,
P23-His and HSP90-YFP (AAPH cells). In addition, dioxin treatment reduced Renilla
luminescence in AAPH cells in a concentration-dependent manner, due to the
degradation of AHR. Intriguingly, the detection limit for dioxin in our AHR
degradation assay was as low as 10(-17) M. This work highlights the potential of 
AHR-RL degradation assays to detect dioxin-like pollutants.

PMID: 23193992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Biochem Soc Trans. 2012 Dec 1;40(6):1167-77. doi: 10.1042/BST20120232.

Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 chemotaxis proteins and electron-transport chain
components essential for congregation near insoluble electron acceptors.

Harris HW(1), El-Naggar MY, Nealson KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 cells utilize a behaviour response called
electrokinesis to increase their speed in the vicinity of IEAs (insoluble
electron acceptors), including manganese oxides, iron oxides and poised
electrodes [Harris, El-Naggar, Bretschger, Ward, Romine, Obraztsova and Nealson
(2010) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 326-331]. However, it is not currently 
understood how bacteria remain in the vicinity of the IEA and accumulate both on 
the surface and in the surrounding medium. In the present paper, we provide
results indicating that cells that have contacted the IEAs swim faster than those
that have not recently made contact. In addition, fast-swimming cells exhibit an 
enhancement of swimming reversals leading to rapid non-random accumulation of
cells on, and adjacent to, mineral particles. We call the observed accumulation
near IEAs 'congregation'. Congregation is eliminated by the loss of a critical
gene involved with EET (extracellular electron transport) (cymA, SO_4591) and is 
altered or eliminated in several deletion mutants of homologues of genes that are
involved with chemotaxis or energy taxis in Escherichia coli. These genes include
chemotactic signal transduction protein (cheA-3, SO_3207), methyl-accepting
chemotaxis proteins with the Cache domain (mcp_cache, SO_2240) or the PAS
(Per/Arnt/Sim) domain (mcp_pas, SO_1385). In the present paper, we report studies
of S. oneidensis MR-1 that lend some insight into how microbes in this group can 
'sense' the presence of a solid substrate such as a mineral surface, and maintain
themselves in the vicinity of the mineral (i.e. via congregation), which may
ultimately lead to attachment and biofilm formation.

PMID: 23176449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Drug Metab Rev. 2013 Feb;45(1):110-21. doi: 10.3109/03602532.2012.738687. Epub
2012 Nov 23.

Xenobiotic receptor humanized mice and their utility.

Scheer N(1), Roland Wolf C.

Author information: 
(1)TaconicArtemis GmbH, Neurather Ring 1, Koeln, Germany.
nico.scheer@taconicartemis.com

The nuclear receptors pregnane X receptor, constitutive androstane receptor, and 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha have important endogenous
functions and are also involved in the induction of drug-metabolizing enzymes and
transporters in response to exogenous xenobiotics. Though not belonging to the
same protein family, the Per-Sim-ARNT domain receptor aryl hydrocarbon receptor
functionally overlaps with the three nuclear receptors in many aspects and is
therefore included in this review. Significant species differences in ligand
affinity and biological responses as a result of activation of these receptors
have been described. Several xenobiotic receptor humanized mice have been created
to overcome these species differences and to provide in vivo models that are more
predictive for human responses. This review provides an overview of the different
xenobiotic receptor humanized mouse models described to date and will summarize
how these models can be applied in basic research and improve drug discovery and 
development. Some of the key applications in the evaluation of drug induction,
drug-drug interactions, nongenotoxic carcinogenicity, other toxicity, or efficacy
studies are described. We also discuss relevant considerations in the
interpretation of such data and potential future directions for the use of
xenobiotic receptor humanized mice.

PMID: 23173549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jan 25;288(4):2655-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.413310. Epub 2012 
Nov 21.

Neuronal Per Arnt Sim (PAS) domain protein 4 (NPAS4) regulates neurite outgrowth 
and phosphorylation of synapsin I.

Yun J(1), Nagai T, Furukawa-Hibi Y, Kuroda K, Kaibuchi K, Greenberg ME, Yamada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychopharmacology and Hospital Pharmacy, Nagoya University
Graduate School of Medicine, 466-8560, Nagoya, Japan.

Neuronal Per Arnt Sim domain protein 4 (NPAS4), a brain-specific basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor, has recently been shown to regulate the
development of the GABAergic inhibitory synapses and transcription program for
contextual memory formation in the hippocampus. We previously reported that
chronic social isolation or restriction stress in mice resulted in an impairment 
in memory and emotional behavior, which was associated with a decrease in Npas4
mRNA levels. In this study, we investigated the role of NPAS4 in neuronal
function in vitro and in vivo. Differentiation medium-induced neurite outgrowth
was inhibited in Npas4 knockdown Neuro2a cells, whereas overexpression of NPAS4
accelerated the neurite outgrowth in Neuro2a cells. Furthermore,
depolarization-induced neurite outgrowth was abolished in Npas4 KO hippocampal
neurons. NPAS4 overexpression increased cyclin-dependent kinase 5
(CDK5)-dependent synapsin I phosphorylation in Neuro2a cells and primary cultured
hippocampal neurons. A CDK5 inhibitor, roscovitine, inhibited the neurite
outgrowth and the increase in phosphorylated synapsin I (p-SYN I) levels in
Npas4-overexpressed Neuro2a cells. Interaction of NPAS4 with promoters of Cdk5
and NeuN genes was demonstrated by a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. In an
in vivo study, pentylenetetrazole-induced convulsions in mice resulted in an
increase in NPAS4 and p-SYN I levels in the prefrontal cortex of wild-type mice, 
although no changes in p-SYN I levels were observed in Npas4 knock-out mice.
These results suggest that NPAS4 plays an important role in the structural and
functional plasticity of neurons.

PMCID: PMC3554932
PMID: 23172225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Chemosphere. 2013 Mar;90(9):2358-64. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2012.10.026. Epub
2012 Nov 17.

Genetic susceptibility to dioxin-like chemicals' induction of cytochrome P4501A2 
in the human adult linked to specific AhRR polymorphism.

Hung WT(1), Lambert GH, Huang PW, Patterson DG Jr, Guo YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Medicine, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University and National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Dioxin-like chemicals are known to exert their effect by binding to
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), forming complexes with aryl hydrocarbon nuclear 
translocator (ARNT), and binding to dioxin responsive elements (DREs) in promoter
region to regulate the transcription of specific genes. In a previous study of
the Yucheng cohort of humans who were exposed to high toxic levels of dioxin-like
chemicals (PCDFs and PCBs), we reported marked induction of cytochrome P450 1A2
(CYP1A2) activity and this induction was an excellent biomarker of the exposure
and adverse human health effects seen in the Yucheng cohort.
OBJECTIVES: The goal of this study was to determine the relationship between
inducibility of CYP1A2 and genetic polymorphisms of AhR, ARNT, and AhRR in human.
METHODS: The Yucheng victims who completed blood sample collecting in 1994-1995
for serum concentrations of PCB, PCDF, and PCDD congeners, and also completed the
caffeine breath tests for CYP1A2 activity were identified. From the collected
blood samples, six single nucleotide polymorphisms were selected for genotyping, 
including AhR (rs2066853), AhRR (rs2292596), ARNT (rs7517566), ARNT (rs3820541), 
ARNT (rs3768016), and ARNT (rs2228099).
RESULTS: AhRR (rs2292596) polymorphism was significantly related to CYP1A2
inducibility (p=0.01). A linear trend test was observed between people with AhRR 
(rs2292596) GG, GC, and CC genotype (p=0.0014).
CONCLUSION: Overall, AhRR (rs2292596) genotypes predict the inducibility of
CYP1A2 in people highly exposed to toxic dioxin-like chemicals. Future studies
and analysis will determine to what degree these polymorphisms can predict a
human's susceptibility to dioxin-related adverse human health effects.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23168330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Curr Mol Med. 2013 Aug;13(7):1047-65.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) family of proteins:
transcriptional modifiers with multi-functional protein interfaces.

Labrecque MP(1), Prefontaine GG, Beischlag TV.

Author information: 
(1)The Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, 8888 University
Drive, Burnaby, BC, Canada.

The basic Helix-Loop-Helix/PER-ARNT-SIM (bHLH-PAS) domain family of transcription
factors mediates cellular responses to a variety of internal and external
stimuli. As functional transcription factors, these proteins act as bHLH-PAS
heterodimers and can be further sub-classified into sensory/activated subunits
and regulatory or ARNT-like proteins. This class of proteins act as master
regulators of the bHLH-PAS superfamily of transcription factors that mediate
circadian rhythm gene programs, innate and adaptive immune responses,
oxygen-sensing mechanisms and compensate for deleterious environmental exposures.
Some contribute to the etiology of human pathologies including cancer because of 
their effects on cell growth and metabolism. We will review the canonical roles
of ARNT and ARNT-like proteins with an emphasis on coactivator selectivity and
recruitment. We will also discuss recent advances in our understanding of
noncanonical DNA-binding independent or off-target roles of ARNT that are
uncoupled from its classic heterodimeric bHLH-PAS binding partners. Understanding
the DNA binding-independent functions of ARNT may identify novel therapeutic
options for the treatment of a large spectrum of disease states.

PMID: 23116263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. IUBMB Life. 2012 Nov;64(11):921-30. doi: 10.1002/iub.1089.

FHL family members suppress vascular endothelial growth factor expression through
blockade of dimerization of HIF1a and HIF1ß.

Lin J(1), Qin X, Zhu Z, Mu J, Zhu L, Wu K, Jiao H, Xu X, Ye Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Molecular Biology, Beijing Institute of Biotechnology,
Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Four and a half LIM domain (FHL) proteins belong to a family of LIM-only proteins
that have been implicated in the development and progression of various types of 
cancers. However, the role of FHL proteins in tumor angiogenesis remains to be
elucidated. Herein, we demonstrate that FHL1-3 decrease the promoter activity and
expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), the key regulator of
angiogenesis in cancer growth and progression as well as an important target gene
of the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF1a/HIF1ß). FHL1-3
interacted with HIF1a both in vitro and in vivo. A single LIM domain of FHL1 was 
sufficient for its interaction with HIF1a. FHL1 interacted with the HIF1a region 
containing basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) motif and PER-ARNT-SIM domain, both of
which aid in dimerization with HIF1ß and DNA binding. FHL1-3 inhibited HIF1
transcriptional activity and HIF1-mediated VEGF expression in a
hypoxia-independent manner. Moreover, FHL1 blocked HIF1a-HIF1ß heterodimerization
and HIF1a recruitment to the VEGF promoter. These data suggest that FHL proteins 
are involved in negative regulation of VEGF possibly by interfering with the
dimerization and DNA binding of HIF1 subunits and may play an important role in
tumor angiogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 23086815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Reprod Toxicol. 2012 Dec;34(4):665-76. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2012.10.005. Epub 
2012 Oct 13.

Cigarette smoke condensate induces aryl hydrocarbon receptor-dependent changes in
gene expression in spermatocytes.

Esakky P(1), Hansen DA, Drury AM, Moley KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, St. Louis, MO, United States.

Cigarette smoke contains numerous compounds that cause oxidative stress and alter
gene expression in many tissues, and cigarette smoking is correlated with male
infertility. To identify mechanisms by which this occurs, we evaluated expression
of antioxidant genes in mouse spermatocytes in response to cigarette smoke
condensate (CSC). CSC exposure led to oxidative stress and dose-dependent
up-regulation of Hsp90aa1, Ahr, Arnt, Sod1, Sod2, and Cyp1a1 expression in a
mouse spermatocyte cell line. An antagonist of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AHR) abrogated several CSC-mediated changes in mRNA and protein levels.
Consistent with these results, spermatocytes isolated by laser-capture
microdissection from CSC-treated mice showed increased expression of several
antioxidant genes. In vivo exposure to CSC was genotoxic to spermatocytes,
resulting in apoptosis and disruptions to the seminiferous tubules. Our in vivo
and in vitro data indicate that CSC-mediated damage to murine spermatocytes is
AHR-dependent and is mediated by oxidative stress.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23069111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46651. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046651. Epub 2012 Oct 8.

Influence of PAS domain flanking regions on oligomerisation and redox signalling 
by NifL.

Little R(1), Slavny P, Dixon R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, John Innes Centre, Norwich Research
Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.

Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domains constitute a typically dimeric, conserved a/ß tertiary
fold of approximately 110 amino acids that perform signalling roles in diverse
proteins from all kingdoms of life. The amino terminal PAS1 domain of NifL from
Azotobacter vinelandii accommodates a redox-active FAD group; elevation of
cytosolic oxygen concentrations result in FAD oxidation and a concomitant
conformational re-arrangement that is relayed via a short downstream linker to a 
second PAS domain, PAS2. At PAS2, the signal is amplified and passed on to
effector domains generating the 'on' (inhibitory) state of the protein. Although 
the crystal structure of oxidised PAS1 reveals regions that contribute to the
dimerisation interface, 21 amino acids at the extreme N-terminus of NifL, are
unresolved. Furthermore, the structure and function of the linker between the two
PAS domains has not been determined. In this study we have investigated the
importance to signalling of residues extending beyond the core PAS fold. Our
results implicate the N-terminus of PAS1 and the helical linker connecting the
two PAS domains in redox signal transduction and demonstrate a role for these
flanking regions in controlling the oligomerisation state of PAS1 in solution.

PMCID: PMC3466315
PMID: 23056386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2013 Jan 1;304(1):F120-6. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00416.2012. Epub 2012 Oct 10.

Regulation of hypoxia-inducible factor 2-a is essential for integrity of the
glomerular barrier.

Ding M(1), Coward RJ, Jeansson M, Kim W, Quaggin SE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Deletion of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor (Vhl) gene from renal
podocytes of mice (podVhl KO) leads to rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
(RPGN), a clinical syndrome characterized by rapid loss of renal function and
crescents on renal biopsy. Genomic profiling of glomeruli isolated from podVhl
knockout (KO) mice and from patients with RPGN identified a fingerprint of genes 
regulated by hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF), important substrates of the product
of the VHL gene. Here, we show that stabilization of Hifs in podocytes is both
required and sufficient for the glomerular phenotype observed in podVhl KO mice. 
Genetic deletion of the obligate dimerization partner Arnt/Hif1b that is
essential for Hif transcriptional function rescues the phenotype. Conversely,
stabilization of HIF2A alone in podocytes results in crescentic glomerular
disease. Together, our results show that the Hif pathway and Hif2a in particular 
are key players in maintenance of the glomerular barrier.

PMCID: PMC3543619
PMID: 23054256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 16;287(47):39412-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.413518. Epub 2012
Oct 4.

The Bacillus subtilis chemoreceptor McpC senses multiple ligands using two
discrete mechanisms.

Glekas GD(1), Mulhern BJ, Kroc A, Duelfer KA, Lei V, Rao CV, Ordal GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801,
USA.

Bacillus subtilis can perform chemotaxis toward all 20 L-amino acids normally
found in proteins. Loss of a single chemoreceptor, McpC, was previously found to 
reduce chemotaxis to 19 of these amino acids. In this study, we investigated the 
amino acid-sensing mechanism of McpC. We show that McpC alone can support
chemotaxis to 17 of these amino acids to varying degrees. Eleven amino acids were
found to directly bind the amino-terminal sensing domain of McpC in vitro.
Sequence analysis indicates that the McpC sensing domain exhibits a dual
Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain structure. Using this structure as a guide, we were
able to isolate mutants that suggest that four amino acids (arginine, glutamine, 
lysine, and methionine) are sensed by an indirect mechanism. We identified four
candidate binding lipoproteins associated with amino acid transporters that may
function in indirect sensing: ArtP, GlnH, MetQ, and YckB. ArtP was found to bind 
arginine and lysine; GlnH, glutamine; MetQ, methionine; and YckB, tryptophan. In 
addition, we found that ArtP, MetQ, and YckB bind the sensing domain of McpC,
suggesting that the three participate in the indirect sensing of arginine,
lysine, methionine, and possibly tryptophan as well. Taken together, these
results further our understanding of amino acid chemotaxis in B. subtilis and
gain insight into how a single chemoreceptor is able to sense many amino acids.

PMCID: PMC3501012
PMID: 23038252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Protein Sci. 2012 Dec;21(12):1885-96. doi: 10.1002/pro.2172. Epub 2012 Nov 9.

Identification of Cys255 in HIF-1a as a novel site for development of covalent
inhibitors of HIF-1a/ARNT PasB domain protein-protein interaction.

Cardoso R(1), Love R, Nilsson CL, Bergqvist S, Nowlin D, Yan J, Liu KK, Zhu J,
Chen P, Deng YL, Dyson HJ, Greig MJ, Brooun A.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Chemistry, Worldwide Research and Development, Pfizer Inc., San
Diego, California 92121, USA.

The heterodimer HIF-1a (hypoxia inducible factor)/HIF-ß (also known as ARNT-aryl 
hydrocarbon nuclear translocator) is a key mediator of cellular response to
hypoxia. The interaction between these monomer units can be modified by the
action of small molecules in the binding interface between their C-terminal
heterodimerization (PasB) domains. Taking advantage of the presence of several
cysteine residues located in the allosteric cavity of HIF-1a PasB domain, we
applied a cysteine-based reactomics "hotspot identification" strategy to locate
regions of HIF-1a PasB domain critical for its interaction with ARNT. COMPOUND 5 
was identified using a mass spectrometry-based primary screening strategy and was
shown to react specifically with Cys255 of the HIF-1a PasB domain. Biophysical
characterization of the interaction between PasB domains of HIF-1a and ARNT
revealed that covalent binding of COMPOUND 5 to Cys255 reduced binding affinity
between HIF-1a and ARNT PasB domains approximately 10-fold. Detailed NMR
structural analysis of HIF-1a-PasB-COMPOUND 5 conjugate showed significant local 
conformation changes in the HIF-1a associated with key residues involved in the
HIF-1a/ARNT PasB domain interaction as revealed by the crystal structure of the
HIF-1a/ARNT PasB heterodimer. Our screening strategy could be applied to other
targets to identify pockets surrounding reactive cysteines suitable for
development of small molecule modulators of protein function.

Copyright © 2012 The Protein Society.

PMCID: PMC3575918
PMID: 23033253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Science. 2012 Sep 28;337(6102):1668-72.

Sedlin controls the ER export of procollagen by regulating the Sar1 cycle.

Venditti R(1), Scanu T, Santoro M, Di Tullio G, Spaar A, Gaibisso R, Beznoussenko
GV, Mironov AA, Mironov A Jr, Zelante L, Piemontese MR, Notarangelo A, Malhotra
V, Vertel BM, Wilson C, De Matteis MA.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy.

Newly synthesized proteins exit the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) via coat protein
complex II (COPII) vesicles. Procollagen (PC), however, forms prefibrils that are
too large to fit into typical COPII vesicles; PC thus needs large transport
carriers, which we term megacarriers. TANGO1 assists PC packing, but its role in 
promoting the growth of megacarriers is not known. We found that TANGO1 recruited
Sedlin, a TRAPP component that is defective in spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda
(SEDT), and that Sedlin was required for the ER export of PC. Sedlin bound and
promoted efficient cycling of Sar1, a guanosine triphosphatase that can constrict
membranes, and thus allowed nascent carriers to grow and incorporate PC
prefibrils. This joint action of TANGO1 and Sedlin sustained the ER export of PC,
and its derangement may explain the defective chondrogenesis underlying SEDT.

PMCID: PMC3471527
PMID: 23019651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 9;109(41):16690-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1207832109. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

Dispersion by Pseudomonas aeruginosa requires an unusual posttranslational
modification of BdlA.

Petrova OE(1), Sauer K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Binghamton University, Binghamton, NY
13902, USA.

Dispersion enables biofilm bacteria to transit from the biofilm to the planktonic
growth state and to spawn novel communities in new locales. Although the
chemotaxis protein BdlA plays a role in the dispersion of Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
biofilms in response to environmental cues, little is known about regulation of
BdlA activity or how BdlA modulates the dispersion response. Here, we demonstrate
that BdlA in its native form is inactive and is activated upon nonprocessive
proteolysis at a ClpP-protease-like cleavage site located between the Per Arnt
Sim (PAS) sensory domains PASa and PASb. Activation of BdlA to enable biofilm
dispersion requires phosphorylation at tyrosine-238 as a signal, elevated
c-di-GMP levels, the chaperone ClpD, and the protease ClpP. The resulting
truncated BdlA polypeptide chains directly interact and are required for P.
aeruginosa biofilms to disperse. Our results provide a basis for understanding
the mechanism of biofilm dispersion that may be applicable to a large number of
biofilm-forming pathogenic species. Insights into the mechanism of BdlA function 
have implications for the control of biofilm-related infections.

PMCID: PMC3478618
PMID: 23012421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Aquat Toxicol. 2012 Nov 15;124-125:197-208. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2012.08.015.
Epub 2012 Aug 24.

Estrogen receptor-hijacking by dioxin-like 3,3'4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl
(PCB126) in salmon hepatocytes involves both receptor activation and receptor
protein stability.

Gjernes MH(1), Schlenk D, Arukwe A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), 
Trondheim, Norway.

Several hypotheses have been proposed explaining the interactions between
estrogen receptor (ER) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) signaling pathways in 
both fish and mammalian systems. In both piscine and mammalian systems,
ligand-activated AhR may recruit basal ER (i.e. hijack) in the absence of ER
ligand and bind to the estrogen responsive elements (ERE) to activate
ER-responsive genes. We have evaluated, the roles of receptor activation and
receptor-protein stability on dioxin-like [3,3'4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl: PCB
126] mediated ER-hijacking in a salmon in vitro system. Primary salmon
hepatocytes were exposed to PCB126 (1, 10 and 50 nM) with or without an
ER-antagonist (ICI), putative AhR inhibitor (3',4'-dimethoxyflavone; DMF) or
protein synthesis inhibitor (cycloheximide; CHX). Hepatocytes were exposed for 6,
12 and 24h. The expression of genes and proteins involved in ER (ERa, ERß and
vitellogenin) and AhR (CYP1A1, AhR-repressor, AhR2-isotypes and cofactors)
pathways were analysed using qPCR and immunochemical methods. PCB126 induced
transcripts of ER and AhR signalling pathways that were variably influenced by
protein synthesis and receptor inhibitors. CHX stimulated a coordinated
recruitment of the proteasome complex, resulting in the ubiquitination and
degradation of ER and AhR isoforms and downstream protein products.
Interestingly, DMF produced differential effects on the AhR signalling pathway,
in the presence or absence of PCB126. Overall, ER-hijacking by dioxin-like
compounds and subsequent activation of ER responsive genes involves both receptor
activation/deactivation and receptor-protein degradation/destabilization
(stability). Given that the Per-AhR/Arnt-Sim homology sequence of transcription
factors usually associate with each other to form heterodimers and bind the XRE
or ERE sequences in the promoter regions of target genes to regulate their
expression, the complete mechanism of interactions between dioxin-like and
estrogenic compounds in vertebrate systems may require additional
characterization.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22982498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2012 Nov;34(3):858-68. doi:
10.1016/j.etap.2012.08.014. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

SDS3 interacts with ARNT in an AhR ligand-specific manner regulating expression
of cKrox and S100A4 in CD4+CD8+ DPK thymocytes differentiation.

Lee DM(1), Lee SH, Jeong KT, Hwang SJ, Park JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Changwon National University, Changwon, Kyungnam
641-773, South Korea.

To study mechanisms underlying differential effects of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and benzo(a)pyrene (B(a)P) on
thymocyte differentiation, we examined effects of AhR ligands on the
differentiation of DPK cells, a CD4(+)CD8(+) thymic lymphoma cell line which can 
differentiate into CD4(+)CD8(-) thymocytes. In contrast to TCDD, which inhibited 
the differentiation, B(a)P showed little effect. Antigen-mediated up-regulation
of S100A4, S100A6, galectin-1, and TRAF5-like protein was remarkably suppressed
by TCDD, but slightly by B(a)P. Immunoprecipitation using anti-ARNT Ab revealed
that SDS3, a component of the Sin3/HDAC repressor complex, was associated with
ARNT only when DPK cells were incubated with TCDD. Expression of cKrox S100A4 was
derepressed when SDS3 protein was reduced. These results indicate that although
it is generally known that many AhR ligands such as TCDD and B(a)P function
mainly by the AhR/ARNT complex, ligand-specific interaction between SDS3 and ARNT
exerts differential effects on the expression of genes associated with thymocyte 
differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22981438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;32(22):4595-610. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00724-12. Epub 2012 Sep
10.

Upstream stimulatory factor 2 and hypoxia-inducible factor 2a (HIF2a)
cooperatively activate HIF2 target genes during hypoxia.

Pawlus MR(1), Wang L, Ware K, Hu CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Graduate Program, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical
Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

While the functions of hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF1a)/aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) and HIF2a/ARNT (HIF2) proteins in activating
hypoxia-inducible genes are well established, the role of other transcription
factors in the hypoxic transcriptional response is less clear. We report here for
the first time that the basic helix-loop-helix-leucine-zip transcription factor
upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2) is required for the hypoxic transcriptional 
response, specifically, for hypoxic activation of HIF2 target genes. We show that
inhibiting USF2 activity greatly reduces hypoxic induction of HIF2 target genes
in cell lines that have USF2 activity, while inducing USF2 activity in cells
lacking USF2 activity restores hypoxic induction of HIF2 target genes.
Mechanistically, USF2 activates HIF2 target genes by binding to HIF2 target gene 
promoters, interacting with HIF2a protein, and recruiting coactivators CBP and
p300 to form enhanceosome complexes that contain HIF2a, USF2, CBP, p300, and RNA 
polymerase II on HIF2 target gene promoters. Functionally, the effect of USF2
knockdown on proliferation, motility, and clonogenic survival of HIF2-dependent
tumor cells in vitro is phenocopied by HIF2a knockdown, indicating that USF2
works with HIF2 to activate HIF2 target genes and to drive HIF2-depedent
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3486188
PMID: 22966206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e44237. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044237. Epub 2012 Aug 29.

Diurnal variation of hepatic antioxidant gene expression in mice.

Xu YQ(1), Zhang D, Jin T, Cai DJ, Wu Q, Lu Y, Liu J, Klaassen CD.

Author information: 
(1)Zunyi Medical College, Zunyi, China.

BACKGROUND: This study was aimed to examine circadian variations of hepatic
antioxidant components, including the Nrf2- pathway, the glutathione (GSH)
system, antioxidant enzymes and metallothionein in mouse liver.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Adult mice were housed in light- and temperature-controlled 
facilities for 2 weeks, and livers were collected every 4 h during the 24 h
period. Total RNA was isolated, purified, and subjected to real-time RT-PCR
analysis. Hepatic mRNA levels of Nrf2, Keap1, Nqo1 and Gclc were higher in the
light-phase than the dark-phase, and were female-predominant. Hepatic GSH
presented marked circadian fluctuations, along with glutathione S-transferases
(GST-a1, GST-µ, GST-p) and glutathione peroxidase (GPx1). The expressions of
GPx1, GST-µ and GST-p mRNA were also higher in females. Antioxidant enzymes Cu/Zn
superoxide dismutase (Sod1), catalase (CAT), cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) and heme
oxygenase-1 (Ho-1) showed circadian rhythms, with higher expressions of Cox-2 and
CAT in females. Metallothionein, a small non-enzymatic antioxidant protein,
showed dramatic circadian variation in males, but higher expression in females.
The circadian variations of the clock gene Brain and Muscle Arnt-like
Protein-1(Bmal1), albumin site D-binding protein (Dbp), nuclear receptor Rev-Erba
(Nr1d1), period protein (Per1 and Per2) and cryptochrome 1(Cry1) were in
agreement with the literature. Furthermore, acetaminophen hepatotoxicity is more 
severe when administered in the afternoon when hepatic GSH was lowest.
CONCLUSIONS: Circadian variations and gender differences in transcript levels of 
antioxidant genes exist in mouse liver, which could affect body responses to
oxidative stress at different times of the day.

PMCID: PMC3430632
PMID: 22952936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43955. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043955. Epub 2012 Aug 31.

Establishment of mouse teratocarcinomas stem cells line and screening genes
responsible for malignancy.

Liu T(1), Wang Y, Peng X, Zhang L, Cheng J, Jin H, Wu M, Qian Q.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral and Gene Therapy, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgical Hospital,
The Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

The sequential transplantation of embryonal carcinoma cells in vivo can
accelerate the growth and malignancy of teratocarcinomas. However, the possible
molecular mechanisms in this process that reflect cancer formation in the early
stage are largely unknown and. To identify which genes are associated with the
changes of malignancy of teratocarcinomas, we established a tumorigenesis model
in which teratocarcinoma were induced via injecting embryonic stem cells into
immuno-deficiency mice, isolating teratocarcinoma stem cell from a
teratocarcinoma in serum-free culture medium and injecting teratocarcinoma stem
cells into immune-deficient mice continuously. By using high-throughput deep
sequence technology, we identified 26 differentially expressed genes related to
the changes of characteristics of teratocarcinoma stem cell in which 18 out of 26
genes were down-regulated and 8 genes were up-regulated. Among these genes,
several tumor-related genes such as Gata3, Arnt and Tdgf1, epigenetic associated 
genes such as PHC1 and Uty were identified. Pathway enrichment analysis result
revealed that Wnt signaling pathway, primary immunodeficiency pathway, antigen
processing and presentation pathway and allograft rejection pathway were involved
in the teratocarcinoma tumorigenesis (corrected p value<0.05). In summary, our
study established a tumorigenesis model and proposed some candidate genes and
signaling pathways that may play a key role in the early stage of cancer
occurrence.

PMCID: PMC3432059
PMID: 22952821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43555. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043555. Epub 2012 Aug 27.

Poor prognosis of gastric adenocarcinoma with decreased expression of AHRR.

Li YF(1), Wang DD, Zhao BW, Wang W, Yuan SQ, Huang CY, Chen YM, Zheng Y, Keshari 
RP, Xia JC, Zhou ZW.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China and Department of Experimental
Research, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, People's Republic of
China.

BACKGROUND: The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) repressor (AHRR), a member of
growing superfamily, is a basic-helix-loop-helix/Per-AHR nuclear translocator
(ARNT)-Sim (bHLH-PAS) protein. Recently, AHRR has been proposed to function as a 
putative new tumor suppressor gene based on some relevant studies in multiple
types of human cancers. This current study aims to investigate AHHR expression
and its prognostic significance in primary gastric adenocarcinoma.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The expression level of AHRR was analyzed using
real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), western blotting, and immunohistochemical
staining. It was clearly showed that the expression status of AHRR was reduced in
tumor tissue samples compared with that in matched adjacent non-tumor tissue
samples by RT-qPCR (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0423) and western blotting analysis (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.004).
Moreover, data revealed that AHRR without exon 8 (the active isoform) was the
predominant form either in tumor tissues (66.7%, 8/12) or in matched adjacent
non-tumor tissues (100.0%, 12/12), and the mRNA level of this isoform was
significantly reduced in tumor tissues (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.006). Immunohistochemistry analysis
indicated that AHRR expression was significantly decreased in 175 of 410 (42.7%) 
gastric adenocarcinoma cases. Kaplan-Meier survival curves and Multivariate Cox
analysis revealed that decreased expression of AHRR was significantly associated 
with poor prognosis in gastric adenocarcinoma patients.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data suggests that, in primary gastric
adenocarcinoma, AHRR may play as a suppressor gene and its expression status has 
the potential to be an independent prognostic factor.

PMCID: PMC3428367
PMID: 22952704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Sep 18;109(38):15479-84. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Cis-2-dodecenoic acid receptor RpfR links quorum-sensing signal perception with
regulation of virulence through cyclic dimeric guanosine monophosphate turnover.

Deng Y(1), Schmid N, Wang C, Wang J, Pessi G, Wu D, Lee J, Aguilar C, Ahrens CH, 
Chang C, Song H, Eberl L, Zhang LH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore. ydeng@imcb.a-star.edu.sg

Many bacterial pathogens produce diffusible signal factor (DSF)-type quorum
sensing (QS) signals in modulation of virulence and biofilm formation. Previous
work on Xanthomonas campestris showed that the RpfC/RpfG two-component system is 
involved in sensing and responding to DSF signals, but little is known in other
microorganisms. Here we show that in Burkholderia cenocepacia the DSF-family
signal cis-2-dodecenoic acid (BDSF) negatively controls the intracellular cyclic 
dimeric guanosine monophosphate (c-di-GMP) level through a receptor protein RpfR,
which contains Per/Arnt/Sim (PAS)-GGDEF-EAL domains. RpfR regulates the same
phenotypes as BDSF including swarming motility, biofilm formation, and virulence.
In addition, the BDSF(-) mutant phenotypes could be rescued by in trans
expression of RpfR, or its EAL domain that functions as a c-di-GMP
phosphodiesterase. BDSF is shown to bind to the PAS domain of RpfR with high
affinity and stimulates its phosphodiesterase activity through induction of
allosteric conformational changes. Our work presents a unique and widely
conserved DSF-family signal receptor that directly links the signal perception to
c-di-GMP turnover in regulation of bacterial physiology.

PMCID: PMC3458384
PMID: 22949660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Res Vet Sci. 2013 Feb;94(1):90-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2012.07.035. Epub 2012 Aug 
24.

Expression of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway and cyclooxygenase-2 in dog
tumors.

Giantin M(1), Vascellari M, Lopparelli RM, Ariani P, Vercelli A, Morello EM,
Cristofori P, Granato A, Buracco P, Mutinelli F, Dacasto M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biomedicina comparata e Alimentazione, viale dell'Università
16, I-35020 Agripolis Legnaro (Padova), Italy.

In humans, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) gene battery constitutes a set of 
contaminant-responsive genes, which have been recently shown to be involved in
the regulation of several patho-physiological conditions, including
tumorigenesis. As the domestic dog represents a valuable animal model in
comparative oncology, mRNA levels of cytochromes P450 1A1, 1A2 and 1B1 (CYP1A1,
1A2 and 1B1), AHR, AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT), AHR repressor (AHRR, whose
partial sequence was here obtained) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2) were measured in 
dog control tissues (liver, skin, mammary gland and bone), in 47 mast cell tumors
(MCTs), 32 mammary tumors (MTs), 5 osteosarcoma (OSA) and related surgical
margins. Target genes were constitutively expressed in the dog, confirming the
available human data. Furthermore, their pattern of expression in tumor biopsies 
was comparable to that already described in a variety of human cancers; in
particular, both AHR and COX2 genes were up-regulated and positively correlated, 
while CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 mRNAs were generally poorly expressed. This work
demonstrated for the first time that target mRNAs are expressed in neoplastic
tissues of dogs, thereby increasing the knowledge about dog cancer biology and
confirming this species as an useful animal model for comparative studies on
human oncology.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22925934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Toxicol Sci. 2012 Dec;130(2):349-61. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfs253. Epub 2012 Aug
17.

High-resolution genome-wide mapping of AHR and ARNT binding sites by ChIP-Seq.

Lo R(1), Matthews J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) activated
complex regulates genes in response to the environmental contaminant
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). AHR has also emerged as a potential
therapeutic target for the treatment of human diseases and different cancers,
including breast cancer. To better understand AHR and ARNT signaling in breast
cancer cells, we used chromatin immunoprecipitation linked to high-throughput
sequencing to identify AHR- and ARNT-binding sites across the genome in
TCDD-treated MCF-7 cells. We identified 2594 AHR-bound, 1352 ARNT-bound, and 882 
AHR/ARNT cobound regions. No significant differences in the genomic distribution 
of AHR and ARNT were observed. Approximately 60% of the cobound regions contained
at least one core an aryl hydrocarbon response element (AHRE), 5'-GCGTG-3'.
AHR/ARNT peak density was the highest within 1 kb of transcription start sites
(TSS); however, a number of AHR/ARNT cobound regions were located as far as 100
kb from TSS. De novo motif discovery identified a symmetrical variation of the
AHRE (5'-GTGCGTG-3'), as well as FOXA1 and SP1 binding motifs. Microarray
analysis identified 104 TCDD-responsive genes where 98 genes were upregulated by 
TCDD. Of the 104 regulated genes, 69 (66.3%) were associated with an AHR- or
ARNT-bound region within 100 kb of their TSS. Overall our study identified
AHR/ARNT cobound regions across the genome, revealed the importance but not
absolute requirement for an AHRE in AHR/ARNT interactions with DNA, and
identified a modified AHRE motif, thereby increasing our understanding of
AHR/ARNT signaling pathway.

PMID: 22903824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Hypertens. 2012 Oct;30(10):1961-9.

Genes and environment: novel, functional polymorphism in the human cathepsin L
(CTSL1) promoter disrupts a xenobiotic response element (XRE) to alter
transcription and blood pressure.

Mbewe-Campbell N(1), Wei Z, Zhang K, Friese RS, Mahata M, Schork AJ, Rao F,
Chiron S, Biswas N, Kim HS, Mahata SK, Waalen J, Nievergelt CM, Hook VY, O'Connor
DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, UCSD, San Deigo, CA, USA.

Comment in
    J Hypertens. 2012 Oct;30(10):1915-6.

BACKGROUND: Cathepsin L (CTSL1) catalyzes the formation of peptides that
influence blood pressure (BP). Naturally occurring genetic variation or targeted 
ablation of the Ctsl1 locus in mice yield cardiovascular pathology. Here, we
searched for genetic variation across the human CTSL1 locus and probed its
functional effects, especially in the proximal promoter.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Systematic polymorphism discovery by re-sequencing across
CTSL1 in 81 patients uncovered 38 genetic variants, five of which were relatively
common (MAF >5%), creating a single linkage disequilibrium block in multiple
biogeographic ancestries. One of these five common variants lay in a functional
domain of the gene: promoter C-171A (rs3118869), which disrupts a predicted
xenobiotic response element (XRE; match C>A). In transfected CTSL1
promoter/luciferase reporter plasmids, C-171A allele influenced transcription
(C>A, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>3.36E-6), and transcription was also augmented by co-exposure to the
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) complex (AHR:ARNT) in the presence of their
ligand dioxin (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.81E-8); allele (C vs. A) and AHR:ARNT/dioxin stimulus
interacted to control gene expression (interaction P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.033). Endogenous Ctsl1, 
Ahr, and Arnt transcripts were present in chromaffin cells. Promoter functional
C-171A genotype also predicted hypertension (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.0E-3), SBP (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.0E-4), and
DBP (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>3.0E-3), in an additive pattern for diploid genotypes (A/A > C/A > C/C) 
in 868 patients, and the results were extended by validation analysis into an
independent population sample of 986 patients.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that common genetic variation in the proximal CTSL1
promoter, especially at position C-171A, is functional in cells, and alters
transcription so as to explain the association of CTSL1 with BP in vivo. At the
XRE, endogenous genetic variation plus exogenous aryl hydrocarbon stimulation
interact to control CTSL1 gene expression. These results unveil a novel control
point whereby heredity and environment can intersect to control a complex trait, 
and point to new transcriptional strategies for intervention into transmitter
biosynthesis and its cardiovascular consequences.

PMCID: PMC3478326
PMID: 22871890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Oct;32(19):4068-77. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00723-12. Epub 2012 Aug 
6.

The hypoxia-inducible factor-C/EBPa axis controls ethanol-mediated hepcidin
repression.

Anderson ER(1), Taylor M, Xue X, Martin A, Moons DS, Omary MB, Shah YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Hepcidin is a liver-derived peptide hormone and the master regulator of systemic 
iron homeostasis. Decreased hepcidin expression is a common feature in alcoholic 
liver disease (ALD) and in mouse models of ethanol loading. Dysregulation of
hepcidin signaling in ALD leads to liver iron deposition, which is a major
contributing factor to liver injury. The mechanism by which hepcidin is regulated
following ethanol treatment is unclear. An increase in liver hypoxia was observed
in an acute ethanol-induced liver injury model. The hypoxic response is
controlled by a family of hypoxia-inducible transcription factors (HIFs), which
are composed of an oxygen-regulated alpha subunit (HIFa) and a constitutively
present beta subunit, aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (HIFß/Arnt).
Disruption of liver HIF function reversed the repression of hepcidin following
ethanol loading. Mouse models of liver HIF overexpression demonstrated that both 
HIF-1a and HIF-2a contribute to hepcidin repression in vivo. Ethanol treatment
led to a decrease in CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBPa) protein
expression in a HIF-dependent manner. Importantly, adenoviral rescue of C/EBPa in
vivo ablated the hepcidin repression in response to ethanol treatment or HIF
overexpression. These data provide novel insight into the regulation of hepcidin 
by hypoxia and indicate that targeting HIFs in the liver could be therapeutic in 
ALD.

PMCID: PMC3457545
PMID: 22869521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e42072. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042072. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Epstein-Barr virus immortalization of human B-cells leads to stabilization of
hypoxia-induced factor 1 alpha, congruent with the Warburg effect.

Darekar S(1), Georgiou K, Yurchenko M, Yenamandra SP, Chachami G, Simos G, Klein 
G, Kashuba E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) encodes six nuclear
transformation-associated proteins that induce extensive changes in cellular gene
expression and signaling and induce B-cell transformation. The role of HIF1A in
EBV-induced B-cell immortalization has not been previously studied.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Using Western blotting and Q-PCR, we found that HIF1A
protein is stabilized in EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cells. Western blotting, 
GST pulldown assays, and immunoprecipitation showed that EBV-encoded nuclear
antigens EBNA-5 and EBNA-3 bind to prolylhydroxylases 1 and 2, respectively, thus
inhibiting HIF1A hydroxylation and degradation. Immunostaining and Q-PCR showed
that the stabilized HIF1A translocates to the nucleus, forms a heterodimer with
ARNT, and transactivates several genes involved in aerobic glycolysis. Using
biochemical assays and Q-PCR, we also found that lymphoblastoid cells produce
high levels of lactate, lactate dehydrogenase and pyruvate.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that activation of the aerobic glycolytic pathway, 
corresponding to the Warburg effect, occurs in EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid
cells, in contrast to mitogen-activated B-cells.

PMCID: PMC3407085
PMID: 22848707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41359. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041359. Epub 2012 Jul 26.

Structure of an MmyB-like regulator from C. aurantiacus, member of a new
transcription factor family linked to antibiotic metabolism in actinomycetes.

Xu Q(1), van Wezel GP, Chiu HJ, Jaroszewski L, Klock HE, Knuth MW, Miller MD,
Lesley SA, Godzik A, Elsliger MA, Deacon AM, Wilson IA.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Center for Structural Genomics, La Jolla, California, United States of
America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(8): doi/10.1371/annotation/f345da14-66b8-4e8b-b448-576dc29a03f5.

Actinomycetes are important bacterial sources of antibiotics and other secondary 
metabolites. Many antibiotic gene clusters are controlled by pathway-specific
activators that act in response to growth conditions. Here we present the crystal
structure of an MmyB-like transcription regulator MltR (PDB code 3pxp)
(Caur_2278) from Chloroflexus aurantiacus, in complex with a fatty acid (myristic
acid). MltR is a distant homolog of the methylenomycin activator MmyB and
consists of an Xre-type N-terminal DNA-binding domain and a C-terminal
ligand-binding module that is related to the Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain. This
structure has enabled identification of a new family of bacterial transcription
factors that are distributed predominantly in actinomycetes. Bioinformatics
analysis of MltR and other characterized family members suggest that they are
likely associated with antibiotic and fatty acid metabolism in actinomycetes.
Streptomyces coelicolor SCO4944 is a candidate as an ancestral member of the
family. Its ortholog in S. griseus, SGR_6891, is induced by A-factor, a
<U+03B3>-butyrolactone that controls antibiotic production and development, and is
adjacent to the A-factor synthase gen, afsA. The location of mltR/mmyB homologs, 
in particular those adjacent to less well-studied antibiotic-related genes, makes
them interesting genetic markers for identifying new antibiotic genes. A model
for signal-triggered DNA-binding by MltR is proposed.

PMCID: PMC3406030
PMID: 22844465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Plant Cell. 2012 Jul;24(7):2949-62. doi: 10.1105/tpc.111.094201. Epub 2012 Jul
27.

Arabidopsis phytochrome a is modularly structured to integrate the multiple
features that are required for a highly sensitized phytochrome.

Oka Y(1), Ono Y, Toledo-Ortiz G, Kokaji K, Matsui M, Mochizuki N, Nagatani A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Physiology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, 
Kitashirakawa-Oiwake-Cho, Sakyo-Ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

Phytochrome is a red (R)/far-red (FR) light-sensing photoreceptor that regulates 
various aspects of plant development. Among the members of the phytochrome
family, phytochrome A (phyA) exclusively mediates atypical phytochrome responses,
such as the FR high irradiance response (FR-HIR), which is elicited under
prolonged FR. A proteasome-based degradation pathway rapidly eliminates active
Pfr (the FR-absorbing form of phyA) under R. To elucidate the structural basis
for the phyA-specific properties, we systematically constructed 16 chimeric
phytochromes in which each of four parts of the phytochrome molecule, namely, the
N-terminal extension plus the Per/Arnt/Sim domain (N-PAS), the cGMP
phosphodiesterase/adenyl cyclase/FhlA domain (GAF), the phytochrome domain (PHY),
and the entire C-terminal half, was occupied by either the phyA or phytochrome B 
sequence. These phytochromes were expressed in transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana to
examine their physiological activities. Consequently, the phyA N-PAS sequence was
shown to be necessary and sufficient to promote nuclear accumulation under FR,
whereas the phyA sequence in PHY was additionally required to exhibit FR-HIR.
Furthermore, the phyA sequence in PHY alone substantially increased the light
sensitivity to R. In addition, the GAF phyA sequence was important for rapid Pfr 
degradation. In summary, distinct structural modules, each of which confers
different properties to phyA, are assembled on the phyA molecule.

PMCID: PMC3426125
PMID: 22843485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Circadian Rhythms. 2012 Jul 24;10(1):5. doi: 10.1186/1740-3391-10-5.

Diurnal-and sex-related difference of metallothionein expression in mice.

Zhang D(1), Jin T, Xu YQ, Lu YF, Wu Q, Zhang YK, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Pharmacology and Key Lab of Basic Pharmacology of Guizhou, Zunyi
Medical College, Zunyi, Guizhou 563003, China. JLiu@kumc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Metallothionein (MT) is a small, cysteine-rich, metal-binding protein
that plays an important role in protecting against toxicity of heavy metal and
chemicals. This study was aimed to define diurnal and sex variation of MT in
mice.
METHODS: Adult mice were maintained in light- and temperature-controlled
facilities for 2 weeks with light on at 8:00 and light off at 20:00. The blood,
liver, and kidneys were collected every 4 h during the 24 h period. Total RNA was
isolated, purified, and subjected to real-time RT-PCR analysis and MT protein was
determined by western blot and the Cd/hemoglobin assay.
RESULTS: The diurnal variations in mRNA levels of MT-1 and MT-2in liver were
dramatic, up to a 40-foldpeak/trough ratio. MT mRNA levels in kidneys and blood
also showed diurnal variation, up to 5-fold peak/trough ratio. The diurnal
variation of MT mRNAs resembled the clock gene albumin site D-binding protein
(Dbp), and was anti-phase to the clock gene Brain and Muscle ARNT-like Protein 1 
(Bmal1) in liver and kidneys. The peaks of MT mRNA levels were higher in females 
than in males. Hepatic MT protein followed a similar pattern, with about a 3-fold
difference.
CONCLUSION: MT mRNA levels and protein showed diurnal- and sex-variation in
liver, kidney, and blood of mice, which could impact the body defense against
toxic stimuli.

PMCID: PMC3585924
PMID: 22827964  [PubMed]


366. Biophys J. 2012 May 2;102(9):2149-57. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2012.03.042.

Single-molecule experiments reveal the flexibility of a Per-ARNT-Sim domain and
the kinetic partitioning in the unfolding pathway under force.

Gao X(1), Qin M, Yin P, Liang J, Wang J, Cao Y, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructure and Department of Physics,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domains serve as versatile binding motifs in many
signal-transduction proteins and are able to respond to a wide spectrum of
chemical or physical signals. Despite their diverse functions, PAS domains share 
a conserved structure. It has been suggested that the structure of PAS domains is
flexible and thus adaptable to many binding partners. However, direct measurement
of the flexibility of PAS domains has not yet been provided. Here, we
quantitatively measure the mechanical unfolding of a PAS domain, ARNT PAS-B,
using single-molecule atomic force microscopy. Our force spectroscopy results
indicate that the structure of ARNT PAS-B can be unraveled under mechanical
forces as low as ~30 pN due to its broad potential well for the mechanical
unfolding transition of ~2 nm. This allows the PAS-B domain to extend by up to
75% of its resting end-to-end distance without unfolding. Moreover, we found that
the ARNT PAS-B domain unfolds in two distinct pathways via a kinetic partitioning
mechanism. Sixty-seven percent of ARNT PAS-B unfolds through a simple two-state
pathway, whereas the other 33% unfolds with a well-defined intermediate state in 
which the C-terminal ß-hairpin is detached. We propose that the structural
flexibility and force-induced partial unfolding of PAS-B domains may provide a
unique mechanism for them to recruit diverse binding partners and lower the
free-energy barrier for the formation of the binding interface.

Copyright © 2012 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC3341564
PMID: 22824279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012 Jul;1261:79-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06640.x.

Transforming growth factor-beta inhibits the expression of clock genes.

Gast H(1), Gordic S, Petrzilka S, Lopez M, Müller A, Gietl A, Hock C, Birchler T,
Fontana A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, University Hospital Berne, University of
Berne, Berne, Switzerland.

Disturbances of sleep-wake rhythms are an important problem in Alzheimer's
disease (AD). Circadian rhythms are regulated by clock genes. Transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-ß) is overexpressed in neurons in AD and is the only cytokine
that is increased in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Our data show that TGF-ß2
inhibits the expression of the clock genes Period (Per)1, Per2, and Rev-erba, and
of the clock-controlled genes D-site albumin promoter binding protein (Dbp) and
thyrotroph embryonic factor (Tef). However, our results showed that TGF-ß2 did
not alter the expression of brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (Bmal1). The
concentrations of TGF-ß2 in the CSF of 2 of 16 AD patients and of 1 of 7 patients
with mild cognitive impairment were in the dose range required to suppress the
expression of clock genes. TGF-ß2-induced dysregulation of clock genes may alter 
neuronal pathways, which may be causally related to abnormal sleep-wake rhythms
in AD patients.

© 2012 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 22823397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Respir Res. 2012 Jul 23;13:60. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-13-60.

HIF-1 expression is associated with CCL2 chemokine expression in airway
inflammatory cells: implications in allergic airway inflammation.

Baay-Guzman GJ(1), Bebenek IG, Zeidler M, Hernandez-Pando R, Vega MI,
Garcia-Zepeda EA, Antonio-Andres G, Bonavida B, Riedl M, Kleerup E, Tashkin DP,
Hankinson O, Huerta-Yepez S.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Infantil de Mexico, Federico Gomez, Unidad de Investigacion en
Enfermedades Oncologicas, Dr, Marquez No 262, Col, Doctores, Delegacion
Cuahutemos, Mexico City CP 06720, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of allergic airway inflammation in asthmatic
patients is complex and characterized by cellular infiltrates and activity of
many cytokines and chemokines. Both the transcription factor hypoxia inducible
factor-1 (HIF-1) and chemokine CCL2 have been shown to play pivotal roles in
allergic airway inflammation. The interrelationship between these two factors is 
not known. We hypothesized that the expression of HIF-1 and CCL2 may be
correlated and that the expression of CCL2 may be under the regulation of HIF-1. 
Several lines of evidence are presented to support this hypothesis.
METHODS: The effects of treating wild-type OVA (ovalbumin)-sensitized/challenged 
mice with ethyl-3,4-dihydroxybenzoate (EDHB), which upregulate HIF, on CCL2
expression, were determined. Mice conditionally knocked out for HIF-1ß was
examined for their ability to mount an allergic inflammatory response and CCL2
expression in the lung after intratracheal exposure to ovalbumin. The association
of HIF-1a and CCL2 levels was also measured in endobronchial biopsies and
bronchial fluid of asthma patients after challenge.
RESULTS: We show that both HIF-1a and CCL2 were upregulated during an OVA
(ovalbumin)-induced allergic response in mice. The levels of HIF-1a and CCL2 were
significantly increased following treatment with a pharmacological agent which
upregulates HIF-1a, ethyl-3,4-dihydroxybenzoate (EDHB). In contrast, the
expression levels of HIF-1a and CCL2 were decreased in the lungs of mice that
have been conditionally knocked out for ARNT (HIF-1ß) following sensitization
with OVA when compared to levels in wild type mice. In asthma patients, the
levels of HIF-1a and CCL2 increased after challenge with the allergen.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that CCL2 expression is regulated, in part, by
HIF-1 in the lung. These findings also demonstrate that both CCL2 and HIF-1 are
implicated in the pathogenesis of allergic airway inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3439306
PMID: 22823210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Hepatology. 2013 Jan;57(1):299-310. doi: 10.1002/hep.25984.

MicroRNA-221 overexpression accelerates hepatocyte proliferation during liver
regeneration.

Yuan Q(1), Loya K, Rani B, Möbus S, Balakrishnan A, Lamle J, Cathomen T, Vogel A,
Manns MP, Ott M, Cantz T, Sharma AD.

Author information: 
(1)Cluster of Excellence REBIRTH, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

The tightly controlled replication of hepatocytes in liver regeneration and
uncontrolled proliferation of tumor cells in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are
often modulated by common regulatory pathways. Several microRNAs (miRNAs) are
involved in HCC progression by modulating posttranscriptional expression of
multiple target genes. miR-221, which is frequently up-regulated in HCCs, delays 
fulminant liver failure in mice by inhibiting apoptosis, indicating a pleiotropic
role of miR-221 in hepatocytes. Here, we hypothesize that modulation of miR-221
targets in primary hepatocytes enhances proliferation, providing novel clues for 
enhanced liver regeneration. We demonstrate that miR-221 enhances proliferation
of in vitro cultivated primary hepatocytes. Furthermore, applying two-thirds
partial hepatectomy as a surgically induced liver regeneration model we show that
adeno-associated virus-mediated overexpression of miR-221 in the mouse liver also
accelerates hepatocyte proliferation in vivo. miR-221 overexpression leads to
rapid S-phase entry of hepatocytes during liver regeneration. In addition to the 
known targets p27 and p57, we identify Aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator
(Arnt) messenger RNA (mRNA) as a novel target of miR-221, which contributes to
the pro-proliferative activity of miR-221.CONCLUSION: miR-221 overexpression
accelerates hepatocyte proliferation. Pharmacological intervention targeting
miR-221 may thus be therapeutically beneficial in liver failure by preventing
apoptosis and by inducing liver regeneration.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 22821679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40323. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040323. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

MicroRNA 107 partly inhibits endothelial progenitor cells differentiation via
HIF-1ß.

Meng S(1), Cao J, Wang L, Zhou Q, Li Y, Shen C, Zhang X, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao-tong University,
Xin-hua Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) play an important role in tissue repair after
ischemic heart disease. In particular, the recovery of endothelial function is
reliant on the ability and rate of EPCs differentiate into mature endothelial
cells. The present study evaluated the effect of microRNA 107 (miR-107) on the
mechanism of EPCs differentiation. EPCs were isolated from rats' bone marrow and 
miR-107 expression of EPCs in hypoxic and normoxic conditions were measured by
real-time qualitative PCR. CD31 was analyzed by flow cytometry and eNOS was
examined by real-time qualitative PCR and western blotting and these were used as
markers of EPC differentiation. In order to reveal the mechanism, we used miR107 
inhibitor and lentiviral vector expressing a short hairpin RNA (shRNA) that
targets miR-107 and hypoxia-inducible factor-1 ß (HIF-1ß) to alter miR107 and
HIF-1ß expression. MiR-107 expression were increased in EPCs under hypoxic
conditions. Up-regulation of miR-107 partly suppressed the EPCs differentiation
induced in hypoxia, while down-regulation of miR-107 promoted EPC
differentiation. HIF-1ß was the target. This study indicated that miR-107 was
up-regulated in hypoxia to prevent EPCs differentiation via its target HIF-1ß.
The physiological mechanisms of miR-107 must be evaluated if it is to be used as 
a potential anti-ischemia therapeutic regime.

PMCID: PMC3391260
PMID: 22792280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Protein Sci. 2012 Sep;21(9):1334-43. doi: 10.1002/pro.2120.

The crystal structure of the periplasmic domain of Vibrio parahaemolyticus CpxA.

Kwon E(1), Kim DY, Ngo TD, Gross CA, Gross JD, Kim KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon 440-746, Korea.

The Cpx two-component system of Gram-negative bacteria senses extracytoplasmic
stresses using the histidine kinase CpxA, a membrane-bound sensor, and controls
the transcription of the genes involved in stress response by the cytosolic
response regulator CpxR, which is activated by the phosphorelay from CpxA. CpxP, 
a CpxA-associated protein, also plays an important role in the regulation of the 
Cpx system by inhibiting the autophosphorylation of CpxA. Although the stress
signals and physiological roles of the Cpx system have been extensively studied, 
the lack of structural information has limited the understanding of the detailed 
mechanism of ligand binding and regulation of CpxA. In this study, we solved the 
crystal structure of the periplasmic domain of Vibrio parahaemolyticus CpxA
(VpCpxA-peri) to a resolution of 2.1 Å and investigated its interaction with
CpxP. VpCpxA-peri has a globular Per-ARNT-SIM (PAS) domain and a protruded
C-terminal tail, which may be required for ligand sensing and CpxP binding,
respectively. The direct interaction of the PAS core of VpCpxA-peri with VpCpxP
was not detected by NMR, suggesting that the C-terminal tail or other factors,
such as the membrane environment, are necessary for the binding of CpxA to CpxP.

Copyright © 2012 The Protein Society.

PMCID: PMC3631362
PMID: 22760860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Cell Biol. 2012 Jul 9;198(1):103-14. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201111063. Epub 2012 Jul 
2.

Bnip3 and AIF cooperate to induce apoptosis and cavitation during epithelial
morphogenesis.

Qi Y(1), Tian X, Liu J, Han Y, Graham AM, Simon MC, Penninger JM, Carmeliet P, Li
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Medicine and Dentistry New Jersey Robert 
Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ 08093, USA.

Erratum in
    J Cell Biol. 2013 Apr 1;201(1):165.

Apoptosis is an essential step in cavitation during embryonic epithelial
morphogenesis, but its mechanisms are largely unknown. In this paper, we used
embryonic stem cell-differentiated embryoid bodies (EBs) as a model and found
that Bnip3 (Bcl-2/adenovirus E1B 19-kD interacting protein), a BH3-only
proapoptotic protein, was highly up-regulated during cavitation in a
hypoxia-dependent manner. Short hairpin RNA silencing of Bnip3 inhibited
apoptosis of the core cells and delayed cavitation. We show that the Bnip3
up-regulation was mediated mainly by hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-2. Ablation
of HIF-2a or HIF-1ß, the common ß subunit of HIF-1 and -2, suppressed Bnip3
up-regulation and inhibited apoptosis and cavitation. We further show that
apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) cooperated with Bnip3 to promote lumen clearance.
Bnip3 silencing in AIF-null EBs nearly blocked apoptosis and cavitation.
Moreover, AIF also regulated Bnip3 expression through mitochondrial production of
reactive oxygen species and consequent HIF-2a stabilization. These results
uncover a mechanism of cavitation through hypoxia-induced apoptosis of the core
cells mediated by HIFs, Bnip3, and AIF.

PMCID: PMC3392936
PMID: 22753893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 17;109(29):11729-34. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1204951109. Epub 2012 Jul 2.

Transcriptional regulation of juvenile hormone-mediated induction of Krüppel
homolog 1, a repressor of insect metamorphosis.

Kayukawa T(1), Minakuchi C, Namiki T, Togawa T, Yoshiyama M, Kamimura M, Mita K, 
Imanishi S, Kiuchi M, Ishikawa Y, Shinoda T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Insect Sciences, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8634, Japan.

The Krüppel homolog 1 gene (Kr-h1) has been proposed to play a key role in the
repression of insect metamorphosis. Kr-h1 is assumed to be induced by juvenile
hormone (JH) via a JH receptor, methoprene-tolerant (Met), but the mechanism of
induction is unclear. To elucidate the molecular mechanism of Kr-h1 induction, we
first cloned cDNAs encoding Kr-h1 (BmKr-h1) and Met (BmMet1 and BmMet2) homologs 
from Bombyx mori. In a B. mori cell line, BmKr-h1 was rapidly induced by
subnanomolar levels of natural JHs. Reporter assays identified a JH response
element (kJHRE), comprising 141 nucleotides, located ~2 kb upstream from the
BmKr-h1 transcription start site. The core region of kJHRE (GGCCTCCACGTG)
contains a canonical E-box sequence to which Met, a basic helix-loop-helix
Per-ARNT-Sim (bHLH-PAS) transcription factor, is likely to bind. In mammalian
HEK293 cells, which lack an intrinsic JH receptor, ectopic expression of BmMet2
fused with Gal4DBD induced JH-dependent activity of an upstream activation
sequence reporter. Meanwhile, the kJHRE reporter was activated JH-dependently in 
HEK293 cells only when cotransfected with BmMet2 and BmSRC, another bHLH-PAS
family member, suggesting that BmMet2 and BmSRC jointly interact with kJHRE. We
also found that the interaction between BmMet2 and BmSRC is dependent on JH.
Therefore, we propose the following hypothesis for the mechanism of JH-mediated
induction of BmKr-h1: BmMet2 accepts JH as a ligand, JH-liganded BmMet2 interacts
with BmSRC, and the JH/BmMet2/BmSRC complex activates BmKr-h1 by interacting with
kJHRE.

PMCID: PMC3406821
PMID: 22753472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 17;109(29):11758-63. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1209592109. Epub 2012 Jul 2.

Brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1) controls circadian cell
proliferation and susceptibility to UVB-induced DNA damage in the epidermis.

Geyfman M(1), Kumar V, Liu Q, Ruiz R, Gordon W, Espitia F, Cam E, Millar SE,
Smyth P, Ihler A, Takahashi JS, Andersen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, CA
92697, USA.

The role of the circadian clock in skin and the identity of genes participating
in its chronobiology remain largely unknown, leading us to define the circadian
transcriptome of mouse skin at two different stages of the hair cycle, telogen
and anagen. The circadian transcriptomes of telogen and anagen skin are largely
distinct, with the former dominated by genes involved in cell proliferation and
metabolism. The expression of many metabolic genes is antiphasic to cell
cycle-related genes, the former peaking during the day and the latter at night.
Consistently, accumulation of reactive oxygen species, a byproduct of oxidative
phosphorylation, and S-phase are antiphasic to each other in telogen skin.
Furthermore, the circadian variation in S-phase is controlled by BMAL1 intrinsic 
to keratinocytes, because keratinocyte-specific deletion of Bmal1 obliterates
time-of-day-dependent synchronicity of cell division in the epidermis leading to 
a constitutively elevated cell proliferation. In agreement with higher cellular
susceptibility to UV-induced DNA damage during S-phase, we found that mice are
most sensitive to UVB-induced DNA damage in the epidermis at night. Because in
the human epidermis maximum numbers of keratinocytes go through S-phase in the
late afternoon, we speculate that in humans the circadian clock imposes
regulation of epidermal cell proliferation so that skin is at a particularly
vulnerable stage during times of maximum UV exposure, thus contributing to the
high incidence of human skin cancers.

PMCID: PMC3406811
PMID: 22753467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Feb 25;366(2):163-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.06.017.
Epub 2012 Jun 28.

AMPK at the crossroads of circadian clocks and metabolism.

Jordan SD(1), Lamia KA.

Author information: 
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, Department of Chemical Physiology, La Jolla,
CA 92037, USA.

Circadian clocks coordinate behavior and physiology with daily environmental
cycles and thereby optimize the timing of metabolic processes such as glucose
production and insulin secretion. Such circadian regulation of metabolism
provides an adaptive advantage in diverse organisms. Mammalian clocks are
primarily based on a transcription and translation feedback loop in which a
heterodimeric complex of the transcription factors CLOCK (circadian locomotor
output cycles kaput) and BMAL1 (brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1) activates
the expression of its own repressors, the period (PER1-3) and cryptochrome (CRY1 
and CRY2) proteins. Posttranslational modification of these core clock components
is critical for setting clock time or adjusting the speed of the clock.
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is one of several metabolic sensors that have
been reported to transmit energy-dependent signals to the mammalian clock. AMPK
does so by driving the phosphorylation and destabilization of CRY and PER
proteins. In addition, AMPK subunit composition, sub-cellular localization, and
substrate phosphorylation are dependent on clock time. Given the well-established
role of AMPK in diverse aspects of metabolic physiology, the reciprocal
regulation of AMPK and circadian clocks likely plays an important role in
circadian metabolic regulation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3502724
PMID: 22750052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2012 Aug 15;303(4):H475-85. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00238.2012. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Development of dilated cardiomyopathy in Bmal1-deficient mice.

Lefta M(1), Campbell KS, Feng HZ, Jin JP, Esser KA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Muscle Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, 
USA.

Circadian rhythms are approximate 24-h oscillations in physiology and behavior.
Circadian rhythm disruption has been associated with increased incidence of
hypertension, coronary artery disease, dyslipidemia, and other cardiovascular
pathologies in both humans and animal models. Mice lacking the core circadian
clock gene, brain and muscle aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT)-like protein (Bmal1), are behaviorally arrhythmic, die prematurely, and
display a wide range of organ pathologies. However, data are lacking on the role 
of Bmal1 on the structural and functional integrity of cardiac muscle. In the
present study, we demonstrate that Bmal1(-/-) mice develop dilated cardiomyopathy
with age, characterized by thinning of the myocardial walls, dilation of the left
ventricle, and decreased cardiac performance. Shortly after birth the Bmal1(-/-) 
mice exhibit a transient increase in myocardial weight, followed by regression
and later onset of dilation and failure. Ex vivo working heart preparations
revealed systolic ventricular dysfunction at the onset of dilation and failure,
preceded by downregulation of both myosin heavy chain isoform mRNAs. We observed 
structural disorganization at the level of the sarcomere with a shift in titin
isoform composition toward the stiffer N2B isoform. However, passive tension
generation in single cardiomyocytes was not increased. Collectively, these
findings suggest that the loss of the circadian clock gene, Bmal1, gives rise to 
the development of an age-associated dilated cardiomyopathy, which is associated 
with shifts in titin isoform composition, altered myosin heavy chain gene
expression, and disruption of sarcomere structure.

PMCID: PMC3423146
PMID: 22707558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Sep;6(3):513-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.941. Epub 2012 Jun 8.

ShRNA-mediated gene silencing of AHR promotes the differentiation of P19 mouse
embryonic carcinoma cells into cardiomyocytes.

Zhu C(1), Chen YL, Wang XJ, Hu XS, Yu ZB, Han SP.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Pediatrics,
Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, PR China.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factor that is activated by environmental contaminants including
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). The AHR affects a variety of processes that are
involved in cell growth and differentiation. In this study, we constructed a P19 
embryonic carcinoma cell line with AHR gene silencing using the vector-based
approach of short hairpin (sh)RNA interference that allows cells to differentiate
into cardiac myocytes when treated with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The expression
levels of the cardiac development-specific GATA4 and Nkx2.5 genes were measured
using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Our data showed
that the expression levels of the GATA4 and Nkx2.5 genes were increased in the
AHR-silenced P19 cells compared with the control groups. Four critical genes
(ARNT, CYP1A1, GSK3ß and ß-catenin) expressed in the AHR and in the Wnt signaling
pathway were also measured by qPCR. We found that the expression levels of ARNT, 
CYP1A1 and ß-catenin were suppressed, whereas GSK3ß expression was elevated in
the AHR-silenced P19 cells. Therefore, it is possible that the silencing of AHR
promotes the differentiation of P19 cells through the AHR and Wnt signal
transduction pathway.

PMID: 22684894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Structure. 2012 Jul 3;20(7):1223-32. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.04.019. Epub 2012
Jun 7.

Adaptor-dependent degradation of a cell-cycle regulator uses a unique substrate
architecture.

Rood KL(1), Clark NE, Stoddard PR, Garman SC, Chien P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Comment in
    Structure. 2012 Jul 3;20(7):1128-30.

In Caulobacter crescentus, the ClpXP protease degrades several crucial cell-cycle
regulators, including the phosphodiesterase PdeA. Degradation of PdeA requires
the response regulator CpdR and signals a morphological transition in concert
with initiation of DNA replication. Here, we report the structure of a
Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain of PdeA and show that it is necessary for
CpdR-dependent degradation in vivo and in vitro. CpdR acts as an adaptor,
tethering the amino-terminal PAS domain to ClpXP and promoting recognition of the
weak carboxyl-terminal degron of PdeA, a combination that ensures processive
proteolysis. We identify sites on the PAS domain needed for CpdR recognition and 
find that one subunit of the PdeA dimer can be delivered to ClpXP by its partner.
Finally, we show that improper stabilization of PdeA in vivo alters cellular
behavior. These results introduce an adaptor/substrate pair for ClpXP and reveal 
broad diversity in adaptor-mediated proteolysis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3410435
PMID: 22682744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Cancer Causes Control. 2012 Aug;23(8):1367-75. doi: 10.1007/s10552-012-9947-4.
Epub 2012 Jun 7.

Variation in xenobiotic transport and metabolism genes, household chemical
exposures, and risk of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Chokkalingam AP(1), Metayer C, Scelo GA, Chang JS, Urayama KY, Aldrich MC, Guha
N, Hansen HM, Dahl GV, Barcellos LF, Wiencke JK, Wiemels JL, Buffler PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, UC Berkeley School of Public Health, University of
California Berkeley, 1995 University Ave, , Berkeley, CA 94704, USA.
anandc@berkeley.edu

BACKGROUND: Recent studies suggest that environmental exposures to pesticides,
tobacco, and other xenobiotic chemicals may increase risk of childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). We sought to evaluate the role of genes involved in
xenobiotic transport and metabolism in childhood ALL risk, both alone and in
conjunction with household chemical exposures previously found to be associated
with childhood ALL risk.
METHODS: We conducted a population-based epidemiologic study of 377 cases and 448
controls in California, utilizing a haplotype-based approach to evaluate 42
xenobiotic transport and metabolism genes in conjunction with data on
self-reported household chemical exposures.
RESULTS: We identified significant associations of childhood ALL risk with
haplotypes of ABCB1, ARNT, CYP2C8, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, and IDH1. In addition, certain
haplotypes showed significant joint effects with self-reported household chemical
exposures on risk of childhood ALL. Specifically, elevated risks associated with 
use of paints in the home (ever) and indoor insecticides (pre-birth) were limited
to subjects carrying specific haplotypes of CYP2C8 and ABCB1, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide support for a role of xenobiotic transport and
metabolism pathways in risk of childhood ALL and indicate that genes in these
pathways may modulate the risk of disease associated with use of common household
chemicals. Additional studies are needed to confirm these findings and localize
specific causal variants.

PMCID: PMC3390694
PMID: 22674224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Front Microbiol. 2012 May 31;3:191. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00191. eCollection
2012.

Modes of retrotransposition of long interspersed element-1 by environmental
factors.

Ishizaka Y(1), Okudaira N, Tamura M, Iijima K, Shimura M, Goto M, Okamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intractable Diseases, National Center for Global Health and
Medicine Tokyo, Japan.

Approximately 42% of the human genome is composed of endogenous retroelements,
and the major retroelement component, long interspersed element-1 (L1), comprises
~17% of the total genome. A single human cell has more than 5<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(5) copies of
L1, 80~100 copies of which are competent for retrotransposition (RTP). Notably,
L1 can induce RTP of other retroelements, such as Alu and SVA, and is believed to
function as a driving force of evolution. Although L1-RTP during early
embryogenesis has been highlighted in the literature, recent observations
revealed that L1-RTP also occurs in somatic cells. However, little is known about
how environmental factors induce L1-RTP. Here, we summarize our current
understanding of the mechanism of L1-RTP in somatic cells. We have focused on the
mode of L1-RTP that is dependent on the basic helix-loop-helix/per-arnt-sim
(bHLH/PAS) family of transcription factors. Along with the proposed function of
bHLH/PAS proteins in environmental adaptation, we discuss the functional linking 
of L1-RTP and bHLH/PAS proteins for environmental adaptation and evolution.

PMCID: PMC3364524
PMID: 22666219  [PubMed]


381. Arch Toxicol. 2012 Oct;86(10):1603-12. doi: 10.1007/s00204-012-0870-y. Epub 2012 
Jun 4.

Regulation of uterine AHR battery gene expression by 17ß-Estradiol is
predominantly mediated by estrogen receptor a.

Rataj F(1), Möller FJ, Jähne M, Zierau O, Diel P, Vollmer G, Kretzschmar G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Physiology and Endocrinology, Institute for Zoology, Technische
Universität Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is known to mediate the cellular response to 
numerous xenobiotics including dioxin. Surprisingly AHR knockout mice provide
evidence for the involvement of the AHR signalling cascade in estrogen regulated 
physiological functions of the female reproductive system. Several studies
already aimed to investigate the impact of the AHR mediated xenobiotic response
pathway on estrogen receptor (ER) signalling, whereas on contrary availability of
data describing the effect of 17ß-Estradiol (E2) on the AHR signalling cascade is
rather limited. In this study we observed an inhibitory effect of E2 treatment on
uterine Ahr, Arnt, Arnt2, Ahrr, Cyp1a1, Ugt1 and Nfe2l2 gene expression in
ovariectomized Wistar rats, whereas Cyp1b1, Nqo1 and Gsta2 displayed an increased
transcription. The usage of the ER selective agonists, 16a-LE(2) (ERa selective) 
and 8ß-VE(2) (ERß selective), enabled us to distinguish between ER subtype
specific responses. On mRNA level the observed changes in gene expression were
mainly mediated by ERa except for the expression of Nqo1. In most cases the
activation of ERß caused effects opposite to the ones observed following
activation of ERa. Despite the significant changes in AHR mRNA levels
immunohistochemical staining uterine tissue section did not reveal changes of the
AHR protein level. Taken together our results validate, support and extend the
hypothesis of uterine crosstalk between AHR and ER signalling pathways.
Furthermore they give an insight into how the AHR and its related genes may
participate in E2 dependent uterine physiological processes and provide another
potential mechanism of action for xenoestrogens.

PMID: 22659940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Science. 2012 Jul 13;337(6091):189-94. doi: 10.1126/science.1222804. Epub 2012
May 31.

Crystal structure of the heterodimeric CLOCK:BMAL1 transcriptional activator
complex.

Huang N(1), Chelliah Y, Shan Y, Taylor CA, Yoo SH, Partch C, Green CB, Zhang H,
Takahashi JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2012 Jul 13;337(6091):165-6.

The circadian clock in mammals is driven by an autoregulatory transcriptional
feedback mechanism that takes approximately 24 hours to complete. A key component
of this mechanism is a heterodimeric transcriptional activator consisting of two 
basic helix-loop-helix PER-ARNT-SIM (bHLH-PAS) domain protein subunits, CLOCK and
BMAL1. Here, we report the crystal structure of a complex containing the mouse
CLOCK:BMAL1 bHLH-PAS domains at 2.3 Å resolution. The structure reveals an
unusual asymmetric heterodimer with the three domains in each of the two
subunits--bHLH, PAS-A, and PAS-B--tightly intertwined and involved in
dimerization interactions, resulting in three distinct protein interfaces.
Mutations that perturb the observed heterodimer interfaces affect the stability
and activity of the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex as well as the periodicity of the
circadian oscillator. The structure of the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex is a starting
point for understanding at an atomic level the mechanism driving the mammalian
circadian clock.

PMCID: PMC3694778
PMID: 22653727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Toxicol In Vitro. 2012 Sep;26(6):979-84. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2012.05.007. Epub
2012 May 28.

A dioxin response element in the multiple cloning site of the pGL3 luciferase
reporter influences transcriptional activity.

Ochs SD(1), Liu J, Fernando TM, Fecher RA, Sulentic CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Boonshoft School of Medicine, Wright 
State University, Dayton, OH 45435, USA.

Luciferase reporter plasmids (pGL3 backbone, Promega) have been utilized to
characterize the transcriptional effects of the environmental contaminant
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and other aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR) ligands. Following ligand activation, the AhR and its dimerization partner 
AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT) regulate transcription by binding dioxin response
elements (DREs) in regulatory regions of dioxin-sensitive genes. Upon sequencing 
of our luciferase reporters, we unexpectedly identified a DRE core motif within
the multiple cloning site (mcsDRE) of the pGL3 luciferase plasmid backbone in a
subset of our reporters. Therefore, the objective of this study was to determine 
if the mcsDRE inadvertently influences reporter activity. Utilizing deletional
analysis we determined that the mcsDRE did significantly alter the
transcriptional effect induced by TCDD. Since many chemicals have been shown to
interact with the AhR and influence transcription through the DRE, the presence
of the mcsDRE in the pGL3 luciferase plasmid may inappropriately influence
promoter and enhancer analysis. As such, insertion of regulatory elements into
pGL3 reporters should be designed to avoid retaining the mcsDRE core motif
(GCGTG) and currently utilized pGL3 reporters should be evaluated for the
presence of the mcsDRE.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3398214
PMID: 22652426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Hum Genet. 2012 Jul;57(7):434-41. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.48. Epub 2012 May 31.

Association of variants in genes involved in environmental chemical metabolism
and risk of cryptorchidism and hypospadias.

Qin XY(1), Kojima Y, Mizuno K, Ueoka K, Massart F, Spinelli C, Zaha H, Okura M,
Yoshinaga J, Yonemoto J, Kohri K, Hayashi Y, Ogata T, Sone H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Environmental Risk, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Comment in
    J Hum Genet. 2012 Jul;57(7):405-6.

We hypothesized that single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of genes involved in 
environmental endocrine disruptors (EEDs) metabolism might influence the risk of 
male genital malformations. In this study, we explored for association between
384 SNPs in 15 genes (AHR, AHRR, ARNT, ARNT2, NR1I2, RXRA, RXRB, RXRG, CYP1A1,
CYP1A2, CYP1B1, CYP2B6, CYP3A4, CYP17A1 and CYP19A1) and risk of cryptorchidism
(CO) and hypospadias (HS) in 334 Japanese (JPN) males (141 controls, 95 CO and 98
HS) and 187 Italian (ITA) males (129 controls and 58 CO). In the JPN study group,
five SNPs from ARNT2 (rs2278705 and rs5000770), CYP1A2 (rs2069521), CYP17A1
(rs4919686) and NR1I2 (rs2472680) were significantly associated at both allelic
and genotypic levels with risk of at least one genital malformation phenotype. In
the ITA study group, two SNPs in AHR (rs3757824) and ARNT2 (rs1020397) were
significantly associated with risk of CO. Interaction analysis of the positive
SNPs using multifactor dimensionality reduction demonstrated that synergistic
interaction between rs2472680, rs4919686 and rs5000770 had 62.81% prediction
accuracy for CO (P=0.011) and that between rs2069521 and rs2278705 had 69.98%
prediction accuracy for HS (P=0.001) in JPN population. In a combined analysis of
JPN and ITA population, the most significant multi-locus association was observed
between rs5000770 and rs3757824, which had 65.70% prediction accuracy for CO
(P=0.055). Our findings indicate that genetic polymorphisms in genes involved in 
EED metabolism are associated with risk of CO and HS.

PMID: 22648180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep 1;40(17):e135. Epub 2012 May 29.

Integrative analysis of gene and miRNA expression profiles with transcription
factor-miRNA feed-forward loops identifies regulators in human cancers.

Yan Z(1), Shah PK, Amin SB, Samur MK, Huang N, Wang X, Misra V, Ji H, Gabuzda D, 
Li C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

We describe here a novel method for integrating gene and miRNA expression
profiles in cancer using feed-forward loops (FFLs) consisting of transcription
factors (TFs), miRNAs and their common target genes. The dChip-GemiNI (Gene and
miRNA Network-based Integration) method statistically ranks computationally
predicted FFLs by their explanatory power to account for differential gene and
miRNA expression between two biological conditions such as normal and cancer.
GemiNI integrates not only gene and miRNA expression data but also
computationally derived information about TF-target gene and miRNA-mRNA
interactions. Literature validation shows that the integrated modeling of
expression data and FFLs better identifies cancer-related TFs and miRNAs compared
to existing approaches. We have utilized GemiNI for analyzing six data sets of
solid cancers (liver, kidney, prostate, lung and germ cell) and found that
top-ranked FFLs account for ~20% of transcriptome changes between normal and
cancer. We have identified common FFL regulators across multiple cancer types,
such as known FFLs consisting of MYC and miR-15/miR-17 families, and novel FFLs
consisting of ARNT, CREB1 and their miRNA partners. The results and analysis web 
server are available at http://www.canevolve.org/dChip-GemiNi.

PMCID: PMC3458521
PMID: 22645320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2012 Sep;163(1):137-46. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpa.2012.05.195. Epub 2012 May 27.

Gene transcripts encoding hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) exhibit tissue- and
muscle fiber type-dependent responses to hypoxia and hypercapnic hypoxia in the
Atlantic blue crab, Callinectes sapidus.

Hardy KM(1), Follett CR, Burnett LE, Lema SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Center for Coastal Marine Sciences,
California Polytechnic State University, 1 Grand Ave, San Luis Obispo, CA 93407, 
USA. kmhardy@calpoly.edu

Hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) is a transcription factor that under low
environmental oxygen regulates the expression of suites of genes involved in
metabolism, angiogenesis, erythropoiesis, immune function, and growth. Here, we
isolated and sequenced partial cDNAs encoding hif-a and arnt/hif-ß from the
Atlantic blue crab, Callinectes sapidus, an estuarine species that frequently
encounters concurrent hypoxia (low O(2)) and hypercapnia (elevated CO(2)). We
then examined the effects of acute exposure (1h) to hypoxia (H) and hypercapnic
hypoxia (HH) on relative transcript abundance for hif-a and arnt/hif-ß in
different tissues (glycolytic muscle, oxidative muscle, hepatopancreas, gill, and
gonads) using quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Our results indicate that hif-a and 
arnt/hif-ß mRNAs were constitutively present under well-aerated normoxia (N)
conditions in all tissues examined. Further, H and HH exposure resulted in both
tissue-specific and muscle fiber type-specific effects on relative hif-a
transcript abundance. In the gill and glycolytic muscle, relative hif-a mRNA
levels were significantly lower under H and HH, compared to N, while no change
(or a slight increase) was detected in oxidative muscle, hepatopancreas and
gonadal tissues. H and HH did not affect relative transcript abundance for
arnt/hif-ß in any tissue or muscle fiber type. Thus, in crustaceans the HIF
response to H and HH appears to involve changes in hif transcript abundance, with
variation in hif-a and arnt/hif-ß transcriptional dynamics occurring in both a
tissue- and muscle fiber type-dependent manner.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22643338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Int J Parasitol. 2012 Apr;42(4):383-91.

Detection of a quantitative trait locus associated with resistance to Ascaris
suum infection in pigs.

Skallerup P(1), Nejsum P, Jørgensen CB, Göring HH, Karlskov-Mortensen P,
Archibald AL, Fredholm M, Thamsborg SM.

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology, Health, and Development, Department of Veterinary Disease
Biology, University of Copenhagen, Dyrlægevej 100, DK-1870 Frederiksberg,
Denmark. pesk@life.ku.dk

Helminths almost invariably have an over-dispersed distribution in the host
population. Human and animal studies have provided evidence suggesting that a
large part of this variation is due to host genetic factors. Recently, the
heritability for roundworm (Ascaris suum) infection levels in pigs was estimated 
to be 0.45. We used single nucleotide polymorphism markers to perform a
whole-genome scan on 195 pigs experimentally infected with A. suum. A putative
quantitative trait locus for worm burden on chromosome 4 covering 2.5 Mbp was
identified by measured genotype analysis, although none of the SNPs reached
genome-wide significance. To validate the putative quantitative trait locus, we
genotyped two of the SNPs within the region in unrelated, informative animals
exposed to experimental or natural infections and from which we had worm counts
and/or faecal egg counts; the validation studies showed that one of the SNPs
(TXNIP) was associated with total worm burden (P < 0.001) and adult worm burden(P
< 0.0001), whereas the other SNP (ARNT) was associated with adult worm burden (P 
< 0.025) in these populations. We were thus able to confirm the existence of the 
quantitative trait locus on chromosome 4.This is to our knowledge the first
report of a quantitative trait locus associated with helminth burden in pigs.

PMID: 22619754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. FASEB J. 2012 Aug;26(8):3453-63. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-205781. Epub 2012 May 18.

The clock gene, brain and muscle Arnt-like 1, regulates adipogenesis via Wnt
signaling pathway.

Guo B(1), Chatterjee S, Li L, Kim JM, Lee J, Yechoor VK, Minze LJ, Hsueh W, Ma K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Medicine, The Methodist Hospital
Research Institute, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Circadian clocks in adipose tissue are known to regulate adipocyte biology.
Although circadian dysregulation is associated with development of obesity, the
underlying mechanism has not been established. Here we report that disruption of 
the clock gene, brain and muscle Arnt-like 1 (Bmal1), in mice led to increased
adipogenesis, adipocyte hypertrophy, and obesity, compared to wild-type (WT)
mice. This is due to its cell-autonomous effect, as Bmal1 deficiency in embryonic
fibroblasts, as well as stable shRNA knockdown (KD) in 3T3-L1 preadipocyte and
C3H10T1/2 mesenchymal stem cells, promoted adipogenic differentiation. We
demonstrate that attenuation of Bmal1 function resulted in down-regulation of
genes in the canonical Wnt pathway, known to suppress adipogenesis. Promoters of 
these genes (Wnt10a, ß-catenin, Dishevelled2, TCF3) displayed Bmal1 occupancy,
indicating direct circadian regulation by Bmal1. As a result, Wnt signaling
activity was attenuated by Bmal1 KD and augmented by its overexpression.
Furthermore, stabilizing ß-catenin through Wnt ligand or GSK-3ß inhibition
achieved partial restoration of blunted Wnt activity and suppression of increased
adipogenesis induced by Bmal1 KD. Taken together, our study demonstrates that
Bmal1 is a critical negative regulator of adipocyte development through
transcriptional control of components of the canonical Wnt signaling cascade, and
provides a mechanistic link between circadian disruption and obesity.

PMID: 22611086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Endocrinology. 2012 Jul;153(7):3006-16. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-2069. Epub 2012 May 
16.

Induction of gastrin expression in gastrointestinal cells by hypoxia or cobalt is
independent of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF).

Xiao L(1), Kovac S, Chang M, Shulkes A, Baldwin GS, Patel O.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Melbourne, Department of Surgery, Austin Health, Studley
Road, Heidelberg, Victoria 3084, Australia.

Gastrin and its precursors have been shown to promote mitogenesis and
angiogenesis in gastrointestinal tumors. Hypoxia stimulates tumor growth, but its
effect on gastrin gene regulation has not been examined in detail. Here we have
investigated the effect of hypoxia on the transcription of the gastrin gene in
human gastric cancer (AGS) cells. Gastrin mRNA was measured by real-time PCR,
gastrin peptides were measured by RIA, and gastrin promoter activity was measured
by dual-luciferase reporter assay. Exposure to a low oxygen concentration (1%)
increased gastrin mRNA concentrations in wild-type AGS cells (AGS) and in AGS
cells overexpressing the gastrin receptor (AGS-cholecystokinin receptor 2) by 2.1
± 0.4- and 4.1 ± 0.3-fold (P < 0.05), respectively. The hypoxia mimetic, cobalt
chloride (300 µM), increased gastrin promoter activity in AGS cells by 2.4 ±
0.3-fold (P < 0.05), and in AGS-cholecystokinin receptor 2 cells by 4.0 ±
0.3-fold (P < 0.05), respectively. The observations that either deletion from the
gastrin promoter of the putative binding sites for the transcription factor
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) or knockdown of either the HIF-1a or HIF-1ß
subunit did not affect gastrin promoter inducibility under hypoxia indicated that
the hypoxic activation of the gastrin gene is likely HIF independent. Mutational 
analysis of previously identified Sp1 regulatory elements in the gastrin promoter
also failed to abrogate the induction of promoter activity by hypoxia. The
observations that hypoxia up-regulates the gastrin gene in AGS cells by
HIF-independent mechanisms, and that this effect is enhanced by the presence of
gastrin receptors, provide potential targets for gastrointestinal cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3380302
PMID: 22593272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2012 Jun;16(2):189-96. doi: 10.1007/s10006-012-0335-8. Epub
2012 May 17.

Correlation of expression of hypoxia-related proteins with prognosis in oral
squamous cell carcinoma patients.

Eckert AW(1), Kappler M, Schubert J, Taubert H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Plastic Surgery, Martin-Luther-University
Halle-Wittenberg, E.-Grube-Str. 40, 06120, Halle, Saale, Germany.
aw.eckert.wissenschaft@web.de

INTRODUCTION: Hypoxia plays a major role in tumor progression, therapy resistance
and for prognosis of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). The crucial step as a
response to hypoxia is the activation and stabilization of the alpha subunit of
hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF-1a). HIF-1: HIF-1 regulates the expression of
different genes to adapt the tumor cells to reduced oxygenation. The HIF-1 system
is intrinsic regulated by von Hippel-Lindau protein (pVHL). Main downstream
proteins are the glucose transporter 1 (GLUT-1), carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX),
and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). For therapeutical stratification
in OSCC, it is important to understand the mechanism caused by hypoxic stress and
to comprehend the resulting adaptive process in cancer cells. Therefore, an
overview of HIF-1a-depending protein expression, focussed on the expression of
GLUT-1, CAIX, and VEGF and their prognostic significance in OSCC is given.
CONCLUSION: Several unique roles of hypoxic pathway in the context of tumor
progression are described in this review. As a consequence, a marker panel is
proposed to allow a more individualized prognosis in OSCC patients. This marker
panel should include beside HIF-1a, pVHL, and GLUT-1.

PMID: 22592457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Clin Res Cardiol. 2012 Oct;101(10):805-13. Epub 2012 May 15.

Green tea halts progression of cardiac transthyretin amyloidosis: an
observational report.

Kristen AV(1), Lehrke S, Buss S, Mereles D, Steen H, Ehlermann P, Hardt S,
Giannitsis E, Schreiner R, Haberkorn U, Schnabel PA, Linke RP, Röcken C, Wanker
EE, Dengler TJ, Altland K, Katus HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Angiology, and Respiratory Medicine, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 410, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
Arnt_Kristen@med.uni-heidelberg.de

BACKGROUND: Treatment options in patients with amyloidotic transthyretin (ATTR)
cardiomyopathy are limited. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), the most abundant 
catechin in green tea (GT), inhibits fibril formation from several amyloidogenic 
proteins in vitro. Thus, it might also halt progression of TTR amyloidosis. This 
is a single-center observational report on the effects of GT consumption in
patients with ATTR cardiomopathy.
METHODS: 19 patients with ATTR cardiomyopathy were evaluated by standard blood
tests, echocardiography, and cardiac MRI (n = 9) before and after consumption of 
GT and/or green tea extracts (GTE) for 12 months.
RESULTS: Five patients were not followed up for reasons of death (n = 2),
discontinuation of GT/GTE consumption (n = 2), and heart transplantation (n = 1).
After 12 months no increase of left ventricular (LV) wall thickness and LV
myocardial mass was observed by echocardiography. In the subgroup of patients
evaluated by cardiac MRI a mean decrease of LV myocardial mass (-12.5 %) was
detected in all patients. This was accompanied by an increase of mean mitral
annular systolic velocity of 9 % in all 14 patients. Total cholesterol
(191.9 ± 8.9 vs. 172.7 ± 9.4 mg/dL; p < 0.01) and LDL cholesterol (105.8 ± 7.6
vs. 89.5 ± 8.0 mg/dL; p < 0.01) decreased significantly during the observational 
period. No serious adverse effects were reported by any of the participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Our observation suggests an inhibitory effect of GT and/or GTE on
the progression of cardiac amyloidosis. We propose a randomized
placebo-controlled investigation to confirm our observation.

PMCID: PMC3445797
PMID: 22584381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Mol Microbiol. 2012 Jul;85(1):39-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08095.x. Epub 
2012 May 30.

The NtrY/X two-component system of Brucella spp. acts as a redox sensor and
regulates the expression of nitrogen respiration enzymes.

Carrica Mdel C(1), Fernandez I, Martí MA, Paris G, Goldbaum FA.

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Instituto Leloir (IIBBA-CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Comment in
    Mol Microbiol. 2012 Jul;85(1):5-7.

Brucella spp. are facultative intracellular bacteria pathogenic for many
mammalian species including humans, causing a disease called brucellosis.
Learning how Brucella adapts to its intracellular niche is crucial for
understanding its pathogenesis mechanism, allowing for the development of new and
more effective vaccines and treatments against brucellosis. Brucella pathogenesis
resides mostly in its ability to adapt to the harsh environmental conditions
encountered during host infection such as the oxygen depletion. The mechanism by 
which Brucella senses the oxygen tension and triggers its environmental
adaptation is unknown. In this work we show that the Brucella abortus NtrY/NtrX
two-component system is involved in oxygen sensing through a haem group contained
in a Per-ARNT-SIM (PAS) domain of the NtrY histidine kinase. The NtrY haem iron
can be reduced to the ferrous form and is rapidly oxidized to the ferric form in 
presence of oxygen. Importantly, we show that the oxidation state of the haem
iron modulates the autokinase activity, being the anoxygenic reduced ferrous form
the signalling state of NtrY. Also, we show that ntrY gene expression increases
under low oxygen tension and that NtrY transfers its signal to its cognate
response regulator NtrX, regulating in this way the expression of nitrogen
respiration enzymes. Based on these findings, we postulate that NtrY acts as a
redox sensor in Brucella spp.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22582926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. DNA Cell Biol. 2012 Aug;31(8):1412-7. doi: 10.1089/dna.2012.1672. Epub 2012 May
11.

Association study of MIA3 rs17465637 polymorphism with cardiovascular disease in 
rheumatoid arthritis patients.

García-Bermúdez M(1), López-Mejías R, González-Juanatey C, Corrales A, Castañeda 
S, Miranda-Filloy JA, Gómez-Vaquero C, Fernández-Gutiérrez B, Balsa A,
Pascual-Salcedo D, Blanco R, González-Álvaro I, Llorca J, Martín J, González-Gay 
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra, IPBLN-CSIC, Granada,
Spain.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a complex polygenic inflammatory disease associated 
with accelerated atherosclerosis. Melanoma inhibitor protein 3 (MIA3) is required
for the export of collagen VlI (COL7A1) from the endoplasmic reticulum and it
appears to be a tumor suppressor of malignant melanoma. Genome-wide association
studies have described an association between MIA3 rs17465637 A/C polymorphisms
and coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction. Because of that, we
assessed the MIA3 rs17465637 polymorphism in 1505 RA Spanish patients stratified 
according to the presence/absence of cardiovascular (CV) disease. Also, a
subgroup of patients without CV events was assessed for the presence of
subclinical atherosclerosis using carotid ultrasound to establish carotid
intima-media wall thickness and carotid plaques and brachial ultrasonography to
determine the presence of endothelial dysfunction by flow-mediated
endothelium-dependent and independent vasodilatation. MIA3 rs17465637 allele A
showed a trend for association with the presence of carotid plaques (odds ratio
1.56, 95% confidence interval [0.96-2.51]; p=0.07). However, apart from an
association of the MIA3 rs17465637 A allele with the risk of CV events in RA
patients with dyslipidemia (p=0.018), no other significant associations were
found between the presence of MIA3 rs17465637 A allele and the risk of suffering 
CV events or other surrogate markers of atherosclerosis. In conclusion, our
results suggest a potential association of the MIA3 rs17465637 with CV disease in
dyslipidemic patients with RA. However, additional studies are required to better
establish the role of the MIA3 gene in mechanisms leading to the accelerated
atherogenesis observed in RA.

PMID: 22577832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2012 Apr 15;260(2):124-34.

7,12-Dimethylbenzanthracene induces apoptosis in RL95-2 human endometrial cancer 
cells: ligand-selective activation of cytochrome P450 1B1.

Kim JY(1), Lee SG, Chung JY, Kim YJ, Park JE, Oh S, Lee SY, Choi HJ, Yoo YH, Kim 
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Dong-A
University, Busan 602-714, Republic of Korea.

7,12-Dimethylbenzanthracene (DMBA), a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon, exhibits
mutagenic, carcinogenic, immunosuppressive, and apoptogenic properties in various
cell types. To achieve these functions effectively, DMBA is modified to its
active form by cytochrome P450 1 (CYP1). Exposure to DMBA causes
cytotoxicitymediated apoptosis in bone marrow B cells and ovarian cells. Although
uterine endometrium constitutively expresses CYP1A1 and CYP1B1, their apoptotic
role after exposure to DMBA remains to be elucidated. Therefore, we chose RL95-2 
endometrial cancer cells as a model system for studying DMBA-induced cytotoxicity
and cell death and hypothesized that exposure to DMBA causes apoptosis in this
cell type following CYP1A1 and/or CYP1B1 activation. We showed that DMBA-induced 
apoptosis in RL95-2 cells is associated with activation of caspases. In addition,
mitochondrial changes, including decrease in mitochondrial potential and release 
of mitochondrial cytochrome c into the cytosol, support the hypothesis that a
mitochondrial pathway is involved in DMBA-induced apoptosis. Exposure to DMBA
upregulated the expression of AhR, Arnt, CYP1A1, and CYP1B1 significantly; this
may be necessary for the conversion of DMBA to DMBA-3,4-diol-1,2-epoxide
(DMBA-DE). Although both CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 were significantly upregulated by
DMBA, only CYP1B1 exhibited activity. Moreover, knockdown of CYP1B1 abolished
DMBA-induced apoptosis in RL95-2 cells. Our data show that RL95-2 cells are
susceptible to apoptosis by exposure to DMBA and that CYP1B1 plays a pivotal role
in DMBA-induced apoptosis in this system.

PMID: 22570863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Lasers Med Sci. 2013 Feb;28(2):543-50. doi: 10.1007/s10103-012-1109-0. Epub 2012 
May 3.

Low-level laser therapy induces the expressions of BMP-2, osteocalcin, and TGF-ß1
in hypoxic-cultured human osteoblasts.

Pyo SJ(1), Song WW, Kim IR, Park BS, Kim CH, Shin SH, Chung IK, Kim YD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Dentistry, Pusan
National University, Beomeo, Mulgum, Yangsan, 626-770, Republic of Korea.

The aim of this study was to examine the effect of low-level laser therapy (LLLT)
on the cell viability and the expression of hypoxia-inducible factor-1s (HIF-1s),
bone morphogenic protein-2 (BMP-2), osteocalcin, type I collagen, transforming
growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1), and Akt in hypoxic-cultured human osteoblasts. Human
fetal osteoblast cells (cell line 1.19) were cultured under 1 % oxygen tension
for 72 h. Cell cultures were divided into two groups. At the experimental side,
low-level laser (808 nm, GaAlAs diode) was applied at 0, 24, and 48 h. After
irradiation, each cell culture was incubated 24 h more under hypoxia. Total
energy was 1.2, 2.4, and 3.6 J/cm(2), respectively. Non-irradiated cultures
served as controls. Comparisons between the two groups were analyzed by t test; a
p value <0.05 was considered statistically significant. Hypoxia resulted in a
decrease in the expression of type I collagen, osteocalcin, and TGF-ß1
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, and p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01, respectively). Cell viability and BMP-2
expression were not decreased by hypoxic condition. On the other hand, LLLT on
hypoxic-cultured osteoblast promoted the expression of BMP-2, osteocalcin, and
TGF-ß1 (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01, and p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, respectively). Cell proliferation was 
also increased time-dependently. However, hypoxia decreased in type I collagen
expression (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), and LLLT did not affect type I collagen expression in
hypoxic-cultured osteoblasts. Furthermore, LLLT inhibited HIF-1 and Akt
expression in hypoxic conditioned osteoblasts. We concluded that LLLT induces the
expression of BMP-2, osteocalcin, and TGF- ß1 in 1 % hypoxic-cultured human
osteoblasts.

PMID: 22552925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Environ Health Prev Med. 2012 Nov;17(6):512-7. doi: 10.1007/s12199-012-0281-y.
Epub 2012 May 1.

Lack of an association human dioxin detoxification gene polymorphisms with
endometriosis in Japanese women: results of a pilot study.

Matsuzaka Y(1), Kikuti YY, Goya K, Suzuki T, Cai LY, Oka A, Inoko H, Kulski JK,
Izumi S, Kimura M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Molecular Science and Molecular Medicine, School of
Medicine, Tokai University, Bohseidai, Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan.
yasunari.matsuzaka@helmholtz-muenchen.de

OBJECTIVES: Endometriosis is a chronic disease caused by the presence of
endometrial tissue in ectopic locations outside the uterus. Chronic exposure to
the environmental pollutant dioxin has been correlated with an increased
incidence in the development of endometriosis in non-human primates. We have
therefore examined whether there is an association between the polymorphisms of
ten dioxin detoxification genes and endometriosis in Japanese women.
METHODS: This was a pilot study in which 100 patients with endometriosis and 143 
controls were enrolled. The prevalence of five microsatellite and 28 single
nucleotide polymorphism markers within ten dioxin detoxification genes (AhR,
AHRR, ARNT, CYP1A1, CYP2E1, EPHX1, GSTM1, GSTP1, GSTT1, NAT2) was examined.
RESULTS: Taking into account that this analysis was a preliminary study due to
its small sample size and genetic power, the results did not show any
statistically significant difference between the cases and controls for any of
the allele and genotype frequency distributions examined. In addition, no
significant associations between the allele/genotype of all polymorphisms and the
stage (I-II or III-IV) of endometriosis were observed.
CONCLUSION: Based on the findings of this pilot study, we conclude the
polymorphisms of the ten dioxin detoxification genes analyzed did not contribute 
to the etiology of endometriosis among our patients.

PMCID: PMC3493626
PMID: 22547312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Toxicol Lett. 2012 Jun 20;211(3):266-73. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2012.04.006. Epub 
2012 Apr 15.

Induction of carbonyl reductase 1 (CBR1) expression in human lung tissues and
lung cancer cells by the cigarette smoke constituent benzo[a]pyrene.

Kalabus JL(1), Cheng Q, Jamil RG, Schuetz EG, Blanco JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The State University of New York at
Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260, USA.

Carbonyl reductase 1 (CBR1) reduces various xenobiotic carbonyl substrates to
corresponding alcohol metabolites. Here we demonstrated that benzo[a]pyrene
(B[a]P), a potent pro-carcinogen and predominant polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon 
(PAH) compound in cigarette smoke and air pollutants, upregulates CBR1 gene
expression in vitro and in vivo, and that a proximal xenobiotic response element 
(XRE) motif (<U+208B>122XRE) mediates the induction effect of B[a]P. First, we observed 
46% and 50% increases in CBR1 mRNA and CBR1 protein levels, respectively, in
human lung tissue samples from smokers compared to never-smokers. Second, we
detected 3.0-fold (p<0.0001) induction of CBR1 mRNA and 1.5-fold (p<0.01)
induction of CBR1 protein levels in cells of the human lung cancer cell line A549
incubated with 2.5 µM B[a]P for 24h. Third, results from experiments with CBR1
promoter constructs indicated that a proximal XRE motif <U+208B>122XRE) mediates
induction of reporter activity in response to B[a]P. Furthermore, we detected
enhanced nuclear translocation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) following B[a]P
exposure in A549 cells. Finally, we demonstrated increased binding of specific
protein complexes to <U+208B>122XRE in nuclear extracts from B[a]P-treated cells and the
presence of the AhR/Arnt complex in the specific nuclear protein <U+208B>122XRE
complexes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3359411
PMID: 22531821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Drugs Dermatol. 2012 May;11(5):626-30.

Lessons of leprosy: the emergence of TH17 cytokines during type II reactions
(ENL) is teaching us about T-cell plasticity.

Martiniuk F(1), Giovinazzo J, Tan AU, Shahidullah R, Haslett P, Kaplan G, Levis
WR.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Division, New York University Department of Medicine, New York, NY, 
USA. martif02@nyumc.org

BACKGROUND: Leprosy was the first disease classified according to the thymus
derived T-cell in the 1960s and the first disease classified by the cytokine
profile as intact interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and interleukin-2 (IL2) or TH1
(tuberculoid) and deficient IFN-<U+03B3> and IL2 or TH2 (lepromatous), in the 1980s.
OBJECTIVE: In the present study, we set out to explore the T helper 17 (TH17)
lymphocyte subset, the hallmark of T-cell plasticity, in skin biopsies from
patients with erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL) who were treated with thalidomide.
METHOD: RNA was extracted from paraffin embedded tissue before and after
thalidomide treatment of ENL and RT-PCR was performed.
RESULTS: IL17A, the hallmark of TH17, was consistently seen before and after
thalidomide treatment, confirming the TH17 subset to be involved in ENL and
potentially up-regulated by thalidomide.
CONCLUSION: A reduction in CD70, GARP, IDO, IL17B (IL-20), and IL17E (IL-25),
coupled with increases in ROR<U+03B3>T, ARNT, FoxP3, and IL17C (IL-21) following
thalidomide treatment, opens the door to understanding the complexity of the
immunomodulatory drug thalidomide, which can operate as an anti-inflammatory
while simultaneously stimulating cell-mediated immunity (CMI). We conclude that
TH17 is involved in the immunopathogenesis of ENL and that thalidomide suppresses
inflammatory components of TH17, while enhancing other components of TH17 that
are potentially involved in CMI.

PMCID: PMC3412264
PMID: 22527432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Cell Signal. 2012 Aug;24(8):1592-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.04.004. Epub 2012
Apr 13.

HERG potassium channel regulation by the N-terminal eag domain.

Gustina AS(1), Trudeau MC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neuroscience, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21201, United States.

Human ether-á-go-go related gene (hERG, K(v)11.1) potassium channels play a
significant role in cardiac excitability. Like other K(v) channels, hERG is
activated by membrane voltage; however, distinct from other K(v) channels, hERG
channels have unusually slow kinetics of closing (deactivation). The mechanism
for slow deactivation involves an N-terminal "eag domain" which comprises a PAS
(Per-Arnt-Sim) domain and a short Cap domain. Here we review recent advances in
understanding how the eag domain regulates deactivation, including several new
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) solution structures of the eag domain, and
evidence showing that the eag domain makes a direct interaction with the
C-terminal C-linker and Cyclic Nucleotide-Binding Homology Domain.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4793660
PMID: 22522181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Toxicol Lett. 2012 Jun 20;211(3):257-65. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2012.04.005. Epub 
2012 Apr 15.

Possible aryl hydrocarbon receptor-independent pathway of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-induced antiproliferative response in human
breast cancer cells.

Yoshioka H(1), Hiromori Y, Aoki A, Kimura T, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Nagase H,
Nakanishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hygienic Chemistry and Molecular Toxicology, Gifu Pharmaceutical
University, 1-25-4 Daigaku-Nishi, Gifu, Gifu 501-1196, Japan.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is a ligand with high affinity for the
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). It suppresses 17ß-estradiol (E2)-induced cell
proliferation in human breast cancer cells. Although it has been theorized that
the AhR is involved in TCDD-induced antiestrogenic activity and antiproliferation
in human breast cancer cells, some evidence suggests that these activities of
chlorinated aromatic compounds also occur by AhR-independent pathways. Here, we
investigated the possibility of TCDD-induced antiproliferative responses in human
breast cancer cells through AhR-independent pathways. Compared with that in
vehicle-treated controls, DNA synthesis was significantly suppressed in MCF-7
cells and ZR75-1 cells treated with TCDD at a very low concentration (0.01 nM),
whereas that in human ovarian carcinoma OVCAR3 cells, human cervical carcinoma
HeLa cells and human choriocarcinoma JEG-3 cells was unaffected, even by exposure
to 10 nM TCDD. The suppression induced by TCDD was not associated with the
estrogen receptor a-signaling pathway. Another AhR agonist,
3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl, had no effect on DNA synthesis in MCF-7 cells at
concentrations high enough to induce the transactivation function of the AhR.
Furthermore, in MCF-7 cells, knockdown of the AhR by RNA interference had no
effect on TCDD-induced antiproliferation. These findings suggest that the
principal pathways of TCDD-induced antiproliferation in breast cancer cells are
not AhR dependent.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22521833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Jun;91(6):1044-52. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2011.336.

PPARA: a novel genetic determinant of CYP3A4 in vitro and in vivo.

Klein K(1), Thomas M, Winter S, Nussler AK, Niemi M, Schwab M, Zanger UM.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart,
Germany.

Interindividual variability in cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) is believed to be
largely heritable; however, predictive genetic factors have remained scarce.
Using a candidate-gene approach in a human liver bank, we identified
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the Ah-receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT), glucocorticoid receptor (GR), progesterone receptor membrane component 2 
(PGRMC2), and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-a (PPARA) that are
associated with CYP3A4 phenotype. Validation in atorvastatin-treated volunteers
confirmed a decrease in atorvastatin-2-hydroxylation in carriers of PPARA SNP
rs4253728. Homozygous carriers expressed significantly less PPAR-a protein in the
liver. Moreover, shRNA-mediated PPARA gene knockdown in primary human hepatocytes
decreased expression levels of the PPAR-a target ACOX1 and of CYP3A4 by more than
50%. In conclusion, this study identified novel genetic determinants of CYP3A4
that, together with nongenetic factors, explained 52, 55, and 33% of hepatic
CYP3A4 mRNA, protein, and atorvastatin-2-hydroxylase activity, respectively.
These findings have implications for variability in response to drug substrates
of CYP3A4.

PMID: 22510778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Exp Dermatol. 2012 Sep;21(9):643-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2012.01472.x. Epub
2012 Apr 16.

The human epidermal differentiation complex: cornified envelope precursors, S100 
proteins and the 'fused genes' family.

Kypriotou M(1), Huber M, Hohl D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cutaneous Biology, Service of Dermatology and Venereology,
Beaumont Hospital CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland.

  The skin is essential for survival and protects our body against biological
attacks, physical stress, chemical injury, water loss, ultraviolet radiation and 
immunological impairment. The epidermal barrier constitutes the primordial
frontline of this defense established during terminal differentiation. During
this complex process proliferating basal keratinocytes become suprabasally
mitotically inactive and move through four epidermal layers (basal, spinous,
granular and layer, stratum corneum) constantly adapting to the needs of the
respective cell layer. As a result, squamous keratinocytes contain polymerized
keratin intermediate filament bundles and a water-retaining matrix surrounded by 
the cross-linked cornified cell envelope (CE) with ceramide lipids attached on
the outer surface. These cells are concomitantly insulated by intercellular lipid
lamellae and hold together by corneodesmosmes. Many proteins essential for
epidermal differentiation are encoded by genes clustered on chromosomal human
region 1q21. These genes constitute the 'epidermal differentiation complex'
(EDC), which is divided on the basis of common gene and protein structures, in
three gene families: (i) CE precursors, (ii) S100A and (iii) S100 fused genes.
EDC protein expression is regulated in a gene and tissue-specific manner by a
pool of transcription factors. Among them, Klf4, Grhl3 and Arnt are essential,
and their deletion in mice is lethal. The importance of the EDC is further
reflected by human diseases: FLG mutations are the strongest risk factor for
atopic dermatitis (AD) and for AD-associated asthma, and faulty CE formation
caused by TG1 deficiency causes life-threatening lamellar ichthyosis. Here, we
review the EDC genes and the progress in this field.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22507538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Cell Sci. 2012 Jul 15;125(Pt 14):3320-32. doi: 10.1242/jcs.095125. Epub 2012
Apr 14.

ARNT controls the expression of epidermal differentiation genes through HDAC- and
EGFR-dependent pathways.

Robertson ED(1), Weir L, Romanowska M, Leigh IM, Panteleyev AA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Division of Medical Sciences,
College of Medicine, Dentistry and Nursing, Ninewells Hospital, University of
Dundee, UK.

Previously we showed that spatial and developmental modulation of ARNT (HIF1ß)
expression in mouse epidermis is essential for maintenance of keratinocyte
differentiation, proper formation of the barrier and normal desquamation. Here,
using lentiviral suppression or induction of ARNT in TERT-immortalized (N-TERT)
and HaCaT cells we assessed the nature and mechanisms of ARNT involvement in
control of differentiation in human epidermal keratinocytes. ARNT depletion did
not affect the levels of basal keratins K5 and K14, but significantly induced
expression of several key differentiation markers (an effect abolished by EGF
supplementation). Furthermore, ARNT deficiency resulted in the downregulation of 
amphiregulin (AREG) - the most highly expressed EGFR ligand in human
keratinocytes - whereas upregulation of ARNT showed the opposite. In
ARNT-deficient monolayer cultures and 3D epidermal equivalents, the
downregulation of AREG was concurrent with a decline of EGFR and ERK1/2
phosphorylation. TSA, a potent suppressor of HDAC activity, abolished the effects
of ARNT deficiency, implying a role for HDACs in ARNT-dependent modulation of the
AREG-EGFR pathway and downstream epidermal genes. Total HDAC activity was
significantly increased in ARNT-depleted cells and decreased with ARNT
overexpression. ARNT-dependent shifts in HDAC activity were specifically
attributed to significant changes in the levels of HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3
proteins (but not mRNA) in both monolayer and 3D cultures. Collectively, our
results suggest that ARNT controls AREG expression and the downstream EGFR-ERK
pathway in keratinocytes, at least in part, by modulating HDAC activity. This
novel regulatory pathway targeting advanced stages of epidermal differentiation
might have important implications for skin pathology such as psoriasis, atopic
dermatitis and cancer.

PMID: 22505606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Mol Biol. 2012 Jun 29;420(1-2):112-27. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.04.006. Epub
2012 Apr 11.

The ß-scaffold of the LOV domain of the Brucella light-activated histidine kinase
is a key element for signal transduction.

Rinaldi J(1), Gallo M, Klinke S, Paris G, Bonomi HR, Bogomolni RA, Cicero DO,
Goldbaum FA.

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Instituto Leloir, IIBBA-CONICET, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Light-oxygen-voltage (LOV) domains are blue-light-activated signaling modules
present in a wide range of sensory proteins. Among them, the histidine kinases
are the largest group in prokaryotes (LOV-HK). Light modulates the virulence of
the pathogenic bacteria Brucella abortus through LOV-HK. One of the striking
characteristic of Brucella LOV-HK is the fact that the protein remains activated 
upon light sensing, without recovering the basal state in the darkness. In
contrast, the light state of the isolated LOV domain slowly returns to the dark
state. To gain insight into the light activation mechanism, we have characterized
by X-ray crystallography and solution NMR spectroscopy the structure of the LOV
domain of LOV-HK in the dark state and explored its light-induced conformational 
changes. The LOV domain adopts the a/ß PAS (PER-ARNT-SIM) domain fold and binds
the FMN cofactor within a conserved pocket. The domain dimerizes through the
hydrophobic ß-scaffold in an antiparallel way. Our results point to the
ß-scaffold as a key element in the light activation, validating a conserved
structural basis for light-to-signal propagation in LOV proteins.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22504229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Dec;227(12):3812-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24092.

SUMOylation of AhR modulates its activity and stability through inhibiting its
ubiquitination.

Xing X(1), Bi H, Chang AK, Zang MX, Wang M, Ao X, Li S, Pan H, Guo Q, Wu H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Dalian University of Technology,
Dalian, China.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a transcription factor that belongs to the
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) Per-Arnt-Sim homology domain (PAS) family. AhR can 
be activated by 2, 3, 7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (2, 3, 7, 8-TCDD) and once
activated, it promotes the abnormal expression of cytochrome P450, leading to
several diseases, including cancer. In this study, we showed that AhR is
subjected to post-translational modification by SUMOylation and this modification
could be reversed by SENP1. Two SUMOylation sites were identified, one in the
bHLH domain (K63) and the other in the TAD domain (K510) of AhR. Substitution of 
either K63 or K510 with arginine resulted in reduced SUMOylation for AhR.
Treatment of MCF-7 cells with TCDD led to a reduced level of SUMOylated AhR in a 
time-dependent manner, and this occurred mainly in the nucleus. SUMOylation of
AhR enhanced its stability through inhibiting its ubiquitination. Moreover,
SUMOylation also repressed the transactivation activity of AhR and this could be 
reversed by TCDD. These results suggested that SUMOylation of AhR might play an
important role in the regulation of its function, and TCDD may activate the
transcriptional activity of AhR through downregulating its SUMOylation.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22495806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Angiogenesis. 2012 Sep;15(3):409-20. doi: 10.1007/s10456-012-9269-x. Epub 2012
Apr 7.

Inhibition of ARNT severely compromises endothelial cell viability and function
in response to moderate hypoxia.

Han Y(1), Yang K, Proweller A, Zhou G, Jain MK, Ramirez-Bergeron DL.

Author information: 
(1)Case Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Medicine, University
Hospitals Harrington Heart and Vascular Institute, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, 2103 Cornell Road, Rm. 4-532, Cleveland, OH 44106,
USA.

Hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) is a master heterodimeric transcriptional
regulator of oxygen (O(2)) homeostasis critical to proper angiogenic responses.
Due to the distinctive coexpression of HIF-1a and HIF-2a subunits in endothelial 
cells, our goal was to examine the genetic elimination of HIF transcriptional
activity in response to physiological hypoxic conditions by using a genetic model
in which the required HIF-ß subunit (ARNT, Aryl hydrocarbon Receptor Nuclear
Translocator) to HIF transcriptional responses was depleted. Endothelial cells
(ECs) and aortic explants were isolated from Arnt ( loxP/loxP ) mice and infected
with Adenovirus-Cre/GFP or control-GFP. We observed that moderate levels of 2.5 %
O(2) promoted vessel sprouting, growth, and branching in control aortic ring
assays while growth from Adenovirus-Cre infected explants was compromised.
Primary Adenovirus-Cre infected EC cultures featured adverse migration and tube
formation phenotypes. Primary pulmonary or cardiac ARNT-deleted ECs also failed
to proliferate and survive in response to 8 or 2.5 % O(2) and hydrogen peroxide
treatment. Our data demonstrates that ARNT promotes EC migration and vessel
outgrowth and is indispensible for the proliferation and preservation of ECs in
response to the physiological environmental cue of hypoxia. Thus, these results
demonstrate that ARNT plays a critical intrinsic role in ECs and support an
important collaboration between HIF-1 and HIF-2 transcriptional activity in these
cells.

PMCID: PMC3661274
PMID: 22484908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Biol Rhythms. 2012 Apr;27(2):156-63. doi: 10.1177/0748730411434405.

The mammalian circadian system is resistant to dioxin.

Pendergast JS(1), Yamazaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235,
USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor
that is bound and activated by many toxic ubiquitous environmental contaminants, 
including the halogenated aromatic hydrocarbon,
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). The AhR belongs to a family of
proteins that contain basic helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-SIM (bHLH/PAS) domains. The
circadian clock protein, BMAL1, is also a bHLH-PAS transcription factor and has
been shown to interact with the AhR. AhRs are expressed in nearly every mammalian
tissue, including the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN), and previous studies have
suggested that activation of the AhR with dioxins affects rhythmicity in
circadian clocks. In this study, the authors tested the hypothesis that
activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor with the potent dioxin, TCDD, alters 
the organization of the mammalian circadian system by measuring bioluminescence
from tissues explanted from PER2::LUCIFERASE mice. They found that in vitro
treatment of explanted tissues with TCDD did not alter the periods, amplitudes,
or damping rates of the PER2::LUC rhythms compared with controls. Likewise, in
vivo treatment with TCDD had no effect on the phase relationship between central 
and peripheral oscillators. Together, these data demonstrate that activation of
the AhR with TCDD does not directly or systemically alter the mouse circadian
system.

PMCID: PMC3337685
PMID: 22476776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Arch Med Sci. 2012 Feb 29;8(1):30-8. doi: 10.5114/aoms.2012.27277.

Age-related BMAL1 change affects mouse bone marrow stromal cell proliferation and
osteo-differentiation potential.

Chen Y(1), Xu X, Tan Z, Ye C, Zhao Q, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Orthodontic Centre, West China College of Stomatology, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China.

INTRODUCTION: Aging people's bone regeneration potential is always impaired. Bone
marrow stromal cells (MSCs) contain progenitors of osteoblasts. Donor age may
affect MSCs' proliferation and differentiation potential, but the genomic base is
still unknown. Due to recent research's indication that a core circadian
component, brain and muscle ARNT-like 1 protein (BMAL1), has a role in premature 
aging, we investigated the normal aging mechanism in mice with their MSCs and
Bmal1 gene/protein level.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 1, 6 and 16 month old C57BL/6 mice were used and the bone
marrow stromal cells were gained and cultured at early passage. Bmal1 gene and
protein level were detected in these cells. Marrow stromal cells were also
induced to differentiate to osteoblasts or adipocytes. Three groups of mice MSCs 
were compared on proliferation by flow cytometry, on cell senescence by SA-ß-gal 
expression and after osteo-induction on osteogenic potential by the expression of
osterix (Osx), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and osteocalcin (OCN).
RESULTS: Bmal1 gene and protein level as well as S-phase fraction of the cell
cycle decreased in MSCs along with the aging process. At the same time, SA-ß-gal+
levels increased, especially in the aged mice MSCs. When induced to be
osteogenic, Osx gene expression and ALP activity declined in the mid-age and aged
mice MSCs, while OCN protein secretion deteriorated in the aged mice MSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that mouse MSCs changed with their
proliferation and osteo-differentiation abilities at different aging stages, and 
that Bmal1 is related to the normal aging process in MSCs.

PMCID: PMC3309433
PMID: 22457671  [PubMed]


409. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32309. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032309. Epub 2012 Mar 19.

TLR2 controls intestinal carcinogen detoxication by CYP1A1.

Do KN(1), Fink LN, Jensen TE, Gautier L, Parlesak A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Technical University of Denmark
(DTU), Lyngby, Denmark.

Intestinal cytochrome P450 subclass 1A1 (CYP1A1) contributes to a metabolic
"shield" protecting the host from ingested carcinogens such as polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). The expression of CYP1 (including CYP1A2 and CYP1B1)
is considered to depend solely on a heterodimeric transcription factor consisting
of the arylhydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and the AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT). So
far, no interference has been noted between the regulation of CYP1 and the
activation of Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2), which modulates the inflammatory
response to bacterial cell wall components in immune cells and enterocytes. Here 
we report that intestinal CYP1A1 is silenced in TLR2-deficient mice, even when
under exposure to the carcinogenic PAH benzo[a]pyrene (BaP). In contrast, hepatic
CYP1A1 was moderately induced in TLR2-deficient mice without restoring their
ability to clear BaP from systemic circulation, as present in wild-type animals. 
After feeding of BaP for 21 days, only TLR2(-/-) mice, but not their wild type
littermates developed polyps in the colon. Gene expressions and protein
concentrations of AHR and ARNT in the intestine did not differ between the
genotypes. In conclusion, the presence of ligands for TLR2 of bacterial origin
seems to be crucial for detoxication of luminal carcinogens by CYP1A1 in the
intestine. This unprecedented finding indicates a complex interplay between the
immune system of the host and intestinal bacteria with detoxication mechanisms.
This highlights the relevance of intestinal microbiota when trying to unravel
pathways present in mammals and opens new perspectives for research in human
health.

PMCID: PMC3307708
PMID: 22442665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Phys Chem B. 2012 Jun 14;116(23):6960-5. doi: 10.1021/jp300525n. Epub 2012 Mar 
27.

Homodimerization of the PAS-B domains of hypoxia-inducible factors.

Zhu J(1), Martinez-Yamout M, Cardoso R, Yan J, Love RA, Grodsky N, Brooun A,
Dyson HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domains of hypoxia-inducible transcription factors (HIF)
mediate heterodimer formation between the HIF-a forms that are induced in the
event of cellular hypoxia and the constitutive HIF-ß variants. Previous efforts
toward structural characterization of the HIF-1a PAS domains were limited by
protein stability. Using homology modeling based on the published crystal
structure of the PAS-B domain of the homologous protein HIF-2a in complex with
the partner HIF-ß (also known as ARNT), we have identified a variant of HIF-1a
with improved solubility, monodispersity, and stability. Purified solutions of
the PAS-B domains of HIF-1a and HIF-2a differ in their propensity for homodimer
formation. In an attempt to understand the structural basis for this difference, 
and to document the structural changes that accompany homodimer formation, we
have undertaken a comparative NMR study of the PAS-B domains of HIF-1a and HIF-2a
and mutants of HIF-1a that mimic the behavior of HIF-2a. The NMR spectra of all
of these domains are very similar, consistent with the similarity of their amino 
acid sequences. However, the greater propensity of the HIF-1a PAS-B domain to
form dimers as the concentration was increased allowed us to determine the site
of homodimerization and pointed toward possible sequence changes in HIF-1a that
might discourage the formation of homodimers.

PMCID: PMC3376167
PMID: 22424208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Mol Biol. 2012 May 25;419(1-2):61-74. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.02.037. Epub 2012
Mar 7.

The amino-terminal helix modulates light-activated conformational changes in
AsLOV2.

Zayner JP(1), Antoniou C, Sosnick TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The mechanism of light-triggered conformational change and signaling in
light-oxygen-voltage (LOV) domains remains elusive in spite of extensive
investigation and their use in optogenetic studies. The LOV2 domain of
Avenasativa phototropin 1 (AsLOV2), a member of the Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) family,
contains a flavin mononucleotide chromophore that forms a covalent bond with a
cysteine upon illumination. This event leads to the release of the
carboxy-terminal Ja helix, the biological output signal. Using mutational
analysis, circular dichroism, and NMR, we find that the largely ignored
amino-terminal helix is a control element in AsLOV2's light-activated
conformational change. We further identify a direct amino-to-carboxy-terminal
"input-output" signaling pathway. These findings provide a framework to
rationalize the LOV domain architecture, as well as the signaling mechanisms in
both isolated and tandem arrangements of PAS domains. This knowledge can be
applied in engineering LOV-based photoswitches, opening up new design strategies 
and improving existing ones.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3338903
PMID: 22406525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jul;40(12):5389-401. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks201. Epub 2012
Mar 8.

HIF2a-Sp1 interaction mediates a deacetylation-dependent FVII-gene activation
under hypoxic conditions in ovarian cancer cells.

Koizume S(1), Ito S, Miyagi E, Hirahara F, Nakamura Y, Sakuma Y, Osaka H, Takano 
Y, Ruf W, Miyagi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology and Genetics Division, Kanagawa Cancer Center Research
Institute, 1-1-2 Nakao, Asahi-ku, Yokohama 241-0815, Japan.

Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF)-1a and HIF2a are major transcription factors
required for adaptive responses to hypoxia. HIFs form a complex with aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) to bind to the regulatory
regions of target genes. The acetylation of histones by histone
acetyltransferases (HATs) is one of the epigenetic marks associated with active
chromatin. Indeed, HIFs recruit p300 HAT to hypoxia response elements (HREs)
within gene regulatory regions. Here, we report an unusual HIF-mediated
transcriptional activation in ovarian clear cell carcinoma (CCC). While
characterizing coagulation factor VII (FVII) gene induction during hypoxic
conditions, we observed that the interaction of HIF2a with Sp1, but not with
ARNT, could induce transcription of FVII in a HRE-independent manner.
Unexpectedly, this gene activation is associated with histone deacetylation. We
found that a class II HDAC, HDAC4, is recruited with HIF2a to the FVII promoter
as a co-activator, while p300 HAT negatively regulated this process. Furthermore,
this mechanism can be synergistically enhanced via a deacetylation-dependent
pathway when cells are simultaneously exposed to hypoxic and serum-free
conditions. These results suggest the presence of a stress-responsive
transcription mediated by the HIF2a/Sp1/HDAC4 network and explain how CCC shed
their procoagulant activity under hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC3384323
PMID: 22402494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32654. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032654. Epub 2012 Mar 2.

Changes in channel trafficking and protein stability caused by LQT2 mutations in 
the PAS domain of the HERG channel.

Harley CA(1), Jesus CS, Carvalho R, Brito RM, Morais-Cabral JH.

Author information: 
(1)IBMC, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal. harleyca@ibmc.up.pt

Inherited human long-QT2 syndrome (LQTS) results from mutations in the gene
encoding the HERG channel. Several LQT2-associated mutations have been mapped to 
the amino terminal cytoplasmic Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain of the HERG1a channel
subunit. Here we have characterized the trafficking properties of some
LQT2-associated PAS domain mutants and analyzed rescue of the trafficking mutants
by low temperature (27°C) or by the pore blocker drug E4031. We show that the
LQT2-associated mutations in the PAS domain of the HERG channel display molecular
properties that are distinct from the properties of LQT2-associated mutations in 
the trans-membrane region. Unlike the latter, many of the tested PAS domain
LQT2-associated mutations do not result in trafficking deficiency of the channel.
Moreover, the majority of the PAS domain mutations that cause trafficking
deficiencies are not rescued by a pore blocking drug. We have also explored the
in vitro folding stability properties of isolated mutant PAS domain proteins
using a thermal unfolding fluorescence assay and a chemical unfolding assay.

PMCID: PMC3292575
PMID: 22396785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2012 May 1;260(3):222-31. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2012.02.012. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator in human liver is regulated by
miR-24.

Oda Y(1), Nakajima M, Mohri T, Takamiya M, Aoki Y, Fukami T, Yokoi T.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Metabolism and Toxicology, Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate 
School of Medical Science, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, 
Japan.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) forms a heterodimer with
aryl hydrocarbon receptor or hypoxia inducible factor 1a to mediate biological
responses to xenobiotic exposure and hypoxia. Although the regulation mechanism
of the ARNT expression is largely unknown, earlier studies reported that the
human ARNT protein level was decreased by hydrogen peroxide or reactive oxygen
species. These stimuli increase the miR-24 level in various human cell lines. In 
silico analysis predicts that some microRNAs including miR-16 and miR-23b may
bind to ARNT mRNA. This background prompted us to investigate whether human ARNT 
is regulated by microRNAs. Overexpression of miR-24 into HuH-7 and HepG2 cells
significantly decreased the ARNT protein level, but not the ARNT mRNA level,
indicating translational repression. However, overexpression of miR-16 or miR-23b
caused no change in the ARNT expression. The miR-24-dependent down-regulation of 
ARNT decreased the expression of its downstream genes such as CYP1A1 and carbonic
anhydrase IX. Luciferase assay was performed to determine the element on the ARNT
mRNA to which miR-24 binds. Finally, it was demonstrated that the miR-24 levels
in a panel of 26 human livers were inversely correlated with the protein levels
or the translational efficiency of ARNT. Taken together, we found that miR-24
negatively regulates ARNT expression in human liver, affecting the expression of 
its downstream genes. miR-24 would be one of the factors underlying the
mechanisms by which ARNT protein is decreased by reactive oxygen species.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22387692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 20;287(17):13850-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.346494. Epub 2012
Feb 29.

PpsR, a regulator of heme and bacteriochlorophyll biosynthesis, is a heme-sensing
protein.

Yin L(1), Dragnea V, Bauer CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana 47405, USA.

Heme-mediated regulation, presented in many biological processes, is achieved in 
part with proteins containing heme regulatory motif. In this study, we
demonstrate that FLAG-tagged PpsR isolated from Rhodobacter sphaeroides cells
contains bound heme. In vitro heme binding studies with tagless apo-PpsR show
that PpsR binds heme at a near one-to-one ratio with a micromolar binding
constant. Mutational and spectral assays suggest that both the second
Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) and DNA binding domains of PpsR are involved in the heme
binding. Furthermore, we show that heme changes the DNA binding patterns of PpsR 
and induces different responses of photosystem genes expression. Thus, PpsR
functions as both a redox and heme sensor to coordinate the amount of heme,
bacteriochlorophyll, and photosystem apoprotein synthesis thereby providing fine 
tune control to avoid excess free tetrapyrrole accumulation.

PMCID: PMC3340169
PMID: 22378778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Comp Physiol B. 2012 Jul;182(5):673-85. doi: 10.1007/s00360-012-0653-z. Epub
2012 Feb 29.

Cloning, tissue expression pattern and daily rhythms of Period1, Period2, and
Clock transcripts in the flatfish Senegalese sole, Solea senegalensis.

Martín-Robles ÁJ(1), Whitmore D, Sánchez-Vázquez FJ, Pendón C, Muñoz-Cueto JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología, Facultad de Ciencias del Mar y Ambientales,
Universidad de Cádiz, Campus de Excelencia Internacional del Mar (CEI MAR),
11510, Puerto Real, Spain.

An extensive network of endogenous oscillators governs vertebrate circadian
rhythmicity. At the molecular level, they are composed of a set of clock genes
that participate in transcriptional-translational feedback loops to control their
own expression and that of downstream output genes. These clocks are synchronized
with the environment, although entrainment by external periodic cues remains
little explored in fish. In this work, partial cDNA sequences of clock genes
representing both positive (Clock) and negative (Period1, Period2) elements of
the molecular feedback loops were obtained from the nocturnal flatfish Senegalese
sole, a relevant species for aquaculture and chronobiology. All of the above
genes exhibited high identities with their respective teleost clock genes, and
Per-Arnt-Sim or basic helix-loop-helix binding domains were recognized in their
primary structure. They showed a widespread distribution through the animal body 
and some of them displayed daily mRNA rhythms in central (retina, optic tectum,
diencephalon, and cerebellum) and peripheral (liver) tissues. These rhythms were 
most robust in retina and liver, exhibiting marked Period1 and Clock daily
oscillations in transcript levels as revealed by ANOVA and cosinor analysis.
Interestingly, expression profiles were inverted in retina and optic tectum
compared to liver. Such differences suggest the existence of tissue-dependent
zeitgebers for clock gene expression in this species (i.e., light for retina and 
optic tectum and feeding time for liver). This study provides novel insight into 
the location of the molecular clocks (central vs. peripheral) and their different
phasing and synchronization pathways, which contributes to better understand the 
teleost circadian systems and its plasticity.

PMID: 22373774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. BMC Proc. 2011 Nov 29;5 Suppl 9:S47. doi: 10.1186/1753-6561-5-S9-S47.

Evaluating aggregate effects of rare and common variants in the 1000 Genomes
Project exon sequencing data using latent variable structural equation modeling.

Nock N(1), Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Case Western Reserve University,
2103 Cornell Road, Cleveland, OH 44106-7281, USA. nln@case.edu.

Methods that can evaluate aggregate effects of rare and common variants are
limited. Therefore, we applied a two-stage approach to evaluate aggregate gene
effects in the 1000 Genomes Project data, which contain 24,487 single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 697 unrelated individuals from 7 populations. In stage 1,
we identified potentially interesting genes (PIGs) as those having at least one
SNP meeting Bonferroni correction using univariate, multiple regression models.
In stage 2, we evaluate aggregate PIG effects on trait, Q1, by modeling each gene
as a latent construct, which is defined by multiple common and rare variants,
using the multivariate statistical framework of structural equation modeling
(SEM). In stage 1, we found that PIGs varied markedly between a randomly selected
replicate (replicate 137) and 100 other replicates, with the exception of FLT1.
In stage 1, collapsing rare variants decreased false positives but increased
false negatives. In stage 2, we developed a good-fitting SEM model that included 
all nine genes simulated to affect Q1 (FLT1, KDR, ARNT, ELAV4, FLT4, HIF1A,
HIF3A, VEGFA, VEGFC) and found that FLT1 had the largest effect on Q1 (ßstd =
0.33 ± 0.05). Using replicate 137 estimates as population values, we found that
the mean relative bias in the parameters (loadings, paths, residuals) and their
standard errors across 100 replicates was on average, less than 5%. Our latent
variable SEM approach provides a viable framework for modeling aggregate effects 
of rare and common variants in multiple genes, but more elegant methods are
needed in stage 1 to minimize type I and type II error.

PMCID: PMC3287884
PMID: 22373404  [PubMed]


418. Xenobiotica. 2012 Jul;42(7):624-32. doi: 10.3109/00498254.2011.650732. Epub 2012 
Feb 21.

Similarities in diesel exhaust particles induced alterations in expression of
cytochrome P-450 and glutathione S-transferases in rat lymphocytes and lungs.

Srivastava A(1), Yadav S, Sharma A, Dwivedi UN, Flora SJ, Parmar D.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Toxicology Division, Indian Institute of Toxicology Research
(Council of Scientific & Industrial Research), M.G. Marg, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh,
India.

Freshly prepared peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) are known to express
cytochrome P450s (CYPs) and glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) involved in the
bioactivation and detoxification of organic components of diesel exhaust
particles (DEPs). To validate that blood lymphocyte expression profiles could be 
used as a biomarker to predict exposure to vehicular emissions, similarities in
the alterations in the mRNA expression of CYPs and GSTs were studied in PBL and
lungs of rats exposed to DEPs. Adult male Wistar rats were treated
transtracheally with different doses of DEPs (3.75- or 7.5- or 15- or 30-mg/kg
b.wt.). The animals were anaesthetized after 24<U+2009>h and blood was drawn and lungs
were taken out and processed. DEP produced a similar pattern of increase in the
mRNA expression of CYPs (CYP1A1, 1A2, 1B1, 2E1), associated arylhydrocarbon
receptor (Ahr) and arylhydrocarbon nuclear translocator (Arnt) and GSTs (GSTPi,
GSTM1 and GSTM2) at all the doses in lungs and PBL. The protein expression of
CYP1A1/1A2 and 2E1 and catalytic activity of CYPs and GSTs also showed a similar 
pattern of increase in blood lymphocyte and in lungs isolated from DEP treated
rats. Our data indicating similarities in the alterations in the expression of
carcinogen metabolizing CYPs and GSTs in PBL with the lung enzymes suggests the
suitability of using expression profiles of blood lymphocyte CYPs and GSTs as a
biomarker to predict exposure to vehicular emissions.

PMID: 22352393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 May;51(5):510-20. doi: 10.1002/gcc.21939. Epub
2012 Feb 15.

Fusion of the AHRR and NCOA2 genes through a recurrent translocation
t(5;8)(p15;q13) in soft tissue angiofibroma results in upregulation of aryl
hydrocarbon receptor target genes.

Jin Y(1), Möller E, Nord KH, Mandahl N, Von Steyern FV, Domanski HA,
Mariño-Enríquez A, Magnusson L, Nilsson J, Sciot R, Fletcher CD, Debiec-Rychter
M, Mertens F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University and Regional Laboratories, Skåne
University Hospital, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Soft tissue angiofibroma is a recently delineated tumor type of unknown cellular 
origin. Cytogenetic analysis of four cases showed that they shared a
t(5;8)(p15;q13). In three of them it was the sole change, underlining its
pathogenetic significance. FISH mapping suggested the involvement of the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AHRR) and nuclear receptor coactivator 2 (NCOA2) 
genes in 5p15 and 8q13, respectively. RT-PCR revealed in-frame AHRR/NCOA2 and
NCOA2/AHHR transcripts in all four cases. Interphase FISH on paraffin-embedded
tissue from 10 further cases without cytogenetic data showed that three were
positive for fusion of AHRR and NCOA2. While AHRR has never been implicated in
gene fusions before, NCOA2 is the 3'-partner in fusions with MYST3 and ETV6 in
leukemias and with PAX3 and HEY1 in sarcomas. As in the previously described
fusion proteins, NCOA2 contributes with its two activation domains to the
AHRR/NCOA2 chimera, substituting for the repressor domain of AHRR. Because the
amino terminal part of the transcription factor AHRR, responsible for the
recognition of xenobiotic response elements in target genes and for
heterodimerization, shows extensive homology with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AHR), the fusion is predicted to upregulate the AHR/ARNT signaling pathway.
Indeed, global gene expression analysis showed upregulation of CYP1A1 as well as 
other typical target genes of this pathway, such as those encoding toll-like
receptors. Apart from providing a diagnostic marker for soft tissue angiofibroma,
the results also suggest that this tumor constitutes an interesting model for
evaluating the cellular effects of AHR signaling.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22337624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 28;109(9):3311-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1113280109. Epub 2012 Feb 13.

Unwinding the differences of the mammalian PERIOD clock proteins from crystal
structure to cellular function.

Kucera N(1), Schmalen I, Hennig S, Öllinger R, Strauss HM, Grudziecki A,
Wieczorek C, Kramer A, Wolf E.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, Department of Structural
Biology, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, 44227 Dortmund, Germany.

The three PERIOD homologues mPER1, mPER2, and mPER3 constitute central components
of the mammalian circadian clock. They contain two PAS (PER-ARNT-SIM) domains
(PAS-A and PAS-B), which mediate homo- and heterodimeric mPER-mPER interactions
as well as interactions with transcription factors and kinases. Here we present
crystal structures of PAS domain fragments of mPER1 and mPER3 and compare them
with the previously reported mPER2 structure. The structures reveal homodimers,
which are mediated by interactions of the PAS-B ß-sheet surface including a
highly conserved tryptophan (Trp448(mPER1), Trp419(mPER2), Trp359(mPER3)). mPER1 
homodimers are additionally stabilized by interactions between the PAS-A domains 
and mPER3 homodimers by an N-terminal region including a predicted
helix-loop-helix motive. We have verified the existence of these homodimer
interfaces in solution and inside cells using analytical gel filtration and
luciferase complementation assays and quantified their contributions to homodimer
stability by analytical ultracentrifugation. We also show by fluorescence
recovery after photobleaching analyses that destabilization of the
PAS-B/tryptophan dimer interface leads to a faster mobility of mPER2 containing
complexes in human U2OS cells. Our study reveals structural and quantitative
differences between the homodimeric interactions of the three mouse PERIOD
homologues, which are likely to contribute to their distinct clock functions.

PMCID: PMC3295261
PMID: 22331899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Arch Med Sci. 2011 Dec 31;7(6):933-40. doi: 10.5114/aoms.2011.26603. Epub 2011
Dec 30.

Obesity alters the expression profile of clock genes in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells.

Tahira K(1), Ueno T, Fukuda N, Aoyama T, Tsunemi A, Matsumoto S, Nagura C,
Matsumoto T, Soma M, Shimba S, Matsumoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Hypertension and Endocrinology, Department of
Medicine, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: The aim of this study was to investigate the association between
the variation in expression profile of clock genes and obesity using peripheral
blood mononuclear (PMN) cells.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The subjects comprised 10 obese patients and 10 healthy
volunteers. Blood was collected at different time-points during the day and
levels of blood sugar, IRI, adiponectin and leptin were determined. Peripheral
blood mononuclear cells were sampled, and expression levels of brain and muscle
Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1), Period (PER)1, PER2, Cryptochrome (CRY)1, CRY2, and 
REV-ERBa mRNA were quantified.
RESULTS: During the day, the expression levels of BMAL1, CRY1, CRY2 and PER2
genes in PMN cells of the obese group were all significantly higher compared to
those in the non-obese group. In addition, expression of BMAL1, CRY1, CRY2 and
PER2 genes in PMN cells increased between 12:00 and 21:00 in the obese group. In 
PMN cells of both groups, PER1 gene expression showed a bimodal pattern, with
high expression at 9:00 and 18:00.
CONCLUSIONS: Differences were observed in the expression profile variation of
clock genes between the obese and non-obese groups. This study reveals the
differences in clock gene expression profiles between obese and non-obese
subjects, with evidence for two distinct chronotypes, and suggests a contribution
of these chronotypes to fat accumulation in humans.

PMCID: PMC3264983
PMID: 22328874  [PubMed]


422. J Cell Sci. 2012 Apr 15;125(Pt 8):2004-16. doi: 10.1242/jcs.097246. Epub 2012 Feb
10.

Binding of the ERa and ARNT1 AF2 domains to exon 21 of the SRC1 isoform SRC1e is 
essential for estrogen- and dioxin-related transcription.

Endler A(1), Chen L, Zhang J, Xu GT, Shibasaki F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine, and Stem Cell Research Center, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China. alexanderendler@msn.com

Steroid receptor co-activator 1 (SRC1) is a transcriptional co-activator of
numerous transcription factors involving nuclear receptors. Aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator 1 (ARNT1) is an obligatory transcriptional partner 
of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and hypoxia inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a), 
as well as a co-activator of estrogen receptors (ERs). To initiate transcription,
the activation function 2 (AF2) domains of estrogen-activated ERs interact with
LxxLL motifs in the nuclear receptor interaction domain (NID) of SRC1. Here we
describe an estrogen and LxxLL domain-independent ERa AF2 binding to SRC1e exon
21. In addition, we found an AF2 domain in exon 16 of ARNT1 that also binds to
SRC1e exon 21. Surprisingly, the interaction between SRC1e exon 21 and the AF2
domain of ERa functions as a crucial enhancer of estrogen-induced transcription. 
The binding of ARNT1 AF2 to SRC1e exon 21 enhances the transcriptional response
to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), but the upregulation essentially
depends on two cyclin destruction boxes (D-boxes), which are also located on exon
16 of ARNT1. Our findings reveal that a binding site for ERa and ARNT1 AF2
domains in the C-terminus of SRC1e upregulates estrogen- and TCDD-related
responses in mammalian cells.

PMID: 22328528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Mol Biol. 2012 Apr 6;417(4):362-74. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.01.056. Epub 2012
Feb 7.

Structural basis for the slow dark recovery of a full-length LOV protein from
Pseudomonas putida.

Circolone F(1), Granzin J, Jentzsch K, Drepper T, Jaeger KE, Willbold D, Krauss
U, Batra-Safferling R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekulare Enzymtechnologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität
Düsseldorf, D-52426 Jülich, Germany.

Blue-light photoreceptors containing lightoxygenvoltage (LOV) domains regulate 
a myriad of different physiological responses in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes.
Their light sensitivity is intricately linked to the photochemistry of the
non-covalently bound flavin mononucleotide (FMN) chromophore that forms a
covalent adduct with a conserved cysteine residue in the LOV domain upon
illumination with blue light. All LOV domains undergo the same primary
photochemistry leading to adduct formation; however, considerable variation is
found in the lifetime of the adduct state that varies from seconds to several
hours. The molecular mechanism underlying this variation among the structurally
conserved LOV protein family is not well understood. Here, we describe the
structural characterization of PpSB1-LOV, a very slow cycling full-length LOV
protein from the Gram-negative bacterium Pseudomonas putida KT2440. Its crystal
structure reveals a novel dimer interface that is mediated by N- and C-terminal
auxiliary structural elements and a unique cluster of four arginine residues
coordinating with the FMN-phosphate moiety. Site-directed mutagenesis of two
arginines (R61 and R66) in PpSB1-LOV resulted in acceleration of the dark
recovery reaction approximately by a factor of 280. The presented structural and 
biochemical data suggest a direct link between structural features and the slow
dark recovery observed for PpSB1-LOV. The overall structural arrangement of
PpSB1-LOV, together with a complementary phylogenetic analysis, highlights a
common ancestry of bacterial LOV photoreceptors and Per-ARNT-Sim chemosensors.

PMID: 22326872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Mol Pharmacol. 2012 May;81(5):669-78. doi: 10.1124/mol.111.077305. Epub 2012 Feb 
6.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor contributes to the proliferation of human
medulloblastoma cells.

Dever DP(1), Opanashuk LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a ligand-activated member of the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) transcription superfamily, is known to
regulate the toxicity of polyaromatic halogenated hydrocarbon environmental
chemicals, most notably dioxin. However, the AhR has also been implicated in
multiple stages of tumorigenesis. Medulloblastoma (MB), a primary cerebellar
brain tumor arising in infants and children, is thought to originate from
abnormally proliferating cerebellar granule neuron precursors (GNPs). GNPs
express high levels of the AhR in the external germinal layer of the developing
cerebellum. Moreover, our laboratory has previously reported that either abnormal
activation or deletion of the AhR leads to dysregulation of GNP cell cycle
activity and maturation. These observations led to the hypothesis that the AhR
promotes the growth of MB. Therefore, this study evaluated whether the AhR serves
a pro-proliferative role in an immortalized MB tumor cell line (DAOY). We
produced a stable AhR knockdown DAOY cell line [AhR short hairpin RNA (shRNA)],
which exhibited a 70% reduction in AhR protein levels. Compared with wild-type
DAOY cells, AhR shRNA DAOY cells displayed an impaired G(1)-to-S cell cycle
transition, decreased DNA synthesis, and reduced proliferation. Furthermore,
these cell cycle perturbations were correlated with decreased levels of the
pro-proliferative gene Hes1 and increased levels of the cell cycle inhibitor
p27(kip1). Supplementation experiments with human AhR restored the proliferative 
activity in AhR shRNA DAOY cells. Taken together, our data show that the AhR
promotes proliferation of MB cells, suggesting that this pathway should be
considered as a potential therapeutic target for MB treatment.

PMCID: PMC3336804
PMID: 22311706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Cancer Lett. 2012 Jul 1;320(1):111-21. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.01.037. Epub
2012 Feb 2.

Suppression of the hypoxia inducible factor-1 function by redistributing the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator from nucleus to cytoplasm.

Wang Y(1), Li Y, Wang D, Li Y, Chang A, Chan WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, Thomas J. Long School of 
Pharmacy and Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, CA 95211, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) heterodimerizes with
hypoxia inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a), followed by upregulation of genes that are 
essential for carcinogenesis. We utilized a novel peptide (Ainp1) to address
whether the HIF-1a signaling could be suppressed by an ARNT-mediated mechanism.
Ainp1 suppresses the HIF-1a-dependent luciferase expression in Hep3B cells and
this suppression can be reversed by ARNT. Ainp1 reduces the interaction between
ARNT and HIF-1a, suppresses the formation of the HIF-1 gel shift complex, and
suppresses the ARNT recruitment to the vegf promoter. These effects are partly
mediated by redistribution of the nuclear ARNT contents to the cytoplasm.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3319868
PMID: 22306343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Mol Biosyst. 2012 Apr;8(4):1286-96. doi: 10.1039/c2mb05354c. Epub 2012 Feb 2.

Forced homodimerization of the c-Fos leucine zipper in designed bHLHZ-like hybrid
proteins MaxbHLH-Fos and ArntbHLH-Fos.

Chen G(1), De Jong AT, Shin JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada
L5L 1C6.

Although the c-Fos leucine zipper (LZ) does not form a homodimer in its native
basic region/leucine zipper (bZIP) structure, we found that it is capable of
homodimerization and promoting protein folding in engineered basic
region/helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper (bHLHZ) hybrid proteins MaxbHLH-Fos and
ArntbHLH-Fos, in which the bHLH subdomains of Max and Arnt are fused to the c-Fos
LZ. By using the in vivo yeast one-hybrid system and in vitro circular dichroism 
and quantitative fluorescence anisotropy, we demonstrated that attachment of the 
c-Fos LZ to the otherwise unstructured MaxbHLH resulted in a hybrid bHLHZ-like
protein now competent for homodimerization and DNA binding at the cognate E-box
site, CACGTG. In ArntbHLH-Fos, the c-Fos LZ promoted proper folding of the HLH
structure, although unlike MaxbHLH, ArntbHLH alone is capable of homodimerization
and DNA binding. In addition, by comparing the E-box binding and secondary
structures of MaxbHLH-Fos and two derivatives containing targeted mutations in
the c-Fos LZ, we found that cooperative communication exists between the bHLH and
LZ: proper folding of the four-helix bundle in the HLH region could be induced by
the c-Fos LZ, and the HLH dimerization region could force homodimerization of the
c-Fos LZ. These results demonstrate that although intrinsically unfavorable, the 
c-Fos LZ can homodimerize, demonstrating that the same c-Fos LZ element can yield
orthogonal differences in structure and/or DNA-binding function within different 
transcription factor families, including the bZIP and bHLHZ.

PMID: 22301802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Int J Breast Cancer. 2011;2011:923250. doi: 10.4061/2011/923250. Epub 2011 Sep
22.

The role of aryl hydrocarbon receptor and crosstalk with estrogen receptor in
response of breast cancer cells to the novel antitumor agents benzothiazoles and 
aminoflavone.

Callero MA(1), Loaiza-Pérez AI.

Author information: 
(1)Research Area, Institute of Oncology "Ángel H. Roffo", University of Buenos
Aires, Avenue San Martín 5481, C1417DTB Ciudad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Many estrogen-receptor- (ER-) expressing breast cancers become refractory to
ER-based therapies. New antitumor drugs like aminoflavone (AF) and benzothiazoles
(Bzs) have been developed and have exquisite antitumor activity in ER+MCF-7 and
T47D cells and in a MCF-7 nude mouse model. ER(-) breast cancer cells like
MDA-MB-231 are less susceptible. We previously found in MCF-7 cells that these
drugs activate the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) via translocation to the
nucleus, induction of AhR-specific DNA binding activity, and expression of
CYP1A1, whose transcription is controlled by the AhR-ARNT transcription factor.
CYP1A1 metabolizes AF and Bz to a species which directly or after further
metabolism damages DNA. In contrast an AhR-deficient variant of MCF-7 or cells
with predominantly nuclear AhR expression, such as MDA-MB 231, are resistant.
Thus, these drugs, unlike other neoplastic agents, require AhR-mediated signaling
to cause DNA damage. This is a new treatment strategy for breast cancers with
intact AhR signaling.

PMCID: PMC3262585
PMID: 22295239  [PubMed]


428. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2012 Jan;26(1):16-22. doi: 10.1002/jbt.20408.

Sudan III dye strongly induces CYP1A1 mRNA expression in HepG2 cells.

Ohno M(1), Ikenaka Y, Ishizuka M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology, Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sappro 060-088, Japan.

Sudan dyes possess a high affinity to the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and
potently induce its target genes, such as cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A1, through
unknown mechanisms. We investigated a detailed event occurring in cells after
binding of Sudan dye to AHR in HepG2 cells. Treatment with 10 µM Sudan III caused
rapid translocation of AHR into the nucleus and increased expression levels of
human CYP1A1 mRNA by approximately 20-fold after 16 and 24 h. The transactivation
was due to the activation of a region located at -1137 to +59 bp from CYP1A1, in 
particular, four xenobiotic responsive elements (XREs) existing in the region.
AHR and the Ah receptor nuclear translocator interacted with XRE sequences in a
gel shift assay using nuclear extract from Sudan III--treated HepG2 cells.
Moreover, we suggest that constitutive androstane receptor could modify CYP1A1
transactivation by Sudan III.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22287322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2012 May;341(2):307-16. doi: 10.1124/jpet.111.189340. Epub 
2012 Jan 23.

Hypoxia-inducible factor activation in myeloid cells contributes to the
development of liver fibrosis in cholestatic mice.

Copple BL(1), Kaska S, Wentling C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan State University, B403
Life Sciences Building, East Lansing, MI 48823, USA. copple@msu.edu

Macrophages play an integral role in the development of liver fibrosis by
releasing mediators, such as platelet-derived growth factor-B (PDGF-B) and
transforming growth factor-ß1, which stimulate hepatic stellate cell
proliferation, chemotaxis, and collagen production. However, the mechanism by
which chronic liver injury stimulates macrophages to release these mediators is
not completely understood. We tested the hypothesis that chronic liver injury
activates hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) transcription factors in macrophages
that regulate the production of mediators that promote fibrosis. To test this
hypothesis, Cre/lox technology was used to generate myeloid cell-specific HIF-1a 
or HIF-1ß knockout mice. When these mice were subjected to bile duct ligation
(BDL), levels of a-smooth muscle actin and type I collagen in the liver were
reduced compared with those of mice with normal levels of HIFs. The deficiency of
HIFs in macrophages did not affect liver injury or inflammation after BDL but
reduced PDGF-B mRNA and protein, suggesting that HIF activation in macrophages
may promote fibrosis by regulating the production of PDGF-B. Consistent with a
role for HIFs in liver fibrosis in cholestatic liver disease, nuclear HIF-1a
protein was present in macrophages, hepatocytes, and fibroblasts in the livers
from patients with primary biliary cirrhosis and primary sclerosing cholangitis. 
These studies demonstrate that HIFs are important regulators of profibrotic
mediator production by macrophages during the development of liver fibrosis and
suggest that HIFs may be a novel therapeutic target for the treatment of chronic 
liver disease in patients.

PMCID: PMC3336817
PMID: 22271822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Exp Gerontol. 2012 Mar;47(3):256-62. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2012.01.001. Epub 2012 
Jan 12.

Effect of premature aging on murine adipose tissue.

Hemmeryckx B(1), Hoylaerts MF, Lijnen HR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,
3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Erratum in
    Exp Gerontol. 2012 Aug;47(8):658.

To evaluate the effect of aging on adipose tissue development, subcutaneous (SC) 
and gonadal (GON) white and peri-aortic brown adipose tissues were analyzed of 10
and 30 week old mice deficient in the clock gene Bmal1 (brain and muscle arnt
like protein 1) (Bmal1(-/-)) and wild-type littermates (Bmal1(+/+)) kept on a
standard fat diet. At both ages, daily food intake was significantly decreased
for Bmal1(-/-) mice, associated with reduced hypothalamic expression of PPARa.
Between 10 and 30 weeks of age, the total body weight of Bmal1(+/+) mice
increased significantly, but that of Bmal1(-/-) mice did not change. Whereas for 
Bmal1(+/+) mice, both SC and GON fat mass increased with age, these decreased for
Bmal1(-/-) mice. This was associated with increased adipocyte size with age for
Bmal1(+/+) but not for Bmal1(-/-) mice. Adipose tissue related angiogenesis was
not affected by genotype or aging. Peri-aortic brown adipose tissue mass in 30
week old Bmal1(-/-) mice was significantly reduced as compared to age-matched
Bmal1(+/+) mice. Comparison of gene expression profiles in SC and GON adipose
tissues of both genotypes revealed very marked effects of Bmal1 gene deletion in 
itself on PAI-1 (4- to 13-fold downregulation), whereas the associated effect of 
premature aging was striking for leptin (90- to 130-fold downregulation). Thus,
premature aging in Bmal1(-/-) mice kept on normal chow was associated with
reduced adiposity.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22265801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29545. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029545. Epub 2012 Jan 3.

Distinct roles for aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator and ah receptor
in estrogen-mediated signaling in human cancer cell lines.

Labrecque MP(1), Takhar MK, Hollingshead BD, Prefontaine GG, Perdew GH, Beischlag
TV.

Author information: 
(1)The Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada.

The activated AHR/ARNT complex (AHRC) regulates the expression of target genes
upon exposure to environmental contaminants such as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Importantly, evidence has shown that 
TCDD represses estrogen receptor (ER) target gene activation through the AHRC.
Our data indicates that AHR and ARNT act independently from each other at
non-dioxin response element sites. Therefore, we sought to determine the specific
functions of AHR and ARNT in estrogen-dependent signaling in human MCF7 breast
cancer and human ECC-1 endometrial carcinoma cells. Knockdown of AHR with siRNA
abrogates dioxin-inducible repression of estrogen-dependent gene transcription.
Intriguingly, knockdown of ARNT does not effect TCDD-mediated repression of
estrogen-regulated transcription, suggesting that AHR represses ER function
independently of ARNT. This theory is supported by the ability of the selective
AHR modulator 3',4'-dimethoxy-a-naphthoflavone (DiMNF) to repress
estrogen-inducible transcription. Furthermore, basal and estrogen-activated
transcription of the genes encoding cathepsin-D and pS2 are down-regulated in
MCF7 cells but up-regulated in ECC-1 cells in response to loss of ARNT. These
responses are mirrored at the protein level with cathepsin-D. Furthermore,
knock-down of ARNT led to opposite but corresponding changes in
estrogen-stimulated proliferation in both MCF7 and ECC-1 cells. We have obtained 
experimental evidence demonstrating a dioxin-dependent repressor function for AHR
and a dioxin-independent co-activator/co-repressor function for ARNT in estrogen 
signalling. These results provide us with further insight into the mechanisms of 
transcription factor crosstalk and putative therapeutic targets in
estrogen-positive cancers.

PMCID: PMC3250444
PMID: 22235307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Anim Reprod Sci. 2011 Dec;129(3-4):152-61. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2011.12.004. Epub 2011 Dec 13.

Hypoxia regulates cell proliferation and steroidogenesis through protein kinase A
signaling in bovine corpus luteum.

Jiang YF(1), Tsui KH, Wang PH, Lin CW, Wang JY, Hsu MC, Chen YC, Chiu CH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Physiology, Department of Animal Science and Technology, 
College of Bio-Resources and Agriculture, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan, ROC.

Hypoxia is an important physiological process which ensures corpus luteum (CL)
formation and development, thus playing an important role in steroidogenesis.
Recent studies have shown that CL develops in an analogous to tumorigenesis by
accumulation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha subunit (HIF1A) in response to
hypoxia. To investigate the relationship among hypoxia, steroidogenesis, and cell
proliferation during CL lifespan, histological and steroidogenic analyses of CL
were performed at various CL stages in non-pregnant Holstein. Also, the
hypoxia-mediated steroidogenesis and cell proliferation were studied in vitro
with both primary luteal and luteinized granulosa cells. Our results showed that 
progesterone (P(4)) concentration increased with the upregulation of
steroidogenic protein including steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (STAR) and
CYP11A1 (P450scc) in the middle luteal stage. On the other hand, the cell
proliferation- or hypoxia-associated proteins were upregulated in the early
stage, including the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), vascular
endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA), HIF1A, and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (ARNT). In primary culture, phospho-protein kinase A (p-PKA) was
downregulated, as were P(4) secretion and steroidogenic proteins both under
oxygen-conditioned hypoxia in luteal cells and cobalt chloride-induced hypoxia in
luteinized granulosa cells. However, under the treatment of hypoxia, PCNA, which 
was downregulated in luteal cells, was upregulated together with HIF1A and VEGFA 
in luteinized granulosa cells. Taken together, present study suggested that
hypoxia downregulated steroidogenesis through PKA signaling and that the
hypoxia-regulated cell proliferation could be activated during CL formation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22226573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jan 15;11(2):213-4. doi: 10.4161/cc.11.2.18786. Epub 2012 Jan
15.

Brain and muscle ARNT-like protein BMAL1 regulates ROS homeostasis and
senescence: a possible link to hypoxia-inducible factor-mediated pathway.

Razorenova OV.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Dec 1;10(23):4162-9.

PMID: 22223094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Chronobiol Int. 2012 Feb;29(1):66-74. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2011.636496.

Comparison of ß-adrenergic and glucocorticoid signaling on clock gene and
osteoblast-related gene expressions in human osteoblast.

Komoto S(1), Kondo H, Fukuta O, Togari A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, Aichi-Gakuin University,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan.

Most living organisms exhibit circadian rhythms that are generated by endogenous 
circadian clocks, the master one being present in the suprachiasmatic nuclei
(SCN). Output signals from the SCN are believed to transmit standard circadian
time to peripheral tissue through sympathetic nervous system and humoral routes. 
Therefore, the authors examined the expression of clock genes following treatment
with the ß-adrenergic receptor agonist, isoprenaline, or the synthetic
glucocorticoid, dexamethasone, in cultured human osteoblast SaM-1 cells. Cells
were treated with 10(-6) M isoprenaline or 10(-7) M dexamethasone for 2<U+2009>h and
gene expressions were determined using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
analysis. Treatment with isoprenaline or dexamethasone induced the circadian
expression of clock genes human period 1 (hPer1), hPer2, hPer3, and human brain
and muscle Arnt-like protein 1 (hBMAL1). Isoprenaline or dexamethasone treatment 
immediately increased hPer1 and hPer2 and caused circadian oscillation of hPer1
and hPer2 with three peaks within 48<U+2009>h. hPer3 expression had one peak after
isoprenaline or dexamethasone treatment. hBMAL expression had two peaks after
isoprenaline or dexamethasone treatment, the temporal pattern being in antiphase 
to that of the other clock genes. Dexamethasone treatment delayed the oscillation
of all clock genes for 2-6<U+2009>h compared with isoprenaline treatment. The authors
also examined the expression of osteoblast-related genes ha-1 type I collagen
(hCol1a1), halkaline phosphatase (hALP), and hosteocalcin (hOC). Isoprenaline
induced oscillation of hCol1a1, but not hALP and hOC. On the other hand,
dexamethasone induced oscillation of hCol1a1 and hALP, but not hOC. Isoprenaline 
up-regulated hCol1a1 expression, but dexamethasone down-regulated hCol1a1 and
hALP expression in the first phase.

PMID: 22217103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. World J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 26;2(12):252-60. doi: 10.4331/wjbc.v2.i12.252.

Regulation of heme oxygenase expression by alcohol, hypoxia and oxidative stress.

Gerjevic LN(1), Lu S, Chaky JP, Harrison-Findik DD.

Author information: 
(1)Lisa Nicole Gerjevic, Sizhao Lu, Jonathan Pascal Chaky, Duygu Dee
Harrison-Findik, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of
Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5820,
United States.

AIM: To study the effect of both acute and chronic alcohol exposure on heme
oxygenases (HOs) in the brain, liver and duodenum.
METHODS: Wild-type C57BL/6 mice, heterozygous Sod2 knockout mice, which exhibit
attenuated manganese superoxide dismutase activity, and liver-specific ARNT
knockout mice were used to investigate the role of alcohol-induced oxidative
stress and hypoxia. For acute alcohol exposure, ethanol was administered in the
drinking water for 1 wk. Mice were pair-fed with regular or ethanol-containing
Lieber De Carli liquid diets for 4 wk for chronic alcohol studies. HO expression 
was analyzed by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction and Western
blotting.
RESULTS: Chronic alcohol exposure downregulated HO-1 expression in the brain but 
upregulated it in the duodenum of wild-type mice. It did not alter liver HO-1
expression, nor HO-2 expression in the brain, liver or duodenum. In contrast,
acute alcohol exposure decreased both liver HO-1 and HO-2 expression, and HO-2
expression in the duodenum of wild-type mice. The decrease in liver HO-1
expression was abolished in ARNT(+/-) mice. Sod2(+/-) mice with acute alcohol
exposure did not exhibit any changes in liver HO-1 and HO-2 expression or in
brain HO-2 expression. However, alcohol inhibited brain HO-1 and duodenal HO-2
but increased duodenal HO-1 expression in Sod2(+/-) mice. Collectively, these
findings indicate that acute and chronic alcohol exposure regulates HO expression
in a tissue-specific manner. Chronic alcohol exposure alters brain and duodenal, 
but not liver HO expression. However, acute alcohol exposure inhibits liver HO-1 
and HO-2, and also duodenal HO-2 expression.
CONCLUSION: The inhibition of liver HO expression by acute alcohol-induced
hypoxia may play a role in the early phases of alcoholic liver disease
progression.

PMCID: PMC3247681
PMID: 22216371  [PubMed]


436. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Apr;40(8):3419-30. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr1297. Epub 2011
Dec 30.

A non-canonical E-box within the MyoD core enhancer is necessary for circadian
expression in skeletal muscle.

Zhang X(1), Patel SP, McCarthy JJ, Rabchevsky AG, Goldhamer DJ, Esser KA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Muscle Biology, Department of Physiology, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

The myogenic differentiation 1 (MyoD) gene is a master regulator of myogenesis.
We previously reported that the expression of MyoD mRNA oscillates over 24<U+2009>h in
skeletal muscle and that the circadian clock transcription factors, BMAL1 (brain 
and muscle ARNT-like 1) and CLOCK (circadian locomotor output cycles kaput), were
bound to the core enhancer (CE) of the MyoD gene in vivo. In this study, we
provide in vivo and in vitro evidence that the CE is necessary for circadian
expression of MyoD in adult muscle. Gel shift assays identified a conserved
non-canonical E-box within the CE that is bound by CLOCK and BMAL1. Functional
analysis revealed that this E-box was required for full activation by BMAL1/CLOCK
and for in vitro circadian oscillation. Expression profiling of muscle of
CE(loxP/loxP) mice found approximately 1300 genes mis-expressed relative to
wild-type. Based on the informatics results, we analyzed the respiratory function
of mitochondria isolated from wild-type and CE(loxP/loxP) mice. These assays
determined that State 5 respiration was significantly reduced in CE(loxP/loxP)
muscle. The results of this work identify a novel element in the MyoD enhancer
that confers circadian regulation to MyoD in skeletal muscle and suggest that
loss of circadian regulation leads to changes in myogenic expression and
downstream mitochondrial function.

PMCID: PMC3333858
PMID: 22210883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jan 6;417(1):484-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.11.146. Epub 2011 Dec 8.

All-trans retinoic acid inhibits the recruitment of ARNT to DNA, resulting in the
decrease of CYP1A1 mRNA expression in HepG2 cells.

Ohno M(1), Ikenaka Y, Ishizuka M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology, Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Japan.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) are
well-conserved transcription factors among species. However, there are a very
limited number of reports on the physiological function of AHR, particularly on
the regulation of AHR by endogenous compounds. We hence investigated the effects 
of all-trans retinoic acid (atRA) on cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A1 gene transcription
as a model of AHR-regulated transcription mechanisms in HepG2 cells, a human
hepatoma cell line. Treatment with atRA significantly reduced transactivation and
expression of CYP1A1 mRNA to less than half of its control value, and this
inhibitory effect was mediated by RARa. The result of chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay indicated that treatment with atRA at 1-100 nM
drastically inhibited the recruitment of ARNT to DNA regions containing
xenobiotic responsive elements. In conclusion, atRA at physiological
concentrations could reduce AHR-mediated gene transcription via the inhibition of
recruitment of ARNT to relevant DNA regions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22177959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Dec 27;108(52):21128-33. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1116123109. Epub 2011 Dec 13.

Ligand-binding properties of a juvenile hormone receptor, Methoprene-tolerant.

Charles JP(1), Iwema T, Epa VC, Takaki K, Rynes J, Jindra M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre des Sciences du Gout et de l'Alimentation, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 6265, Institut National de la
Recherche Agronomique Unité Mixte de Recherche 1324, Université de Bourgogne,
21000 Dijon, France.

Juvenile hormone (JH) is a sesquiterpenoid of vital importance for insect
development, yet the molecular basis of JH signaling remains obscure, mainly
because a bona fide JH receptor has not been identified. Mounting evidence points
to the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain protein
Methoprene-tolerant (Met) as the best JH receptor candidate. However, details of 
how Met transduces the hormonal signal are missing. Here, we demonstrate that Met
specifically binds JH III and its biologically active mimics, methoprene and
pyriproxyfen, through its C-terminal PAS domain. Substitution of individual amino
acids, predicted to form a ligand-binding pocket, with residues possessing
bulkier side chains reduces JH III binding likely because of steric hindrance.
Although a mutation that abolishes JH III binding does not affect a Met-Met
complex that forms in the absence of methoprene, it prevents both the
ligand-dependent dissociation of the Met-Met dimer and the ligand-dependent
interaction of Met with its partner bHLH-PAS protein Taiman. These results show
that Met can sense the JH signal through direct, specific binding, thus
establishing a unique class of intracellular hormone receptors.

PMCID: PMC3248530
PMID: 22167806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Eur J Pharmacol. 2012 Feb 15;676(1-3):6-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2011.11.029.
Epub 2011 Dec 4.

Characterization of [³H]Lu AE60157
([³H]8-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)-3-phenylsulfonylquinoline) binding to
5-hydroxytryptamine6 (5-HT6) receptors in vivo.

Witten L(1), Bang-Andersen B, Nielsen SM, Miller S, Christoffersen CT, Stensbøl
TB, Brennum LT, Arnt J.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Drug Discovery Denmark, H. Lundbeck A/S, 9 Ottiliavej,
Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

The serotonin6 (5-HT(6)) receptor has received attention for its proposed role in
cognitive impairments associated with schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease. This
has lead to a search for selective 5-HT(6) receptor ligands useful for in vivo
imaging in animals and humans. The novel 5-HT(6) receptor antagonist Lu AE60157
(8-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)-3-phenylsulfonylquinoline) displays high affinity for
the human (h) 5-HT(6) receptor (K(d) 0.2nM), and broad profiling in 60 additional
binding and enzyme assays showed that Lu AE60157 displays 16-fold selectivity to 
the h5-HT(2A) receptor (K(i) 3.2nM) and >100-fold selectivity to all other
evaluated targets. Lu AE60157 was labeled with tritium in the N-methyl group and 
evaluated as a radioligand in vitro as well as in vivo in rats and mice.
Autoradiography experiments showed that [(3)H]Lu AE60157 bound preferentially to 
rat brain regions with expected high 5-HT(6) receptor density. Furthermore,
[(3)H]Lu AE60157 showed good brain penetration after systemic administration and 
high (about 75%) specific in vivo binding to the striatal 5-HT(6) receptor in
rats. The striatal binding of [(3)H]Lu AE60157 was fully displaced by selective
5-HT(6) receptor antagonists (SB-742457; Lu AE58054) and antipsychotics known to 
inhibit the binding of 5-HT(6) receptors in vitro (clozapine; olanzapine;
sertindole), but was not displaced by antipsychotics lacking high 5-HT(6)
receptor affinities (risperidone; haloperidol; quetiapine). No specific binding
to mouse brain tissue in vivo could be obtained. In conclusion, [(3)H]Lu AE60157 
is suitable for measuring in vivo occupancies of 5-HT(6) receptor ligands in rat 
brain regions in which 5-HT(2A) receptors do not interfere.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22155399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2011;75(12):2411-4. Epub 2011 Dec 7.

Photochemical characterization of phytochrome missense mutants.

Shin AY(1), Kim HS, Lee SS, Kim MG, Han YJ, Song PS, Kim JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Kumho Life Science Laboratory, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, Korea.

Phytochromes are photoreceptors that regulate many aspects of plant growth and
development in response to red/far-red light signals from the environment. In
this study, we analyzed chromophore ligation and photochromism of missense
phytochrome mutants in the Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS)-related domain (PRD). Among the 14 
mutants analyzed, the Gly768Asp mutant of Avena phytochrome A showed aberrant
photochromism and dark reversion, suggesting that amino acid residues in the
C-terminal domain affect the photochemical properties of the photosensory
N-terminal domain.

PMID: 22146729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Reprod Toxicol. 2012 Jan;33(1):67-75. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2011.11.004. Epub
2011 Nov 25.

Benzyl butyl phthalate induces necrosis by AhR mediation of CYP1B1 expression in 
human granulosa cells.

Chen HS(1), Chiang PH, Wang YC, Kao MC, Shieh TH, Tsai CF, Tsai EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

We investigated the signaling pathway of the arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) on
HO23 cells (immortalized human granulosa cells (hGC)) mediated by benzyl
butyl-phthalate (BBP). BBP (1 µM) significantly increased the mRNA and protein
levels of AhR, aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) and
cytochrome-P450 (CYP)1B1 in HO23 cells. Treatment with 3',4'-dimethoxyflavone
(3',4'-DMF) or AhR siRNA significantly reduced AhR and CYP1B1, but CYP1A1 was not
affected by 3',4'-DMF or AhR siRNA, suggesting that increases in CYP1A1 may not
regulated by AhR. BBP induced the AhR fusion protein to localize and accumulate
around the nucleus, and AhR heterodimerization with ARNT was observed in the
nucleus by immunoprecipitation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and reporter assays
revealed the effect of BBP on CYP1B1, but not CYP1A1. Necrosis was significantly 
increased in HO23 cells after BBP treatment, and 3',4'-DMF, AhR siRNA or CYP1B1
siRNA knockdown blocked this phenomenon. These data suggest that BBP-induced HO23
cell necrosis is AhR and CYP1B1 dependent.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22138065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Jul;33(7):1487.e21-8. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.10.011. Epub 2011 Dec 2.

Genome-wide study links MTMR7 gene to variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob risk.

Sanchez-Juan P(1), Bishop MT, Aulchenko YS, Brandel JP, Rivadeneira F, Struchalin
M, Lambert JC, Amouyel P, Combarros O, Sainz J, Carracedo A, Uitterlinden AG,
Hofman A, Zerr I, Kretzschmar HA, Laplanche JL, Knight RS, Will RG, van Duijn CM.

Author information: 
(1)Neurology Department, University Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla, Fundación
Marqués de Valdecilla (University of Cantabria) IFIMAV and Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas, Santander, 
Spain.

The aim of our study was to discover genomic variations related to variant
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD) susceptibility. A genome-wide association
analysis with most vCJD samples available in the world was performed. A series of
93 vCJD UK patients and 1504 UK controls were included in the discovery stage.
Our best findings were replicated in an independent population of 22 UK and 20
French vCJD cases. Post hoc analysis to assess our main results included 5711
French controls, 445 Dutch controls, and 446 sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
(CJD) cases. We found 2 genome wide significant variants tagging PRNP: rs6107516 
(p = 2.6 × 10(-18)) and rs2065706 (p = 8.8 × 10(-14)). Two other single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs4921542 and rs7565981) were successfully
replicated in independent samples and reached genome-wide significance after
pooling discovery and replication populations. Rs4921542 (p = 1.6 × 10(-8)) is an
intronic variant in the myotubularin related protein 7 gene (MTMR7), which is
specifically expressed in the central nervous system (CNS) and dephosphorylates
phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate and inositol 1,3-bisphosphate. Rs7565981 (p =
4.2 × 10(-8)) is in an intergenic region upstream of the neuronal PAS
(per-ARNT-sim) domain-containing protein 2 gene (NPAS2), a regulatory gene
belonging to a family of transcription factors that has been implicated in
memory, seasonal affective disorder, and the molecular clock in the mammalian
forebrain. A proxy of rs7565981 (rs17024792; r(2) = 1.0) has been found to
regulate the phospholipase C-delta-3 gene (PLCD3) in trans. This enzyme catalyzes
the hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate. Our study reveals 2 new 
genome-wide significant markers for vCJD outside PRNP and provides evidence
supporting a role of the phosphatidylinositol pathway in vCJD susceptibility.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22137330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Toxicol Sci. 2011;36(6):713-24.

Three-generation experiment showed female C57BL/6J mice drink drainage canal
water containing low level of TCDD-like activity causing high pup mortality.

Huang L(1), Huang R, Ran XR, Liu HY, Zhang Y, Dai LJ, Li B.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Animal Research center, Guangzhou Medical College, Yuexiu
district, Guangzhou, China.

2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and 
similar compounds are toxic to animals and humans. Based on a yeast reporter
system, AhR-activating ligands similar in concentration to 2 ng/l of TCDD were
detected in two canal waters in Guangzhou, China. In this study, a
three-generation experiment was conducted to assess the reproductive and
developmental risks associated with these waters in C57BL/6J female mice,
including female reproduction, pup indices, reproductive hormone levels, and
levels of AhR, ARNT, and CYP1A2 in the uterus. Similar reproductive toxic effects
were produced in the offspring of mice that drank the canal water as would occur 
if they drank 2 ng/l/day TCDD. The major reproductive indices that were affected 
included mating time and gestation length over all the generations. A striking
finding is the TCDD (2 ng/l) and the water samples significantly reduced Day 4
pup survival rates in the F2 and F3. Both TCDD exposure and drinking canal water 
decreased estradiol-17ß (E2) levels in the multiparous females and decreased
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH) and E2 levels in the
virgin females. Immunochemical staining revealed that the AhR and CYP1A2 positive
signals were enhanced, and the ARNT positive signal was weakened in the uteri of 
mice drinking water with TCDD (2 ng/l) and the canal water samples. These results
imply that the canal water contains AhR ligands that could induce similar toxic
effects as do low levels of TCDD. Exposure to these contaminants can
significantly impair the reproductive health of female mice. Considering this
canals are open directly to Pearl River, whether these effects could be caused in
human reproduction and development warrants further study.

PMID: 22129735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Gen Physiol. 2011 Dec;138(6):581-92. doi: 10.1085/jgp.201110683.

hERG1a N-terminal eag domain-containing polypeptides regulate homomeric hERG1b
and heteromeric hERG1a/hERG1b channels: a possible mechanism for long QT
syndrome.

Trudeau MC(1), Leung LM, Roti ER, Robertson GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. mtrudeau@som.umaryland.edu

Human ether-á-go-go-related gene (hERG) potassium channels are critical for
cardiac action potential repolarization. Cardiac hERG channels comprise two
primary isoforms: hERG1a, which has a regulatory N-terminal Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS)
domain, and hERG1b, which does not. Isolated, PAS-containing hERG1a N-terminal
regions (NTRs) directly regulate NTR-deleted hERG1a channels; however, it is
unclear whether hERG1b isoforms contain sufficient machinery to support
regulation by hERG1a NTRs. To test this, we constructed a series of PAS
domain-containing hERG1a NTRs (encoding amino acids 1-181, 1-228, 1-319, and
1-365). The NTRs were also predicted to form from truncation mutations that were 
linked to type 2 long QT syndrome (LQTS), a cardiac arrhythmia disorder
associated with mutations in the hERG gene. All of the hERG1a NTRs markedly
regulated heteromeric hERG1a/hERG1b channels and homomeric hERG1b channels by
decreasing the magnitude of the current-voltage relationship and slowing the
kinetics of channel closing (deactivation). In contrast, NTRs did not measurably 
regulate hERG1a channels. A short NTR (encoding amino acids 1-135) composed
primarily of the PAS domain was sufficient to regulate hERG1b. These results
suggest that isolated hERG1a NTRs directly interact with hERG1b subunits. Our
results demonstrate that deactivation is faster in hERG1a/hERG1b channels
compared to hERG1a channels because of fewer PAS domains, not because of an
inhibitory effect of the unique hERG1b NTR. A decrease in outward current density
of hERG1a/hERG1b channels by hERG1a NTRs may be a mechanism for LQTS.

PMCID: PMC3226966
PMID: 22124116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Arch Toxicol. 2012 Apr;86(4):625-32. doi: 10.1007/s00204-011-0781-3. Epub 2011
Nov 26.

The Alternaria mycotoxins alternariol and alternariol methyl ether induce
cytochrome P450 1A1 and apoptosis in murine hepatoma cells dependent on the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor.

Schreck I(1), Deigendesch U, Burkhardt B, Marko D, Weiss C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
Campus North, Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen,
Germany.

The Alternaria mycotoxins alternariol (AOH) and alternariol methyl ether (AME)
are potential carcinogens. As planar compounds, AOH and AME are preferentially
metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A1 and 1A2. The most prominent regulator of
CYP1A1 is the dimeric transcription factor complex AhR/ARNT, which is activated
by planar ligands. Therefore, we studied the activation of AhR/ARNT by AOH and
AME and monitored CYP1A1 induction in murine hepatoma cells (Hepa-1c1c7). Indeed,
AOH and AME enhanced the levels of CYP1A1 in Hepa-1c1c7 cells but not in cells
with inactivated AhR (Hepa-1c1c12) or ARNT (Hepa-1c1c4). AOH and AME did not
increase the production of reactive oxygen species but reduced cell counts in
Hepa-1c1c7 cells after 24 and 48 h. This effect, however, was independent of
AhR/ARNT. At 48 h, AOH and AME increased apoptosis dependent on AhR and ARNT. In 
conclusion, AOH and AME are novel inducers of the AhR/ARNT pathway, which
mediates induction of CYP1A1 and apoptosis and might thereby contribute to the
toxicity of these mycotoxins.

PMID: 22120949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Mol Pharmacol. 2012 Mar;81(3):338-47. doi: 10.1124/mol.111.075952. Epub 2011 Nov 
23.

A novel nonconsensus xenobiotic response element capable of mediating aryl
hydrocarbon receptor-dependent gene expression.

Huang G(1), Elferink CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX 77555-0654, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a mediator of xenobiotic toxicity, best
recognized for conveying the deleterious effects of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) exposure. The AhR functions as a
ligand-activated transcription factor that binds to a canonical xenobiotic
response element (XRE) in association with the heterodimerization partner, the
AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt) protein. However, within the repertoire of AhR
target genes identified in recent years, many lack a clearly defined XRE
highlighting the growing realization that AhR-mediated gene expression seems to
involve additional mechanisms distinct from the well characterized process
involving the XRE. The present study characterized a novel nonconsensus XRE
(NC-XRE) in the promoter of the plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) gene
that recruits a novel protein-DNA complex responsible for TCDD-inducible
expression. DNA binding studies and reporter assays identified key residues in
the NC-XRE necessary for protein-DNA binding and function, respectively.
Functional studies with AhR expression constructs confirm that TCDD-inducibility 
is AhR-dependent and requires direct AhR-DNA binding to the NC-XRE. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and RNA interference studies reveal that the Arnt protein is 
not a component of the NC-XRE-bound AhR complex, suggesting that in contrast to
the XRE, AhR-dependent gene expression mediated through the NC-XRE may involve a 
new DNA binding partner.

PMCID: PMC3286297
PMID: 22113079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Nature. 2011 Nov 20;481(7381):380-4. doi: 10.1038/nature10602.

Reductive glutamine metabolism by IDH1 mediates lipogenesis under hypoxia.

Metallo CM(1), Gameiro PA, Bell EL, Mattaini KR, Yang J, Hiller K, Jewell CM,
Johnson ZR, Irvine DJ, Guarente L, Kelleher JK, Vander Heiden MG, Iliopoulos O,
Stephanopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Acetyl coenzyme A (AcCoA) is the central biosynthetic precursor for fatty-acid
synthesis and protein acetylation. In the conventional view of mammalian cell
metabolism, AcCoA is primarily generated from glucose-derived pyruvate through
the citrate shuttle and ATP citrate lyase in the cytosol. However, proliferating 
cells that exhibit aerobic glycolysis and those exposed to hypoxia convert
glucose to lactate at near-stoichiometric levels, directing glucose carbon away
from the tricarboxylic acid cycle and fatty-acid synthesis. Although glutamine is
consumed at levels exceeding that required for nitrogen biosynthesis, the
regulation and use of glutamine metabolism in hypoxic cells is not well
understood. Here we show that human cells use reductive metabolism of
a-ketoglutarate to synthesize AcCoA for lipid synthesis. This isocitrate
dehydrogenase-1 (IDH1)-dependent pathway is active in most cell lines under
normal culture conditions, but cells grown under hypoxia rely almost exclusively 
on the reductive carboxylation of glutamine-derived a-ketoglutarate for de novo
lipogenesis. Furthermore, renal cell lines deficient in the von Hippel-Lindau
tumour suppressor protein preferentially use reductive glutamine metabolism for
lipid biosynthesis even at normal oxygen levels. These results identify a
critical role for oxygen in regulating carbon use to produce AcCoA and support
lipid synthesis in mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC3710581
PMID: 22101433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Gastric Cancer. 2011 Mar;11(1):16-22. doi: 10.5230/jgc.2011.11.1.16. Epub 2011 
Mar 31.

Eupatilin Inhibits Gastric Cancer Cell Growth by Blocking STAT3-Mediated VEGF
Expression.

Cheong JH(1), Hong SY, Zheng Y, Noh SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: Eupatilin is an antioxidative flavone and a phytopharmaceutical derived 
from Artemisia asiatica. It has been reported to possess anti-tumor activity in
some types of cancer including gastric cancer. Eupatilin may modulate the
angiogenesis pathway which is part of anti-inflammatory effect demonstrated in
gastric mucosal injury models. Here we investigated the anti-tumor effects of
eupatilin on gastric cancer cells and elucidated the potential underlying
mechanism whereby eupatilin suppresses angiogenesis and tumor growth.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The impact of eupatilin on the expression of angiogenesis 
pathway proteins was assessed using western blots in MKN45 cells. Using a
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we tested whether eupatilin affects the
recruitment of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) and hypoxia-inducible factor-1a 
(HIF-1a) to the human VEGF promoter. To investigate the effect of eupatilin on
vasculogenesis, tube formation assays were conducted using human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs). The effect of eupatilin on tumor suppression in mouse
xenografts was assessed.
RESULTS: Eupatilin significantly reduced VEGF, ARNT and STAT3 expression
prominently under hypoxic conditions. The recruitment of STAT3, ARNT and HIF-1a
to the VEGF promoter was inhibited by eupatilin treatment. HUVECs produced much
foreshortened and severely broken tubes with eupatilin treatment. In addition,
eupatilin effectively reduced tumor growth in a mouse xenograft model.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that eupatilin inhibits angiogenesis in gastric
cancer cells by blocking STAT3 and VEGF expression, suggesting its therapeutic
potential in the treatment of gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3204482
PMID: 22076197  [PubMed]


449. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 23;286(51):44005-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.254995. Epub
2011 Nov 7.

Human mutation within Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain-containing protein kinase (PASK) 
causes basal insulin hypersecretion.

Semplici F(1), Vaxillaire M, Fogarty S, Semache M, Bonnefond A, Fontés G,
Philippe J, Meur G, Diraison F, Sessions RB, Rutter J, Poitout V, Froguel P,
Rutter GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Cell Biology, Division of Diabetes
Endocrinology and Metabolism, School of Public Health, Imperial College London,
London, UK.

PAS kinase (PASK) is a glucose-regulated protein kinase involved in the control
of pancreatic islet hormone release and insulin sensitivity. We aimed here to
identify mutations in the PASK gene that may be associated with young-onset
diabetes in humans. We screened 18 diabetic probands with unelucidated
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). We identified two rare nonsynonymous
mutations in the PASK gene (p.L1051V and p.G1117E), each of which was found in a 
single MODY family. Wild type or mutant PASKs were expressed in HEK 293 cells.
Kinase activity of the affinity-purified proteins was assayed as
autophosphorylation at amino acid Thr307 or against an Ugp1p-derived peptide.
Whereas the PASK p.G1117E mutant displayed a ~25% increase with respect to wild
type PASK in the extent of autophosphorylation, and a ~2-fold increase in kinase 
activity toward exogenous substrates, the activity of the p.L1051V mutant was
unchanged. Amino acid Gly1117 is located in an a helical region opposing the
active site of PASK and may elicit either: (a) a conformational change that
increases catalytic efficiency or (b) a diminished inhibitory interaction with
the PAS domain. Mouse islets were therefore infected with adenoviruses expressing
wild type or mutant PASK and the regulation of insulin secretion was examined.
PASK p.G1117E-infected islets displayed a 4-fold decrease in glucose-stimulated
(16.7 versus 3 mM) insulin secretion, chiefly reflecting a 4.5-fold increase in
insulin release at low glucose. In summary, we have characterized a rare mutation
(p.G1117E) in the PASK gene from a young-onset diabetes family, which modulates
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion.

PMCID: PMC3243507
PMID: 22065581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Aquat Toxicol. 2012 Jan 15;106-107:9-19. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2011.10.009. Epub
2011 Oct 18.

PFOS elicits transcriptional responses of the ER, AHR and PPAR pathways in
Oryzias melastigma in a stage-specific manner.

Fang C(1), Wu X, Huang Q, Liao Y, Liu L, Qiu L, Shen H, Dong S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Urban Environment and Health, Institute of Urban Environment,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen 361021, PR China.

Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) is widely distributed in seawater. However, the 
effects of PFOS on important receptors involved in the toxicity of POPs have not 
been fully defined, especially for the embryonic stages of marine fish. In this
study, we examined the transcriptional responses and PFOS accumulation in the
marine medaka embryos at the early and late developmental stages of 4 and 10 dpf 
upon PFOS exposure (1, 4, and 16mg/L). PFOS accumulated in the embryos, and the
embryonic burdens of PFOS at 10 dpf were markedly higher than those at 4 dpf.
Moreover, thirteen genes involved in three important POPs-related receptor
pathways, including ER, AHR and PPAR, were cloned and investigated. The mRNA
expression levels of ERa and ER<U+03B3> were not significantly altered, but the
estrogenic marker genes were downregulated upon PFOS exposure at 4 dpf.
Conversely, ERs and related marker genes all were significantly upregulated at 10
dpf. The expressions of ARNT and cyp1a were both upregulated at 4 dpf, while no
obvious changes were detected at 10 dpf. The expressions of cyp19a and cyp19b
were regulated by PFOS in a stage-specific manner. PFOS produced different
effects on three isoforms of PPAR. PPARa and PPARß were first inhibited at 4 dpf 
and were induced at 10 dpf. PFOS did not elicit a change in PPAR<U+03B3> expression at
either stage. In conclusion, this study showed that PFOS has an estrogenic
activity and endocrine-disruptive properties. Meanwhile, PFOS could elicit
transcriptional responses on POPs-related pathways in a stage-specific manner.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22057250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Mamm Genome. 2012 Feb;23(1-2):76-84. doi: 10.1007/s00335-011-9364-0. Epub 2011
Nov 4.

Inherited liver shunts in dogs elucidate pathways regulating embryonic
development and clinical disorders of the portal vein.

van Steenbeek FG(1), van den Bossche L, Leegwater PA, Rothuizen J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Yalelaan 104, PO Box
80154, 3508 TD Utrecht, The Netherlands. f.g.vansteenbeek@uu.nl

Congenital disorders of the hepatic portal vasculature are rare in man but occur 
frequently in certain dog breeds. In dogs, there are two main subtypes:
intrahepatic portosystemic shunts, which are considered to stem from defective
closure of the embryonic ductus venosus, and extrahepatic shunts, which connect
the splanchnic vascular system with the vena cava or vena azygos. Both subtypes
result in nearly complete bypass of the liver by the portal blood flow. In both
subtypes the development of the smaller branches of the portal vein tree in the
liver is impaired and terminal branches delivering portal blood to the liver
lobules are often lacking. The clinical signs are due to poor liver growth,
development, and function. Patency of the ductus venosus seems to be a digenic
trait in Irish wolfhounds, whereas Cairn terriers with extrahepatic portosystemic
shunts display a more complex inheritance. The genes involved in these disorders 
cannot be identified with the sporadic human cases, but in dogs, the genome-wide 
study of the extrahepatic form is at an advanced stage. The canine disease may
lead to the identification of novel genes and pathways cooperating in growth and 
development of the hepatic portal vein tree. The same pathways likely regulate
the development of the vascular system of regenerating livers during liver
diseases such as hepatitis and cirrhosis. Therefore, the identification of these 
molecular pathways may provide a basis for future proregenerative intervention.

PMCID: PMC3275728
PMID: 22052005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Food Chem Toxicol. 2012 Feb;50(2):353-62. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2011.10.052. Epub
2011 Oct 21.

Harmaline and harmalol inhibit the carcinogen-activating enzyme CYP1A1 via
transcriptional and posttranslational mechanisms.

El Gendy MA(1), Soshilov AA, Denison MS, El-Kadi AO.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2N8.

Dioxins are known to cause several human cancers through activation of the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Harmaline and harmalol are dihydro-ß-carboline
compounds present in several medicinal plants such as Peganum harmala. We have
previously demonstrated the ability of P. harmala extract to inhibit
TCDD-mediated induction of Cyp1a1 in murine hepatoma Hepa 1c1c7 cells. Therefore,
the aim of this study is to examine the effect of harmaline and its main
metabolite, harmalol, on dioxin-mediated induction of CYP1A1 in human hepatoma
HepG2 cells. Our results showed that harmaline and harmalol at concentrations of 
(0.5-12.5µM) significantly inhibited the dioxin-induced CYP1A1 at mRNA, protein
and activity levels in a concentration-dependent manner. The role of AhR was
determined by the inhibition of the TCDD-mediated induction of AhR-dependent
luciferase activity and the AhR/ARNT/XRE formation by both harmaline and
harmalol. In addition, harmaline significantly displaced [(3)H]TCDD in the
competitive ligand binding assay. At posttranslational level, both harmaline and 
harmalol decreased the protein stability of CYP1A1, suggesting that
posttranslational modifications are involved. Moreover, the posttranslational
modifications of harmaline and harmalol involve ubiquitin-proteasomal pathway and
direct inhibitory effects of both compounds on CYP1A1 enzyme. These data suggest 
that harmaline and harmalol are promising agents for preventing dioxin-mediated
effects.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3281145
PMID: 22037238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011 Nov;22(11):2047-56. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2010101080. Epub 2011
Oct 27.

Mutations in multiple PKD genes may explain early and severe polycystic kidney
disease.

Bergmann C(1), von Bothmer J, Ortiz Brüchle N, Venghaus A, Frank V, Fehrenbach H,
Hampel T, Pape L, Buske A, Jonsson J, Sarioglu N, Santos A, Ferreira JC, Becker
JU, Cremer R, Hoefele J, Benz MR, Weber LT, Buettner R, Zerres K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Bioscientia, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 17, 55218
Ingelheim, Germany. carsten.bergmann@bioscientia.de

Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is typically a late-onset
disease caused by mutations in PKD1 or PKD2, but about 2% of patients with ADPKD 
show an early and severe phenotype that can be clinically indistinguishable from 
autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). The high recurrence risk
in pedigrees with early and severe PKD strongly suggests a common familial
modifying background, but the mechanisms underlying the extensive phenotypic
variability observed among affected family members remain unknown. Here, we
describe severely affected patients with PKD who carry, in addition to their
expected familial germ-line defect, additional mutations in PKD genes, including 
HNF-1ß, which likely aggravate the phenotype. Our findings are consistent with a 
common pathogenesis and dosage theory for PKD and may propose a general concept
for the modification of disease expression in other so-called monogenic
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3279997
PMID: 22034641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2012 Jan;326(1):31-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2011.02426.x.

Light signaling mediated by PAS domain-containing proteins in Xanthomonas
campestris pv. campestris.

Mao D(1), Tao J, Li C, Luo C, Zheng L, He C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domains are important signalling modules that possibly monitor
changes in various stimuli such as light. For the majority of PAS domains that
have been identified by sequence similarity, the biological function of the
signalling pathways has not yet been experimentally investigated.Thirty-three PAS
proteins were discovered in Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris(Xcc) by
genome/proteome analysis. Thirteen PAS proteins were identified as contributing
to light signalling and Xcc growth, motility or virulence using molecular
genetics and bioinformatics methods. The PAS domains played important roles in
light signalling to regulate the growth, motility and virulence of Xcc. They
might be regulated by not only light quality (wavelength)but also quantity
(intensity) as potential light-signalling components. Evaluating the light
wavelength, three light-signalling types of PAS proteins in Xcc were shown to be 
involved in blue light signalling, tricolour (blue, red and far red)signalling or
red/far-red signalling. This showed that Xcc had evolved a complicated
light-signalling system to adapt to a complex environment.

PMID: 22029486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Cardiovasc Res. 2012 Jan 1;93(1):162-9. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvr282. Epub 2011 Oct
25.

Tie2-dependent knockout of HIF-1 impairs burn wound vascularization and homing of
bone marrow-derived angiogenic cells.

Sarkar K(1), Rey S, Zhang X, Sebastian R, Marti GP, Fox-Talbot K, Cardona AV, Du 
J, Tan YS, Liu L, Lay F, Gonzalez FJ, Harmon JW, Semenza GL.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Program, Institute for Cell Engineering, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

AIMS: Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a heterodimer composed of HIF-1a and 
HIF-1ß subunits. HIF-1 is known to promote tissue vascularization by activating
the transcription of genes encoding angiogenic factors, which bind to receptors
on endothelial cells (ECs) and bone marrow-derived angiogenic cells (BMDACs). In 
this study, we analysed whether HIF-1 activity in the responding ECs and BMDACs
is also required for cutaneous vascularization during burn wound healing.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We generated mice with floxed alleles at the Hif1a or Arnt
locus encoding HIF-1a and HIF-1ß, respectively. Expression of Cre recombinase was
driven by the Tie2 gene promoter, which is expressed in ECs and bone marrow
cells. Tie2Cre(+) and Tie2Cre(-) mice were subjected to burn wounds of
reproducible diameter and depth. Deficiency of HIF-1a or HIF-1ß in Tie2-lineage
cells resulted in delayed wound closure, reduced vascularization, decreased
cutaneous blood flow, impaired BMDAC mobilization, and decreased BMDAC homing to 
burn wounds.
CONCLUSION: HIF-1 activity in Tie2-lineage cells is required for the mobilization
and homing of BMDACs to cutaneous burn wounds and for the vascularization of burn
wound tissue.

PMCID: PMC3243042
PMID: 22028336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2012 Feb;67(2):160-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0897.2011.01077.x.
Epub 2011 Oct 21.

Polymorphisms of dioxin receptor complex components and detoxification-related
genes jointly confer susceptibility to advanced-stage endometriosis in the
taiwanese han population.

Wu CH(1), Guo CY, Yang JG, Tsai HD, Chang YJ, Tsai PC, Hsu CC, Kuo PL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua,
Taiwan.

PROBLEM: To establish a multilocus model for studying the effect of dioxin
receptor complex components and detoxification-related enzymes on advanced
endometriosis.
METHOD OF STUDY: Six single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and two deletion
polymorphisms from eight genes (CYP1A1, CYP1B1, GSTM1, GSTT1, GSTP1, AhR, ARNT,
and AhRR) were genotyped.
RESULTS: In the single SNP analysis, GSTM1 null type and AhRR variant type were
associated with a significantly increased risk of endometriosis [odds ratio
(OR)=2.38 and 2.45, respectively]. Using multiple SNPs in the logistic regression
for covariates, wild-type AhR and mutant AhRR combination was significantly
higher in patients (67.8%) than in controls (48.0%) (OR=2.76). On the other hand,
mutant AhRR in combination with GSTM1 null genotype was significantly higher in
patients (35.5%) than in controls (19.3%) (OR=6.12).
CONCLUSION: Polymorphisms of dioxin receptor complex components and
detoxification-related genes jointly confer susceptibility to advanced-stage
endometriosis in the Taiwanese Han population.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22017422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2012 Feb 1;16(3):203-16. doi: 10.1089/ars.2011.3882. Epub 
2011 Oct 17.

Hydrogen sulfide inhibits hypoxia- but not anoxia-induced hypoxia-inducible
factor 1 activation in a von hippel-lindau- and mitochondria-dependent manner.

Kai S(1), Tanaka T, Daijo H, Harada H, Kishimoto S, Suzuki K, Takabuchi S,
Takenaga K, Fukuda K, Hirota K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia, Kyoto University Hospital, Japan.

AIMS: In addition to nitric oxide and carbon monoxide, hydrogen sulfide (H(2)S)
is an endogenously synthesized gaseous molecule that acts as an important
signaling molecule in the living body. Transcription factor hypoxia-inducible
factor 1 (HIF-1) is known to respond to intracellular reduced oxygen (O(2))
availability, which is regulated by an elaborate balance between O(2) supply and 
demand. However, the effect of H(2)S on HIF-1 activity under hypoxic conditions
is largely unknown in mammalian cells. In this study, we tried to elucidate the
effect of H(2)S on hypoxia-induced HIF-1 activation adopting cultured cells and
mice.
RESULTS: The H(2)S donors sodium hydrosulfide and sodium sulfide in
pharmacological concentrations reversibly reduced cellular O(2) consumption and
inhibited hypoxia- but not anoxia-induced HIF-1a protein accumulation and
expression of genes downstream of HIF-1 in established cell lines. H(2)S did not 
affect HIF-1 activation induced by the HIF-a hydroxylases inhibitors
desferrioxamine or CoCl(2). Experimental evidence adopting von Hippel-Lindau
(VHL)- or mitochondria-deficient cells indicated that H(2)S did not affect
neosynthesis of HIF-1a protein but destabilized HIF-1a in a VHL- and
mitochondria-dependent manner. We also demonstrate that exogenously administered 
H(2)S inhibited HIF-1-dependent gene expression in mice.
INNOVATION: For the first time, we show that H(2)S modulates intracellular O(2)
homeostasis and regulates activation of HIF-1 and the subsequent gene expression 
induced by hypoxia by using an in vitro system with established cell lines and an
in vivo system in mice.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that H(2)S inhibits hypoxia-induced HIF-1 activation 
in a VHL- and mitochondria-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC3234659
PMID: 22004513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Nat Genet. 2011 Oct 9;43(11):1114-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.958.

Genome-wide association study identifies a new melanoma susceptibility locus at
1q21.3.

Macgregor S(1), Montgomery GW, Liu JZ, Zhao ZZ, Henders AK, Stark M, Schmid H,
Holland EA, Duffy DL, Zhang M, Painter JN, Nyholt DR, Maskiell JA, Jetann J,
Ferguson M, Cust AE, Jenkins MA, Whiteman DC, Olsson H, Puig S, Bianchi-Scarrà G,
Hansson J, Demenais F, Landi MT, Debniak T, Mackie R, Azizi E, Bressac-de
Paillerets B, Goldstein AM, Kanetsky PA, Gruis NA, Elder DE, Newton-Bishop JA,
Bishop DT, Iles MM, Helsing P, Amos CI, Wei Q, Wang LE, Lee JE, Qureshi AA,
Kefford RF, Giles GG, Armstrong BK, Aitken JF, Han J, Hopper JL, Trent JM, Brown 
KM, Martin NG, Mann GJ, Hayward NK.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
stuart.macgregor@qimr.edu.au

We performed a genome-wide association study of melanoma in a discovery cohort of
2,168 Australian individuals with melanoma and 4,387 control individuals. In this
discovery phase, we confirm several previously characterized melanoma-associated 
loci at MC1R, ASIP and MTAP-CDKN2A. We selected variants at nine loci for
replication in three independent case-control studies (Europe: 2,804 subjects
with melanoma, 7,618 control subjects; United States 1: 1,804 subjects with
melanoma, 1,026 control subjects; United States 2: 585 subjects with melanoma,
6,500 control subjects). The combined meta-analysis of all case-control studies
identified a new susceptibility locus at 1q21.3 (rs7412746, P = 9.0 × 10(-11), OR
in combined replication cohorts of 0.89 (95% CI 0.85-0.95)). We also show
evidence suggesting that melanoma associates with 1q42.12 (rs3219090, P = 9.3 ×
10(-8)). The associated variants at the 1q21.3 locus span a region with ten
genes, and plausible candidate genes for melanoma susceptibility include ARNT and
SETDB1. Variants at the 1q21.3 locus do not seem to be associated with human
pigmentation or measures of nevus density.

PMCID: PMC3227560
PMID: 21983785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Cell Metab. 2011 Oct 5;14(4):491-503. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.08.006.

The differential role of Hif1ß/Arnt and the hypoxic response in adipose function,
fibrosis, and inflammation.

Lee KY(1), Gesta S, Boucher J, Wang XL, Kahn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Integrative Physiology and Metabolism, Joslin Diabetes Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

In obesity, adipocytes distant from vasculature become hypoxic and dysfunctional.
This hypoxic response is mediated by hypoxia-inducible factors (Hif1a, Hif2a, and
Hif3a) and their obligate partner, Hif1ß (Arnt). We show that mice lacking Hif1ß 
in fat (FH1ßKO) are lean, exhibit reduced adipocyte size, and are protected from 
age- and diet-induced glucose intolerance. There is also reduced Vegf and
vascular permeability in FH1ßKO fat, but diet-induced inflammation and fibrosis
is unchanged. Adipocytes from FH1ßKO mice have reduced glucose uptake due to
decreased Glut1 and Glut4, which is mirrored in 3T3-L1 adipocytes with Hif1ß
knockdown. Hif1ß knockdown cells also fail to respond appropriately to hypoxia
with reduced cellular respiration and reduced mitochondrial gene expression.
Some, but not all, of these effects are reproduced by Hif1a knockdown. Thus,
Hif1ß/Arnt regulates glucose uptake, mitochondrial gene expression, and vascular 
permeability to control adipose mass and function, providing a target for obesity
therapy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3206000
PMID: 21982709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Chem Inf Model. 2011 Nov 28;51(11):2868-81. doi: 10.1021/ci2001617. Epub 2011
Nov 2.

New aryl hydrocarbon receptor homology model targeted to improve docking
reliability.

Motto I(1), Bordogna A, Soshilov AA, Denison MS, Bonati L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze dell'Ambiente e del Territorio, Università degli Studi
di Milano-Bicocca, Piazza della Scienza 1, 20126 Milano, Italy.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-dependent, basic helix-loop-helix
Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) containing transcription factor that can bind and be activated
by structurally diverse chemicals, including the toxic environmental contaminant 
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). As no experimentally determined
structures of the AhR ligand binding domain (LBD) are available and previous
homology models were only derived from apo template structures, we developed a
new model based on holo X-ray structures of the hypoxia-inducible factor 2a
(HIF-2a) PAS B domain, targeted to improve the accuracy of the binding site for
molecular docking applications. We experimentally confirmed the ability of two
HIF-2a crystallographic ligands to bind to the mAhR with relatively high affinity
and demonstrated that they are AhR agonists, thus justifying the use of the holo 
HIF-2a structures as templates. A specific modeling/docking approach was proposed
to predict the binding modes of AhR ligands in the modeled LBD. It was validated 
by comparison of the calculated and the experimental binding affinities of active
THS ligands and TCDD for the mAhR and by functional activity analysis using
several mAhR mutants generated on the basis of the modeling results. Finally the 
ability of the proposed approach to reproduce the different affinities of TCDD
for AhRs of different species was confirmed, and a first test of its reliability 
in virtual screening is carried out by analyzing the correlation between the
calculated and experimental binding affinities of a set of 14 PCDDs.

PMCID: PMC3263330
PMID: 21981577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25418. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025418. Epub 2011 Sep 29.

An a/ß hydrolase and associated Per-ARNT-Sim domain comprise a bipartite sensing 
module coupled with diverse output domains.

Nadezhdin EV(1), Brody MS, Price CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of California Davis, Davis, California,
United States of America.

The RsbQ a/ß hydrolase and RsbP serine phosphatase form a signaling pair required
to activate the general stress factor s(B) of Bacillus subtilis in response to
energy limitation. RsbP has a predicted N-terminal Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domain, a
central coiled-coil, and a C-terminal protein phosphatase M (PPM) domain.
Previous studies support a model in which RsbQ provides an activity needed for
PAS to regulate the phosphatase domain via the coiled-coil. RsbQ and the PAS
domain (RsbP-PAS) therefore appear to form a sensory module. Here we test this
hypothesis using bioinformatic and genetic analysis. We found 45 RsbQ and
RsbP-PAS homologues encoded by adjacent genes in diverse bacteria, with PAS and a
predicted coiled-coil fused to one of three output domains: PPM phosphatase (Gram
positive bacteria), histidine protein kinase (Gram negative bacteria), and
diguanylate cyclase (both lineages). Multiple alignment of the RsbP-PAS
homologues suggested nine residues that distinguish the class. Alanine
substitutions at four of these conferred a null phenotype in B. subtilis,
indicating their functional importance. The F55A null substitution lay in the Fa 
helix of an RsbP-PAS model. F55A inhibited interaction of RsbP with RsbQ in yeast
two-hybrid and pull-down assays but did not significantly affect interaction of
RsbP with itself. We propose that RsbQ directly contacts the PAS domains of an
RsbP oligomer to provide the activating signal, which is propagated to the
phosphatase domains via the coiled-coil. A similar mechanism would allow the
RsbQ-PAS module to convey a common input signal to structurally diverse output
domains, controlling a variety of physiological responses.

PMCID: PMC3183031
PMID: 21980452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25231. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025231. Epub 2011 Sep 22.

Deficient of a clock gene, brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1), induces 
dyslipidemia and ectopic fat formation.

Shimba S(1), Ogawa T, Hitosugi S, Ichihashi Y, Nakadaira Y, Kobayashi M, Tezuka
M, Kosuge Y, Ishige K, Ito Y, Komiyama K, Okamatsu-Ogura Y, Kimura K, Saito M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Science, School of Pharmacy, Nihon University, Funabashi,
Chiba, Japan. shimba.shigeki@nihon-u.ac.jp

A link between circadian rhythm and metabolism has long been discussed. Circadian
rhythm is controlled by positive and negative transcriptional and translational
feedback loops composed of several clock genes. Among clock genes, the brain and 
muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1) and circadian locomotor output cycles kaput
(CLOCK) play important roles in the regulation of the positive rhythmic
transcription. In addition to control of circadian rhythm, we have previously
shown that BMAL1 regulates adipogenesis. In metabolic syndrome patients, the
function of BMAL1 is dysregulated in visceral adipose tissue. In addition,
analysis of SNPs has revealed that BMAL1 is associated with susceptibility to
hypertension and type II diabetes. Furthermore, the significant roles of BMAL1 in
pancreatic ß cells proliferation and maturation were recently reported. These
results suggest that BMAL1 regulates energy homeostasis. Therefore, in this
study, we examined whether loss of BMAL1 function is capable of inducing
metabolic syndrome. Deficient of the Bmal1 gene in mice resulted in elevation of 
the respiratory quotient value, indicating that BMAL1 is involved in the
utilization of fat as an energy source. Indeed, lack of Bmal1 reduced the
capacity of fat storage in adipose tissue, resulting in an increase in the levels
of circulating fatty acids, including triglycerides, free fatty acids, and
cholesterol. Elevation of the circulating fatty acids level induced the formation
of ectopic fat in the liver and skeletal muscle in Bmal1 -/- mice. Interestingly,
ectopic fat formation was not observed in tissue-specific (liver or skeletal
muscle) Bmal1 -/- mice even under high fat diet feeding condition. Therefore, we 
were led to conclude that BMAL1 is a crucial factor in the regulation of energy
homeostasis, and disorders of the functions of BMAL1 lead to the development of
metabolic syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3178629
PMID: 21966465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Lab Invest. 2012 Jan;92(1):110-24. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2011.134. Epub 2011 Sep
26.

Loss of Arnt (Hif1ß) in mouse epidermis triggers dermal angiogenesis, blood
vessel dilation and clotting defects.

Wondimu A(1), Weir L, Robertson D, Mezentsev A, Kalachikov S, Panteleyev AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

Targeted ablation of Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) in the
mouse epidermis results in severe abnormalities in dermal vasculature reminiscent
of petechia induced in human skin by anticoagulants or certain genetic disorders.
Lack of Arnt leads to downregulation of Egln3/Phd3 hydroxylase and concomitant
hypoxia-independent stabilization of hypoxia-induced factor 1a (Hif1a) along with
compensatory induction of Arnt2. Ectopic induction of Arnt2 results in its
heterodimerization with stabilized Hif1a and is associated with activation of
genes coding for secreted proteins implicated in control of angiogenesis,
coagulation, vasodilation and blood vessel permeability such as S100a8/S100a9,
S100a10, Serpine1, Defb3, Socs3, Cxcl1 and Thbd. Since ARNT and ARNT2
heterodimers with HIF1a are known to have different (yet overlapping) downstream 
targets our findings suggest that loss of Arnt in the epidermis activates an
aberrant paracrine regulatory pathway responsible for dermal vascular phenotype
in K14-Arnt KO mice. This assumption is supported by a significant decline of von
Willebrand factor in dermal vasculature of these mice where Arnt level remains
normal. Given the essential role of ARNT in the adaptive response to
environmental stress and striking similarity between skin vascular phenotype in
K14-Arnt KO mice and specific vascular features of tumour stroma and psoriatic
skin, we believe that further characterization of Arnt-dependent epidermal-dermal
signalling may provide insight into the role of macro- and micro-environmental
factors in control of skin vasculature and in pathogenesis of environmentally
modulated skin disorders.

PMID: 21946855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Diabetes. 2011 Nov;60(11):2883-91. doi: 10.2337/db11-0340. Epub 2011 Sep 20.

FoxO feedback control of basal IRS-2 expression in pancreatic ß-cells is distinct
from that in hepatocytes.

Tsunekawa S(1), Demozay D, Briaud I, McCuaig J, Accili D, Stein R, Rhodes CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Kovler Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Appropriate regulation of insulin receptor substrate 2 (IRS-2)
expression in pancreatic ß-cells is essential to adequately compensate for
insulin resistance. In liver, basal IRS-2 expression is controlled via a temporal
negative feedback of sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1 (SREBP-1) to
antagonize transcription factors forkhead box class O (FoxO)1/FoxO3a at an
insulin response element (IRE) on the IRS-2 promoter. The purpose of the study
was to examine if a similar mechanism controlled IRS-2 expression in ß-cells.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: IRS-2 mRNA and protein expression, as well as IRS-2 
gene promoter activity, were examined in isolated rat islets. Specific
transcription factor association with the IRE on the IRS-2 promoter was examined 
by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, and their nuclear translocation
was examined by immunofluorescence. A direct in vivo effect of insulin on control
of IRS-2 expression in liver and pancreatic islets was also investigated.
RESULTS: In IRS-2 promoter-reporter assays conducted in isolated islets, removal 
of the IRE decreased basal IRS-2 promoter activity in ß-cells up to 80%.
Activation of IRS signaling in isolated rat islets by insulin/IGF-I (used as an
experimental in vitro tool) or downstream constitutive activation of protein
kinase B (PKB) significantly decreased IRS-2 expression. In contrast, inhibition 
of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) or PKB significantly increased IRS-2
levels in ß-cells. ChIP assays indicated that transcription factors FoxO1 and
FoxO3a associated with the IRE on the IRS-2 promoter in ß-cells in a
PI3K/PKB-dependent manner, whereas others, such as SREBP-1, the transcription
factor binding to immunoglobulin heavy chain enhancer 3', and the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), did not. However, only FoxO3a, 
not FoxO1, was capable of driving IRS-2 promoter activity via the IRE in ß-cells.
In vivo studies showed insulin was able to suppress IRS-2 expression via
activation of SREBP-1 in the liver, but this mechanism was not apparent in
pancreatic islets from the same animal.
CONCLUSIONS: The molecular mechanism for feedback control of IRS signaling to
decrease IRS-2 expression in liver and ß-cells is quite distinct, with a
predominant role played by FoxO3a in ß-cells.

PMCID: PMC3198101
PMID: 21933986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Dec 15;20(24):5012-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr415. Epub 2011 Sep
17.

Genome-wide association study identifies novel loci predisposing to cutaneous
melanoma.

Amos CI(1), Wang LE, Lee JE, Gershenwald JE, Chen WV, Fang S, Kosoy R, Zhang M,
Qureshi AA, Vattathil S, Schacherer CW, Gardner JM, Wang Y, Bishop DT, Barrett
JH; GenoMEL Investigators, MacGregor S, Hayward NK, Martin NG, Duffy DL; Q-Mega
Investigators, Mann GJ, Cust A, Hopper J; AMFS Investigators, Brown KM, Grimm EA,
Xu Y, Han Y, Jing K, McHugh C, Laurie CC, Doheny KF, Pugh EW, Seldin MF, Han J,
Wei Q.

Collaborators: Mann GJ, Hopper JL, Aitken JF, Armstrong BK, Giles GG, Kefford RF,
Cust AE, Jenkins MA, Schmid H, Aguilera P, Badenas C, Carrera C, Cuellar F,
Gabriel D, Martinez E, Gonzalez M, Iglesias P, Malvehy J, Marti-Laborda R, Mila
M, Ogbah Z, Butille JA, Puig S, Alós L, Arance A, Arguís P, Campo A, Castel T,
Conill C, Palou J, Rull R, Sánchez M, Vidal-Sicart S, Vilalta A, Vilella R,
Martin NG, Montgomery GW, Duffy DL, Whiteman DC, MacGregor S, Hayward NK,
Whiteman D, Webb P, Green A, Parsons P, Purdie D, Hayward N, Landi MT, Calista D,
Landi G, Minghetti P, Arcangeli F, Bertazzi PA, Bianchi-Scarra G, Ghiorzo P,
Pastorino L, Bruno W, Battistuzzi L, Gargiulo S, Nasti S, Gliori S, Origone P,
Andreotti V, Queirolo P, Mackie R, Lang J, Bishop JA, Affleck P, Barrett JH,
Bishop DT, Harrison J, Iles MM, Randerson-Moor J, Harland M, Taylor JC, Whittaker
L, Kukalizch K, Leake S, Karpavicius B, Haynes S, Mack T, Chan M, Taylor Y,
Davies J, King P, Gruis NA, van Nieuwpoort FA, Out C, van der Drift C, Bergman W,
Kukutsch N, Bavinck JN, Bakker B, van der Stoep N, ter Huurne J, van der Rhee H, 
Bekkenk M, Snels D, van Praag M, Brochez L, Gerritsen R, Crijns M, Vasen H,
Olsson H, Ingvar C, Jönsson G, Borg Å, Måsbäck A, Lundgren L, Baeckenhorn K,
Nielsen K, Casslén AS, Helsing P, Andresen PA, Rootwelt H, Akslen LA, Molven A,
Avril MF, Bressac-de Paillerets B, Chaudru V, Chateigner N, Corda E, Jeannin P,
Lesueur F, de Lichy M, Maubec E, Mohamdi H, Demenais F, Andry-Benzaquen P,
Bachollet B, Bérard F, Berthet P, Boitier F, Bonadona V, Bonafé JL, Bonnetblanc
JM, Cambazard F, Caron O, Caux F, Chevrant-Breton J, Chompret A, Dalle S, Demange
L, Dereure O, Doré MX, Doutre MS, Dugast C, Faivre L, Grange F, Humbert P, Joly
P, Kerob D, Lasset C, Leccia MT, Lenoir G, Leroux D, Levang J, Lipsker D, Mansard
S, Martin L, Martin-Denavit T, Mateus C, Michel JL, Morel P, Olivier-Faivre L,
Perrot JL, Robert C, Ronger-Savle S, Sassolas B, Souteyrand P, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, 
Thomas L, Vabres P, Wierzbicka E, Elder D, Kanetsky P, Knorr J, Ming M, Mitra N, 
Ruffin A, Van Belle P, Debniak T, Lubinski J, Mirecka A, Ertmanski S, Novakovic
S, Hocevar M, Peric B, Cerkovnik P, Höiom V, Hansson J, Mann GJ, Kefford RF,
Schmid H, Holland EA, Azizi E, Galore-Haskel G, Friedman E, Baron-Epel O, Scope
A, Pavlotsky F, Yakobson E, Cohen-Manheim I, Laitman Y, Milgrom R, Shimoni I,
Kozlovaa E.

We performed a multistage genome-wide association study of melanoma. In a
discovery cohort of 1804 melanoma cases and 1026 controls, we identified loci at 
chromosomes 15q13.1 (HERC2/OCA2 region) and 16q24.3 (MC1R) regions that reached
genome-wide significance within this study and also found strong evidence for
genetic effects on susceptibility to melanoma from markers on chromosome 9p21.3
in the p16/ARF region and on chromosome 1q21.3 (ARNT/LASS2/ANXA9 region). The
most significant single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 15q13.1 locus
(rs1129038 and rs12913832) lie within a genomic region that has profound effects 
on eye and skin color; notably, 50% of variability in eye color is associated
with variation in the SNP rs12913832. Because eye and skin colors vary across
European populations, we further evaluated the associations of the significant
SNPs after carefully adjusting for European substructure. We also evaluated the
top 10 most significant SNPs by using data from three other genome-wide scans.
Additional in silico data provided replication of the findings from the most
significant region on chromosome 1q21.3 rs7412746 (P = 6 × 10(-10)). Together,
these data identified several candidate genes for additional studies to identify 
causal variants predisposing to increased risk for developing melanoma.

PMCID: PMC3298855
PMID: 21926416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Mol Biol. 2011 Oct 28;413(3):561-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.08.048. Epub 2011 
Sep 3.

Structure of an enclosed dimer formed by the Drosophila period protein.

King HA(1), Hoelz A, Crane BR, Young MW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Period (PER) is the major transcription inhibitor in metazoan circadian clocks
and lies at the center of several feedback loops that regulate gene expression.
Dimerization of Drosophila PER influences nuclear translocation, repressor
activity, and behavioral rhythms. The structure of a central, 346-residue PER
fragment reveals two associated PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) domains followed by a
protruding a-helical extension (aF). A closed, pseudo-symmetric dimer forms from 
a cross handshake interaction of the N-terminal PAS domain with aF of the
opposing subunit. Strikingly, a shift of aF against the PAS ß-sheet generates two
alternative subunit interfaces in the dimer. Taken together with a previously
reported PER structure in which aF extends, these data indicate that aF unlatches
to switch association of PER with itself to its partner Timeless. The variable
positions of the aF helix provide snapshots of a helix dissociation mechanism
that has relevance to other PAS protein systems. Conservation of PER interaction 
residues among a family of PAS-AB-containing transcription factors suggests that 
contacts mediating closed PAS-AB dimers serve a general function.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3252215
PMID: 21907720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2012 Mar;110(3):253-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1742-7843.2011.00790.x. Epub 2011 Oct 10.

Expression and inducibility of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1As in MCF-7 human
breast carcinoma cells.

Hanioka N(1), Iwabu H, Hanafusa H, Nakada S, Narimatsu S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama
University, 1-1-1 Tsushima-naka, Kita-ku, Okayama, Japan.
nhanioka@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp

UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are conjugation enzymes, which are regulated 
in a tissue-specific manner by endogenous and environmental factors. In this
study, we focused on UGT1A isoforms broadly expressed in hepatic and extrahepatic
tissues and examined the expression and inducibility of UGT1As (UGT1A1 and
UGT1A3-1A10) in MCF-7 cells (human breast carcinoma cell line). Reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis demonstrated that
UGT1A1, UGT1A6 and UGT1A9 mRNAs as well as the mRNAs of transcriptional
regulators (AhR, aryl hydrocarbon receptor; Arnt, AhR nuclear translocator; ERa, 
oestrogen receptor a; ERß, oestrogen receptor ß; and GR, glucocorticoid receptor)
are expressed in MCF-7 cells. UGT1A6 mRNA level in MCF-7 cells was significantly 
increased to 1.9 times by ß-naphthoflavone (BNF), whereas UGT1A1 and UGT1A9 mRNA 
levels were not affected by BNF. There were no significant changes in the mRNAs
of UGT1A1, UGT1A6 and UGT1A9 in MCF-7 cells by treatment with phenobarbital (PB) 
and dexamethasone (DEX) in MCF-7 cells. The kinetics of
7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin (SN-38), 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) and
4-methylumbelliferone (4-MU) glucuronidation by microsomes from control and
BNF-treated MCF-7 cells fitted with the Michaelis-Menten model, and the V(max)
and CL(int) values were significantly increased to 7.5-8.5 times and 5.9-10.4
times by BNF treatment, respectively. These findings suggest that BNF induces
UGT1A6 in MCF-7 cells and that the increase may be mediated by AhR but not
pregnane X receptor (PXR)/constitutive androstane receptor (CAR). The information
gained in this study should help predict and assess the toxicity of environmental
chemicals.

© 2011 The Authors. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology © 2011 Nordic
Pharmacological Society.

PMID: 21902811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Zoolog Sci. 2011 Sep;28(9):671-5. doi: 10.2108/zsj.28.671.

Molecular characterization of alternative transcripts of the horse BMAL1 gene.

Bae JH(1), Ahn K, Nam GH, Lee CE, Park KD, Lee HK, Cho BW, Kim HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea.

The horse BMAL1 gene encodes the brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1, which is a
key regulator of circadian rhythmic systems in most organs and cells. The first
exon of the horse-specific BMAL1 gene is produced by an exonization event of
LINE3 (CR1) and SINE (MIR) was detected by bioinformatic analysis. Alternative
variants generated by cassette exon event in various horse tissues were also
detected by RT-PCR amplification and sequencing. The cDNA sequences of the horse 
transcripts (BMAL1a, BMAL1b) contain additional 21 bp and 71 bp fragments
relative to horse BMAL1. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR was performed to compare
the expression patterns between transcript variants in various horse tissues. The
results of these experiments showed splice variants that were widely expressed in
most tissues. Furthermore, they were highly expressed in cerebellum, heart, and
kidney.

PMID: 21882956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Diabetes. 2011 Oct;60(10):2484-95. doi: 10.2337/db11-0174. Epub 2011 Aug 26.

Disruption of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 in adipocytes improves insulin
sensitivity and decreases adiposity in high-fat diet-fed mice.

Jiang C(1), Qu A, Matsubara T, Chanturiya T, Jou W, Gavrilova O, Shah YM,
Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Obesity, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes form a tightly
correlated cluster of metabolic disorders in which adipose is one of the first
affected tissues. The role of hypoxia and hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF1) in
the development of high-fat diet (HFD)-induced obesity and insulin resistance was
investigated using animal models.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Mice with adipocyte-specific targeted disruption of 
the genes encoding the HIF1 obligatory subunits Hif1a or Arnt (Hif1ß) were
generated using an aP2-Cre transgene with the Cre/LoxP system. The mice were fed 
an HFD for 12 weeks and their metabolic phenotypes were determined. Gene
expression patterns in adipose tissues were also determined by microarray and
quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: On an HFD, adipocyte-specific ARNT knockout mice and adipocyte-specific 
HIF1a knockout mice exhibit similar metabolic phenotypes, including reduced fat
formation, protection from HFD-induced obesity, and insulin resistance compared
with similarly fed wild-type controls. The cumulative food intake remained
similar; however, the metabolic efficiency was lower in adipocyte-specific HIF1a 
knockout mice. Moreover, indirect calorimetry revealed respiratory exchange
ratios were reduced in adipocyte-specific HIF1a knockout mice.
Hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp studies demonstrated that targeted disruption
of HIF1a in adipocytes enhanced whole-body insulin sensitivity. The improvement
of insulin resistance is associated with decreased expression of Socs3 and
induction of adiponectin.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of HIF1 in adipose tissue ameliorates obesity and insulin
resistance. This study reveals that HIF1 could provide a novel potential
therapeutic target for obesity and type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3178277
PMID: 21873554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 7;286(40):35275-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.246439. Epub 2011
Aug 19.

Ligand displaces heat shock protein 90 from overlapping binding sites within the 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligand-binding domain.

Soshilov A(1), Denison MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis,
California 95616-8588, USA.

Hsp90 (heat shock protein of 90 kDa) is often found associated with functional
domains of client proteins, including those for ligand binding, dimerization, DNA
binding, and enzymatic activity. Although Hsp90 can maintain the conformation of 
functionally important domains prior to activation of the client protein, its
specific binding site and the mechanism(s) of Hsp90 dissociation during
activation are unknown. Here, we have identified and characterized residues
involved in Hsp90 binding within the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
ligand-binding domain and demonstrate that they overlap with those involved in
ligand binding. In agreement with this spatial model, ligand binding results in
Hsp90 dissociation from the AhR Per-ARNT-Sim B fragment. Interestingly, whereas
Hsp90-binding residues within the ligand-binding domain were not involved in
Hsp90-dependent AhR protein stability, several of these residues are important
for ligand-dependent AhR activation, and their mutation resulted in conversion of
two AhR antagonists/partial agonists into full AhR agonists. These studies reveal
co-localization of a tentative Hsp90-binding site with that for AhR ligand
binding and provide the first molecular mechanism for Hsp90 dissociation in the
activation of a client protein.

PMCID: PMC3186366
PMID: 21856752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Mol Microbiol. 2011 Oct;82(1):222-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2011.07812.x. Epub
2011 Sep 8.

Substitutions in the redox-sensing PAS domain of the NifL regulatory protein
define an inter-subunit pathway for redox signal transmission.

Little R(1), Salinas P, Slavny P, Clarke TA, Dixon R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, John Innes Centre, Norwich Research
Park, Norwich NR47UH, UK.

The Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domain is a conserved a/ß fold present within a plethora
of signalling proteins from all kingdoms of life. PAS domains are often dimeric
and act as versatile sensory and interaction modules to propagate environmental
signals to effector domains. The NifL regulatory protein from Azotobacter
vinelandii senses the oxygen status of the cell via an FAD cofactor accommodated 
within the first of two amino-terminal tandem PAS domains, termed PAS1 and PAS2. 
The redox signal perceived at PAS1 is relayed to PAS2 resulting in conformational
reorganization of NifL and consequent inhibition of NifA activity. We have
identified mutations in the cofactor-binding cavity of PAS1 that prevent
'release' of the inhibitory signal upon oxidation of FAD. Substitutions of
conserved ß-sheet residues on the distal surface of the FAD-binding cavity trap
PAS1 in the inhibitory signalling state, irrespective of the redox state of the
FAD group. In contrast, substitutions within the flanking A'a-helix that
comprises part of the dimerization interface of PAS1 prevent transmission of the 
inhibitory signal. Taken together, these results suggest an inter-subunit pathway
for redox signal transmission from PAS1 that propagates from core to the surface 
in a conformation-dependent manner requiring a flexible dimer interface.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21854469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Environ Health Perspect. 2011 Dec;119(12):1739-44. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1103593. Epub
2011 Aug 17.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor deficiency enhances insulin sensitivity and reduces
PPAR-a pathway activity in mice.

Wang C(1), Xu CX, Krager SL, Bottum KM, Liao DF, Tischkau SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine,
Springfield, Illinois 62974-9629, USA.

BACKGROUND: Numerous man-made pollutants activate the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR) and are risk factors for type 2 diabetes. AhR signaling also affects
molecular clock genes to influence glucose metabolism.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated mechanisms by which AhR activation affects glucose
metabolism.
METHODS: Glucose tolerance, insulin resistance, and expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-a (PPAR-a) and genes affecting glucose metabolism
or fatty acid oxidation and clock gene rhythms were investigated in wild-type
(WT) and AhR-deficient [knockout (KO)] mice. AhR agonists and small interfering
RNA (siRNA) were used to examine the effect of AhR on PPAR-a expression and
glycolysis in the liver cell line Hepa-1c1c7 (c7) and its c12 and c4 derivatives.
Brain, muscle ARNT-like protein 1 (Bmal1) siRNA and Ahr or Bmal1 expression
plasmids were used to analyze the effect of BMAL1 on PPAR-a expression in c7
cells.
RESULTS: KO mice displayed enhanced insulin sensitivity and improved glucose
tolerance, accompanied by decreased PPAR-a and key gluconeogenic and fatty acid
oxidation enzymes. AhR agonists increased PPAR-a expression in c7 cells. Both Ahr
and Bmal1 siRNA reduced PPAR-a and metabolism genes. Moreover, rhythms of BMAL1
and blood glucose were altered in KO mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate a link between AhR signaling, circadian
rhythms, and glucose metabolism. Furthermore, hepatic activation of the PPAR-a
pathway provides a mechanism underlying AhR-mediated insulin resistance.

PMCID: PMC3261983
PMID: 21849270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011 Oct;301(4):H1519-30. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.01080.2010. Epub 2011 Aug 12.

microRNA-210 is upregulated in hypoxic cardiomyocytes through Akt- and
p53-dependent pathways and exerts cytoprotective effects.

Mutharasan RK(1), Nagpal V, Ichikawa Y, Ardehali H.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Northwestern University, Chicago, 
Illinois 60611, USA.

microRNA-210 (miR-210) is upregulated in hypoxia, but its function in
cardiomyocytes and its regulation in response to hypoxia are not well
characterized. The purpose of this study was to identify upstream regulators of
miR-210, as well as to characterize miR-210's function in cardiomyocytes. We
first showed miR-210 is upregulated through both hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF)-dependent and -independent pathways, since aryl hydrocarbon nuclear
translocator (ARNT) knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF), lacking intact
HIF signaling, still displayed increased miR-210 levels in hypoxia. To determine 
the mechanism for HIF-independent regulation of miR-210, we focused on p53 and
protein kinase B (Akt). Overexpression of p53 in wild-type MEFs induced miR-210, 
whereas p53 overexpression in ARNT knockout MEFs did not, suggesting p53
regulates miR-210 in a HIF-dependent mechanism. Akt inhibition reduced miR-210
induction by hypoxia, whereas Akt overexpression increased miR-210 levels in both
wild-type and ARNT knockout MEFs, indicating Akt regulation of miR-210 is
HIF-independent. We then studied the effects of miR-210 in cardiomyocytes.
Overexpression of miR-210 reduced cell death in response to oxidative stress and 
reduced reactive oxygen species (ROS) production both at baseline and after
treatment with antimycin A. Furthermore, downregulation of miR-210 increased ROS 
after hypoxia-reoxygenation. To determine a mechanism for the cytoprotective
effects of miR-210, we focused on the predicted target, apoptosis-inducing
factor, mitochondrion-associated 3 (AIFM3), known to induce cell death. Although 
miR-210 reduced AIFM3 levels, overexpression of AIFM3 in the presence of miR-210 
overexpression did not reduce cellular viability either at baseline or after
hydrogen peroxide treatment, suggesting AIFM3 does not mediate miR-210's
cytoprotective effects. Furthermore, HIF-3a, a negative regulator of HIF
signaling, is targeted by miR-210, but miR-210 does not modulate HIF activity. In
conclusion, we demonstrate a novel role for p53 and Akt in regulating miR-210 and
demonstrate that, in cardiomyocytes, miR-210 exerts cytoprotective effects,
potentially by reducing mitochondrial ROS production.

PMCID: PMC3197368
PMID: 21841015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2011;26(6):637-45. doi: 10.2133/dmpk.DMPK-11-SC-031.
Epub 2011 Aug 9.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the human aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (ARNT) gene.

Urban JD(1), Budinsky RA, Rowlands JC.

Author information: 
(1)ToxStrategies, Texas, USA.

Species' variation(s) in gene homologues can result in differences among species 
in their quantitative and qualitative susceptibility and responsiveness to
environmental contaminants. In the case of dioxin-like compounds (DLCs), it has
been hypothesized that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes associated
with aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)-regulated pathways may result in greater
susceptibility to DLC toxicity. A key step in the activation of AHR involves
heterodimerization with the AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) protein before
binding to its DNA response element. The objective of this study was to identify 
SNPs in the human ARNT gene that could potentially affect the sensitivity of
AHR-dependent gene transcription. Results from DNA sequencing of 101 human
samples demonstrated the presence of five unique SNPs at the ARNT locus,
including three non-synonymous SNPs, of which two were novel: V304M and T462A.
The genetic frequencies of the non-synonymous SNPs were very low (=0.02), and the
novel SNPs occurred in the Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) functional domain. In silico
analysis indicated that V304M was the only SNP identified in the current
population with the potential to significantly alter ARNT protein function. Our
findings indicated a very limited occurrence of SNPs with predicted functional
consequence in key domains of human ARNT.

PMID: 21828933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Mol Model. 2012 May;18(5):1691-700. doi: 10.1007/s00894-011-1150-0. Epub 2011
Aug 5.

Computational modeling on the recognition of the HRE motif by HIF-1: molecular
docking and molecular dynamics studies.

Sokkar P(1), Sathis V, Ramachandran M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India.

Hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a bHLH-family transcription factor that
controls genes involved in glycolysis, angiogenesis, migration, as well as
invasion factors that are important for tumor progression and metastasis. HIF-1, 
a heterodimer of HIF-1a and HIF-1ß, binds to the hypoxia responsive element (HRE)
present in the promoter regions of hypoxia responsive genes, such as vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Neither the structure of free HIF-1 nor that of
its complex with HRE is available. Computational modeling of the transcription
factor-DNA complex has always been challenging due to their inherent flexibility 
and large conformational space. The present study aims to model the interaction
between the DNA-binding domain of HIF-1 and HRE. Experiments showed that rigid
macromolecular docking programs (HEX and GRAMM-X) failed to predict the optimal
dimerization of individually modeled HIF-1 subunits. Hence, the HIF-1 heterodimer
was modeled based on the phosphate system positive regulatory protein (PHO4)
homodimer. The duplex VEGF-DNA segment containing HRE with flanking nucleotides
was modeled in the B form and equilibrated via molecular dynamics (MD)
simulation. A rigid docking approach was used to predict the crude binding mode
of HIF-1 dimer with HRE, in which the putative contacts were found to be present.
An MD simulation (5 ns) of the HIF-1-HRE complex in explicit water was performed 
to account for its flexibility and to optimize its interactions. All of the
conserved amino acid residues were found to play roles in the recognition of HRE.
The present work, which sheds light on the recognition of HRE by HIF-1, could be 
beneficial in the design of peptide or small molecule therapeutics that can mimic
HIF-1 and bind with the HRE sequence.

PMID: 21814878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Toxicol Lett. 2011 Oct 10;206(2):204-9. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2011.07.014. Epub
2011 Jul 23.

Gene expression and inducibility of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-dependent
pathway in cultured bovine blood lymphocytes.

Girolami F(1), Spalenza V, Carletti M, Perona G, Sacchi P, Rasero R, Nebbia C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Pathology, University of Turin, Via Leonardo da Vinci 44,
Grugliasco, Italy.

The exposure to dioxin-like (DL) compounds, an important class of persistent
environmental pollutants, results in the altered expression of target genes. This
occurs through the binding to the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), the subsequent
dimerization with the AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT), and the binding of the
complex to DNA responsive elements. A number of genes are up-regulated,
including, among others, the AhR repressor (AHRR) and several biotransformation
enzymes, such as the members of CYP1 family and NAD(P)H-quinone oxidoreductase
(NOQ1). The expression and the inducibility of the above genes were investigated 
in mitogen-stimulated cultured blood lymphocytes from cattle, which represent a
notable source of DL-compound human exposure through dairy products and meat. As 
assessed by real-time PCR, all the examined genes except CYP1A2 and NQO1 were
detected under basal conditions. Cell exposure to the DL-compounds PCB126 or
PCB77 in the 10(-6)-10(-9)M concentration range resulted in a 2-4-fold induction 
of CYPIA1 and CYP1B1, which was antagonized by a-naphthoflavone or PCB153. This
study demonstrates for the first time the presence and inducibility of the AhR
pathway in easily accessible cells like bovine peripheral lymphocytes and prompts
further investigations to verify whether similar changes could occur under in
vivo conditions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21803134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Nov;31(11):2552-9. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.229062.

Progression of the prothrombotic state in aging Bmal1-deficient mice.

Hemmeryckx B(1), Van Hove CE, Fransen P, Emmerechts J, Kauskot A, Bult H, Lijnen 
HR, Hoylaerts MF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Nov;31(11):2361-3.

OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study was to examine the functional relationship
between aging endothelium and thrombogenicity in a mouse model of premature
aging.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Coagulation tests and factors, blood cell counts, aorta
endothelial function, aorta gene expression, and FeCl(3)-induced thrombosis in
mesenteric blood vessels were analyzed in 10- to 30-week-old brain and muscle
ARNT-like protein-1 (Bmal1)-deficient (knockout [KO]) mice and wild-type
littermates. Ten-week-old KO mice manifested shortened prothrombin times (9.7
versus 11.3 seconds in wild-type) and elevated plasma fibrinogen (264 versus 172 
mg/dL). At 30 weeks, factor VII (198% versus 149%), and platelet counts (2049
versus 1354 K/µL) were increased in KO mice. Gene deficiency reduced the
vasoactive nitric oxide production at 10 and 30 weeks and tended to reduce and
increase the protein expression of thrombomodulin and von Willebrand factor,
respectively, with aging. Shortened venular and arteriolar occlusion times on
FeCl(3)-induced injury in 10-week-old KO mice confirmed higher thrombogenicity,
culminating in priapism, observed in 60% of 25- to 30-week-old KO males.
CONCLUSION: Endothelial dysfunction and a hypercoagulable state cause early
arterial and venous thrombogenicity in Bmal1 KO mice. With aging, progressive
endothelial dysfunction, rising platelet counts, and high factor VII further
enhance thrombogenicity, provoking priapism.

PMID: 21799179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mol Pharmacol. 2011 Oct;80(4):673-82. doi: 10.1124/mol.111.071381. Epub 2011 Jul 
26.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor activation in hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
alters cell function and pathway-specific gene modulation reflecting changes in
cellular trafficking and migration.

Casado FL(1), Singh KP, Gasiewicz TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, 
USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a transcription factor belonging to the
Per-ARNT-Sim family of proteins. These proteins sense molecules and stimuli from 
the cellular/tissue environment and initiate signaling cascades to elicit
appropriate cellular responses. Recent literature reports suggest an important
function of AhR in hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) biology. However, the molecular 
mechanisms by which AhR signaling regulates HSC functions are unknown. In
previous studies, we and others reported that treatment of mice with the AhR
agonist 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) compromises the competitive
reconstitution of bone marrow (BM) cells into irradiated host animals. Additional
studies indicated a requirement for AhR in hematopoietic cells and not marrow
microenvironment cells. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that
TCDD-mediated phenotypic and functional changes of HSCs are a result of changes
in gene expression that disrupt stem cell numbers and/or their migration. TCDD
treatment to mice increased the numbers of phenotypically defined HSCs in BM.
These cells showed compromised migration to the BM in vivo and to the chemokine
CXCL12 in vitro, as well as increased expression of the leukemia-associated
receptors CD184 (CXCR4) and CD44. Gene expression profiles at 6 and 12 h after
exposure were consistent with the phenotypic and functional changes observed. The
expressions of Scin, Nqo1, Flnb, Mmp8, Ilf9, and Slamf7 were consistently
altered. TCDD also disrupted expression of other genes involved in hematological 
system development and function including Fos, JunB, Egr1, Ptgs2 (Cox2), and
Cxcl2. These data support a molecular mechanism for an AhR ligand to disrupt the 
homeostatic cell signaling of HSCs that may promote altered HSC function.

PMCID: PMC3187533
PMID: 21791576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Sep 1;137(1):902-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.06.047. Epub
2011 Jul 12.

Modified expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-related genes by
deoxymiroestrol, a phytoestrogen, in mouse hepatocytes in primary culture.

Udomsuk L(1), Jarukamjorn K, Putalun W, Sakuma T, Kawasaki Y, Nemoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Deoxymiroestrol (DM), a strong phytoestrogen from
Pueraria candollei Wall. ex Benth. var. mirifica (family Leguminosae). This plant
has long been used in traditional medicine for rejuvenation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-related genes 
in mouse hepatocytes in primary culture was quantified by real-time RT-PCR and
hepatic microsomal P450 activity was assessed by using ethoxyresorufin
O-dealkylation.
RESULTS: The mRNA expression of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), AhR nuclear 
translocator, and CYP1A1 was suppressed, whereas that of CYP1B1, estrogen
receptor a (ERa), CYP2B9, and glutathione-S-transferase a2 (GSTa2) was increased.
The effects of DM on the gene expression depended on treatment period and
concentrations, and were similar to those of ß-estradiol (E2). DM and E2 at
pharmacological concentrations had a marked synergistic effect on CYP1A1
expression after combined treatment with a typical CYP1 inducer, ß-naphthoflavone
(ßNF), at the level of both transcription and enzymatic activity. DM enhanced the
inducible mRNA expression of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 similar to E2. Meanwhile, the
expression of ERa mRNA was not affected by ßNF, which, on the contrary,
completely eliminated the DM-induced mRNA expression of ERa, CYP2B9, and GSTa2.
CONCLUSION: The findings that DM modified the expression of several
metabolism-related genes suggest the need for caution when using health
supplements having phytoestrogenic activity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21777665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Aug;89(4):396-404. doi: 10.1139/O11-028. Epub 2011 Jul
20.

A PAS domain within F plasmid TraJ is critical for its function as a
transcriptional activator.

Arutyunov D(1), Rodriguez-Maillard JM, Frost LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
arutyuno@ualberta.ca

TraJ is the positive activator of the major transfer operon in the F plasmid of
Escherichia coli that counteracts H-NS silencing at the main transfer promoter
(P(Y)). Multiple sequence alignment revealed a putative PAS (Per-ARNT-Sim) domain
that might be involved in sensing redox potential or energy levels in the cell.
This domain, which contains a conserved PXCXR motif along with a C(X)(9-10)CR/N/K
motif of variable position, was identified within the N-terminal region of TraJ
orthologues including F TraJ. The 5 cysteine residues in F TraJ were changed to
serine to give protein with single or multiple substitutions. Single C to S
substitutions had little effect on mating efficiency (ME), whereas cumulative
substitutions from the N- to the C-termini (2CS to 5CS) gradually reduced ME to
undetectable levels. F TraJ was able to bind to Fe (III) on an affinity sorbent
column. This feature was severely impaired for the 5CS mutant. Thus, the cysteine
residues within the PAS domain could be the part of a metal-containing redox
centre that plays a key role in the transcriptional activation of the P(Y) operon
by TraJ.

PMID: 21774634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Apr 5;164(2):179-84. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2011.06.123. Epub 
2011 Jul 20.

Skeletal scintigraphy indicates disease severity of cardiac involvement in
patients with senile systemic amyloidosis.

Kristen AV(1), Haufe S, Schonland SO, Hegenbart U, Schnabel PA, Röcken C, Hardt
S, Lohse P, Ho AD, Haberkorn U, Dengler TJ, Altland K, Katus HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Angiology, and Respiratory Medicine, Im Neuenheimer 
Feld 410, Heidelberg, Germany. Arnt_Kristen@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Comment in
    Int J Cardiol. 2013 Oct 12;168(5):4988-9.

BACKGROUND: Senile systemic amyloidosis (SSA) is a common aging phenomenon in the
elderly population. Nevertheless, pre-mortem diagnosis of SSA is rare. Thus, data
on clinical characterization and disease severity are limited.
METHODS: 36 consecutive SSA patients (71.6 [64.7-82.7]years) were evaluated by
electrocardiography, echocardiography, laboratory tests, and
(99m)Technetium-3,3-diphosphono-1,2-propanodicarboxylic acid ((99m)Tc-DPD)
scintigraphy (n=20).
RESULTS: In addition to cardiac involvement, amyloid deposition was found in
rectum (n=6), peripheral nerves (n=2), and urinary bladder (n=2). Five patients
showed low voltage pattern. Thickness of interventricular septum (IVS) was 20
[12-27]mm. LV longitudinal function was diminished (TDI-s 5 [3-11] cm/s; MAPSE
6.5 [2.5-19]mm; TAPSE 12.5 [2-24]mm). LV systolic function (LV-EF<45%) was
markedly decreased in 19 patients. Plasma levels of troponin T (0.05
[0.01-0.23]µg/L) and NT-proBNP (4318 [205-16597]ng/L) were elevated. (99m)Tc-DPD 
heart retention was 7.8 [2.4-11.0]% and correlated with MAPSE (<U+03C1>=-0.716;
p=0.0018), TAPSE (<U+03C1>=-0.491; p<0.05), and IVS (<U+03C1>=0.556; p=0.0153). Heart-to-body
ratio correlated with MAPSE (<U+03C1>=-0.771; p=0.0018), IVS (<U+03C1>=0.603; p=0.0086). Twelve
patients died during follow-up of 27.4 [0.1-106.2]months. Exclusively (99m)Tc-DPD
heart retention, diastolic dysfunction and in trend MAPSE were associated with
patient's outcome. Interestingly, risk predictors that were well established in
patients with AL amyloidosis were not predictive for survival in patients with
SSA.
CONCLUSIONS: This study gave first evidence that (99m)Tc-DPD HR may be capable to
display the extent of cardiac amyloid deposition. Moreover, this study suggested 
that (99m)Tc-DPD HR, diastolic dysfunction and in trend MAPSE are associated with
poor outcome. Nevertheless, these findings need to be established in a larger
prospective trial.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21764155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Strength Cond Res. 2011 Sep;25(9):2552-8. doi: 10.1519/JSC.0b013e3181fb4809.

Time course of endothelial adaptation after acute and chronic exercise in
patients with metabolic syndrome.

Tjønna AE(1), Rognmo Ø, Bye A, Stølen TO, Wisløff U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Circulation and Medical Imaging, Norwegian University of Science
and Technology, Trondheim, Norway. arnt.e.tjonna@ntnu.no

Clustering of cardiovascular risk factors may lead to endothelial dysfunction.
Physical exercise is an important factor in prevention and treatment of
endothelial dysfunction. We wanted to determine the time course of adaptation to 
a single bout of exercise at either high or moderate intensity upon endothelial
function both before and after a 16-week fitness program in patients with
metabolic syndrome. Twenty-eight patients with metabolic syndrome participated in
the study and were randomized and stratified (according to age and sex) into an
aerobic interval exercise training group (AIT, n = 11), a continuously
moderate-intensity exercise training group (CME, n = 8) or to a control group (n 
= 9). Flow-mediated dilatation (FMD) was determined at baseline, immediately, 24,
48, and 72 hours after 1 bout of exercise and repeated after 16 weeks of
exercise. In the untrained state, FMD improved from 5 to 11% (p = 0.003)
immediately after a single bout of aerobic interval training (AIT), an effect
lasting 72 hours postexercise. In comparison, continuous moderate exercise (CME) 
improved FMD immediately after a single bout of exercise from 5 to 8% (p = 0.02),
an effect lasting 24 hours postexercise (group difference, p < 0.001). In the
trained state, a single bout of AIT resulted in a 2% (p = 0.007) acute increase
of FMD lasting 48 hours postexercise. The CME increased FMD by 3% (p < 0.01), an 
effect lasting 24 hours postexercise (group difference p = 0.0012). Blood glucose
level decreased after 1 single bout of AIT in the untrained state (p < 0.05), and
the effect lasted at least 72 hours postexercise (p < 0.01). Acute CME decreased 
blood glucose with normalization of the values 24 hours postexercise (p < 0.01). 
A single bout of exercise in the trained state reduced fasting blood glucose by
10% (p < 0.05) after both AIT and CME. Exercise training, especially high
intensity, thus appears to be highly beneficial in reducing blood glucose and
improving endothelial function.

PMID: 21747296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Mol Genet Metab. 2011 Sep-Oct;104(1-2):180-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2011.06.009.
Epub 2011 Jun 22.

RNA expressions of AHR, ARNT and CYP1B1 are influenced by AHR Arg554Lys
polymorphism.

Helmig S(1), Seelinger JU, Döhrel J, Schneider J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut und Poliklinik für Arbeits- und Sozialmedizin,
Justus-Liebig-Universität, Aulweg 129, D-35392 Giessen, Germany.
Simone.Helmig@arbmed.med.uni-giessen.de

AIM: The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand activated transcription
factor that together with Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Nuclear Translocator (ARNT)
controls the expression of Xenobiotic metabolising enzymes (XME) such as CYP1B1. 
In the absence of exogenous ligands, AHR is supposed to be involved in promotion 
of cell cycle progression. Polymorphisms of the AHR gene are suggested to be
associated with susceptibility to cancer. Because of its critical role in
xenobiotic induced toxicity and carcinogenesis as well as its ligand independent 
relevance we investigated the effects of AHR Arg554Lys Polymorphism on gene
expression level of the AHR, ARNT and CYP1B1.
METHODS: Detection of the AHR Arg554Lys polymorphism of the AHR gene was
performed by rapid capillary PCR with melting curve analysis. The quantitative
Real-Time PCR (qRT-PCR) of AHR, ARNT and CYP1B1 mRNAs was carried out in white
blood cells from 287 Caucasians. Calculations of expression were made with the
2(-<U+0394><U+0394>CT) method.
RESULTS: The relative AHR mRNA expression revealed significant differences
between the two homozygote AHR genotypes Arg554Arg (11.0±1.0; n=228) and
Lys554Lys (0.6±0.4; n=3; p<0.001). Also significant differences were seen between
the heterozygote genotype Arg554Lys (13.0±3.0; n=40) and the homozygote Lys554Lys
genotype (0.6±0.4; n=3; p<0.001). These differences above were replicated
significantly in the relative mRNA expression of ARNT and CYP1B1. Comparing the
determined CT-values, a correlation coefficient of R=0.748 for AHR and ARNT,
R=0.626 for ARNT and CYP1B1 as well as R=0.533 for AHR and CYP1B1 was calculated.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that the homozygote variant genotype of AHR
Lys554Lys is associated with a significantly lower AHR, ARNT and CYP1B1 mRNA
expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21742528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2011 Sep;20(9):1211-23. doi:
10.1517/13543784.2011.601738. Epub 2011 Jul 8.

Serotonin 2A receptor antagonists for treatment of schizophrenia.

Ebdrup BH(1), Rasmussen H, Arnt J, Glenthøj B.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuropsychiatric Schizophrenia Research, Copenhagen University
Hospital Glostrup, Faculty of Health Sciences, Psychiatric Center Glostrup,
Nordre Ringvej 29, DK-2600 Glostrup, Denmark.

INTRODUCTION: All approved antipsychotic drugs share an affinity for the dopamine
2 (D(2)) receptor; however, these drugs only partially ameliorate the symptoms of
schizophrenia. It is, therefore, of paramount importance to identify new
treatment strategies for schizophrenia.
AREAS COVERED: Preclinical, clinical and post-mortem studies of the serotonin
5-HT(2A) system in schizophrenia are reviewed. The implications of a combined
D(2) and 5-HT(2A) receptor blockade, which is obtained by several current
antipsychotic drugs, are discussed, and the rationale for the development of more
selective 5-HT(2A) receptor antagonists is evaluated. Moreover, the
investigational pipeline of major pharmaceutical companies is examined and an
Internet search conducted to identify other pharmaceutical companies
investigating 5-HT(2A) receptor antagonists for the treatment of schizophrenia.
EXPERT OPINION: 5-HT(2A) receptor antagonists appear to assume an intermediate
position by being marginally superior to placebo but inferior to conventional
antipsychotic drugs. Three previous 5-HT(2A) receptor antagonists have been
discontinued after Phase II or III trials, and available Phase IIa data on the
remaining 5-HT(2A) receptor antagonist will need substantial additional
validation to be approved as a new treatment strategy against schizophrenia.

PMID: 21740279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Mol Cancer. 2011 Jul 7;10:81. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-10-81.

A 5'-region polymorphism modulates promoter activity of the tumor suppressor gene
MFSD2A.

Colombo F(1), Falvella FS, Galvan A, Frullanti E, Kunitoh H, Ushijima T, Dragani 
TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Predictive and Preventive Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The MFSD2A gene maps within a linkage disequilibrium block containing
the MYCL1-EcoRI polymorphism associated with prognosis and survival in lung
cancer patients. Survival discrepancies between Asians and Caucasians point to
ethnic differences in allelic frequencies of the functional genetic variations.
RESULTS: Analysis of three single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) mapping in the 
MFSD2A 5'-regulatory region using a luciferase reporter system showed that SNP
rs12072037, in linkage disequilibrium with the MYCL1-EcoRI polymorphism and
polymorphic in Asians but not in Caucasians, modulated transcriptional activity
of the MFSD2A promoter in cell lines expressing AHR and ARNT transcription
factors, which potentially bind to the SNP site.
CONCLUSION: SNP rs12072037 modulates MFSD2A promoter activity and thus might
affect MFSD2A levels in normal lung and in lung tumors, representing a candidate 
ethnically specific genetic factor underlying the association between the MYCL1
locus and lung cancer patients' survival.

PMCID: PMC3155907
PMID: 21736709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Bacteriol. 2011 Sep;193(17):4509-15. doi: 10.1128/JB.00200-11. Epub 2011 Jul 1.

Bile salts induce resistance to polymyxin in enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli
O157:H7.

Kus JV(1), Gebremedhin A, Dang V, Tran SL, Serbanescu A, Barnett Foster D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biology, Ryerson University, 350 Victoria St.,
Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Canada.

Many enteric bacteria use bile as an environmental cue to signal resistance and
virulence gene expression. Microarray analysis of enterohemorrhagic Escherichia
coli O157:H7 (EHEC) treated with bile salts revealed upregulation of genes for an
efflux system (acrAB), a two-component signal transduction system (basRS/pmrAB), 
and lipid A modification (arnBCADTEF and ugd). Bile salt treatment of EHEC
produced a basS- and arnT-dependent resistance to polymyxin.

PMCID: PMC3165498
PMID: 21725004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Strahlenther Onkol. 2011 Jul;187(7):393-400. doi: 10.1007/s00066-011-2248-0. Epub
2011 Jun 27.

Curcumin decreases survival of Hep3B liver and MCF-7 breast cancer cells: the
role of HIF.

Ströfer M(1), Jelkmann W, Depping R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Center for Structural and Cell Biology in Medicine, 
University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany. troefer@physio.uni-luebeck.de

BACKGROUND: Curcumin, a commonly used spice, affects the activities of cytokines,
enzymes, and transcription factors that are linked to inflammation. Furthermore, 
curcumin has been assigned tumor growth inhibiting effects, possibly mediated by 
promoting hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) degradation. HIFs are transcription
factors that play a central role in the adaptation and response to low oxygen
levels in metazoan cells. However, curcumin also exhibits properties of an iron
chelator indicating its potential of inhibiting HIF-a prolyl hydroxylase (PHD)
activity.
METHODS: We were interested in clarifying these divergent actions of curcumin in 
due consideration of the effects on radio-therapy. Thus, concentration- and
time-dependent effects of curcumin on HIF-a and -ß protein levels and activity in
hepatoma and breast carcinoma cell cultures under normoxic and hypoxic conditions
were studied.
RESULTS: It was shown that HIF-1a accumulated in normoxia after the application
of higher doses of the drug. Curcumin proved to lower HIF-1a and HIF-2a protein
levels in hypoxia. HIF-1ß (ARNT; arylhydrocarbon nuclear translocator) protein
levels and HIF transcriptional activity were reduced in normoxia and hypoxia
after 4 h and 24 h incubation periods. Furthermore, curcumin treatment negatively
impacted on clonogenic cell survival of Hep3B hepatoma and MCF-7 breast carcinoma
cells.
CONCLUSION: Effects of curcumin on cell growth and survival factor expression
suggest its potential benefit in the treatment of cancer without a direct
radiosensitizing influence of curcumin on these cells.

PMID: 21713389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Mol Psychiatry. 2012 Mar;17(3):267-79. doi: 10.1038/mp.2011.73. Epub 2011 Jun 28.

Transcriptional regulation of neurodevelopmental and metabolic pathways by NPAS3.

Sha L(1), MacIntyre L, Machell JA, Kelly MP, Porteous DJ, Brandon NJ, Muir WJ,
Blackwood DH, Watson DG, Clapcote SJ, Pickard BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute for Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Molecular Medicine Centre, Western General Hospital,
Edinburgh, UK.

The basic helix-loop-helix PAS (Per, Arnt, Sim) domain transcription factor gene 
NPAS3 is a replicated genetic risk factor for psychiatric disorders. A knockout
(KO) mouse model exhibits behavioral and adult neurogenesis deficits consistent
with human illness. To define the location and mechanism of NPAS3 etiopathology, 
we combined immunofluorescent, transcriptomic and metabonomic approaches. Intense
Npas3 immunoreactivity was observed in the hippocampal subgranular zone-the site 
of adult neurogenesis--but was restricted to maturing, rather than proliferating,
neuronal precursor cells. Microarray analysis of a HEK293 cell line
over-expressing NPAS3 showed that transcriptional targets varied according to
circadian rhythm context and C-terminal deletion. The most highly up-regulated
NPAS3 target gene, VGF, encodes secretory peptides with established roles in
neurogenesis, depression and schizophrenia. VGF was just one of many NPAS3 target
genes also regulated by the SOX family of transcription factors, suggesting an
overlap in neurodevelopmental function. The parallel repression of multiple
glycolysis genes by NPAS3 reveals a second role in the regulation of glucose
metabolism. Comparison of wild-type and Npas3 KO metabolite composition using
high-resolution mass spectrometry confirmed these transcriptional findings. KO
brain tissue contained significantly altered levels of NAD(+), glycolysis
metabolites (such as dihydroxyacetone phosphate and fructose-1,6-bisphosphate),
pentose phosphate pathway components and Kreb's cycle intermediates (succinate
and a-ketoglutarate). The dual neurodevelopmental and metabolic aspects of NPAS3 
activity described here increase our understanding of mental illness etiology,
and may provide a mechanism for innate and medication-induced susceptibility to
diabetes commonly reported in psychiatric patients.

PMID: 21709683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2011 Sep;301(3):C550-2. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00176.2011. Epub 2011 Jun 15.

Hypoxia. Cross talk between oxygen sensing and the cell cycle machinery.

Semenza GL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Program, Institute for Cell Engineering, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. gsemenza@jhmi.edu

A fundamental physiological property of mammalian cells is the regulation of
proliferation according to O(2) availability. Progression through the cell cycle 
is inhibited under hypoxic conditions in many, but not all, cell types, and this 
G1 arrest is dependent on hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) 1a. Components of the
hexameric MCM helicase, which binds to replication origins before the onset of
DNA synthesis, are present in large excess in mammalian cells relative to
origins, suggesting that they may have additional functions. Screens for HIF-1a
interacting proteins revealed that MCM7 binds to the amino-terminal PER-SIM-ARNT 
(PAS) domain of HIF-1a and stimulates prolyl hydroxylation-dependent
ubiquitination and degradation of HIF-1a, whereas MCM3 binds to the carboxyl
terminus of HIF-1a and enhances asparaginyl hydroxylation-dependent inhibition of
HIF-1a transactivation domain function. Thus MCM proteins inhibit HIF activity
via two distinct O(2)-dependent mechanisms. Under prolonged hypoxic conditions,
MCM mRNA expression is inhibited in a HIF-1a-dependent manner. Thus HIF and MCM
proteins act in a mutually antagonistic manner, providing a novel molecular
mechanism for homeostatic regulation of cell proliferation based on the relative 
levels of these proteins.

PMCID: PMC3174572
PMID: 21677261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Sep;123(1):26-36. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr150. Epub 2011 Jun 10.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor and aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator expression in
human and rat placentas and transcription activity in human trophoblast cultures.

Stejskalova L(1), Vecerova L, Peréz LM, Vrzal R, Dvorak Z, Nachtigal P, Pavek P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Charles University in Prague,
Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and its heterodimer aryl hydrocarbon nuclear
translocator (ARNT) form a ligand-activated transcription complex that regulates 
expression of the AHR battery of target genes that includes the most important
placental biotransformation enzyme cytochrome CYP1A1. Expression, placental
localization, and ontogeny of AHR/Ahr and ARNT/Arnt have not been systematically 
studied in either human or rat placentas. Moreover, induction of such AHR target 
genes as CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, UGT1A1, and breast cancer resistance protein
(BCRP), as well as of AHR, ARNT, and aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AHRR)
genes, after exposure to AHR ligands have not been studied in human placental
trophoblast cultures. In this article, we show that only CYP1A1 messenger RNA
(mRNA), but not CYP1A2, CYP1B1, UGT1A1, BCRP, AHR, ARNT, and AHRR mRNAs, is
significantly induced in human term placental trophoblast cultures after exposure
to prototype AHR ligands/activators 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin,
3-methylcholanthrene, omeprazole, and ß-naphthoflavone. We localized AHR/Ahr and 
ARNT/Arnt in rat placental trophoblasts throughout gestation and in first
trimester and term human placental trophoblast, which comprise the crucial
component of the maternal-fetal barrier. We demonstrate that rat Ahr and Cyp1a1
reached highest expression during gestation days 15 and 18, which might indicate 
different response to Ahr ligands in placental Cyp1a1 induction during rat
gestation. We also propose the JEG3 choriocarcinoma cell line as a cellular model
for human trophoblast induction studies through AHR. In conclusion, we describe
expression and ontogeny of AHR/Ahr and ARNT/Arnt and systematically characterize 
induction of major AHR target genes in human placental trophoblast forming the
placental maternal-fetal morphological and metabolic barrier.

PMID: 21666223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Annu Rev Microbiol. 2011;65:261-86. doi: 10.1146/annurev-micro-121809-151631.

Ligand-binding PAS domains in a genomic, cellular, and structural context.

Henry JT(1), Crosson S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domains occur in proteins from all kingdoms of life. In the
bacterial kingdom, PAS domains are commonly positioned at the amino terminus of
signaling proteins such as sensor histidine kinases, cyclic-di-GMP
synthases/hydrolases, and methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins. Although these
domains are highly divergent at the primary sequence level, the structures of
dozens of PAS domains across a broad section of sequence space have been solved, 
revealing a conserved three-dimensional architecture. An all-versus-all alignment
of 63 PAS structures demonstrates that the PAS domain family forms structural
clades on the basis of two principal variables: (a) topological location inside
or outside the plasma membrane and (b) the class of small molecule that they
bind. The binding of a chemically diverse range of small-molecule metabolites is 
a hallmark of the PAS domain family. PAS ligand binding either functions as a
primary cue to initiate a cellular signaling response or provides the domain with
the capacity to respond to secondary physical or chemical signals such as gas
molecules, redox potential, or photons. This review synthesizes the current state
of knowledge of the structural foundations and evolution of ligand recognition
and binding by PAS domains.

PMCID: PMC3298442
PMID: 21663441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Proteins. 2011 Aug;79(8):2557-65. doi: 10.1002/prot.23089. Epub 2011 Jun 9.

An NMR study of the N-terminal domain of wild-type hERG and a T65P trafficking
deficient hERG mutant.

Gayen S(1), Li Q, Chen AS, Nguyen TH, Huang Q, Hill J, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Therapeutics Centre, Agency for Science, Technology and Research 
(A*STAR), Singapore.

The human Ether-à-go-go Related Gene (hERG) potassium channel plays an important 
role in the heart by controlling the rapid delayed rectifier current. The
N-terminal 135 residues (NTD) contain a Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain and an
N-terminal amphipathic helix. NMR relaxation analysis and H/D exchange
experiments on the NTD demonstrated that the amphipathic helix is rigid and
solvent accessible. An NTD containing a T65P mutation, which causes a hERG
channel trafficking deficiency, was purified from E.coli. The mutant protein did 
not aggregate in gel filtration analysis and the amide cross peaks of its
residues disappeared in an HSQC spectrum indicating the possibility of structural
changes. A carbon chemical shift comparison of the residues with cross peaks in
the HSQC spectrum showed no clear difference between the purified wild-type
protein and the purified mutant. There were multiple conformations observed for
the T65P mutant protein at high temperatures from HSQC experiments and a thermal 
stability assay showed that the T65P mutation reduced the thermal stability of
NTD. This instability may affect protein folding or structural dynamics of other 
regions.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21661061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2011 Sep;15(9):1061-71. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2011.588209. Epub 2011 Jun 2.

Ceramide formation as a target in beta-cell survival and function.

Lang F(1), Ullrich S, Gulbins E.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tübingen, Institute of Physiology, Germany.
florian.lang@uni-tuebingen.de

INTRODUCTION: Ceramide may be synthesized de novo or generated by
sphingomyelinase-dependent hydrolysis of sphingomyelin.
AREAS COVERED: The role of ceramide, ceramide-sensitive signaling and ion
channels in ß-cell apoptosis, lipotoxicity and amyloid-induced ß-cell death.
EXPERT OPINION: Ceramide participates in ß-cell dysfunction and apoptosis after
exposure to TNFa, IL-1ß and IFN-<U+03B3>, excessive amyloid and islet amyloid
polypeptide or non-esterified fatty acids (lipotoxicity). Knockout of
sphingomyelin synthase 1, which converts ceramide to sphingomyelin, leads to
impairment of insulin secretion. Increased ceramidase activity or pharmacological
inhibition of ceramide synthetase, inhibits ß-cell apoptosis. Ceramide
contributes to endoplasmatic reticulum (ER) stress, decreased mitochondrial
membrane potential in insulin-secreting cells and mitochondrial release of
cytochrome c into the cytosol, which are all triggers of apoptotic cell death.
Ceramide-dependent signaling involves activation of extracellularly regulated
kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2), downregulation of Period (Per)-aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt)-single-minded (Sim) kinase (PASK),
activation of okadaic-acid-sensitive protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) and
stimulation of NADPH-oxidase with generation of superoxides and lipid peroxides. 
Ceramide reduces the activity of voltage gated potassium (Kv)-channels in
insulin-secreting cells. The role of ceramide in ß-cell survival and function may
be therapeutically relevant, because ceramide formation can be suppressed by
pharmacological inhibition of ceramide synthetase and/or sphingomyelinase.

PMID: 21635197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Cell Death Differ. 2011 Nov;18(11):1711-25. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.47. Epub 2011
May 6.

Pro-apoptotic activity of inhibitory PAS domain protein (IPAS), a negative
regulator of HIF-1, through binding to pro-survival Bcl-2 family proteins.

Torii S(1), Goto Y, Ishizawa T, Hoshi H, Goryo K, Yasumoto K, Fukumura H, Sogawa 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku 
University, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.

Inhibitory PAS (Per/Arnt/Sim) domain protein (IPAS) is a dominant negative
transcription factor that represses hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) activity. 
In this study, we show that IPAS also functions as a pro-apoptotic protein
through binding to pro-survival Bcl-2 family members. In a previous paper, we
reported that NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent IPAS induction by cobalt chloride repressed the
hypoxic response in PC12 cells. We found that prolonged incubation under the same
conditions caused apoptosis in PC12 cells. Repression of IPAS induction protected
cells from apoptosis. Furthermore, knockdown of IPAS recovered cell viability.
EGFP-IPAS protein was localized in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm, with a
large fraction associated with mitochondria. Mitochondrial IPAS induced
mitochondria depolarization and caspase-3 activation. Immunoprecipitation assays 
revealed that IPAS is associated with Bcl-x(L), Bcl-w and Mcl-1. The association 
of IPAS with Bcl-x(L) was also observed in living cells by the FLIM-based FRET
analysis, indicating direct binding between the two proteins. IPAS contributed to
dysfunction of Bcl-x(L) by inhibiting the interaction of Bcl-x(L) with Bax. These
results demonstrate that IPAS functions as a dual function protein involved in
transcription repression and apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3190112
PMID: 21546903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Int J Cancer. 2012 Apr 15;130(8):1745-54. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26166. Epub 2011 Aug
16.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator is associated with tumor growth
and progression of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Liang Y(1), Li WW, Yang BW, Tao ZH, Sun HC, Wang L, Xia JL, Qin LX, Tang ZY, Fan 
J, Wu WZ.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute and Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Key
Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

bHLH/PAS proteins play important roles in tumor progression. Lost or reduced
expression of single-minded homolog 2 (SIM) as well as aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
repressor (AHRR) has been observed in cancerous human tissues. Here, we
investigated the role of aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT),
another bHLH/PAS protein, in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Using tissue
microarray and immunohistochemistry, we found that intratumoral ARNT was
inversely correlated with time to recurrence and overall survival of HCC patients
after resection. Knockdown of ARNT in HepG2, HCCLM3 and HCCLM6 cells
significantly shortened cell doubling time, increased S-phase cell populations
and accelerated in vivo HCCLM6 growth and metastasis. After ARNT expression was
rescued, prolonged cell doubling time and decreased S-phase cell populations were
observed in HepG2, HCCLM3 and HCCLM6 cells. And, HCCLM6 growth and metastasis in 
vivo were remarkably inhibited. Screening by quantitative reverse-transcription
PCR and PCR arrays revealed that cyclin E1, CDK2, Fos and Jun were negatively
regulated by ARNT, whereas CDKN1C, CNKN2A, CDKN2B, MAPK11 and MAPK14 were
positively regulated in HCC. According to the results of immunoprecipitation
assay, both ARNT/ARNT and ARNT/AHRR complexes were clearly formed in HCCLM6
xenograft with increased ARNT expression. In summary, ARNT is an important
regulator of HCC growth and metastasis and could be a promising prognostic
candidate in HCC patients.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 21544813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 24;286(25):22160-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.205948. Epub 2011
May 2.

Rescue of aberrant gating by a genetically encoded PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) domain in
several long QT syndrome mutant human ether-á-go-go-related gene potassium
channels.

Gianulis EC(1), Trudeau MC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

Congenital long QT syndrome 2 (LQT2) is caused by loss-of-function mutations in
the human ether-á-go-go-related gene (hERG) voltage-gated potassium (K(+))
channel. hERG channels have slow deactivation kinetics that are regulated by an
N-terminal Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain. Only a small percentage of hERG channels
containing PAS domain LQT2 mutations (hERG PAS-LQT2) have been characterized in
mammalian cells, so the functional effect of these mutations is unclear. We
investigated 11 hERG PAS-LQT2 channels in HEK293 cells and report a diversity of 
functional defects. Most hERG PAS-LQT2 channels formed functional channels at the
plasma membrane, as measured by whole cell patch clamp recordings and cell
surface biotinylation. Mutations located on one face of the PAS domain (K28E,
F29L, N33T, R56Q, and M124R) caused defective channel gating, including faster
deactivation kinetics and less steady-state inactivation. Conversely, the other
mutations caused no measurable differences in channel gating (G53R, H70R, and
A78P) or no measurable currents (Y43C, C66G, and L86R). We used a genetically
encoded hERG PAS domain (NPAS) to examine whether channel dysfunction could be
corrected. We found that NPAS fully restored wild-type-like deactivation kinetics
and steady-state inactivation to the hERG PAS-LQT2 channels. Additionally, NPAS
rescued aberrant currents in hERG R56Q channels during a dynamic ramp voltage
clamp. Thus, our results reveal a putative "gating face" in the PAS domain where 
mutations within this region form functional channels with altered gating
properties, and we show that NPAS is a general means for rescuing aberrant gating
in hERG LQT2 mutant channels and may be a potential biological therapeutic.

PMCID: PMC3121360
PMID: 21536673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mol Biol Cell. 2011 Jul 1;22(13):2301-8. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E11-02-0143. Epub 2011 
Apr 27.

cTAGE5 mediates collagen secretion through interaction with TANGO1 at endoplasmic
reticulum exit sites.

Saito K(1), Yamashiro K, Ichikawa Y, Erlmann P, Kontani K, Malhotra V, Katada T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma-associated antigen 5 (cTAGE5), an originally identified
tumor antigen, is overexpressed in various cancer cell lines. The cDNA encodes an
integral membrane protein containing two coiled-coil motifs and a proline-rich
domain. We show that cTAGE5 specifically localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) exit sites. In addition, cTAGE5 forms a complex with TANGO1 (MIA3), a
previously characterized cargo receptor for collagen VII, by the interaction of
their coiled-coil motifs. Of interest, cTAGE5, as well as TANGO1, is capable of
interacting with the inner-layer coatomer of COPII Sec23/24 complex through their
C-terminal proline-rich domains and required for collagen VII secretion. We
propose that cTAGE5 acts as a coreceptor of TANGO1 for collagen VII export from
the ER.

PMCID: PMC3128532
PMID: 21525241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Addict Biol. 2012 Mar;17(2):274-86. doi: 10.1111/j.1369-1600.2011.00319.x. Epub
2011 Apr 26.

Bifeprunox: a partial agonist at dopamine D2 and serotonin 1A receptors,
influences nicotine-seeking behaviour in response to drug-associated stimuli in
rats.

Di Clemente A(1), Franchi C, Orrù A, Arnt J, Cervo L.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Psychopharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, Mario Negri
Institute for Pharmacological Research, Via Giuseppe La Masa 19, Milan, Italy.

Environmental stimuli repeatedly associated with the self-administered drugs may 
acquire motivational importance. Because dopamine (DA) D(2) /D(3) partial
agonists and D(3) antagonists interfere with the ability of drug-associated cues 
to induce drug-seeking behaviour, the present study investigated whether
bifeprunox, 7-[4-([1,1'biphenyl]-3-ylmethyl)-1-piperazinyl]-2(3H)-benzoxazolone
mesylate), a high-affinity partial agonist of the D(2) subfamily of DA receptors 
and of serotonin(1A) receptors, influences reinstatement of drug-associated
cue-induced nicotine-seeking behaviour. The study also explored whether
bifeprunox reduced motivated behaviour by evaluating its effects on reinstatement
induced by stimuli conditioned to sucrose. To verify whether bifeprunox
interferes with the primary reinforcing properties of either drug or sucrose, we 
compared its effects on nicotine self-administration and on sucrose-reinforced
behaviour. Different groups of experimentally naïve, food-restricted Wistar rats 
were trained to associate a discriminative stimulus with response-contingent
availability of nicotine or sucrose and tested for reinstatement after extinction
of nicotine or sucrose-reinforced behaviour. Bifeprunox (4-16 µg/kg, s.c.)
dose-dependently attenuated the response-reinstating effects of
nicotine-associated cues. Higher doses (64-250 µg/kg, s.c.) reduced spontaneous
locomotor activity and suppressed operant responding induced by
sucrose-associated cues and by the primary reinforcing properties of nicotine or 
sucrose. Provided they can be extrapolated to abstinent human addicts, these
results suggest the potential therapeutic use of partial DA D(2) receptor agonist
to prevent cue-controlled nicotine-seeking and relapse. The profile of action of 
high doses of bifeprunox remains to be examined for potential sedation or
anhedonia effects.

© 2011 The Authors, Addiction Biology © 2011 Society for the Study of Addiction.

PMID: 21521422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 May 10;108(19):7739-44. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1101357108. Epub 2011 Apr 21.

Coactivators necessary for transcriptional output of the hypoxia inducible
factor, HIF, are directly recruited by ARNT PAS-B.

Partch CL(1), Gardner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-8816, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) is the key transcriptional effector of the hypoxia
response in eukaryotes, coordinating the expression of genes involved in oxygen
transport, glycolysis, and angiogenesis to promote adaptation to low oxygen
levels. HIF is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS (PER-ARNT-SIM) heterodimer
composed of an oxygen-labile HIF-a subunit and a constitutively expressed aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) subunit, which dimerize via
basic helix-loop-helix and PAS domains, and recruit coactivators via HIF-a
C-terminal transactivation domains. Here we demonstrate that the ARNT PAS-B
domain provides an additional recruitment site by binding the coactivator
transforming acidic coiled-coil 3 (TACC3) in a step necessary for transcriptional
responses to hypoxia. Structural insights from NMR spectroscopy illustrate how
this PAS domain simultaneously mediates interactions with HIF-a and TACC3.
Finally, mutations on ARNT PAS-B modulate coactivator selectivity and target gene
induction by HIF in vivo, demonstrating a bifunctional role for transcriptional
regulation by PAS domains within bHLH-PAS transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3093465
PMID: 21512126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Jul;122(1):26-37. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr089. Epub 2011 Apr 19.

Detoxification: a novel function of BRCA1 in tumor suppression?

Kang HJ(1), Hong YB, Kim HJ, Rodriguez OC, Nath RG, Tilli EM, Albanese C, Chung
FL, Kwon SH, Bae I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Our studies found that BRCA1 levels negatively correlate with DNA adducts induced
by Benzo(a)pyrene (BaP). Pulse-chase experiments showed that the increase in
BaP-induced DNA adducts in BRCA1 knockdown cells may not be associated with
BRCA1's function in nucleotide excision repair activity; rather, it may be
associated with its function in modulating transcriptional regulation. BRCA1
knockdown in MCF-10A cells significantly attenuated the induction of CYP1A1
following BaP treatment indicating that the increase in BaP-induced adducts in
BRCA1 knockdown cells is not CYP1A1 dependent. However, our study shows that
BRCA1 defective cells may still be able to biotransform BaP by regulating other
CYP enzymes, including CYP1B1. Knockdown of BRCA1 also severely affected the
expression levels of two types of uridine diphosphate glucorunyltransferase
(UGT1A1 and UGT1A9) and NRF2. Both UGTs are known as BaP-specific detoxification 
enzymes, and NRF2 is a master regulator of antioxidant and detoxification genes. 
Thus, we concluded that the increased amount of BaP-induced DNA adducts in BRCA1 
knockdown cells is strongly associated with its loss of functional
detoxification. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that BRCA1 is
recruited to the promoter/enhancer sequences of UGT1A1, UGT1A9, and NRF2.
Regulation of UGT1A1 and UGT1A9 expression showed that the induction of DNA
adducts by BaP is directly affected by their expression levels. Finally,
overexpression of UGTs, NRF2, or ARNT significantly decreased the amount of
BaP-induced adducts in BRCA1-deficient cells. Overall, our results suggest that
BRCA1 protects cells by reducing the amount of BaP-induced DNA adducts possibly
via transcriptional activation of detoxification gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3143468
PMID: 21507987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 11;6(4):e17904. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017904.

Regulation of mouse small heat shock protein ab-crystallin gene by aryl
hydrocarbon receptor.

Liu S(1), Piatigorsky J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, National Eye Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
liushuang1999@yahoo.com

The stress-inducible small heat shock protein (shsp)/aB-crystallin gene is
expressed highly in the lens and moderately in other tissues. Here we provide
evidence that it is a target gene of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
transcription factor. A sequence (-329/-323, CATGCGA) similar to the consensus
xenobiotic responsive element (XRE), called here XRE-like, is present in the aBE2
region of aB-crystallin enhancer and can bind AhR in vitro and in vivo.
aB-crystallin protein levels were reduced in retina, lens, cornea, heart,
skeletal muscle and cultured muscle fibroblasts of AhR(-/-) mice; aB-crystallin
mRNA levels were reduced in the eye, heart and skeletal muscle of AhR(-/-) mice. 
Increased AhR stimulated aB-crystallin expression in transfection experiments
conducted in conjunction with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 
(ARNT) and decreased AhR reduced aB-crystallin expression. AhR effect on
aB-crystallin promoter activity was cell-dependent in transfection experiments.
AhR up-regulated aB-crystallin promoter activity in transfected HeLa, NIH3T3 and 
COS-7 cells in the absence of exogenously added ligand (TCDD), but had no effect 
on the aB-crystallin promoter in C(2)C(12), CV-1 or Hepa-1 cells with or without 
TCDD. TCDD enhanced AhR-stimulated aB-crystallin promoter activity in transfected
aTN4 cells. AhR could bind to an XRE-like site in the aB-crystallin enhancer in
vitro and in vivo. Finally, site-specific mutagenesis experiments showed that the
XRE-like motif was necessary for both basal and maximal AhR-induction of
aB-crystallin promoter activity. Our data strongly suggest that AhR is a
regulator of aB-crystallin gene expression and provide new avenues of research
for the mechanism of tissue-specific aB-crystallin gene regulation under normal
and physiologically stressed conditions.

PMCID: PMC3073930
PMID: 21494593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochemistry. 2011 May 24;50(20):4281-90. doi: 10.1021/bi200341b. Epub 2011 May
3.

Probing domain interactions in soluble guanylate cyclase.

Derbyshire ER(1), Winter MB, Ibrahim M, Deng S, Spiro TG, Marletta MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California-Berkeley,
CA 94720, USA.

Eukaryotic nitric oxide (NO) signaling involves modulation of cyclic GMP (cGMP)
levels through activation of the soluble isoform of guanylate cyclase (sGC). sGC 
is a heterodimeric hemoprotein that contains a Heme-Nitric oxide and OXygen
binding (H-NOX) domain, a Per/ARNT/Sim (PAS) domain, a coiled-coil (CC) domain,
and a catalytic domain. To evaluate the role of these domains in regulating the
ligand binding properties of the heme cofactor of NO-sensitive sGC, we
constructed chimeras by swapping the rat ß1 H-NOX domain with the homologous
region of H-NOX domain-containing proteins from Thermoanaerobacter tengcongensis,
Vibrio cholerae, and Caenorhabditis elegans (TtTar4H, VCA0720, and Gcy-33,
respectively). Characterization of ligand binding by electronic absorption and
resonance Raman spectroscopy indicates that the other rat sGC domains influence
the bacterial and worm H-NOX domains. Analysis of cGMP production in these
proteins reveals that the chimeras containing bacterial H-NOX domains exhibit
guanylate cyclase activity, but this activity is not influenced by gaseous ligand
binding to the heme cofactor. The rat-worm chimera containing the atypical sGC
Gcy-33 H-NOX domain was weakly activated by NO, CO, and O(2), suggesting that
atypical guanylate cyclases and NO-sensitive guanylate cyclases have a common
molecular mechanism for enzyme activation. To probe the influence of the other
sGC domains on the mammalian sGC heme environment, we generated heme pocket
mutants (Pro118Ala and Ile145Tyr) in the ß1 H-NOX construct (residues 1-194), the
ß1 H-NOX-PAS-CC construct (residues 1-385), and the full-length a1ß1 sGC
heterodimer (ß1 residues 1-619). Spectroscopic characterization of these proteins
shows that interdomain communication modulates the coordination state of the
heme-NO complex and the heme oxidation rate. Taken together, these findings have 
important implications for the allosteric mechanism of regulation within H-NOX
domain-containing proteins.

PMCID: PMC3096724
PMID: 21491957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Appl Genet. 2011 May;52(2):229-32. doi: 10.1007/s13353-011-0043-3. Epub 2011
Apr 5.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping of six loci containing genes involved 
in the dioxin metabolism of domestic bovids.

Genualdo V(1), Spalenza V, Perucatti A, Iannuzzi A, Di Meo GP, Caputi-Jambrenghi 
A, Vonghia G, Rasero R, Nebbia C, Sacchi P, Iannuzzi L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Cytogenetics and Gene Mapping, National Research Council 
(CNR), ISPAAM, Via Argine 1085, 80147, Naples, Italy.

Six loci containing genes involved in the dioxin metabolism (ARNT, AHR, CYP1A1,
CYP1A2, CYP1B1 and AHRR) were assigned, for the first time, to cattle (Bos
taurus, 2n = 60, BTA), river buffalo (Bubalus bubalis, 2n = 50, BBU), sheep (Ovis
aries, 2n = 54, OAR) and goat (Capra hircus, 2n = 60, CHI) chromosomes by
comparative FISH-mapping and R-banding using bovine BAC-clones. The following
chromosome locations were found: ARNT to BTA3q21, BBU6q21, OAR1p21 and CHI3q21,
AHR to BTA4q15, BBU8q15, OAR4q15 and CHI4q15; CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 to BTA21q17,
BBU20q17, OAR18q17 and CHI21q17; CYP1B1 to BTA11q16, BBU12q22, OAR3p16 and
CHI11q16, AHRR to BTA20q24, BBU19q24, OAR16q24 and CHI20q24. All loci were mapped
at the same homoeologous chromosomes and chromosome bands of the four bovid
species. Comparisons with corresponding human locations were also reported.

PMID: 21465154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Apr;28(2):195-8. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2011.02.016.

[No association of AhR gene 1661G/A and ARNT gene 567G/C polymorphisms with
endometriosis in southern Han Chinese women].

[Article in Chinese]

WANG YF(1), ZONG LL, ZHAO X, MAO T, FU YG, ZENG J, RAO XQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510282 P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the association between the arylhydrocarbon receptor gene
(AhR) 1661G/A or arylhydrocarbon nuclear translocatorgene (ARNT) 567G/C
polymorphism and endometriosis in southern Han Chinese women.
METHODS: The polymorphisms of AhR gene 1661G/Aand ARNT gene 567G/C in 431 cases
of endometriosis and 499 healthy women were genotyped by fluorescence
quantitative PCR-based high resolution melting.
RESULTS: The frequencies of genotypes AA, AG, GG and alleles A and G in controls 
were 12.0%, 41.9%, 46.1%, 33.0% and 67.0%, respectively, which were not
significantly different from those in patients with endometriosis (9.7%, 44.6%,
45.7%, 32.0% and 68.0%, respectively). The genotype frequencies of GG, GC, CC and
alleles C and G in controls (15.6 %, 51.7%, 32.7%, 58.5%, 41.5%) were not
significantly different from those in patients with endometriosis (13.5%, 47.8%, 
38.7%, 62.6%, 37.4%), either. And no interaction of AhR 1661G/A and ARNT 567G/C
on endometriosis was found.
CONCLUSION: No association between AhR 1661G/A and ARNT 567G/C genetic
polymorphisms and endometriosis was found in the southern Han Chinese women in
this study.

PMID: 21462134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biol Rhythms. 2011 Apr;26(2):160-70. doi: 10.1177/0748730410395732.

Circadian clock gene expression in brain regions of Alzheimer 's disease patients
and control subjects.

Cermakian N(1), Lamont EW, Boudreau P, Boivin DB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Chronobiology, Douglas Mental Health University
Institute, McGill University, 6875 LaSalle Blvd., Montreal (QC) H4H 1R3 Canada.
nicolas.cermakian@mcgill.ca

Circadian oscillators have been observed throughout the rodent brain. In the
human brain, rhythmic expression of clock genes has been reported only in the
pineal gland, and little is known about their expression in other regions. The
investigators sought to determine whether clock gene expression could be detected
and whether it varies as a function of time of day in the bed nucleus of the
stria terminalis (BNST) and cingulate cortex, areas known to be involved in
decision making and motivated behaviors, as well as in the pineal gland, in the
brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and aged controls. Relative
expression levels of PERIOD1 (PER1 ), PERIOD2 (PER2), and Brain and muscle
Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1) were detected by quantitative PCR in all 3 brain
regions. A harmonic regression model revealed significant 24-h rhythms of PER1 in
the BNST of AD subjects. A significant rhythm of PER2 was found in the cingulate 
cortex and BNST of control subjects and in all 3 regions of AD patients. In
controls, BMAL1 did not show a diurnal rhythm in the cingulate cortex but
significantly varied with time of death in the pineal and BNST and in all 3
regions for AD patients. Notable differences in the phase of clock gene rhythms
and phase relationships between genes and regions were observed in the brains of 
AD compared to those of controls. These results indicate the presence of multiple
circadian oscillators in the human brain and suggest altered synchronization
among these oscillators in the brain of AD patients.

© 2011 Sage Publications

PMID: 21454296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Jul 29;52(8):5872-80. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-7204.

Normoxic activation of hypoxia-inducible factors in photoreceptors provides
transient protection against light-induced retinal degeneration.

Lange C(1), Heynen SR, Tanimoto N, Thiersch M, Le YZ, Meneau I, Seeliger MW,
Samardzija M, Caprara C, Grimm C.

Author information: 
(1)Lab for Retinal Cell Biology, Department of Ophthalmology, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

PURPOSE: Hypoxic preconditioning activates hypoxia-inducible transcription
factors (HIFs) in the retina and protects photoreceptors from light-induced
retinal degeneration. The authors tested whether photoreceptor-specific
activation of HIFs in normoxia is sufficient for protection.
METHODS: Rod-specific Vhl knockdown mice were generated using the Cre-lox system 
with the rod opsin promoter controlling expression of CRE recombinase to
stabilize HIF transcription factors in normoxic rods. Cell death was induced by
light exposure and quantified by ELISA. Rhodopsin was quantified by
spectrophotometry. Gene expression was analyzed by real-time PCR, and levels of
proteins were determined by Western blotting. Morphology was investigated by
light microscopy and retinal function tested by ERG.
RESULTS: The rod-specific Vhl knockdown stabilized HIF-a proteins and induced
expression of HIF target genes in retinas of 10-week-old mice under normoxic
conditions. Retinal morphology and function were normal. At 36 hours after
exposure to excessive light, Vhl knockdowns showed significantly less
photoreceptor cell death than did wild-type controls. Ten days after light
exposure, however, photoreceptor degeneration in Vhl knockdowns was similar to
that of control animals. Vhl knockdowns expressed Fgf2 at higher basal levels
before light exposure. After light exposure, however, expression of Fgf2 was not 
significantly different from that of wild-type controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Artificial activation of HIF transcription factors in normoxic
photoreceptors results in an increased basal expression of Fgf2 that may
contribute to a transient protection of rods against light damage. Full
photoreceptor protection may require a hypoxia-like response in additional
retinal cell types and/or the differential regulation of additional mechanisms.

PMID: 21447692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Aug;112(8):2015-8. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23120.

4S polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (glycine N-methyltransferase) and the
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (hypoxia inducible factor-1ß)
interaction in Chinese hamster ovary and rat hepatoma cells: 4S PAH-R/ARNT
hetero-oligomers?

Sterling KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Florida, Whitney Laboratory, 9505 Ocean Shore Blvd., St.
Augustine, Florida 32080, USA. ksterling@whitney.ufl.edu

Rat CYP1A1 promoter-luciferase, transiently transfected wild-type and 4S PAH
receptor (glycine N-methyl transferase, GNMT)-transformed Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO) cells were exposed to benzo[a]pyrene and assayed for luciferase activity as
an indicator of CYP1A1 promoter activity. CHO cells transformed with the rat 4S
PAH receptor/GNMT expression vector had twice the induction level of luciferase
activity with respect to wild-type CHO cells in concert with previously published
reports that the 4S PAH receptor/GNMT mediates benzo[a]pyrene induction of CYP1A1
gene expression. Lysates of GNMT-transformed CHO cells and wild-type H4IIE rat
hepatoma cells exposed to benzo[a]pyrene were immuno-precipitated with anti-GNMT 
antibodies, separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred
to PVDF membrane for Western blot analysis with anti-aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT, HIF-1ß) antibodies. Results of this analysis
indicated that the 4S PAH receptor/GNMT forms a hetero-oligomer (dimer?) with
ARNT/HIF-1ß which dissociates in the presence of B[a]P. These observations
further indicate the role of GNMT (which has been shown to be multifunctional)
and B[a]P in the induction of CYP1A1 and also a potential role of GNMT in the
modulation of hypoxia inducible factor-1 function with respect to the HIF-1ß
subunit (ARNT).

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21445860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Mar 24;13(2):R32. doi: 10.1186/bcr2854.

Estrogen receptor beta inhibits transcriptional activity of hypoxia inducible
factor-1 through the downregulation of arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator.

Lim W(1), Park Y, Cho J, Park C, Park J, Park YK, Park H, Lee Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, College of Life Science, Institute
of Biotechnology, Sejong University, Kwangjingu, Kunjadong, Seoul 143-747, Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Estrogen receptor (ER) ß is predicted to play an important role in 
prevention of breast cancer development and metastasis. We have shown previously 
that ERß inhibits hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)-1a mediated transcription, but
the mechanism by which ERß works to exert this effect is not understood.
METHODS: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was measured in conditioned
medium by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. Reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR), Western blotting, immunoprecipitation, luciferase assays
and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were used to ascertain the
implication of ERß on HIF-1 function.
RESULTS: In this study, we found that the inhibition of HIF-1 activity by ERß
expression was correlated with ERß's ability to degrade aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT) via ubiquitination processes leading to the reduction
of active HIF-1a/ARNT complexes. HIF-1 repression by ERß was rescued by
overexpression of ARNT as examined by hypoxia-responsive element (HRE)-driven
luciferase assays. We show further that ERß attenuated the hypoxic induction of
VEGF mRNA by directly decreasing HIF-1a binding to the VEGF gene promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that ERß suppresses HIF-1a-mediated transcription
via ARNT down-regulation, which may account for the tumour suppressive function
of ERß.

PMCID: PMC3219195
PMID: 21435239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Gastroenterology. 2011 Jun;140(7):2044-55. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.03.007.
Epub 2011 Mar 17.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-2a mediates the adaptive increase of intestinal
ferroportin during iron deficiency in mice.

Taylor M(1), Qu A, Anderson ER, Matsubara T, Martin A, Gonzalez FJ, Shah YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor Michigan, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Iron deficiency and iron overload affect over a billion people
worldwide. Dietary iron absorption in the small intestine is required for
systemic iron homeostasis. Ferroportin (FPN) is the only characterized,
mammalian, basolateral iron exporter. Despite the importance of FPN in
maintaining iron homeostasis, its in vivo mechanisms of regulation are unclear.
METHODS: Systemic iron homeostasis was assessed in mice with intestine-specific
disruption of genes encoding the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein
(Vhl), hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1a, HIF-2a, and aryl hydrocarbon nuclear
translocator (ARNT).
RESULTS: We observed biphasic regulation of Fpn during iron deficiency. Fpn was
rapidly induced under conditions of low iron, which required the transcription
factor HIF-2a. Targeted disruption of HIF-2a in the intestine inhibited Fpn
induction in mice with low iron, through loss of transcriptional activation.
Analysis of the Fpn promoter and in vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated that HIF-2a directly binds to the Fpn promoter and induces its
expression, indicating a mechanism of transcriptional regulation of Fpn following
changes in systemic levels of iron. During chronic iron deficiency, FPN protein
levels also increased, via increased stability through a HIF-2a-independent
pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: In mice, expression of the gene that encodes Fpn and its protein
levels are regulated by distinct pathways to provide a rapid and sustained
response to acute and chronic iron deficiency. Therapies that target FPN might be
developed for patients with iron-related disorders.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3109109
PMID: 21419768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. FEBS J. 2011 May;278(10):1757-68. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08100.x. Epub
2011 Apr 8.

Substrate preference and phosphatidylinositol monophosphate inhibition of the
catalytic domain of the Per-Arnt-Sim domain kinase PASKIN.

Schläfli P(1), Tröger J, Eckhardt K, Borter E, Spielmann P, Wenger RH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.

The Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain serine/threonine kinase PASKIN, or PAS kinase,
links energy flux and protein synthesis in yeast, regulates glycogen synthesis
and protein translation in mammals, and might be involved in insulin regulation
in the pancreas. According to the current model, binding of a putative ligand to 
the PAS domain disinhibits the kinase domain, leading to PASKIN
autophosphorylation and increased kinase activity. To date, only synthetic but no
endogenous PASKIN ligands have been reported. In the present study, we identified
a number of novel PASKIN kinase targets, including ribosomal protein S6. Together
with our previous identification of eukaryotic elongation factor 1A1, this
suggests a role for PASKIN in the regulation of mammalian protein translation.
When searching for endogenous PASKIN ligands, we found that various phospholipids
can bind PASKIN and stimulate its autophosphorylation. Interestingly, the
strongest binding and autophosphorylation was achieved with monophosphorylated
phosphatidylinositols. However, stimulated PASKIN autophosphorylation did not
correlate with ribosomal protein S6 and eukaryotic elongation factor 1A1 target
phosphorylation. Although autophosphorylation was enhanced by monophosphorylated 
phosphatidylinositols, di- and tri-phosphorylated phosphatidylinositols inhibited
autophosphorylation. By contrast, target phosphorylation was always inhibited,
with the highest efficiency for di- and tri-phosphorylated phosphatidylinositols.
Because phosphatidylinositol monophosphates were found to interact with the
kinase rather than with the PAS domain, these data suggest a multiligand
regulation of PASKIN activity, including a still unknown PAS domain
binding/activating ligand and kinase domain binding modulatory
phosphatidylinositol phosphates.

© 2011 The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 FEBS.

PMID: 21418524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Curr Drug Metab. 2011 Feb;12(2):154-72.

Steroid regulation of drug-metabolizing cytochromes P450.

Monostory K(1), Dvorak Z.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Research Center, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.
monostor@chemres.hu

Cytochrome P450 (P450) monooxygenases are capable of catalyzing metabolism of
various endogenous and exogenous compounds, such as bile acids, fatty acids,
retinoids, steroids, drugs and other xenobiotics. The enzymes, belonging to CYP1,
CYP2 and CYP3 families are primarily involved in the metabolism of drugs and
xenobiotics. P450-mediated defense mechanism protects organisms from the
potentially toxic effects of xenobiotics to which they are exposed. The adaptive 
transcriptional induction of P450s by xenobiotics is mediated by aromatic
hydrocarbon receptor of Per-ARNT-Sim family, and nuclear hormone receptors,
including pregnane X receptor, constitutive androstane receptor and
glucocorticoid receptor. In addition to the receptor-mediated induction,
endogenous factors (developmental, sex or hormonal factors) can also modulate
P450 expression. Steroid hormones are biologically active compounds, controlling 
many physiological processes via endocrine signaling pathways and contributing to
the transcriptional regulation of drug metabolizing P450s. Any change in P450
activities influences the rate of activation or inactivation of drugs. Exposure
to xenobiotics (drugs, environmental pollutants) can exert changes in endocrine
function both directly as hormone agonists/antagonists or indirectly altering the
rates of hormone metabolism and consequently the circulating levels of hormones. 
Modulation of P450 expression by xenobiotics can affect the subsequent metabolism
of not only foreign chemicals, but also steroid hormones. Perturbation in hormone
metabolism leads to the imbalance in sexual and reproductive development, and in 
glucose, lipid and salt/water homeostasis. The purpose of this review is to
highlight the interplay between drug-metabolizing P450s and steroid hormones as
well as the interactions of xenosensor with steroid signaling pathways.

PMID: 21395541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 May;31(9):1870-84. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01393-10. Epub 2011 Mar
7.

Cell-type-dependent regulation of mTORC1 by REDD1 and the tumor suppressors
TSC1/TSC2 and LKB1 in response to hypoxia.

Wolff NC(1), Vega-Rubin-de-Celis S, Xie XJ, Castrillon DH, Kabbani W, Brugarolas 
J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd.,
Dallas, TX 75390-9133, USA.

mTORC1 is a critical regulator of cell growth that integrates multiple signals
and is deregulated in cancer. We previously reported that mTORC1 regulation by
hypoxia involves Redd1 and the Tsc1/Tsc2 complex. Here we show that Redd1
induction by hypoxia is tissue dependent and that hypoxia signals are relayed to 
mTORC1 through different pathways in a tissue-specific manner. In the liver,
Redd1 induction is restricted to the centrilobular area, and in primary
hepatocytes, mTORC1 inhibition by hypoxia is independent of Redd1. Furthermore,
Tsc1/Tsc2 and Arnt (Hif-1ß) are similarly dispensable. Hypoxia signaling in
hepatocytes involves Lkb1, AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), and raptor.
Differences in signal relay extend beyond hypoxia and involve AMPK signaling.
AMPK activation (using 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide riboside [AICAR]) induces
raptor phosphorylation and inhibits mTORC1 in both mouse embryo fibroblasts
(MEFs) and hepatocytes, but whereas mTORC1 inhibition is Tsc1/Tsc2 dependent in
MEFs, it is independent in hepatocytes. In liver cells, raptor phosphorylation is
essential for both AMPK and hypoxia signaling. Thus, context-specific signals are
required for raptor phosphorylation-induced mTORC1 inhibition. Our data
illustrate a heretofore unappreciated topological complexity in mTORC1
regulation. Interestingly, topological differences in mTORC1 regulation by the
tumor suppressor proteins Lkb1 and Tsc1/Tsc2 may underlie their tissue
specificity of tumor suppressor action.

PMCID: PMC3133225
PMID: 21383064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Dig Dis Sci. 2011 Sep;56(9):2532-44. doi: 10.1007/s10620-011-1643-9. Epub 2011
Mar 5.

A role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor in attenuation of colitis.

Furumatsu K(1), Nishiumi S, Kawano Y, Ooi M, Yoshie T, Shiomi Y, Kutsumi H,
Ashida H, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Azuma T, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kobe University
Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1, Chuo-ku, Kusunoki-cho, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0017, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), which is a member of
the basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim homology superfamily, plays an important 
role in multiple biological functions, and AhR knockout (AhR KO) animals suffer
from a variety of organ disorders including a decline in the efficacy of their
immune system. In addition, AhR activation is known to aid the maintenance of
homeostasis in vivo. In this study, we investigated whether AhR is functionally
associated with intestinal immunity.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In in vivo experiments, it was found that dextran sodium
sulfate (DSS)-evoked colitis was more severe in AhR KO mice than in C57BL/6J wild
type mice. It was also revealed that the administration of DSS increased the
expression levels of AhR and CYP1A1 mRNA in the colon epithelium. In addition,
oral administration of ß-naphthoflavone (ßNF), a non-toxic agonist of AhR,
suppressed the pathogenesis of DSS-induced colitis. ßNF also attenuated
DSS-induced colitis. In cell culture experiments, downregulation of AhR in human 
colon carcinoma SW480 cells enhanced the inflammatory responses evoked by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and furthermore, AhR activation attenuated LPS-induced 
inflammatory responses, suggesting that AhR expressing intestinal epithelial
cells are involved in the prevention of colitis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings about the potential role of AhR activators in
epithelial immune regulation aid our understanding of mucosal homeostasis and
inflammatory bowl disease (IBD) and suggest that AhR activation has therapeutic
value for the treatment of IBD.

PMID: 21374063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Gen Physiol. 2011 Mar;137(3):315-25. doi: 10.1085/jgp.201010582.

hERG potassium channel gating is mediated by N- and C-terminal region
interactions.

Gustina AS(1), Trudeau MC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neuroscience and 2 Department of Physiology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Human ether-á-go-go-related gene (hERG) potassium channels have voltage-dependent
closing (deactivation) kinetics that are unusually slow. A Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS)
domain in the cytoplasmic N-terminal region of hERG regulates slow deactivation
by making a direct interaction with another part of the hERG channel. The
mechanism for slow deactivation is unclear, however, because the other regions of
the channel that participate in regulation of deactivation are not known. To
identify other functional determinants of slow deactivation, we generated hERG
channels with deletions of the cytoplasmic C-terminal regions. We report that
hERG channels with deletions of the cyclic nucleotide-binding domain (CNBD) had
accelerated deactivation kinetics that were similar to those seen in hERG
channels lacking the PAS domain. Channels with dual deletions of the PAS domain
and the CNBD did not show further acceleration in deactivation, indicating that
the PAS domain and the CNBD regulate deactivation by a convergent mechanism. A
recombinant PAS domain that we previously showed could directly regulate PAS
domain-deleted channels did not regulate channels with dual deletions of the PAS 
domain and CNBD, suggesting that the PAS domain did not interact with
CNBD-deleted channels. Biochemical protein interaction assays showed that
glutathione S-transferase (GST)-PAS (but not GST) bound to a CNBD-containing
fusion protein. Coexpression of PAS domain-deleted subunits (with intact
C-terminal regions) and CNBD-deleted subunits (with intact N-terminal regions)
resulted in channels with partially restored slow deactivation kinetics,
suggesting regulatory intersubunit interactions between PAS domains and CNBDs.
Together, these data suggest that the mechanism for regulation of slow
deactivation in hERG channels is an interaction between the N-terminal PAS domain
and the C-terminal CNBD.

PMCID: PMC3047612
PMID: 21357734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Plant Cell. 2011 Feb;23(2):567-82. doi: 10.1105/tpc.110.080754. Epub 2011 Feb 25.

A per-ARNT-sim-like sensor domain uniquely regulates the activity of the
homeodomain leucine zipper transcription factor REVOLUTA in Arabidopsis.

Magnani E(1), Barton MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, Carnegie Institution, Stanford, California 94305,
USA.

Class III homeodomain leucine zipper (HD-ZIP III) transcription factors regulate 
critical developmental programs in plants; these include leaf polarity, polarity 
along the shoot-root axis, and stem cell specification and proliferation. One of 
the defining features of HD-ZIP III proteins is the presence of a
Per-ARNT-Sim-like (PAS-like) MEKHLA domain at the C terminus. PAS-like domains
are known to respond to a variety of chemical and physical stimuli. Here, we
provide evidence that the MEKHLA domain acts as a negative regulator of
Arabidopsis thaliana HD-ZIP III REVOLUTA activity. Based on experiments in yeast 
and plants, we propose a model in which the MEKHLA domain inhibits dimerization
through a sequence-independent steric masking mechanism. This inhibition is
relieved in response to a cellular signal that requires the C terminus of the
MEKHLA domain for its perception. Overexpression experiments suggest that this
signal is unequally distributed and/or sensed in the plant. Our data show that
the function of the REVOLUTA MEKHLA domain differs among other HD-ZIP III family 
members; this difference may explain the genetic differences that have been
observed among family members. This finding, combined with our phylogenetic
analysis, suggests that REVOLUTA is the latest type of HD-ZIP III protein to have
evolved in land plants.

PMCID: PMC3077777
PMID: 21357492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Apr;9(4):516-27. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0270. Epub
2011 Feb 25.

Upregulation of ABCG2 by romidepsin via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway.

To KK(1), Robey R, Zhan Z, Bangiolo L, Bates SE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
kennethto@cuhk.edu.hk

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACI) are promising anticancer agents and their 
use in combination with conventional anticancer drugs is currently under
investigation. We previously reported cell line-specific upregulation of ABCG2, a
multidrug resistance transporter shown to control oral bioavailability and CNS
penetration, by the HDACI romidepsin, although the precise mechanism in a
particular cell line remains to be determined. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that can be activated by
numerous environmental contaminants and has been shown to be a client protein of 
heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90). A xenobiotic response element was defined in the
ABCG2 promoter and was shown to mediate AhR signaling. Activated AhR was found to
be associated with the ABCG2 promoter only in cell line models that respond to
romidepsin with ABCG2 upregulation. Our data suggest that romidepsin acetylated
Hsp70 and inhibited the chaperone function of Hsp90, thereby allowing the
dissociation of AhR from Hsp90. The dissociation of AhR from Hsp90 may be a
prerequisite for the differential upregulation of ABCG2 by romidepsin. Increasing
our understanding of the mechanism(s) governing differential upregulation of
ABCG2 in response to romidepsin could provide an insight into strategies needed
to tackle resistance to HDACIs in cancer therapeutics.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21357443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Horm Metab Res. 2011 May;43(5):337-42. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1271693. Epub 2011 Feb
17.

Melatonin exerts direct inhibitory actions on ACTH responses in the human adrenal
gland.

Campino C(1), Valenzuela FJ, Torres-Farfan C, Reynolds HE, Abarzua-Catalan L,
Arteaga E, Trucco C, Guzmán S, Valenzuela GJ, Seron-Ferre M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Endocrinología, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

In nonhuman primates and rodents, melatonin acting directly on the adrenal gland,
inhibits glucocorticoid response to ACTH. In these species, an intrinsic adrenal 
circadian clock is involved in ACTH-stimulated glucocorticoid production. We
investigated whether these findings apply to the human adrenal gland by
determining i) expression of clock genes in vivo and ii) direct effects of
melatonin in ACTH-stimulated adrenal explants over a) expression of the clock
genes PER1 (Period 1) mRNA and BMAL1 [Brain-Muscle (ARNT)-like] protein,
ACTH-induced steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR), and 3ß-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase (3ß-HSD) and b) over cortisol and progesterone production. Adrenal 
tissue was obtained from 6 renal cancer patients undergoing unilateral
nephrectomy-adrenalectomy. Expression of the clock genes PER1, PER2, CRY2
(Cryptochrome 2), CLOCK (Circadian Locomotor Output Cycles Kaput) and BMAL1, was 
investigated by RT-PCR in a normal adrenal and in an adenoma. In independent
experiments, explants from 4 normal adrenals were preincubated in culture medium 
(6 h) followed by 12 h in: medium alone; ACTH (100 nM); ACTH plus melatonin (100 
nM); and melatonin alone. The explants' content of PER1 mRNA (real-time PCR) and 
StAR, 3ß-HSD, BMAL1 (immuno slot-blot), and their cortisol and progesterone
production (RIA) were measured. The human adrenal gland expresses the clock genes
PER1, PER2, CRY2, CLOCK, and BMAL1. ACTH increased PER1 mRNA, BMAL1, StAR, and
3ß-HSD protein levels, and cortisol and progesterone production. Melatonin
inhibited these ACTH effects. Our study demonstrates, for the first time, direct 
inhibitory effects of melatonin upon several ACTH responses in the human adrenal 
gland.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 21332028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2011;96:141-61. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385902-0.00006-1.

5-HT6 receptor ligands and their antipsychotic potential.

Arnt J(1), Olsen CK.

Author information: 
(1)Lundbeck Research Denmark, H Lundbeck A/S, DK-2500 Valby, Denmark.

PMID: 21329787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Diabetologia. 2011 Apr;54(4):719-21. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2072-1. Epub 2011
Feb 17.

Per-arnt-sim (PAS) domain kinase (PASK) as a regulator of glucagon secretion.

MacDonald PE(1), Rorsman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
pmacdonald@pmcol.ualberta.ca

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2011 Apr;54(4):819-27.

The physiological and pathophysiological regulation of glucagon secretion from
pancreatic alpha cells remains a hotly debated topic. The mechanism(s)
contributing to the glucose sensitivity of glucagon release and its impaired
regulation in diabetes remain unclear. A paper in the current issue of
Diabetologia by da Silva Xavier and colleagues (doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-2010-7 ) 
provides intriguing new insight into a metabolic sensing pathway mediated by the 
per-arnt-sim (PAS) domain kinase (PASK) that may contribute to both the paracrine
and the intrinsic glucose regulation of alpha cells. Importantly, the authors
show that PASK is decreased in islets from patients with type 2 diabetes,
providing a potential mechanism for impaired suppression of glucagon by
hyperglycaemia in this disease. Much work remains to be done to determine the
exact role and mechanism of PASK in alpha and beta cells. Nevertheless, the
present work introduces a new player in the metabolic regulation of glucagon
secretion.

PMID: 21327866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Surg Res. 2012 May 15;174(2):291-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2010.12.028. Epub 2011
Jan 15.

p53 inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor expression in solid tumor.

Yoshioka Y(1), Shimizu S, Ito T, Taniguchi M, Nomura M, Nishida T, Sawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Surgery, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The p53 tumor-suppressor gene is one of the most frequently mutated
genes in cancers, and its mutations affect various biological actions, such as
tumor growth, apoptosis, and so on. During hypoxia, p53 is stabilized by
interaction with hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). This interaction raised the 
possibility for regulating HIF-1 activity by p53, which is still to be
elucidated.
METHODS: First, we introduced various types of the p53 mutant gene into Hep3B and
evaluated the role of p53 in hypoxic responses, including vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) production and HIF-1 activation. Second, Hep3B-vector cells 
and Hep3B-p53 cells were subcutaneously injected into BALB/c (nu/nu) mice, and
tumor progression and the hypoxic responses were analyzed. Finally, we
investigated the role of the p53 mutant genes in the level of vascularity in
human pancreatic neoplasia.
RESULTS: Here, we showed that expression of wild-type p53, but not null or
mutated p53, significantly suppressed HIF-1 activity and production of VEGF,
which mostly depends on the HIF-1ß protein level. In a tumor xenograft model, we 
consistently found that loss of p53 promotes VEGF production, neovascularization,
and tumor progression via accumulation of HIF-1ß protein. Furthermore, in
clinical pancreatic neoplasia, tumors with mutated p53 have significantly higher 
levels of vascularity than those with wild-type p53.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that loss of p53 contributes to
neovascularization through regulation of HIF-1.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21324396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Environ Toxicol. 2011 Oct;26(5):515-23. doi: 10.1002/tox.20665. Epub 2011 Feb 9.

Toxicity evaluation of verapamil and tramadol based on toxicity assay and
expression patterns of Dhb, Vtg, Arnt, CYP4, and CYP314 in Daphnia magna.

Le TH(1), Lim ES, Lee SK, Park JS, Kim YH, Min J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioprocess Engineering, Chonbuk National University, 664-14
Deokjin-dong, 1Ga Deokjin-Gu Jeonju 561-756, South Korea.

In this study, the toxicities of two pharmaceuticals, verapamil and tramadol were
evaluated in Daphnia magna using the conventional toxicity tests (acute and
chronic test) and the expression patterns of five stress responsive genes. In the
chronic toxicity test, several parameters, such as the survival percentage, the
body length of D. magna, the time of first reproduction, and the number of
offspring per female, were adversely affected during the exposure to 4.2 mg L(-1)
verapamil and 34 mg L(-1) tramadol. During the 24-h short-term exposure,
verapamil particularly caused a downregulated expression of the CYP4 and CYP314
genes, whereas tramadol upregulated the expression of the CYP314 gene. Neither
pharmaceutical affected the expression of Dhb, Arnt, and Vtg. However, during the
21-day long-term exposure, both verapamil and tramadol significantly reduced the 
expression level of the Vtg gene, a biomarker of the reproduction ability in an
oviparous animal, whereas neither affected the other genes.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21308947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cancer Res. 2011 Feb 15;71(4):1244-52. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2360. Epub
2011 Feb 8.

HIF-1a confers aggressive malignant traits on human tumor cells independent of
its canonical transcriptional function.

Yoo YG(1), Christensen J, Huang LE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurosurgery and Oncological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah, USA.

Hypoxia is known to favor tumor survival and progression. Numerous studies have
shown that hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF-1a), an oxygen-sensitive
transcription factor, is overexpressed in various types of human cancers and
upregulates a battery of hypoxia-responsive genes for the growth and survival of 
cancer cells. Although tumor progression involves the acquisition of genetic
and/or epigenetic changes that confer additional malignant traits, the underlying
mechanisms of these changes remain obscure. We recently identified an alternative
mechanism of HIF-1a function by which HIF-1a suppresses DNA repair by
counteracting c-Myc transcriptional activity that maintains gene expression.
Here, we show that this HIF-a-c-Myc pathway plays an essential role in mediating 
hypoxic effects on malignant progression via genetic alterations, resulting in
the formation of malignant tumors with aggressive local invasion and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. We show an absolute requirement of the
HIF-a-c-Myc pathway for malignant progression, whereas the canonical
transcription function of HIF-1a alone is insufficient and seemingly dispensable.
This study indicates that HIF-1a induction of genetic alteration is the
underlying cause of tumor progression, especially by the hypoxic
microenvironment.

©2011 AACR

PMCID: PMC3041864
PMID: 21303984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. PLoS Genet. 2011 Jan 27;7(1):e1001285. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001285.

Evolutionary conserved regulation of HIF-1ß by NF-<U+03BA>B.

van Uden P(1), Kenneth NS, Webster R, Müller HA, Mudie S, Rocha S.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, College of Life
Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.

Hypoxia Inducible Factor-1 (HIF-1) is essential for mammalian development and is 
the principal transcription factor activated by low oxygen tensions. HIF-a
subunit quantities and their associated activity are regulated in a
post-translational manner, through the concerted action of a class of enzymes
called Prolyl Hydroxylases (PHDs) and Factor Inhibiting HIF (FIH) respectively.
However, alternative modes of HIF-a regulation such as translation or
transcription are under-investigated, and their importance has not been firmly
established. Here, we demonstrate that NF-<U+03BA>B regulates the HIF pathway in a
significant and evolutionary conserved manner. We demonstrate that NF-<U+03BA>B directly
regulates HIF-1ß mRNA and protein. In addition, we found that NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated
changes in HIF-1ß result in modulation of HIF-2a protein. HIF-1ß overexpression
can rescue HIF-2a protein levels following NF-<U+03BA>B depletion. Significantly, NF-<U+03BA>B 
regulates HIF-1ß (tango) and HIF-a (sima) levels and activity (Hph/fatiga,
ImpL3/ldha) in Drosophila, both in normoxia and hypoxia, indicating an
evolutionary conserved mode of regulation. These results reveal a novel mechanism
of HIF regulation, with impact in the development of novel therapeutic strategies
for HIF-related pathologies including ageing, ischemia, and cancer.

PMCID: PMC3029248
PMID: 21298084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2011 Jun;38(3):352-5. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2010.09.010. Epub
2011 Jan 26.

Expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocators in human adenoid tissue.

Kubo K(1), Sakaki M, Ohashi M, Komune S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Fukuoka, Japan. kubokazu@qent.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine whether aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) and AhR nuclear translocators (ARNTs) are expressed in human
adenoid tissue.
METHODS: Paraffin-embedded human adenoid tissue specimens were obtained from
eight children with adenoid hypertrophy. Sections were stained
immunohistochemically with specific polyclonal antibodies to evaluate the
expression pattern of AhR, ARNT1 and ARNT2 were evaluated.
RESULTS: AhR-immunoreactivity was ubiquitously seen in human adenoid tissue such 
as the epithelium, subepithelial layer, germinal center, mantle zone and
interfollicular area. ARNT1 was also widely expressed in the same regions as AhR.
Although ARNT2 was expressed in the human adenoid, the expression level was
significantly lower than that of ARNT1.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that the relationship between AhR and ARNTs may
play an important role in the local immune response in adenoid and that ARNT1 may
be more important than ARNT2 especially in adenoid tissue.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21273015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Thromb Haemost. 2011 Apr;105(4):670-5. doi: 10.1160/TH10-10-0641. Epub 2011 Jan
25.

Extended evidence for association between the melanoma inhibitory activity 3 gene
and myocardial infarction.

Koch W(1), Schatke A, Wolferstetter H, Mueller JC, Schömig A, Kastrati A.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Herzzentrum München and 1. Medizinische Klinik, Klinikum rechts der 
Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany. wkoch@dhm.mhn.de

In a genome-wide scan, isolated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), including
rs17465637, in the melanoma inhibitory activity 3 gene (MIA3) on chromosome 1
were identified to be associated with coronary artery disease and myocardial
infarction (MI). Because the role of common variation at the MIA3 locus has not
yet been investigated, the aim of this case-control study was to determine the
impact of haplotype-tagging SNPs and haplotypes in the MIA3 region on the risk of
MI. In a set of nine haplotype-tagging SNPs, rs17465637, but none of the other
SNPs, was associated with MI. After adjustments were made for age, gender,
history of arterial hypertension, history of hypercholesterolaemia, current
cigarette smoking and diabetes mellitus, multiple logistic regression analyses
showed an increased risk in the carriers of one or two C alleles [adjusted odds
ratio (OR) 1.17, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.04-1.32, and 1.37, 95% CI
1.08-1.74, respectively]. Nine common haplotypes (frequency >1%) were established
across the MIA3 region. Two of the haplotypes were associated with an increased
risk of MI: the frequent (48%) TGACCAAAG haplotype and the rare (2%) CGACCAAAG
haplotype (adjusted OR 1.102, 95% CI 1.002-1.212, and 1.574, 95% CI 1.077-2.298, 
respectively). Showing association between rs17465637 and MI, this work was
consistent with results from the original detection study and most prior
replication studies addressing this issue. In addition to correspond with such
isolated evidence of association with MI, the present study identified specific
haplotypes capturing the risk-related variation in the entire MIA3 region.

PMID: 21264445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Bacteriol. 2011 Apr;193(7):1543-51. doi: 10.1128/JB.01364-10. Epub 2011 Jan 21.

Unusual heme-binding PAS domain from YybT family proteins.

Rao F(1), Ji Q, Soehano I, Liang ZX.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang
Drive, Singapore 637551, Singapore.

YybT family proteins (COG3887) are functionally unknown proteins that are widely 
distributed among the firmicutes, including the human pathogens Staphylococcus
aureus and Listeria monocytogenes. Recent studies suggested that YybT family
proteins are crucial for the in vivo survival of bacterial pathogens during host 
infection. YybT family proteins contain an N-terminal domain that shares minimum 
sequence homology with Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domains. Despite the lack of an
apparent residue for heme coordination, the putative PAS domains of BsYybT and
GtYybT, two representative members of the YybT family proteins from Bacillus
subtilis and Geobacillus thermodenitrificans, respectively, are found to bind
b-type heme with 1:1 stoichiometry. Heme binding suppresses the catalytic
activity of the DHH/DHHA1 phosphodiesterase domain and the degenerate GGDEF
domain. Absorption spectroscopic studies indicate that YybT proteins do not form 
stable oxyferrous complexes due to the rapid oxidation of the ferrous iron upon
O(2) binding. The ferrous heme, however, forms a hexacoordinated complex with
carbon monoxide (CO) and a pentacoordinated complex with nitric oxide (NO). The
coordination of NO, but not CO, to the heme stimulates the phosphodiesterase
activity. These results suggest that YybT family proteins function as
stress-signaling proteins for monitoring cellular heme or the NO level by using a
heme-binding PAS domain that features an unconventional heme coordination
environment.

PMCID: PMC3067658
PMID: 21257773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Toxicol In Vitro. 2011 Apr;25(3):671-83. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2011.01.008. Epub
2011 Jan 20.

Single and concerted effects of benzo[a]pyrene and flavonoids on the AhR and
Nrf2-pathway in the human colon carcinoma cell line Caco-2.

Niestroy J(1), Barbara A, Herbst K, Rode S, van Liempt M, Roos PH.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors, D-44139
Dortmund, Germany.

As phytochemicals have the potential to counteract adverse effects of carcinogens
we investigated the influence of the flavonoids quercetin and kaempferol on
benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) mediated effects on human colon cancer cells, Caco-2. We
focused on concerted effects on the expression of AhR and Nrf2 pathway
components. In contrast to kaempferol, BaP and quercetin efficiently induced
CYP1A1, CYP1A2 and CYP1B1-mRNA in Caco-2 cells. BaP not only acted via AhR
activation but sustainably also by increasing AhR and by down-regulating AhRR
mRNA. The flavonoids did not affect AhR expression but counteracted the BaP
mediated AhRR repression. Only quercetin was found to induce AhRR mRNA. ARNT mRNA
appeared to be slightly but significantly down-regulated by BaP as well as by
flavonoids while expression of AIP was not or only slightly modulated. The Nrf2
pathway was activated by BaP and by the flavonoids shown by induction of Nrf2 and
several of its target genes such as NQO1, GSTP1, GSTA1 and GCLC. Induction
effects of 10 µm BaP on Nrf2, GSTP1 and NQO1 were abolished by the flavonoids. In
summary, we show that quercetin supports AhR mediated effects. Both flavonoids,
however, may counteract the effects of BaP on expression of AhR, AhRR, Nrf2,
GSTP1 and NQO1. In conclusion, quercetin appears to have two faces, a
flavonoid-like one and a PAH-like one which supports Ahr-mediated effects while
kaempferol acts "just like a flavonoid". Thus, flavonoids have to be treated
individually with respect to their anti-adverse activity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21256954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 13;6(1):e16191. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016191.

The N-terminal tail of hERG contains an amphipathic a-helix that regulates
channel deactivation.

Ng CA(1), Hunter MJ, Perry MD, Mobli M, Ke Y, Kuchel PW, King GF, Stock D,
Vandenberg JI.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology and Biophysics Division, Victor Chang Cardiac Research
Institute, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, Australia.

The cytoplasmic N-terminal domain of the human ether-a-go-go related gene (hERG) 
K+ channel is critical for the slow deactivation kinetics of the channel.
However, the mechanism(s) by which the N-terminal domain regulates deactivation
remains to be determined. Here we show that the solution NMR structure of the
N-terminal 135 residues of hERG contains a previously described Per-Arnt-Sim
(PAS) domain (residues 26-135) as well as an amphipathic a-helix (residues 13-23)
and an initial unstructured segment (residues 2-9). Deletion of residues 2-25,
only the unstructured segment (residues 2-9) or replacement of the a-helix with a
flexible linker all result in enhanced rates of deactivation. Thus, both the
initial flexible segment and the a-helix are required but neither is sufficient
to confer slow deactivation kinetics. Alanine scanning mutagenesis identified R5 
and G6 in the initial flexible segment as critical for slow deactivation. Alanine
mutants in the helical region had less dramatic phenotypes. We propose that the
PAS domain is bound close to the central core of the channel and that the
N-terminal a-helix ensures that the flexible tail is correctly orientated for
interaction with the activation gating machinery to stabilize the open state of
the channel.

PMCID: PMC3020963
PMID: 21249148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 May;39(9):3695-709. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1336. Epub 2011
Jan 17.

Identification of residues in the N-terminal PAS domains important for
dimerization of Arnt and AhR.

Hao N(1), Whitelaw ML, Shearwin KE, Dodd IB, Chapman-Smith A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, 
SA 5005, Australia.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH).PAS dimeric transcription factors have crucial 
roles in development, stress response, oxygen homeostasis and neurogenesis. Their
target gene specificity depends in part on partner protein choices, where
dimerization with common partner Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(Arnt) is an essential step towards forming active, DNA binding complexes. Using 
a new bacterial two-hybrid system that selects for loss of protein interactions, 
we have identified 22 amino acids in the N-terminal PAS domain of Arnt that are
involved in heterodimerization with aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Of these,
Arnt E163 and Arnt S190 were selective for the AhR/Arnt interaction, since
mutations at these positions had little effect on Arnt dimerization with other
bHLH.PAS partners, while substitution of Arnt D217 affected the interaction with 
both AhR and hypoxia inducible factor-1a but not with single minded 1 and 2 or
neuronal PAS4. Arnt uses the same face of the N-terminal PAS domain for homo- and
heterodimerization and mutational analysis of AhR demonstrated that the
equivalent region is used by AhR when dimerizing with Arnt. These interfaces
differ from the PAS ß-scaffold surfaces used for dimerization between the
C-terminal PAS domains of hypoxia inducible factor-2a and Arnt, commonly used for
PAS domain interactions.

© The Author(s) 2011. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC3089468
PMID: 21245039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 May 1;90(2):305-14. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvr007. Epub 2011 Jan
13.

Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor by doxorubicin mediates
cytoprotective effects in the heart.

Volkova M(1), Palmeri M, Russell KS, Russell RR.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, 333
Cedar Street, FMP 3, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

AIMS: Doxorubicin (DOX) is a highly effective chemotherapeutic agent; however,
cumulative dose-dependent cardiotoxicity is a significant side effect of this
therapy. Because DOX is a polyaromatic hydrocarbon, we hypothesized that it will 
be metabolized by the activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a
ligand-activated transcription factor that is involved in the metabolism of
numerous xenobiotic agents. These studies were performed to determine whether DOX
activates AhR and whether this activation modulates the toxicity of DOX in
cardiomyocytes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Treatment with DOX induced AhR migration to the nucleus,
increased AhR binding with its co-factor, aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator-1 (ARNT1), and increased the expression of AhR-regulated phase I
(CYP1A1) and phase II (GSTA1) drug-metabolizing enzymes in both cardiomyocytes
and in the intact heart. Knockdown of AhR in H9C2 cells abolished DOX-induced
increases in CYP1A1 and GSTA1 expression. Similar results were obtained by
treating adult rat ventricular myocytes with the AhR antagonist, CH-223191. Taken
together, these findings indicate that DOX-induced upregulation of CYP1A1 and
GSTA1 expression is AhR dependent. AhR null mice treated with 10 mg/kg DOX did
not show any activation of CYP1A1 or GSTA1 expression. Moreover, lack of AhR in
vivo resulted in a significant decrease in left ventricular function compared
with wild-type animals, and increased p53 activation and apoptosis in the heart
after treatment with DOX.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that AhR plays an important role in DOX
metabolism by the heart and further demonstrate that AhR is cardioprotective
against DOX-induced cardiotoxicity.

PMCID: PMC3078799
PMID: 21233252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 11;286(10):8437-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.191684. Epub 2010
Dec 28.

Steroid receptor co-activator is required for juvenile hormone signal
transduction through a bHLH-PAS transcription factor, methoprene tolerant.

Zhang Z(1), Xu J, Sheng Z, Sui Y, Palli SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, College of Agriculture, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, Kentucky 40546, USA.

Metamorphosis in insects is regulated by juvenile hormone (JH) and ecdysteroids. 
The mechanism of 20-hydroxyecdysone (20E), but not of JH action, is well
understood. A basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) family member,
methoprene tolerant (Met), plays an important role in JH action. Microarray
analysis and RNA interference (RNAi) were used to identify 69 genes that require 
Met for their hydroprene-regulated expression in the red flour beetle, Tribolium 
castaneum. Quantitative real time PCR analysis confirmed microarray data for 13
of the 16 hydroprene-response genes tested. The members of the bHLH-PAS family
often function as heterodimers to regulate gene expression and Met is a member of
this family. To determine whether other members of the bHLH-PAS family are
required for the expression of JH-response genes, we employed RNAi to knockdown
the expression of all 11 members of the bHLH-PAS family and studied the
expression of JH-response genes in RNAi insects. These studies showed that
besides Met, another member of this family, steroid receptor co-activator (SRC)
is required for the expression of 15 JH-response genes tested. Moreover, studies 
in JH responsive Aag-2 cells revealed that Aedes aegypti homologues of both Met
and SRC are required for the expression of the JH-response gene, kr-h1, and SRC
is required for expression of ecdysone-response genes. These data suggest the
steroid receptor co-activator plays key roles in both JH and 20E action
suggesting that this may be an important molecule that mediates cross-talk
between JH and 20E to prevent metamorphosis.

PMCID: PMC3048728
PMID: 21190938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Arh Hig Rada Toksikol. 2010 Dec;61(4):445-53. doi:
10.2478/10004-1254-61-2010-2024.

Dioxins and human toxicity.

Marinkovic N(1), Paalic D, Ferencak G, Grkovic B, Stavljenic Rukavina A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Zagreb University School of
Medicine, Salata 3, Zagreb, Croatia. nmarinko@snz.hr

The term dioxins usually refers to polychlorinated dibenzo-dioxins (PCDDs) and
polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs). As 2,3,7,8-tetrachloro-dibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) has the highest toxic potential, the toxic potentials of other PCDDs and
PCDFs are defined in comparison with it. Human exposure to dioxins can be
environmental (background), occupational, or accidental pollution. In the human
body, dioxins are in part metabolised and eliminated, and the rest is stored in
body fat. People vary in their capacity to eliminate TCDD, but it is also
dose-dependent; the elimination rate is much faster at higher than lower levels. 
The liver microsomal P4501A1 enzyme oxygenates lipophilic chemicals such as
dioxins. It is encoded by the CYP1A1 gene. Cytosolic aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR) mediates their carcinogenic action. It binds to dioxin, translocates to
nucleus and together with hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT) and xenobiotic 
responsive element (XRE) increases the expression of CYP1A1.Dioxins are
classified as known human carcinogens, but they also cause noncancerous effects
like atherosclerosis, hypertension, and diabetes. Long-term exposures to dioxins 
cause disruption of the nervous, immune, reproductive, and endocrine system.
Short-term exposure to high levels impairs the liver function and causes
chloracne. The most sensitive population to dioxin exposure are the foetuses and 
infants.A large number of health effects have been documented in the scientific
literature, and they all place dioxins among the most toxic chemicals known to
man.

PMID: 21183436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Toxicol Lett. 2011 Mar 5;201(2):116-22. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2010.12.013. Epub
2010 Dec 21.

Circadian clock disruption in the mouse ovary in response to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Tischkau SA(1), Jaeger CD, Krager SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Southern Illinois University, School of Medicine, 
801N. Rutledge, Springfield, IL 62794-9629, USA. stischkau@siumed.edu

Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) by the highly toxic,
prototypical ligand, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) or other
dioxin-like compounds compromises ovarian function by altering follicle
maturation and steroid synthesis. Although alteration of transcription after
nuclear translocation and heterodimerization of AhR with its binding partner,
aryl hydrocarbon nuclear transporter (ARNT), is often cited as a primary
mechanism for mediating the toxic effects of dioxins, recent evidence indicates
that crosstalk between AhR and several other signaling pathways also occurs. Like
the circadian clock genes, AhR is a member of the basic helix-loop-helix,
Per-ARNT-SIM (bHLH-PAS) domain family of proteins. Thus, these studies tested the
hypothesis that TCDD can act to alter circadian clock regulation in the ovary.
Adult female c57bl6/J mice entrained to a typical 12h light/12h dark cycle were
exposed to a single 1 µg/kg dose of TCDD by gavage. Six days after exposure,
animals were released into constant darkness and ovaries were collected every 4h 
over a 24h period. Quantitative real-time PCR and immunoblot analysis
demonstrated that TCDD exposure alters expression of the canonical clock genes,
Bmal1 and Per2 in the ovary. AhR transcript and protein, which displayed a
circadian pattern of expression in the ovaries of control mice, were also altered
after TCDD treatment. Immunohistochemistry studies revealed co-localization of
AhR with BMAL1 in various ovarian cell types. Furthermore, co-immunoprecipitation
demonstrated time-of-day dependent interactions of AhR with BMAL1 that were
enhanced after TCDD treatment. Collectively these studies suggest that crosstalk 
between classical AhR signaling and the molecular circadian clockworks may be
responsible for altered ovarian function after TCDD exposure.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3039055
PMID: 21182907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Diabetologia. 2011 Apr;54(4):910-21. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1998-z. Epub 2010
Dec 22.

Synergistic effects of genetic beta cell dysfunction and maternal glucose
intolerance on offspring metabolic phenotype in mice.

Lau SM(1), Lin S, Stokes RA, Cheng K, Baldock PA, Enriquez RF, McLean M, Cheung
NW, Sainsbury A, Gonzalez FJ, Herzog H, Gunton JE.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Transcription Factors Group, Garvan Institute of Medical
Research, 384 Victoria St, Darlinghurst, NSW, Australia.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Diabetes in pregnancy is linked to development of obesity in the
offspring, but the mechanisms are not fully understood. Gestational diabetes
mellitus (GDM) occurs when beta cells are unable to compensate for the normal
insulin resistance of late pregnancy. In this study, we used a murine model of
beta cell dysfunction to examine the effects of maternal GDM on phenotype in male
offspring with and without an inherited predisposition for beta cell dysfunction.
METHODS: Beta cell-specific aryl-hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-null
(ßArnt) mice develop GDM from beta cell dysfunction. ßArnt and control female
mice were used to induce GDM and non-diabetic pregnancies, respectively.
RESULTS: Offspring from GDM pregnancies became spontaneously obese on a
normal-chow diet. They were heavier than offspring from non-diabetic pregnancies,
with increased body fat. Respiratory exchange ratio (RER) was higher, indicating 
decreased capacity to switch to lipid oxidation. Metabolic rate in GDM offspring 
was decreased prior to onset of obesity. The phenotype was more pronounced in
ßArnt GDM offspring than in GDM offspring of control genotype, demonstrating an
interaction between genotype and pregnancy exposure. ßArnt GDM offspring had
increased hypothalamic neuropeptide Y (Npy) and decreased pro-opiomelanocortin
(Pomc) expression. Weight, body fat, insulin sensitivity and RER in all mice, and
hypothalamic Npy in ßArnt mice were significantly correlated with AUC of maternal
late pregnancy glucose tolerance tests (p < 0.01), but not with litter size,
maternal weight, triacylglycerol or pre-pregnancy glycaemia.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: In ßArnt mice, exposure to GDM and inheritance of
genetic beta cell dysfunction had additive effects on male offspring obesity;
severity of the offspring phenotype correlated with maternal glycaemia.

PMID: 21181398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Diabetologia. 2011 Apr;54(4):819-27. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-2010-7. Epub 2010
Dec 23.

Per-arnt-sim (PAS) domain-containing protein kinase is downregulated in human
islets in type 2 diabetes and regulates glucagon secretion.

da Silva Xavier G(1), Farhan H, Kim H, Caxaria S, Johnson P, Hughes S, Bugliani
M, Marselli L, Marchetti P, Birzele F, Sun G, Scharfmann R, Rutter J, Siniakowicz
K, Weir G, Parker H, Reimann F, Gribble FM, Rutter GA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell Biology, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, South
Kensington, London SW7 2AZ, UK. g.dasilva-xavier@imperial.ac.uk

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2011 Apr;54(4):719-21.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We assessed whether per-arnt-sim (PAS) domain-containing protein
kinase (PASK) is involved in the regulation of glucagon secretion.
METHODS: mRNA levels were measured in islets by quantitative PCR and in
pancreatic beta cells obtained by laser capture microdissection. Glucose
tolerance, plasma hormone levels and islet hormone secretion were analysed in
C57BL/6 Pask homozygote knockout mice (Pask-/-) and control littermates.
Alpha-TC1-9 cells, human islets or cultured E13.5 rat pancreatic epithelia were
transduced with anti-Pask or control small interfering RNAs, or with adenoviruses
encoding enhanced green fluorescent protein or PASK.
RESULTS: PASK expression was significantly lower in islets from human type 2
diabetic than control participants. PASK mRNA was present in alpha and beta cells
from mouse islets. In Pask-/- mice, fasted blood glucose and plasma glucagon
levels were 25 ± 5% and 50 ± 8% (mean ± SE) higher, respectively, than in control
mice. At inhibitory glucose concentrations (10 mmol/l), islets from Pask-/- mice 
secreted 2.04 ± 0.2-fold (p < 0.01) more glucagon and 2.63 ± 0.3-fold (p < 0.01) 
less insulin than wild-type islets. Glucose failed to inhibit glucagon secretion 
from PASK-depleted alpha-TC1-9 cells, whereas PASK overexpression inhibited
glucagon secretion from these cells and human islets. Extracellular insulin (20
nmol/l) inhibited glucagon secretion from control and PASK-deficient alpha-TC1-9 
cells. PASK-depleted alpha-TC1-9 cells and pancreatic embryonic explants
displayed increased expression of the preproglucagon (Gcg) and AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK)-alpha2 (Prkaa2) genes, implying a possible role for
AMPK-alpha2 downstream of PASK in the control of glucagon gene expression and
release.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: PASK is involved in the regulation of glucagon
secretion by glucose and may be a useful target for the treatment of type 2
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3052475
PMID: 21181396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 6;5(12):e15145. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015145.

Genomic aberrations in lung adenocarcinoma in never smokers.

Job B(1), Bernheim A, Beau-Faller M, Camilleri-Broët S, Girard P, Hofman P,
Mazières J, Toujani S, Lacroix L, Laffaire J, Dessen P, Fouret P; LG
Investigators.

Collaborators: Dartevelle P, Dulmet E, Leroy-Ladurie F, de Montpreville V, Monnet
I, Bernard A, Piard F, Alifano M, Camilleri-Broët S, Régnard JF, Hofman P, Hofman
V, Mouroux J, Trédaniel J, Beau-Faller M, Massard G, Neuville A, Antoine M,
Cadranel J, Brouchet L, Mazières J, Rouquette I, Saint-Blancard P, Vaylet F,
Berhneim A, Dessen P, Dufour F, Dorvault N, Fouret P, Job B, Lacroix L, Lazar V, 
Richon C, Roux V, Saulnier P, Taranchon E, Toujani S, Valent A, Girard P, Gossot 
D, Validire P, Laffaire J.

Author information: 
(1)Plate-forme de Biologie intégrée, Institut de recherche intégrée en
Cancérologie à Villejuif, Villejuif, France.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer in never smokers would rank as the seventh most common
cause of cancer death worldwide.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We performed high-resolution array comparative genomic
hybridization analysis of lung adenocarcinoma in sixty never smokers and
identified fourteen new minimal common regions (MCR) of gain or loss, of which
five contained a single gene (MOCS2, NSUN3, KHDRBS2, SNTG1 and ST18). One larger 
MCR of gain contained NSD1. One focal amplification and nine gains contained FUS.
NSD1 and FUS are oncogenes hitherto not known to be associated with lung cancer. 
FISH showed that the amplicon containing FUS was joined to the next telomeric
amplicon at 16p11.2. FUS was over-expressed in 10 tumors with gain of 16p11.2
compared to 30 tumors without that gain. Other cancer genes present in
aberrations included ARNT, BCL9, CDK4, CDKN2B, EGFR, ERBB2, MDM2, MDM4, MET, MYC 
and KRAS. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering with adjustment for
false-discovery rate revealed clusters differing by the level and pattern of
aberrations and displaying particular tumor characteristics. One cluster was
strongly associated with gain of MYC. Another cluster was characterized by
extensive losses containing tumor suppressor genes of which RB1 and WRN. Tumors
in that cluster frequently harbored a central scar-like fibrosis. A third cluster
was associated with gains on 7p and 7q, containing ETV1 and BRAF, and displayed
the highest rate of EGFR mutations. SNP array analysis validated copy-number
aberrations and revealed that RB1 and WRN were altered by recurrent copy-neutral 
loss of heterozygosity.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study has uncovered new aberrations containing cancer
genes. The oncogene FUS is a candidate gene in the 16p region that is frequently 
gained in never smokers. Multiple genetic pathways defined by gains of MYC,
deletions of RB1 and WRN or gains on 7p and 7q are involved in lung
adenocarcinoma in never smokers.

PMCID: PMC2997777
PMID: 21151896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 25;286(8):6184-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.199364. Epub 2010 
Dec 6.

Mechanistic insight into human ether-à-go-go-related gene (hERG) K+ channel
deactivation gating from the solution structure of the EAG domain.

Muskett FW(1), Thouta S, Thomson SJ, Bowen A, Stansfeld PJ, Mitcheson JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Henry Wellcome Building, University of Leicester, 
Lancaster Road, Leicester LE1 9HN, United Kingdom. fwm1@le.ac.uk

Human ether-à-go-go-related gene (hERG) K(+) channels have a critical role in
cardiac repolarization. hERG channels close (deactivate) very slowly, and this is
vital for regulating the time course and amplitude of repolarizing current during
the cardiac action potential. Accelerated deactivation is one mechanism by which 
inherited mutations cause long QT syndrome and potentially lethal arrhythmias.
hERG deactivation is highly dependent upon an intact EAG domain (the first 135
amino acids of the N terminus). Importantly, deletion of residues 2-26
accelerates deactivation to a similar extent as removing the entire EAG domain.
These and other experiments suggest the first 26 residues (NT1-26) contain
structural elements required to slow deactivation by stabilizing the open
conformation of the pore. Residues 26-135 form a Per-Arnt-Sim domain, but a
structure for NT1-26 has not been forthcoming, and little is known about its site
of interaction on the channel. In this study, we present an NMR structure for the
entire EAG domain, which reveals that NT1-26 is structurally independent from the
Per-Arnt-Sim domain and contains a stable amphipathic helix with one face being
positively charged. Mutagenesis and electrophysiological studies indicate that
neutralizing basic residues and breaking the amphipathic helix dramatically
accelerate deactivation. Furthermore, scanning mutagenesis and molecular modeling
studies of the cyclic nucleotide binding domain suggest that negatively charged
patches on its cytoplasmic surface form an interface with the NT1-26 domain. We
propose a model in which NT1-26 obstructs gating motions of the cyclic nucleotide
binding domain to allosterically stabilize the open conformation of the pore.

PMCID: PMC3057830
PMID: 21135103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2011 Apr;153(3):269-79. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpc.2010.11.005. Epub 2010 Dec 4.

Molecular and functional characterization of aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator 1 (ARNT1) and ARNT2 in chicken (Gallus gallus).

Lee JS(1), Kim EY, Iwabuchi K, Iwata H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Toxicology, Center for Marine Environmental
Studies, Ehime University, Bunkyo-cho 2-5, Matsuyama 790-8577, Japan.

Our previous studies have provided evidence that birds have two isoforms of aryl 
hydrocarbon receptors (AHR1 and AHR2) and AHR nuclear translocators (ARNT1 and
ARNT2) that potentially mediate toxic responses to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related compounds. We have also
shown that while both in vitro-expressed chicken AHR1 (ckAHR1) and AHR2 (ckAHR2) 
exhibit binding affinities to TCDD, only ckAHR1 but not ckAHR2 showed a
TCDD-dose-dependent transactivation potency of chicken cytochrome P450 1A5
(ckCYP1A5) in in vitro reporter gene assays. To explore the molecular mechanism
of functional difference in the two ckAHRs, the present study investigated the
molecular characteristics and function of chicken ARNT (ckARNT) that is a
potential dimerization partner for the activation of ckAHR. The full-length
ckARNT1 and ckARNT2 cDNAs were isolated and their alternative splice variants
were also identified. The ckARNT1 transcript was ubiquitously expressed in
various tissues, but ckARNT2 showed restricted expressions in brain, kidney and
eye, indicating a similar expression pattern to mammalian ARNTs. The expressions 
of tagged-ckARNT1 and -ckARNT2 were confirmed in a chicken hepatoma LMH cells by 
western blot analyses, and their interactions with each ckAHR and a specific
recognition DNA element, xenobiotic response element (XRE), were examined by gel 
shift assays. The result showed that ckARNT1 and ckARNT2 dimerize with each ckAHR
isoform and bind with the XRE in a TCDD-dependent manner. Hence, we conclude that
functional loss on the dimerization with ckARNTs or the XRE binding is not the
major cause of the deficient TCDD-dependency of ckAHR2 for the transactivation.
Furthermore, in vitro reporter gene assays showed that transfected ckARNT1 failed
to modulate the transcriptional induction of ckAHR-mediated ckCYP1A5 gene by TCDD
in COS-7 and LMH cells, whereas ckARNT2 could potentiate the TCDD-dependent
response in COS-7 but not in LMH cells. This suggests that ckARNT2 has a distinct
role from ckARNT1 in AHR signaling pathway and in a cell-specific mode of action.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21134488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Jan;1813(1):60-72. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2010.11.014. 
Epub 2010 Dec 1.

Hypoxia-mediated control of HIF/ARNT machinery in epidermal keratinocytes.

Weir L(1), Robertson D, Leigh IM, Vass JK, Panteleyev AA.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, Dentistry and Nursing, University of Dundee, Ninewells
Hospital, Dundee DD1 9SY, UK.

Transcriptional activity of hypoxia-induced factor 1 (HIF1) - a heterodimer of
HIF1a and ARNT (HIF1ß) - is essential for cellular adaptation to environmental
stress and plays an important role in skin development, wound healing,
tumorigenesis and barrier function. Using primary mouse and human epidermal
keratinocytes at ambient or hypoxic (1% O(2)) conditions we studied effects of
hypoxia upon HIF protein expression. Significant nuclear levels of ARNT and HIF1a
along with high HIF1 activity in normoxic keratinocytes suggest an as yet
uncharacterised oxygen-independent role for HIF pathway in the epidermis. Acute
hypoxia results in an instant but transient increase of HIF1a protein accompanied
by a gradual decrease in its mRNA, while ARNT expression remains unchanged. In
prolonged (chronic) hypoxia both HIF1a and Arnt are downregulated along with
decline of HIF1 activity. However, expression of classical HIF1 targets such as
Selenbp1 and Vegfa remains high. Thus, keratinocytes respond to acute hypoxia
with immediate block of HIF1a protein degradation and concomitant increase of HIF
activity, while under chronic hypoxia pro-angiogenic signalling is maintained
through HIF1-independent pathway(s). Decline of HIF1a during chronic exposure is 
controlled at both mRNA and protein levels, while Arnt is downregulated
post-translationally. Distinct transcription levels of Hif1a and Hif3a splice
variants under normoxia and their differential response to hypoxia suggest
functional diversity of Hif-a isoforms and highlight the complexity of HIF
machinery control in epidermal keratinocytes.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21129412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Nutr Res Pract. 2010 Oct;4(5):351-5. doi: 10.4162/nrp.2010.4.5.351. Epub 2010 Oct
26.

Significance of p27 as potential biomarker for intracellular oxidative status.

Quintos L(1), Lee IA, Kim HJ, Lim JS, Park J, Sung MK, Seo YR, Kim JS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Applied Biosciences, Kyungpook National University, 1370
Sankyuk-dong, Buk-gu, Daegu 702-701, Korea.

Our previous proteomic study demonstrated that oxidative stress and antioxidant
delphinidin regulated the cellular level of p27(kip1) (referred to as p27) as
well as some heat shock proteins in human colon cancer HT 29 cells. Current study
was conducted to validate and confirm the regulation of these proteins using both
in vitro and in vivo systems. The level of p27 was decreased by hydrogen peroxide
in a dose-dependent manner in human colon carcinoma HCT 116 (p53-positive) cells 
while it was increased upon exposure to hydrogen peroxide in HT 29 (p53-negative)
cells. However, high concentration of hydrogen peroxide (100 µM) downregulated
p27 in both cell lines, but delphindin, one of antioxidative anthocyanins,
enhanced the level of p27 suppressed by 100 µM hydrogen peroxide. ICR mice were
injected with varying concentrations of hydrogen peroxide, delphinidin and both. 
Western blot analysis for the mouse large intestinal tissue showed that the
expression of p27 was upregulated by 25 mg/kg BW hydrogen peroxide. To
investigate the association of p27 regulation with hypoxia-inducible factor
1-beta (HIF-1ß), the level of p27 was analyzed in wild-type mouse hepatoma
hepa1c1c7 and Aryl Hydrocarbon Nuclear Translocator (arnt, HIF-1ß)-defective
mutant BPRc1 cells in the absence and presence of hydrogen peroxide and
delphinidin. While the level of p27 was responsive to hydrogen peroxide and
delphinidin, it remained unchanged in BPRc1, suggesting that the regulation of
p27 requires functional HIF-1ß. We also found that hydrogen peroxide and
delphinidin affected PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway which is one of upstream
regulators of HIFs. In conclusion, hydrogen peroxide and antioxidant delphinidin 
seem to regulate intracellular level of p27 through regulating HIF-1 level which 
is, in turn, governed by its upstream regulators comprising of PI3K/Akt/mTOR
signaling pathway. The results should also encourage further study for the
potential of p27 as a biomarker for intracellular oxidative or antioxidant
status.

PMCID: PMC2981716
PMID: 21103079  [PubMed]


41. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Feb;32(2):203-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq237. Epub 2010 Nov
16.

Genetic variation in the bioactivation pathway for polycyclic hydrocarbons and
heterocyclic amines in relation to risk of colorectal neoplasia.

Wang H(1), Yamamoto JF, Caberto C, Saltzman B, Decker R, Vogt TM, Yokochi L,
Chanock S, Wilkens LR, Le Marchand L.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology Program, Cancer Research Center of Hawaii, University of Hawaii, 
Honolulu, HI 96813, USA.

Animal work implicates chemical carcinogens, such as polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) and heterocyclic aromatic amines (HAAs) as contributing to
the development of colorectal cancer (CRC). The epidemiologic evidence, however, 
remains inconsistent possibly due to intra-individual variation in bioactivation 
of these compounds. We conducted a case-control study of colorectal adenoma (914 
cases, 1185 controls) and CRC (496 cases, 607 controls) among Japanese Americans,
European Americans and Native Hawaiians to investigate the association of genetic
variation in the PAH and HAA bioactivation pathway (CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, AHR
and ARNT) identified through sequencing with risk of colorectal neoplasia, as
well as their interactions with smoking and intakes of red meat and HAAs. The A
allele for ARNT rs12410394 was significantly inversely associated with CRC [odds 
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for GG, AG and AA genotypes:
1.00, 0.66 (0.48-0.89), 0.54 (0.37-0.78), P(trend) = 0.0008] after multiple
comparison adjustment. CYP1A2 rs11072508 was marginally significantly associated 
with CRC, where each copy of the T allele was associated with reduced risk (OR:
0.72, 95% CI: 0.58-0.88, P(trend) = 0.0017). No heterogeneity of genetic effects 
across racial/ethnic groups was detected. In addition, no significant interaction
was observed after adjusting for multiple testing between genetic variants and
pack-years of smoking, intake of red meat or HAAs (PhIP, MeIQx, Di-MeIQx or total
HAAs) or NAT2 genotype (Rapid versus Slow or Intermediate). This study suggests
that the genomic region around ARNT rs12410394 may harbor variants associated
with CRC.

PMCID: PMC3026844
PMID: 21081473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 8;5(11):e15382. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015382.

Dioxin toxicity in vivo results from an increase in the dioxin-independent
transcriptional activity of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor.

Céspedes MA(1), Galindo MI, Couso JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton, East Sussex, United
Kingdom.

The Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Ahr) is the nuclear receptor mediating the
toxicity of dioxins--widespread and persistent pollutants whose toxic effects
include tumor promotion, teratogenesis, wasting syndrome and chloracne.
Elimination of Ahr in mice eliminates dioxin toxicity but also produces adverse
effects, some seemingly unrelated to dioxin. Thus the relationship between the
toxic and dioxin-independent functions of Ahr is not clear, which hampers
understanding and treatment of dioxin toxicity. Here we develop a Drosophila
model to show that dioxin actually increases the in vivo dioxin-independent
activity of Ahr. This hyperactivation resembles the effects caused by an increase
in the amount of its dimerisation partner Ahr nuclear translocator (Arnt) and
entails an increased transcriptional potency of Ahr, in addition to the
previously described effect on nuclear translocation. Thus the two apparently
different functions of Ahr, dioxin-mediated and dioxin-independent, are in fact
two different levels (hyperactivated and basal, respectively) of a single
function.

PMCID: PMC2975661
PMID: 21079739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 14;286(2):1014-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.149062. Epub 2010 
Nov 8.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator/hypoxia-inducible factor-1{beta}
plays a critical role in maintaining glucose-stimulated anaplerosis and insulin
release from pancreatic {beta}-cells.

Pillai R(1), Huypens P, Huang M, Schaefer S, Sheinin T, Wettig SD, Joseph JW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada.

The metabolic pathways that are involved in regulating insulin secretion from
pancreatic ß-cells are still incompletely understood. One potential regulator of 
the metabolic phenotype of ß-cells is the transcription factor aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)/hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1ß.
ARNT/HIF-1ß levels are profoundly reduced in islets obtained from type 2 diabetic
patients. However, no study to date has investigated key pathways involved in
regulating insulin release in ß-cells that lack ARNT/HIF-1ß. In this study, we
confirm that siRNA-mediated knockdown of ARNT/HIF-1ß inhibits glucose-stimulated 
insulin secretion. We next investigated the metabolic consequence of the loss of 
ARNT/HIF-1ß knockdown. We demonstrate that ß-cells with reduced ARNT/HIF-1ß
expression levels exhibit a 31% reduction in glycolytic flux without significant 
changes in glucose oxidation or the ATP:ADP ratio. Metabolic profiling of ß-cells
treated with siRNAs against the ARNT/HIF-1ß gene revealed that glycolysis,
anaplerosis, and glucose-induced fatty acid production were down-regulated, and
all are key events involved in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. In addition,
both first and second phase insulin secretion in islets were significantly
reduced after ARNT/HIF-1ß knockdown. Together, our data suggest an important role
for ARNT/HIF-1ß in anaplerosis, and it may play a critical role in maintaining
normal secretion competence of ß-cells.

PMCID: PMC3020708
PMID: 21059654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2011 Jan;123(1-2):58-64. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2010.10.009. Epub 2010 Nov 5.

Hypoxia enhances transcriptional activity of androgen receptor through
hypoxia-inducible factor-1a in a low androgen environment.

Mitani T(1), Yamaji R, Higashimura Y, Harada N, Nakano Y, Inui H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Applied Life Sciences, Graduate School of Life and Environmental
Sciences, Osaka Prefecture University, Sakai, Osaka 5998531, Japan.

The androgen receptor (AR) acts as a ligand-dependent transcriptional factor
controlling development or progression of prostate cancer. Androgen ablation by
castration is an effective therapy for prostate cancer, whereas eventually most
of the tumors convert from a hormone-sensitive to a hormone-refractory disease
state and grow even in a low androgen environment (e.g., 0.1nM
5a-dihydrotestosterone (DHT)) like the castration-resistant stage. Androgen
ablation results in hypoxia, and solid tumors possess hypoxic environments.
Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1, which is composed of HIF-1a and HIF-1ß/ARNT
subunits, functions as a master transcription factor for hypoxia-inducible genes.
Here, we report that hypoxia enhances AR transactivation in the presence of 0.05 
and 0.1nM DHT in LNCaP prostate cancer cells. siRNA-mediated knockdown of HIF-1a 
inhibited hypoxia-enhanced AR transactivation. Its inhibition by HIF-1a siRNA was
canceled by expression of a siRNA-resistant form of HIF-1a. HIF-1a siRNA
repressed hypoxia-stimulated expression of the androgen-responsive NKX3.1 gene in
the presence of 0.1nM DHT, but not in the absence of DHT. In hypoxia, HIF-1a
siRNA-repressed AR transactivation was restored in mutants in which HIF-1a lacked
DNA-binding activity. Furthermore, a dominant negative form of HIF-1a canceled
hypoxia-enhanced AR transactivation, and HIF-1ß/ARNT siRNAs had no influence on
hypoxia-enhanced AR transactivation. These results indicate that hypoxia leads to
HIF-1a-mediated AR transactivation independent of HIF-1 activity and that
HIF-1ß/ARNT is not necessarily required for the transactivation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21056661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2011 Apr;214(3):625-37. doi:
10.1007/s00213-010-2066-6. Epub 2010 Nov 4.

Sertindole restores attentional performance and suppresses glutamate release
induced by the NMDA receptor antagonist CPP.

Carli M(1), Calcagno E, Mainini E, Arnt J, Invernizzi RW.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Laboratory of Neurochemistry 
and Behavior, Via G. La Masa 19, 20156, Milan, Italy. mirjana@marionegri.it

RATIONALE: Blockade of N-methyl-d-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptors in the rat
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) impairs performance in the five-choice serial
reaction time task (5-CSRTT) and increases glutamate (GLU) release. Recent
research suggests that excessive GLU release may be critical for attention
deficits.
OBJECTIVES: We tested this hypothesis by investigating the effects of the
atypical antipsychotics sertindole and clozapine on
3-(R)-2-carboxypiperazin-4-propyl-1-phosphonic acid (CPP)-induced performance
deficits in the 5-CSRTT and on the CPP-induced GLU release in the mPFC.
METHODS: The 5-CSRTT, a test of divided and sustained visual attention providing 
indices of attentional functioning (accuracy of visual discrimination), response 
control (anticipatory and perseverative responses) and intracortical
microdialysis in conscious rats were used to investigate the effects of
sertindole and clozapine.
RESULTS: Low doses of sertindole (0.02-0.32 mg/kg) prevented CPP-induced accuracy
deficits, anticipatory over-responding and the rise in GLU release. In contrast, 
doses ranging from 0.6 to 2.5 mg/kg had no effect or even enhanced the effect of 
CPP on anticipatory responding. Similarly, 2.5 mg/kg sertindole was unable to
reverse CPP-induced rise in GLU release. Clozapine (2.5 mg/kg) prevented accuracy
deficits and the increase in anticipatory responding and abolished the rise in
GLU release induced by CPP.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings show that the ameliorating effects of sertindole and 
clozapine on NMDA receptor dependent attention deficit is associated with
suppression in GLU release in the mPFC. This supports the proposal that
suppression in GLU release might be a target for the development of novel drugs
aimed at counteracting some aspects of cognitive deficits of schizophrenia.

PMID: 21049266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Feb;119(2):319-34. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq336. Epub 2010 Nov 3.

Molecular and functional characterization of Aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor 
from the chicken (Gallus gallus): interspecies similarities and differences.

Lee JS(1), Kim EY, Nomaru K, Iwata H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Marine Environmental Studies, Ehime University, Bunkyo-cho 2-5,
Matsuyama, Japan.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) repressor (AHRR) has been recognized as a
negative feedback modulator of AHR-mediated responses in fish and mammals.
However, the repressive mechanism by the AHRR has not been investigated in other 
animals. To understand the molecular mechanism of dioxin toxicity and the
evolutionary history of the AHR signaling pathway in avian species, the present
study addresses chicken AHRR (ckAHRR). The complementary DNA sequence of ckAHRR
encodes an 84-kDa protein sharing 29-52% identities with other AHRRs. High levels
of ckAHRR messenger RNA were recorded in the kidney and intestine of nontreated
chicks. In hepatoma LMH cells, the 2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)
50% effective concentration value for ckAHRR induction (0.0016nM) was the same as
that for chicken cytochrome P450 1A5 (ckCYP1A5), implying a shared
transcriptional regulation of ckAHRR and ckCYP1A5 by chicken AHR (ckAHR). In
ckAHRR transient transfection assays, ckAHRR repressed both ckAHR1- and
ckAHR2-mediated transcriptional activities. Deletion and mutation assays revealed
that basic helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-Sim A domains of ckAHRR, particularly
217-402 amino acid residues, are indispensable for the repression, but the AHR
nuclear translocator sequestration by ckAHRR and SUMOylation of ckAHRR are not
involved in its repressive mechanism. Additionally, subcellular localization
assay of ckAHR1-enhanced green fluorescent protein fusion protein showed that
ckAHRR did not affect nuclear translocation of the ckAHR1. Furthermore, ckAHRR
inhibited the TCDD- and 17ß estradiol-enhanced ckCYP1A5 transcription through
AHR-estrogen receptor a (ERa) cross talk. Taken together, the function of AHRR is
conserved in chicken in terms of the negative regulation of AHR and ERa
activities, but its functional mechanism is likely distinct from those of the
mammalian and fish homologues.

PMID: 21047992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. BJOG. 2010 Dec;117(13):1635-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-0528.2010.02735.x. Epub 2010 
Oct 13.

Reduced placental prolyl hydroxylase 3 mRNA expression in pregnancies affected by
fetal growth restriction.

Gourvas V(1), Sifakis S, Dalpa E, Soulitzis N, Koukoura O, Spandidos DA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Virology, Medical School, University of Crete,
Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) pathway 
in fetal growth restriction (FGR).
DESIGN: A case-control study.
SETTING: Research laboratory and gynaecology clinic.
SAMPLE: Twenty placentas from normal pregnancies and 20 from FGR pregnancies.
METHODS: RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis, quantitative real-time polymerase chain 
reaction (qRT-PCR) assay, statistical analysis.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: mRNA expression of HIF-1a, HIF-2a and HIF-ß (ARNT), along 
with prolyl hydroxylase domain 3 (PHD3), which leads to proteasomal degradation
of HIF-a subunits.
RESULTS: No statistically significant differences in the transcription levels of 
ARNT and HIF-2a were found between FGR and normal placentas. By contrast, PHD3
and HIF-1a mRNA were downregulated in FGR placentas. PHD3 mRNA expression was
associated with gestational age at delivery (P = 0.008), birthweight centile (P =
0.029) and abnormal umbilical artery (UA) Doppler measurements (P = 0.034).
CONCLUSIONS: As PHD3 regulates the HIF-mediated hypoxic response in FGR, we
deduce that fetal adaptation to hypoxia ranges from impaired to adequate, as
observed by the gradient of PHD3 downregulation in relation to the severity of
FGR.

© 2010 The Authors Journal compilation © RCOG 2010 BJOG An International Journal 
of Obstetrics and Gynaecology.

PMID: 21040392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2011 Mar;19(3):659-61. doi: 10.1038/oby.2010.266. Epub
2010 Oct 28.

Impact of clock gene Bmal1 deficiency on nutritionally induced obesity in mice.

Hemmeryckx B(1), Himmelreich U, Hoylaerts MF, Lijnen HR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

To evaluate the hypothesis that the clock gene Bmal1 (brain and muscle arnt like 
protein-1) plays a role in the development of obesity, 5-week-old male
Bmal1-deficient (Bmal1(-/-)) mice and wild-type littermates (Bmal1(+/+)) were
kept on a high-fat diet (HFD) for 15 weeks. Despite an initial accelerated weight
gain of Bmal1(-/-) mice, body weight and subcutaneous (SC) and gonadal (GON)
adipose tissue mass were comparable to Bmal1(+/+) mice at the end of the diet
period. Noninvasive magnetic resonance imaging scanning revealed a modest
increase in fat content in Bmal1(-/-) mice after 10 weeks of HFD, whereas at the 
start and the end of the HFD feeding no differences were observed between both
genotypes. After 15 weeks of HFD, adipocyte and blood vessel size and density
were similar for Bmal1(+/+) and Bmal1(-/-) mice. However, the weight of major
organs was significantly reduced in Bmal1(-/-) mice, confirming the premature
ageing phenotype. Thus, we hypothesize that an initial accelerated increase in
body weight and fat mass of Bmal1(-/-) mice on HFD may have been offset by the
effect of premature ageing on organ weight, resulting in comparable weights after
15 weeks of HFD.

PMID: 21030946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2011 Mar 15;14(6):1079-91. doi: 10.1089/ars.2010.3417.
Epub 2010 Oct 28.

Flavin redox switching of protein functions.

Becker DF(1), Zhu W, Moxley MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 
68588-0664, USA. dbecker3@unl.edu

Flavin cofactors impart remarkable catalytic diversity to enzymes, enabling them 
to participate in a broad array of biological processes. The properties of
flavins also provide proteins with a versatile redox sensor that can be utilized 
for converting physiological signals such as cellular metabolism, light, and
redox status into a unique functional output. The control of protein functions by
the flavin redox state is important for transcriptional regulation, cell
signaling pathways, and environmental adaptation. A significant number of
proteins that have flavin redox switches are found in the Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS)
domain family and include flavoproteins that act as photosensors and respond to
changes in cellular redox conditions. Biochemical and structural studies of PAS
domain flavoproteins have revealed key insights into how flavin redox changes are
propagated to the surface of the protein and translated into a new functional
output such as the binding of a target protein in a signaling pathway.
Mechanistic details of proteins unrelated to the PAS domain are also emerging and
provide novel examples of how the flavin redox state governs protein-membrane
interactions in response to appropriate stimuli. Analysis of different flavin
switch proteins reveals shared mechanistic themes for the regulation of protein
structure and function by flavins.

PMCID: PMC3113445
PMID: 21028987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011 Jan 15;650(2-3):579-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.10.022. 
Epub 2010 Oct 20.

Clozapine and N-methyl-D-aspartate have positive modulatory actions on their
respective discriminative stimulus properties in C57BL/6 mice.

Vunck SA(1), Wiebelhaus JM, Arnt J, Porter JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA
23284-2018, USA.

The impairment of N-Methyl-D-Aspartate receptors is thought to contribute to
negative symptoms and cognitive deficits. In vitro studies suggest that atypical 
antipsychotic drugs like clozapine may help to alleviate these deficits by
enhancing glutamatergic function. The present study examined the in vivo
interaction of clozapine with N-Methyl D-aspartate by training one group of
C57BL/6 mice to discrimination 2.5 mg/kg clozapine from vehicle and another group
to discriminate 30 mg/kg N-Methyl D-aspartate from vehicle in a two-lever drug
discrimination task. Cross-generalization testing revealed that N-Methyl
D-aspartate (3-56 mg/kg) failed to substitute for clozapine in the
clozapine-trained mice, while clozapine (0.625 mg/kg) produced partial
substitution in the N-Methyl D-aspartate-trained mice. Interestingly,
administration of a low, non-generalizing dose of each training drug in
combination with the full range of doses of the alternate training drug produced 
full and dose-dependent substitution in both clozapine- and N-Methyl
D-aspartate-trained mice. The a(1) antagonist prazosin fully and dose-dependently
substituted for both clozapine and N-Methyl D-aspartate. These results suggest
that the shared discriminative stimulus properties between clozapine and N-Methyl
D-aspartate may be mediated through indirect mechanisms, possibly in part through
a(1) adrenergic antagonism.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20969851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Methods Enzymol. 2010;471:125-34. doi: 10.1016/S0076-6879(10)71008-9. Epub 2010
Mar 1.

Light-activated bacterial LOV-domain histidine kinases.

Tseng TS(1), Frederickson MA, Briggs WR, Bogomolni RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, Carnegie Institution for Science, Stanford,
California, USA.

Bacteria rely on two-component signaling systems in their adaptive responses to
environmental changes. Typically, the two-component system consists of a sensory 
histidine kinase that signals by transferring a phosphoryl group to a secondary
response regulator that ultimately relays the signal to the cell. Some of these
sensors use PAS (Per-Arnt-Sin) domains. A new member of the PAS super family is
the LOV (light, oxygen, voltage) domain, a 10-kDa flavoprotein that functions as 
a light-sensory module in plant, algal, fungal, and bacterial blue-light
receptors. Putative LOV domains have been identified in the genomes of many
higher and lower eukaryotes, plants, eubacteria, archaebacteria, and particularly
in genes coding for histidine kinases (LOV-histidine kinases, LOV-HKs) of plant
and animal pathogenic bacteria, including Brucella. We describe here biochemical,
photochemical, and biophysical methodology to purify these enzymes and to
characterize their light-activation process.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20946846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 24;285(52):41034-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.157594. Epub
2010 Oct 13.

Structural bases of PAS domain-regulated kinase (PASK) activation in the absence 
of activation loop phosphorylation.

Kikani CK(1), Antonysamy SA, Bonanno JB, Romero R, Zhang FF, Russell M, Gheyi T, 
Iizuka M, Emtage S, Sauder JM, Turk BE, Burley SK, Rutter J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84112-5650, USA.

Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain-containing protein kinase (PASK) is an evolutionary
conserved protein kinase that coordinates cellular metabolism with metabolic
demand in yeast and mammals. The molecular mechanisms underlying PASK regulation,
however, remain unknown. Herein, we describe a crystal structure of the kinase
domain of human PASK, which provides insights into the regulatory mechanisms
governing catalysis. We show that the kinase domain adopts an active conformation
and has catalytic activity in vivo and in vitro in the absence of activation loop
phosphorylation. Using site-directed mutagenesis and structural comparison with
active and inactive kinases, we identified several key structural features in
PASK that enable activation loop phosphorylation-independent activity. Finally,
we used combinatorial peptide library screening to determine that PASK prefers
basic residues at the P-3 and P-5 positions in substrate peptides. Our results
describe the key features of the PASK structure and how those features are
important for PASK activity and substrate selection.

PMCID: PMC3003402
PMID: 20943661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2011 Feb;158(2):183-8. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpa.2010.10.003. Epub 2010 Oct 16.

Molecular characterization of hypoxia and hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha
(HIF-1a) from Taiwan voles (Microtus kikuchii).

Jiang YF(1), Chou CH, Lin EC, Chiu CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Technology, College of Bio-Resources and
Agriculture, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a transcription factor that senses and
adapts cells to hypoxic environmental conditions. HIF-1 is composed of an
oxygen-regulated a subunit (HIF-1a) and a constitutively expressed ß subunit
(HIF-1ß). Taiwan voles (Microtus kikuchii) are an endemic species in Taiwan,
found only in mountainous areas greater than 2000m above sea level. In this
study, the full-length HIF-1a cDNA was cloned and sequenced from liver tissues of
Taiwan voles. We found that HIF-1a of Taiwan voles had high sequence similarity
to HIF-1a of other species. Sequence alignment of HIF-1a functional domains
indicated basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH), PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) and C-terminal
transactivation (TAD-C) domains were conserved among species, but sequence
variations were found between the oxygen-dependent degradation domains (ODDD). To
measure Taiwan vole HIF-1a responses to hypoxia, animals were challenged with
cobalt chloride, and HIF-1a mRNA and protein expression in brain, lung, heart,
liver, kidney, and muscle was assessed by quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot
analysis. Upon induction of hypoxic stress with cobalt chloride, an increase in
HIF-1a mRNA levels was detected in lung, heart, kidney, and muscle tissue. In
contrast, protein expression levels showed greater variation between individual
animals. These results suggest that the regulation of HIF-1a may be important to 
the Taiwan vole under cobalt chloride treatments. But more details regarding the 
evolutionary effect of environmental pressure on HIF-1a primary sequence, HIF-1a 
function and regulation in Taiwan voles remain to be identified.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20937407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Toxicol Sci. 2010 Dec;118(2):554-63. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq305. Epub 2010 Oct 8.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator in hepatocytes is required for
aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated adaptive and toxic responses in liver.

Nukaya M(1), Walisser JA, Moran SM, Kennedy GD, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) plays a central role in the toxic responses
to halogenated dibenzo-p-dioxins ("dioxins"), in the metabolic adaptation to
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and in the development of the mature vascular
system. A number of lines of evidence support the idea that the regulation of
adaptive metabolism requires an AHR partnership with the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT). Yet, for AHR-dependent vascular development
and dioxin toxicity, the role of ARNT is less certain. In fact, numerous models
have been proposed over the years to suggest that the AHR signals in important
ways via ARNT-independent events. In an effort to clarify the role of ARNT in
AHR-mediated dioxin hepatotoxicity, we generated a conditional Arnt mouse model. 
Such a model was essential because global inactivation of Arnt results in
embryonic lethality presumably due to this protein's role as a heterodimeric
partner for the hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs). Using a hepatocyte-specific
Arnt deletion, we were able to demonstrate that hepatocyte ARNT is required for
major aspects of AHR-mediated dioxin toxicity in the liver. Results from this
conditional Arnt allele are also consistent with a model where hepatocyte ARNT is
unrelated to AHR-mediated hepatovascular development. In sum, these data suggest 
that AHR-ARNT dimers within the hepatocyte direct the toxic and adaptive and
developmental functions associated with the AHR and that developmental vascular
events arise due to signaling in a distinct cell type expressing this dimeric
pair.

PMCID: PMC2984536
PMID: 20935161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Oct 19;107(42):17986-91. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1004823107. Epub 2010 Oct 1.

Robustness and evolvability in the functional anatomy of a PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS)
domain.

Philip AF(1), Kumauchi M, Hoff WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The robustness of proteins against point mutations implies that only a small
subset of residues determines functional properties. We test this prediction
using photoactive yellow protein (PYP), a 125-residue prototype of the
PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) domain superfamily of signaling proteins. PAS domains are
defined by a small number of conserved residues of unknown function. We report
high-throughput biophysical measurements on a complete Ala scan set of purified
PYP mutants. The dataset of 1,193 values on active site properties, functional
kinetics, stability, and production level reveals that 124 mutants retain the
characteristic photocycle of PYP, but that the majority of substitutions
significantly alter functional properties. Only 35% of substitutions that
strongly affect function are located at the active site. Unexpectedly, most
PAS-conserved residues are required for maintaining protein production. PAS
domain activation often involves conformational changes in a-helices linked to
the PAS core. However, the mechanism of transmission and kinetic regulation of
allosteric structural changes from the PAS domain to these helices is not clear. 
The Ala scan data reveal interactions governing allosteric switching in PYP. The 
photocycle kinetics is significantly altered by substitutions at 58 positions and
spans a 3,000-fold range. Nine residues that dock the N-terminal a-helices of PYP
to its PAS core regulate signaling kinetics. Ile39 and Asn43 are identified as
part of a mechanism for regulating allosteric switching that is conserved among
PAS domains. These results show that PYP combines robustness with a high degree
of evolvability and imply production level as an important factor in protein
evolution.

PMCID: PMC2964196
PMID: 20889915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 21;5(9):e12805. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012805.

Light entrained rhythmic gene expression in the sea anemone Nematostella
vectensis: the evolution of the animal circadian clock.

Reitzel AM(1), Behrendt L, Tarrant AM.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole,
Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND: Circadian rhythms in behavior and physiology are the observable
phenotypes from cycles in expression of, interactions between, and degradation of
the underlying molecular components. In bilaterian animals, the core molecular
components include Timeless-Timeout, photoreceptive cryptochromes, and several
members of the basic-loop-helix-Per-ARNT-Sim (bHLH-PAS) family. While many of
core circadian genes are conserved throughout the Bilateria, their specific roles
vary among species. Here, we identify and experimentally study the rhythmic gene 
expression of conserved circadian clock members in a sea anemone in order to
characterize this gene network in a member of the phylum Cnidaria and to infer
critical components of the clockwork used in the last common ancestor of
cnidarians and bilaterians.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We identified homologs of circadian regulatory
genes in the sea anemone Nematostella vectensis, including a gene most similar to
Timeout, three cryptochromes, and several key bHLH-PAS transcription factors. We 
then maintained N. vectensis either in complete darkness or in a 12 hour light:
12 hour dark cycle in three different light treatments (blue only, full spectrum,
blue-depleted). Gene expression varied in response to light cycle and light
treatment, with a particularly strong pattern observed for NvClock. The
cryptochromes more closely related to the light-sensitive clade of cryptochromes 
were upregulated in light treatments that included blue wavelengths. With
co-immunoprecipitation, we determined that heterodimerization between CLOCK and
CYCLE is conserved within N. vectensis. Additionally, we identified E-box motifs,
DNA sequences recognized by the CLOCK:CYCLE heterodimer, upstream of genes
showing rhythmic expression.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study reveals conserved molecular and functional
components of the circadian clock that were in place at the divergence of the
Cnidaria and Bilateria, suggesting the animal circadian clockwork is more ancient
than previous data suggest. Characterizing circadian regulation in a cnidarian
provides insight into the early origins of animal circadian rhythms and molecular
regulation of environmentally cued behaviors.

PMCID: PMC2943474
PMID: 20877728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Future Microbiol. 2010 Sep;5(9):1383-402. doi: 10.2217/fmb.10.103.

Sensing by the membrane-bound sensor kinase DcuS: exogenous versus endogenous
sensing of C(4)-dicarboxylates in bacteria.

Scheu PD(1), Kim OB, Griesinger C, Unden G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Microbiology & Wine Research, University of Mainz, Germany.

Bacteria are able to grow at the expense of both common (succinate, L-malate,
fumarate and aspartate) and uncommon (L-tartrate and D-malate)
C(4)-dicarboxylates, which are components of central metabolism. Two types of
sensors/regulators responding to the C(4)-dicarboxylates function in Escherichia 
coli, Bacillus, Lactobacillus and related bacteria. The first type represents
membrane-integral two-component systems, while the second includes cytoplasmic
LysR-type transcriptional regulators. The difference in location and substrate
specificity allows the exogenous induction of metabolic genes by common
C(4)-dicarboxylates, and endogenous induction by uncommon C(4)-dicarboxylates.
The two-component sensors, DcuS and CitA, are composed of an extracellular
Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain, two transmembrane helices, a cytoplasmic PAS and the
kinase domain. The structures of the extracellular PAS domains of DcuS and CitA
have been determined in the ligand-bound and the apo form. Binding of the ligand 
results in closing and compaction of the binding site, and the structural change 
gives rise to piston-type movement of the adjacent membrane-spanning helix-2, and
signal transmission to the cytoplasmic side. For DcuS, a membrane-embedded
construct has been developed that suggests (by experimentation and modeling) that
plasticity of the cytoplasmic PAS domain is central to signal transduction from
the membrane to the kinase. Sensor kinase DcuS of E. coli requires the
C(4)-dicarboxylate transporters DctA or DcuB as co-sensors for function under
aerobic and anaerobic conditions, respectively. DcuB contains a regulatory site
that controls the function of DcuS and is independent from the transport region. 
Therefore, DcuS senses C(4)-dicarboxylates in two independent modes, responding
to the effector concentration and the metabolic flux of extracellular
C(4)-dicarboxylates.

PMID: 20860483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011 Jan 1;81(1):60-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2010.09.008. Epub
2010 Sep 18.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A6 overexpression in breast cancer cells resistant
to methotrexate.

de Almagro MC(1), Selga E, Thibaut R, Porte C, Noé V, Ciudad CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Barcelona, Av. Diagonal 643, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.
cdealmagro@ub.edu

Methotrexate is a chemotherapeutic agent used in breast cancer treatment, but the
occurrence of resistance limits its therapeutic use. A microarrays analysis
between sensitive and methotrexate resistant MCF7 and MDA-MB-468 breast cancer
cells pointed out the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A (UGT1A) family as a common
deregulated node in both cell lines. This family of genes is involved in Phase II
metabolism. UGT1A6 was the main isoform responsible for UGT1A family
overexpression in these cells. Its overexpression was not due to gene
amplification. Transfection of a vector encoding for UGT1A6 in sensitive cells
counteracted the cytotoxicity caused by methotrexate. Methotrexate increased the 
transcriptional activity from a luciferase reporter driven by the UGT1A6 promoter
and induced UGT1A6 mRNA and enzymatic activity. Promoter analysis suggested that 
UGT1A6 induction by methotrexate could be driven by the transcription factors
ARNT (HIF-1) and AhR/ARNT. Cells incubated with anticancer drugs susceptible to
glucuronidation, such as tamoxifen or irinotecan, together with methotrexate,
showed a lesser degree of cytotoxicity, due to UGT1A6 induction. The
pharmacological effect of this induction should be taken into account when
combining methotrexate with other drugs that are glucuronidated.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20854796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Oct 26;107(43):18487-92. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1001252107. Epub 2010 Sep 17.

Induction of long interspersed nucleotide element-1 (L1) retrotransposition by
6-formylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole (FICZ), a tryptophan photoproduct.

Okudaira N(1), Iijima K, Koyama T, Minemoto Y, Kano S, Mimori A, Ishizaka Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8655,
Japan.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Oct 26;107(43):18239-40.

Long interspersed nucleotide element-1 (L1) is a retroelement comprising about
17% of the human genome, of which 80-100 copies are competent as mobile elements 
(retrotransposition: L1-RTP). Although the genetic structures modified during
L1-RTP have been clarified, little is known about the cellular signaling cascades
involved. Herein we found that 6-formylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole (FICZ), a
tryptophan photoproduct postulated as a candidate physiological ligand of the
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), induces L1-RTP. Notably, RNA-interference
experiments combined with back-transfection of siRNA-resistant cDNAs revealed
that the induction of L1-RTP by FICZ is dependent on AhR nuclear translocator-1
(ARNT1), a binding partner of AhR, and the activation of cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein. However, our extensive analyses suggested that AhR is
not required for L1-RTP. FICZ stimulated the interaction of the L1-encoded open
reading frame-1 (ORF1) and ARNT1, and recruited ORF1 to chromatin in a manner
dependent on the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase. Along with our
additional observations that the cellular cascades for FICZ-induced L1-RTP were
different from those of L1-RTP triggered by DNA damage, we propose that the
presence of the cellular machinery of ARNT1 mediates L1-RTP. A possible role of
ARNT1-mediated L1-RTP in the adaptation of living organisms to environmental
changes is discussed.

PMCID: PMC2973001
PMID: 20852066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Haematologica. 2011 Jan;96(1):78-86. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.028241. Epub 2010
Sep 17.

CD4-positive T-helper cell responses to the PASD1 protein in patients with
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Ait-Tahar K(1), Liggins AP, Collins GP, Campbell A, Barnardo M, Cabes M, Lawrie
CH, Moir D, Hatton C, Banham AH, Pulford K.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Oxford, UK.

BACKGROUND: Vaccine development targeting the novel immunogenic Per ARNT Sim
Domain containing 1 (PASD1) cancer testis antigen represents an attractive
therapeutic approach for the significant number of patients with diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma who are refractory to conventional treatment. Since CD4-positive 
T helper cells have crucial roles in promoting and maintaining immune responses
to tumor antigens, the presence of a CD4-positive T-helper immune response to the
PASD1 antigen in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma was investigated in 
the current study.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Thirty-one patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (25
with de novo, five with transformed and one with T-cell-rich B-cell lymphoma)
were studied. Five immunogenic PASD1 peptides predicted to bind to several major 
histocompatibiliy complex, class II DR beta 1 alleles were identified using
web-based algorithms. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients were used 
to investigate the immunogenicity of these DR beta 1-restricted peptides in vitro
using both gamma-interferon release enzyme-linked immunospot and cytolytic
assays.
RESULTS: Two of the five PASD1 peptides, PASD1(6) and PASD1(7), were shown to be 
immunogenic in 14 out of 32 patients studied in a gamma-interferon release assay.
CD4-positive T-helper cell lines from two patients raised against PASD1 peptides 
were able to lyse cell lines derived from hematologic malignancies expressing
endogenous PASD1 protein.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of a CD4-positive T-helper response to the 
PASD1 protein in patients with lymphoma. The immunogenic peptides described here 
represent valuable additional candidates for inclusion in a vaccine to treat
patients with PASD1-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma whose disease is
refractory to conventional therapies.

PMCID: PMC3012768
PMID: 20851862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cancer Lett. 2010 Dec 28;299(2):119-29. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.08.010. Epub
2010 Sep 16.

Inhibition of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-dependent transcription by resveratrol or
kaempferol is independent of estrogen receptor a expression in human breast
cancer cells.

Macpherson L(1), Matthews J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5S 1A8.

Resveratrol and kaempferol are natural chemopreventative agents that are also
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) antagonists and estrogen receptor (ER) agonists. 
In this study we evaluated the role of ERa in resveratrol- and
kaempferol-mediated inhibition of AHR-dependent transcription. Kaempferol or
resveratrol inhibited dioxin-induced cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1) and CYP1B1
expression levels and recruitment of AHR, ERa and co-activators to CYP1A1 and
CYP1B1. Both phytochemicals induced the expression and recruitment of ERa to gene
amplified in breast cancer 1 (GREB1). RNAi-mediated knockdown of ERa in T-47D
cells did not affect the inhibitory action of either phytochemical on AHR
activity. Both compounds also inhibited AHR-dependent transcription in
ERa-negative MDA-MB-231 and BT-549 breast cancer cells. These data show that ERa 
does not contribute to the AHR-inhibitory activities of resveratrol and
kaempferol.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20846786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. BMC Med. 2010 Sep 16;8:54. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-8-54.

Blood cell gene expression associated with cellular stress defense is modulated
by antioxidant-rich food in a randomised controlled clinical trial of male
smokers.

Bøhn SK(1), Myhrstad MC, Thoresen M, Holden M, Karlsen A, Tunheim SH, Erlund I,
Svendsen M, Seljeflot I, Moskaug JO, Duttaroy AK, Laake P, Arnesen H, Tonstad S, 
Collins A, Drevon CA, Blomhoff R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Plant-based diets rich in fruit and vegetables can prevent
development of several chronic age-related diseases. However, the mechanisms
behind this protective effect are not elucidated. We have tested the hypothesis
that intake of antioxidant-rich foods can affect groups of genes associated with 
cellular stress defence in human blood cells.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT00520819 http://clinicaltrials.gov.
METHODS: In an 8-week dietary intervention study, 102 healthy male smokers were
randomised to either a diet rich in various antioxidant-rich foods, a kiwifruit
diet (three kiwifruits/d added to the regular diet) or a control group. Blood
cell gene expression profiles were obtained from 10 randomly selected individuals
of each group. Diet-induced changes on gene expression were compared to controls 
using a novel application of the gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) on
transcription profiles obtained using Affymetrix HG-U133-Plus 2.0 whole genome
arrays.
RESULTS: Changes were observed in the blood cell gene expression profiles in both
intervention groups when compared to the control group. Groups of genes involved 
in regulation of cellular stress defence, such as DNA repair, apoptosis and
hypoxia, were significantly upregulated (GSEA, FDR q-values < 5%) by both diets
compared to the control group. Genes with common regulatory motifs for aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and AhR nuclear translocator (AhR/ARNT) were
upregulated by both interventions (FDR q-values < 5%). Plasma antioxidant
biomarkers (polyphenols/carotenoids) increased in both groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The observed changes in the blood cell gene expression profiles
suggest that the beneficial effects of a plant-based diet on human health may be 
mediated through optimization of defence processes.

PMCID: PMC2955589
PMID: 20846424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2010 Dec 15;504(2):221-7. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2010.09.001.
Epub 2010 Sep 8.

Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor induces hepatic steatosis via the
upregulation of fatty acid transport.

Kawano Y(1), Nishiumi S, Tanaka S, Nobutani K, Miki A, Yano Y, Seo Y, Kutsumi H, 
Ashida H, Azuma T, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Japan.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a basic helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-Sim
domain transcription factor, which is activated by various xenobiotic ligands.
AHR is known to be abundant in liver tissue and to be associated with hepatic
steatosis. However, it has not yet been elucidated how the activation of AHR
promotes hepatic steatosis. The aim of this study is to clarify the role of AHR
in hepatic steatosis. The intraperitoneal injection of 3-methylcholanthrene
(3MC), a potent AHR ligand, into C57BL/6J mice significantly increased the levels
of triglycerides and six long-chain monounsaturated fatty acids in the livers of 
mice, resulting in hepatic microvesicular steatosis. 3MC significantly enhanced
the expression level of fatty acid translocase (FAT), a factor regulating the
uptake of long-chain fatty acids into hepatocytes, in the liver. In an in vitro
experiment using human hepatoma HepG2 cells, 3MC increased the expression level
of FAT, and the downregulation of AHR by AHR siRNA led to the suppression of
3MC-induced FAT expression. In addition, the mRNA level of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) a, an upstream factor of FAT, was
increased in the livers of 3MC-treated mice. Taking together, AHR activation
induces hepatic microvesicular steatosis by increasing the expression level of
FAT.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20831858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2010 Sep 1;66(Pt 9):1056-9.
doi: 10.1107/S1744309110027880. Epub 2010 Aug 26.

Crystallization and preliminary crystallographic characterization of the PAS
domains of EAG and ELK potassium channels.

Adaixo R(1), Morais-Cabral JH.

Author information: 
(1)IBMC-Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Rua do Campo Alegre 823, Porto
4150-180, Portugal.

Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domains are ubiquitous in nature; they are approximately
130-amino-acid protein domains that adopt a fairly conserved three-dimensional
structure despite their low degree of sequence homology. These domains constitute
the N-terminus or, less frequently, the C-terminus of a number of proteins, where
they exert regulatory functions. PAS-containing proteins generally display two or
more copies of this motif. In this work, the crystallization and preliminary
analysis of the PAS domains of two eukaryotic potassium channels from the
ether-à-go-go (EAG) family are reported.

PMCID: PMC2935226
PMID: 20823525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Oct 1;202(1):22-6. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.07.121.

ETV6-ARNT fusion in a patient with childhood T lymphoblastic leukemia.

Otsubo K(1), Kanegane H, Eguchi M, Eguchi-Ishimae M, Tamura K, Nomura K, Abe A,
Ishii E, Miyawaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Toyama, Japan.

The ETS variant gene 6 (ETV6) gene is located at 12p13, and is frequently
involved in translocations in various human neoplasms, resulting in the
expression of fusion proteins consisting of the amino-terminal part of ETV6 and
unrelated transcription factors or protein tyrosine kinases. Leukemia with
t(1;12)(q21;p13) was previously described in a 5-year-old boy with acute
myeloblastic leukemia (AML-M2) who exhibited a novel ETV6-aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) fusion protein. We herein report the case of
a 2-year-old boy with T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) harboring
t(1;12)(q21;p13). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with a ETV6
dual-color DNA probe revealed that the split signals of the ETV6 gene in 96.7% of
bone marrow cells, indicating rearrangement of the ETV6 gene. Therefore, we
performed a FISH analysis with bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) probes
containing the ARNT, BCL9, and MLLT11 genes located at 1q21, and these results
indicated that the ARNT gene might be involved in the t(1;12)(q21;p13). Reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis disclosed the existence of a
ETV6-ARNT fusion gene. To our knowledge, the current report is novel in its
report of the ETV6-ARNT fusion in childhood T-ALL. The ETV6-ARNT fusion is
associated not only with AML but also with T-ALL.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20804916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Exp Neurobiol. 2010 Sep;19(2):71-4. doi: 10.5607/en.2010.19.2.71. Epub 2010 Sep
30.

Isolation and Characterization of Chicken NPAS3.

Shin J(1), Jeong HY, Lee KE, Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul
120-750, Korea.

Here we describe characterization of chicken neuronal Per-Arnt-Sim domain 3
(NPAS3) gene during embryogenesis including examinations of expression pattern
and function of the gene. RTPCR assay showed that the primary tissue of
expression for this gene is the central nervous system (CNS) while RNA in situ
hybridization assay confirmed that NPAS3 was expressed in the ventricular zone of
developing neural tube as early as Hamburger-Hamilton (HH) stage 20. Ectopic
over-expression of the gene in ovo in the developing chicken neural tube by
electroporation had little effect on stem cell population, overall neurogenesis, 
and motor neuron differentiation. We discuss the implications of our observation.

PMCID: PMC3214776
PMID: 22110344  [PubMed]


67. Biomol NMR Assign. 2011 Apr;5(1):15-7. doi: 10.1007/s12104-010-9256-3. Epub 2010 
Aug 14.

Resonance assignment and secondary structure prediction of the N-terminal domain 
of hERG (Kv11.1).

Muskett FW(1), Mitcheson JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, United Kingdom.
fwm1@le.ac.uk

The hERG (human ether-à-go-go related gene) channel is a member of the eag
voltage-gated K(+) channel family. In common with other members of this family,
it has a subunit topology of six trans-membrane helices that tetramerise to form 
a functional ion-channel. In addition, hERG has an N-terminal PAS (Per, Arnt and 
Sim) domain and a C-terminal cyclic nucleotide binding domain (cNBD). Both these 
cytosolic domains are involved in regulation of the gating of the ion channel as 
demonstrated by inheritable mutations in these domains that result in either a
loss, or a gain, in function. Here we report near complete backbone and side
chain (15)N, (13)C and (1)H assignments for the N-terminal domain (residues
1-135) including the functionally critical first 26 residues. Comparison with the
secondary structure of the crystal structure (residues 26-135) suggests that the 
solution and crystal structures are very similar except that the solution
structure contains an additional helix between residues 12-23; a region of the
protein important for channel gating.

PMID: 20711762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Am J Pathol. 2010 Oct;177(4):1969-76. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.100138. Epub 2010 
Aug 13.

Mice with inactivation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (Aip)
display complete penetrance of pituitary adenomas with aberrant ARNT expression.

Raitila A(1), Lehtonen HJ, Arola J, Heliövaara E, Ahlsten M, Georgitsi M, Jalanko
A, Paetau A, Aaltonen LA, Karhu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP) gene have
been shown to predispose to pituitary adenoma predisposition, a condition
characterized by growth hormone (GH)-secreting pituitary tumors. To study
AIP-mediated tumorigenesis, we generated an Aip mouse model. Heterozygous mice
developed normally but were prone to pituitary adenomas, in particular to those
secreting GH. A complete loss of AIP was detected in these lesions, and full
penetrance was reached at the age of 15 months. No excess of any other tumor type
was found. Ki-67 analysis indicated that Aip-deficient tumors have higher
proliferation rates compared with Aip-proficient tumors, suggesting a more
aggressive disease. Similar to human AIP-deficient pituitary adenomas,
immunohistochemical studies showed that expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator 1 or 2 (ARNT or ARNT2) protein was lost in the mouse tumors,
suggesting that mechanisms of AIP-related tumorigenesis involve aberrant ARNT
function. The Aip(+/-) mouse appears to be an excellent model for the respective 
human disease phenotype. This model constitutes a tool to further study
AIP-associated pituitary tumorigenesis and may be potentially valuable in efforts
to develop therapeutic strategies to treat pituitary adenomas.

PMCID: PMC2947291
PMID: 20709796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Cell Sci. 2010 Sep 1;123(Pt 17):2976-86. doi: 10.1242/jcs.068122. Epub 2010 Aug
10.

Casein kinase 1 regulates human hypoxia-inducible factor HIF-1.

Kalousi A(1), Mylonis I, Politou AS, Chachami G, Paraskeva E, Simos G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Thessaly,
Mezourlo 41110, Larissa, Greece.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), a transcriptional activator that mediates
cellular response to hypoxia and a promising target of anticancer therapy, is
essential for adaptation to low oxygen conditions, embryogenesis and tumor
progression. HIF-1 is a heterodimer of HIF-1alpha, expression of which is
controlled by oxygen levels as well as by various oxygen-independent mechanisms, 
and HIF-1beta (or ARNT), which is constitutively expressed. In this work, we
investigate the phosphorylation of the N-terminal heterodimerization (PAS) domain
of HIF-1alpha and identify Ser247 as a major site of in vitro modification by
casein kinase 1delta (CK1delta). Mutation of this site to alanine, surprisingly, 
enhanced the transcriptional activity of HIF-1alpha, a result phenocopied by
inhibition or small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated silencing of CK1delta under 
hypoxic conditions. Conversely, overexpression of CK1delta or phosphomimetic
mutation of Ser247 to aspartate inhibited HIF-1alpha activity without affecting
its stability or nuclear accumulation. Immunoprecipitation and in vitro binding
experiments suggest that CK1-dependent phosphorylation of HIF-1alpha at Ser247
impairs its association with ARNT, a notion also supported by modeling the
structure of the complex between HIF-1alpha and ARNT PAS-B domains. We suggest
that modification of HIF-1alpha by CK1 represents a novel mechanism that controls
the activity of HIF-1 during hypoxia by regulating the interaction between its
two subunits.

PMID: 20699359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2010 Oct 15;502(2):121-9. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2010.07.022.
Epub 2010 Jul 29.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-interacting protein 2
suppresses the estrogen receptor signaling via an Arnt-dependent mechanism.

Li Y(1), Li Y, Zhang T, Chan WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, University of the
Pacific, Stockton, CA 95211, USA.

We explored whether modulation of the estrogen receptor (ER) signaling is
possible through an aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(Arnt)-dependent mechanism. We utilized the Arnt-interacting protein 2 (Ainp2) to
examine whether the presence of Ainp2 in MCF-7 cells would interfere with the
Arnt-mediated ER signaling. We found that Arnt increased the 17 beta-estradiol
(E2)-dependent luciferase activity and Ainp2 significantly suppressed this
Arnt-mediated luciferase activity. Ainp2 significantly suppressed 25% of the E2- 
and Arnt-dependent up-regulation of the GREB1 message. No suppression of the ER
target gene expression by Ainp2 was detected in Arnt-knockdown MCF-7 cells and in
Arnt-independent ER signaling. Although Ainp2 did not interact with ER alpha and 
ER beta, it suppressed the ER alpha::Arnt interaction and reduced the E2-driven
recruitment of Arnt to the GREB1 promoter. We concluded that Ainp2 suppresses the
ER signaling by not allowing Arnt to participate in the ER-dependent,
Arnt-mediated activation of gene transcription.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2936660
PMID: 20674540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2010 Oct;212(3):329-44. doi:
10.1007/s00213-010-1954-0. Epub 2010 Jul 23.

Divergent acute and chronic modulation of glutamatergic postsynaptic density
genes expression by the antipsychotics haloperidol and sertindole.

Iasevoli F(1), Tomasetti C, Marmo F, Bravi D, Arnt J, de Bartolomeis A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Psychiatry and Psychopharmacotherapeutics, Section of 
Psychiatry, Department of Neuroscience, University School of Medicine Federico
II, Edificio 18, Via Pansini 5, 80131, Naples, Italy.

RATIONALE: A pivotal role for glutamate in the pathophysiology and treatment of
schizophrenia has been suggested. Few reports have investigated the impact of
antipsychotics on postsynaptic density (PSD) molecules involved in glutamatergic 
transmission and synaptic remodeling. Homer is a key PSD molecule putatively
implicated in schizophrenia.
OBJECTIVES: We studied the effect, in acute and chronic paradigms, of a first and
a second generation antipsychotic (haloperidol and sertindole, respectively) on
the expression of Homer1a and Homer-interacting PSD molecules.
RESULTS: In the acute paradigm, Homer1a expression was induced by haloperidol but
not sertindole in the striatum, consistent with the less propensity of sertindole
to affect nigrostriatal neurotransmission. The profile of expression of two other
inducible genes, Ania3 and Arc, was highly similar to Homer1a. In the cortex,
haloperidol reduced Homer1a and induced Ania3. In the chronic paradigm, striatal 
expression of Homer1a and Ania3 resembled that observed in the acute paradigm. In
the cortex, haloperidol induced Homer1a, while sertindole did not. Homer1b
expression was increased by haloperidol in the striatum and cortex whereas
sertindole selectively induced Homer1b in the cortex. The expression of mGluR5
was increased by both antipsychotics. A modulation by haloperidol was also seen
for PSD-95 and aCaMKII.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that haloperidol and sertindole may
significantly modulate glutamatergic transcripts of the postsynaptic density.
Sertindole induces constitutive genes in the cortex predominantly, which may
correlate with its propensity to improve cognitive functions. Haloperidol
preferentially modulates gene expression in the striatum, consistent with its
action at nigrostriatal projections and its propensity to give motor side
effects.

PMID: 20652539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. New Phytol. 2010 Oct;188(1):52-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2010.03371.x. Epub
2010 Jul 14.

Transcription factor families inferred from genome sequences of photosynthetic
stramenopiles.

Rayko E(1), Maumus F, Maheswari U, Jabbari K, Bowler C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure, CNRS UMR8197 INSERM U1024,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France.

 By comparative analyses we identify lineage-specific diversity in transcription
factors (TFs) from stramenopile (or heterokont) genome sequences. We compared a
pennate (Phaeodactylum tricornutum) and a centric diatom (Thalassiosira
pseudonana) with those of other stramenopiles (oomycetes, Pelagophyceae, and
Phaeophyceae (Ectocarpus siliculosus)) as well as to that of Emiliania huxleyi, a
haptophyte that is evolutionarily related to the stramenopiles.  We provide a
detailed description of diatom TF complements and report numerous peculiarities: 
in both diatoms, the heat shock factor (HSF) family is overamplified and
constitutes the most abundant class of TFs; Myb and C2H2-type zinc finger TFs are
the two most abundant TF families encoded in all the other stramenopile genomes
investigated; the presence of diatom and lineage-specific gene fusions, in
particular a class of putative photoreceptors with light-sensitive Per-Arnt-Sim
(PAS) and DNA-binding (basic-leucine zipper, bZIP) domains and an HSF-AP2 domain 
fusion.  Expression data analysis shows that many of the TFs studied are
transcribed and may be involved in specific responses to environmental stimuli. 
Evolutionary and functional relevance of these observations are discussed.

PMID: 20646219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Interdiscip Sci. 2009 Sep;1(3):220-8. doi: 10.1007/s12539-009-0042-9. Epub 2009
Aug 7.

Computational and structural analysis of deleterious functional SNPs in ARNT
oncogene.

George Priya Doss C(1), Sethumadhavan R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Vellore
Institute of Technology University, Vellore, 632014, Tamil Nadu, India.

Along with the completion of human genome project, major interest in human
genetics is to distinguish mutations that are functionally neutral from those
that contribute to disease. The central focus of cancer genetics is the study of 
mutations that are causally implicated in tumorigenesis. The identification of
such causal mutations not only provides insight into cancer biology but also
presents anticancer therapeutic targets and diagnostic markers. Understanding the
human genetic variation through Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) is
currently believed to reveal the cause of individual susceptibility to disease
and the large variation observed in response to treatment. The aim of our study
reported here is to determine the deleterious SNPs that can alter the expression 
and function of the ARNT gene in causing acute myeloblastic leukemia through
computational methods. Our approach will present the application of computational
tools in understanding functional variation from the perspective of structure,
expression, evolution and phenotype. Based on the SIFT (evolutionary
basedapproach) and PolyPhen (structure based-approach) scores, structure analysis
was carried out with the major mutation that occurred in the native protein
(1X0O) coded by ARNT gene, which are at the amino acid position F363L and R430Q. 
The amino acid residues in the native and mutant modeled protein were further
analyzed for solvent accessibility, and secondary structure to check the
stability of the proteins. The models built in this work would be applicable for 
predicting the deleterious nsSNPs which would be helpful for further
genotype-phenotype research as well as pharmacogenetics studies.

PMID: 20640841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Environ Int. 2010 Nov;36(8):907-17. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2010.05.011. Epub 2010 
Jul 17.

PCB congener specific oxidative stress response by microarray analysis using
human liver cell line.

De S(1), Ghosh S, Chatterjee R, Chen YQ, Moses L, Kesari A, Hoffman EP, Dutta SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Howard University, Washington, DC 20059, United States.

In this study we have examined the effect of exposure to different congeners of
PCBs and their role in oxidative stress response. A metabolically competent human
liver cell line (HepG2) was exposed with two prototype congeners of PCBs:
coplanar PCB-77 and non-coplanar PCB-153. After the predetermined times of
exposure (0-24h) at 70 µM concentration, the HepG2 cells showed significant
apoptotic changes by fluorescent microscopy after 12h of exposure. Gene set
enrichment analysis (GSEA) identified oxidative stress as the predominant
enrichment. Further, paraquat assay showed that PCB congeners lead to oxidative
stress to different extents, PCB-77 being more toxic. This study, with emphasis
on all recommended microarray quality control steps, showed that apoptosis was
one of the most significant cellular processes as a result of oxidative stress,
but each of these congeners had a unique signature gene expression, which was
further validated by Taqman real time PCR and immunoblotting. The pathways
involved leading to the common apoptotic effect were completely different.
Further in-silico analysis showed that PCB-153 most likely acted through the TNF 
receptor, leading to oxidative stress involving metallothionein gene families,
and causing apoptosis mainly by the Fas receptor signaling pathway. In contrast, 
PCB-77 acted through the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. It induced oxidative stress
through the involvement of cytochrome P450 (CYP1A1) leading to apoptosis through 
AHR/ARNT pathway.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3018769
PMID: 20638727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2010 Sep;152(3):279-87. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpc.2010.05.004. Epub 2010 May 31.

Molecular cloning and sequence analysis and the response of a aryl hydrocarbon
receptor homologue gene in the clam Ruditapes philippinarum exposed to
benzo(a)pyrene.

Liu N(1), Pan L, Miao J, Xu C, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Mariculture, Ministry of Education, Ocean University of 
China, Qingdao 266003, PR China.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a member of the basic
helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH/PAS) family of transcription factors. In the 
present study, a cDNA encoding an AhR homologue was initially cloned and
sequenced from the clam, Ruditapes philippinarum. The predicted amino acid
sequences contain regions characteristic of AhRs from other species including
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domains, but it does not
contain distinct Q-rich domain as found in the mammalian AhRs. The clam AhR
homologue cDNA coded for a 765 amino acids protein and phylogenetic analysis
demonstrated that it was clustered within the invertebrate AhRs branch. The clam 
AhR homologue mRNA expression was detected in all the adult tissues tested (gill,
digestive gland, adductor muscle and mantle) and highest transcription level were
observed in gill compared to other tissues. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR
analysis revealed that the clam AhR homologue mRNA expression levels in gill and 
digestive gland of R. philippinarum were induced by benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) and the 
absolute expression levels of the gene showed temporal and dose-dependent
response.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20624694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. BMC Med. 2010 Jul 12;8:44. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-8-44.

Hypoxia inducible factor 1alpha gene (HIF-1alpha) splice variants: potential
prognostic biomarkers in breast cancer.

Dales JP(1), Beaufils N, Silvy M, Picard C, Pauly V, Pradel V, Formisano-Tréziny 
C, Bonnier P, Giusiano S, Charpin C, Gabert J.

Author information: 
(1)Plateforme Transcriptome, CRO2, Marseille, France. Jdales@ap-hm.fr

Comment in
    BMC Med. 2010;8:45.

BACKGROUND: Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a master transcriptional
regulator of genes regulating oxygen homeostasis. The HIF-1 protein is composed
of two HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta/aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT) subunits. The prognostic relevance of HIF-1alpha protein overexpression
has been shown in breast cancer. The impact of HIF-1alpha alternative splice
variant expression on breast cancer prognosis in terms of metastasis risk is not 
well known.
METHODS: Using real-time quantitative reverse transcription PCR assays, we
measured mRNA concentrations of total HIF-1alpha and 4 variants in breast tissue 
specimens in a series of 29 normal tissues or benign lesions (normal/benign) and 
53 primary carcinomas. In breast cancers HIF-1alpha splice variant levels were
compared to clinicopathological parameters including tumour microvessel density
and metastasis-free survival.
RESULTS: HIF-1alpha isoforms containing a three base pairs TAG insertion between 
exon 1 and exon 2 (designated HIF-1alphaTAG) and HIF-1alpha736 mRNAs were found
expressed at higher levels in oestrogen receptor (OR)-negative carcinomas
compared to normal/benign tissues (P = 0.009 and P = 0.004 respectively). In
breast carcinoma specimens, lymph node status was significantly associated with
HIF-1alphaTAG mRNA levels (P = 0.037). Significant statistical association was
found between tumour grade and HIF-1alphaTAG (P = 0.048), and total HIF-1alpha (P
= 0.048) mRNA levels. HIF-1alphaTAG mRNA levels were also inversely correlated
with both oestrogen and progesterone receptor status (P = 0.005 and P = 0.033
respectively). Univariate analysis showed that high HIF-1alphaTAG mRNA levels
correlated with shortened metastasis free survival (P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show for the first time that mRNA expression of a
HIF-1alphaTAG splice variant reflects a stage of breast cancer progression and is
associated with a worse prognosis.See commentary:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7015/8/45.

PMCID: PMC2917392
PMID: 20624301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biomol NMR Assign. 2010 Oct;4(2):211-3. doi: 10.1007/s12104-010-9248-3. Epub 2010
Jul 7.

1H, 13C and 15N chemical shift assignments for the N-terminal domain of the
voltage-gated potassium channel-hERG.

Li Q(1), Raida M, Kang C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology and Nanotechnology, The Agency for Science,
Technology and Research, Singapore, 138669, Singapore.

The human ether à go-go related gene (hERG) voltage-gated potassium controls the 
rapid delayed rectifier potassium current (I(ks)) in heart. The N-terminal 135
amino acids (NTD) form a Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain which involves in signal
transduction and protein-protein interactions. NTD was shown to be necessary for 
the regulation of the channel activity through its interaction with the channel
pore region of hERG. Mutations in NTD were related to serious heart diseases. We 
report the (1)H, (13)C and (15)N chemical shift assignments for NTD using 2D and 
3D heteronuclear NMR experiments. More than 95% backbone resonance assignments
were obtained.

PMID: 20607461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010 Oct 1;80(7):982-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2010.06.018. Epub
2010 Jun 23.

LW6, a novel HIF-1 inhibitor, promotes proteasomal degradation of HIF-1alpha via 
upregulation of VHL in a colon cancer cell line.

Lee K(1), Kang JE, Park SK, Jin Y, Chung KS, Kim HM, Lee K, Kang MR, Lee MK, Song
KB, Yang EG, Lee JJ, Won M.

Author information: 
(1)Dongguk University-Seoul, Seoul, 100-715, Republic of Korea.

Hypoxia-inducible factor HIF-1 is responsible for radiation resistance and poor
prognosis in cancer therapy. As part of our drug discovery program, a novel HIF
inhibitor, LW6, was identified as a small compound that inhibits the accumulation
of HIF-1alpha. We found that LW6 decreased HIF-1alpha protein expression without 
affecting HIF-1beta expression. MG132, a proteasome inhibitor, protected
HIF-1alpha from LW6-induced proteasomal degradation, indicating that LW6 affects 
the stability of the HIF-1alpha protein. We found that LW6 promoted the
degradation of wild type HIF-1alpha, but not of a DM-HIF-1alpha with
modifications of P402A and P564A, at hydroxylation sites in the oxygen-dependent 
degradation domain (ODDD). LW6 did not affect the activity of prolyl hydroxylase 
(PHD), but induced the expression of von Hippel-Lindau (VHL), which interacts
with prolyl-hydroxylated HIF-1alpha for proteasomal degradation. In the presence 
of LW6, knockdown of VHL did not abolish HIF-1alpha protein accumulation,
indicating that LW6 degraded HIF-1alpha via regulation of VHL expression. In mice
carrying xenografts of human colon cancer HCT116 cells, LW6 demonstrated strong
anti-tumor efficacy in vivo and caused a decrease in HIF-1alpha expression in
frozen-tissue immunohistochemical staining. These data suggest that LW6 may be
valuable in the development of a HIF-1alpha inhibitor for cancer treatment.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20599784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Science. 2010 Jul 2;329(5987):75-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1190371.

Sequencing of 50 human exomes reveals adaptation to high altitude.

Yi X(1), Liang Y, Huerta-Sanchez E, Jin X, Cuo ZX, Pool JE, Xu X, Jiang H,
Vinckenbosch N, Korneliussen TS, Zheng H, Liu T, He W, Li K, Luo R, Nie X, Wu H, 
Zhao M, Cao H, Zou J, Shan Y, Li S, Yang Q, Asan, Ni P, Tian G, Xu J, Liu X,
Jiang T, Wu R, Zhou G, Tang M, Qin J, Wang T, Feng S, Li G, Huasang, Luosang J,
Wang W, Chen F, Wang Y, Zheng X, Li Z, Bianba Z, Yang G, Wang X, Tang S, Gao G,
Chen Y, Luo Z, Gusang L, Cao Z, Zhang Q, Ouyang W, Ren X, Liang H, Zheng H, Huang
Y, Li J, Bolund L, Kristiansen K, Li Y, Zhang Y, Zhang X, Li R, Li S, Yang H,
Nielsen R, Wang J, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China.

Comment in
    Science. 2010 Sep 17;329(5998):1467; author reply 1467-8.
    High Alt Med Biol. 2010 Winter;11(4):307-8.
    Science. 2010 Jul 2;329(5987):40-1.

Residents of the Tibetan Plateau show heritable adaptations to extreme altitude. 
We sequenced 50 exomes of ethnic Tibetans, encompassing coding sequences of 92%
of human genes, with an average coverage of 18x per individual. Genes showing
population-specific allele frequency changes, which represent strong candidates
for altitude adaptation, were identified. The strongest signal of natural
selection came from endothelial Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain protein 1 (EPAS1), a
transcription factor involved in response to hypoxia. One single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) at EPAS1 shows a 78% frequency difference between Tibetan and 
Han samples, representing the fastest allele frequency change observed at any
human gene to date. This SNP's association with erythrocyte abundance supports
the role of EPAS1 in adaptation to hypoxia. Thus, a population genomic survey has
revealed a functionally important locus in genetic adaptation to high altitude.

PMCID: PMC3711608
PMID: 20595611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 24;5(6):e11303. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011303.

Hypoxia regulates BMP4 expression in the murine spleen during the recovery from
acute anemia.

Wu DC(1), Paulson RF.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biochemistry, Microbiology and Molecular Biology, The
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: Bone marrow erythropoiesis is primarily homeostatic, producing new
erythrocytes at a constant rate. However at times of acute anemia, new
erythrocytes must be rapidly produced much faster than bone marrow steady state
erythropoiesis. At these times stress erythropoiesis predominates. Stress
erythropoiesis occurs in the fetal liver during embryogenesis and in the adult
spleen and liver. In adult mice, stress erythropoiesis utilizes a specialized
population of stress erythroid progenitors that are resident in the spleen. In
response to acute anemia, these progenitors rapidly expand and differentiate in
response to three signals, BMP4, SCF and hypoxia. In absence of acute anemic
stress, two of these signals, BMP4 and hypoxia, are not present and the pathway
is not active. The initiating event in the activation of this pathway is the
up-regulation of BMP4 expression in the spleen.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this paper we analyze the regulation of BMP4
expression in the spleen by hypoxia. Using stromal cell lines, we establish a
role for hypoxia transcription factor HIFs (Hypoxia Inducible Factors) in the
transcription of BMP4. We identified putative Hypoxia Responsive Elements (HREs) 
in the BMP4 gene using bioinformatics. Analysis of these elements showed that in 
vivo, Hif2alpha binds two cis regulatory sites in the BMP4 gene, which regulate
BMP4 expression during the recovery from acute anemia.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: These data show that hypoxia plays a key role in
initiating the BMP4 dependent stress erythropoiesis pathway by regulating BMP4
expression.

PMCID: PMC2892039
PMID: 20585586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Blood. 2010 Oct 7;116(14):2455-61. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-02-267708. Epub 2010
Jun 25.

Assessment of disease severity and outcome in patients with systemic light-chain 
amyloidosis by the high-sensitivity troponin T assay.

Kristen AV(1), Giannitsis E, Lehrke S, Hegenbart U, Konstandin M, Lindenmaier D, 
Merkle C, Hardt S, Schnabel PA, Röcken C, Schonland SO, Ho AD, Dengler TJ, Katus 
HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Angiology, and Respiratory Medicine, Heidelberg
University, Heidelberg, Germany. Arnt_Kristen@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Cardiac biomarkers provide prognostic information in light-chain amyloidosis
(AL). Thus, a novel high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T (hs-TnT) assay may
improve risk stratification. hs-TnT was assessed in 163 patients. Blood levels
were higher with cardiac than renal or other organ involvement and were related
to the severity of cardiac involvement. Increased sensitivity was not associated 
with survival benefit. Forty-seven patients died during follow-up (22.3 ± 1.0
months). Nonsurvivors had higher hs-TnT than survivors. Outcome was worse if
hs-TnT more than or equal to 50 ng/L and best less than 3 ng/L. Survival of
patients with hs-TnT 3 to 14 ng/L did not differ from patients with moderately
increased hs-TnT (14-50 ng/L), but was worse if interventricular septum was more 
than or equal to 15 mm. Discrimination according to the Mayo staging system was
only achieved by the use of the hs-TnT assay, but not by the fourth-generation
troponin T assay. Multivariate analysis revealed hs-TnT, NT-proBNP, and left
ventricular impairment as independent risk factors for survival. hs-TnT and
NT-proBNP predicted survival, even after exclusion of patients with impaired
renal function. Plasma levels of the hs-TnT assay are associated with the
clinical, morphologic, and functional severity of cardiac AL amyloidosis and
could provide useful information for clinicians on cardiac involvement and
outcome.

PMID: 20581312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2010 Oct;9(10):2184-94. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M110.001263. Epub
2010 Jun 23.

Differential proteomics analysis reveals a role for E2F2 in the regulation of the
Ahr pathway in T lymphocytes.

Azkargorta M(1), Fullaondo A, Laresgoiti U, Aloria K, Infante A, Arizmendi JM,
Zubiaga AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of the Basque
Country, UPV/EHU, 48940 Leioa, Spain.

E2F transcription factors (E2F1-8) are best known for their role in cell
proliferation, although it is clear that they regulate many other biological
processes through the transcriptional modulation of distinct target genes.
However, the specific set of genes regulated by each E2F remains to be
characterized. To gain insight into the molecular pathways regulated by E2F2, we 
have analyzed the proteome of antigen receptor-activated T cells lacking E2F2. We
report that loss of E2F2 results in a deregulated Aryl-hydrocarbon-receptor
pathway. Proliferating E2F2(-/-) T lymphocytes expressed significantly higher
levels of Aip, Ahr, and Arnt relative to wild-type (WT)(1) controls. The
mechanism for increased levels of Aip appears straightforward, involving direct
regulation of the Aip gene promoter by E2F2. Although the Ahr and Arnt promoters 
also bind E2F2, their regulation appears to be more complex. Nevertheless,
exposure to the environmental xenobiotic 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD), a well-known exogenous ligand of the Ahr pathway, led to overexpression
of the Ahr target gene Cyp1a1, and to increased sensitivity to TCDD-triggered
apoptosis in E2F2(-/-) T cells compared with WT controls. These results suggest
that E2F2 modulates cellular sensitivity to xenobiotic signals through the
negative regulation of the Ahr pathway.

PMCID: PMC2953915
PMID: 20573986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010 Aug 15;247(1):60-9. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2010.05.018.
Epub 2010 Jun 4.

Flavin-containing monooxygenase-3: induction by 3-methylcholanthrene and complex 
regulation by xenobiotic chemicals in hepatoma cells and mouse liver.

Celius T(1), Pansoy A, Matthews J, Okey AB, Henderson MC, Krueger SK, Williams
DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada. celius64@gmail.com

Flavin-containing monooxygenases often are thought not to be inducible but we
recently demonstrated aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)-dependent induction of FMO 
mRNAs in mouse liver by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) (Celius et
al., Drug Metab Dispos 36:2499, 2008). We now evaluated FMO induction by other
AHR ligands and xenobiotic chemicals in vivo and in mouse Hepa1c1c7 hepatoma
cells (Hepa-1). In mouse liver, 3-methylcholanthrene (3MC) induced FMO3 mRNA
8-fold. In Hepa-1 cells, 3MC and benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) induced FMO3 mRNA >30-fold.
Induction by 3MC and BaP was AHR dependent but, surprisingly, the potent AHR
agonist, TCDD, did not induce FMO3 mRNA in Hepa-1 cells nor did chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays detect recruitment of AHR or ARNT to Fmo3 regulatory
elements after exposure to 3MC in liver or in Hepa-1 cells. However, in Hepa-1,
3MC and BaP (but not TCDD) caused recruitment of p53 protein to a p53 response
element in the 5'-flanking region of the Fmo3 gene. We tested the possibility
that FMO3 induction in Hepa-1 cells might be mediated by Nrf2/anti-oxidant
response pathways, but agents known to activate Nrf2 or to induce oxidative
stress did not affect FMO3 mRNA levels. The protein synthesis inhibitor,
cycloheximide (which causes "superinduction" of CYP1A1 mRNA in TCDD-treated
cells), by itself caused dramatic upregulation (>300-fold) of FMO3 mRNA in Hepa-1
suggesting that cycloheximide prevents synthesis of a labile protein that
suppresses FMO3 expression. Although FMO3 mRNA is highly induced by 3MC or TCDD
in mouse liver and in Hepa-1 cells, FMO protein levels and FMO catalytic function
showed only modest elevation.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2906660
PMID: 20570689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2010 Sep;13(8):1021-33. doi:
10.1017/S1461145710000659. Epub 2010 Jun 23.

Lu AE58054, a 5-HT6 antagonist, reverses cognitive impairment induced by
subchronic phencyclidine in a novel object recognition test in rats.

Arnt J(1), Bang-Andersen B, Grayson B, Bymaster FP, Cohen MP, DeLapp NW, Giethlen
B, Kreilgaard M, McKinzie DL, Neill JC, Nelson DL, Nielsen SM, Poulsen MN, Schaus
JM, Witten LM.

Author information: 
(1)Lundbeck Research Denmark, H. Lundbeck A/S, Valby, Denmark. JA@lundbeck.com

The in-vitro potency and selectivity, in-vivo binding affinity and effect of the 
5-HT(6)R antagonist Lu AE58054
([2-(6-fluoro-1H-indol-3-yl)-ethyl]-[3-(2,2,3,3-tetrafluoropropoxy)-benzyl]-amine
) on impaired cognition were evaluated. Lu AE58054 displayed high affinity to the
human 5-HT(6) receptor (5-HT(6)R) with a Ki of 0.83 nm. In a 5-HT(6) GTPgammaS
efficacy assay Lu AE58054 showed no agonist activity, but demonstrated potent
inhibition of 5-HT-mediated activation. Besides medium affinity to adrenergic
alpha(1A)- and alpha(1B)-adrenoreceptors, Lu AE58054 demonstrated >50-fold
selectivity for more than 70 targets examined. Orally administered Lu AE58054
potently inhibited striatal in-vivo binding of the 5-HT(6) antagonist radioligand
[(3)H]Lu AE60157 ([(3)H]8-(4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)-3-phenylsulfonylquinoline),
with an ED(50) of 2.7 mg/kg. Steady-state modelling of an acute
pharmacokinetic/5-HT(6)R occupancy time-course experiment indicated a plasma
EC(50) value of 20 ng/ml. Administration of Lu AE58054 in a dose range (5-20
mg/kg p.o.) leading to above 65% striatal 5-HT(6)R binding occupancy in vivo,
reversed cognitive impairment in a rat novel object recognition task induced
after subchronic treatment for 7 d with phencyclidine (PCP 2 mg/kg b.i.d., i.p.
for 7 d, followed by 7 d drug free). The results indicate that Lu AE58054 is a
selective antagonist of 5-HT(6)Rs with good oral bioavailability and robust
efficacy in a rat model of cognitive impairment in schizophrenia. Lu AE58054 may 
be useful for the pharmacotherapy of cognitive dysfunction in disease states such
as schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease.

PMID: 20569520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Oct;67(20):3523-33. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0392-9. Epub 
2010 May 28.

Involvement of aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator in EGF-induced
c-Jun/Sp1-mediated gene expression.

Huang WC(1), Chen ST, Chang WC, Chang KY, Chang WC, Chen BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) binds to other basic
helix-loop-helix Per/ARNT/Sim (bHLH-PAS) proteins to form functional
transcriptional complexes in order to regulate specific biological pathways.
Here, we report a novel mechanism that upon EGF treatment, ARNT associated with
non-bHLH-PAS transcription factors, c-Jun/Sp1, and regulated gene expression,
through forming a c-Jun/ARNT/Sp1 complex and binding to the Sp1 site of the gene 
promoter. EGF-induced promoter activity and the mRNA level of 12(S)-lipoxygenase 
as well as the association between c-Jun and Sp1 were reduced by ARNT knockdown. 
Notably, dominant negative c-Jun mutant, TAM-67, blocked ARNT-mediated
12(S)-lipoxygenase expression, demonstrating that c-Jun was responsible for the
transcriptional activation. Moreover, ARNT knockdown also inhibited other
EGF-induced c-Jun/Sp1 mediated gene expression, such as p21( WAF1/CIP1 ). Our
results reveal a novel mechanism by which ARNT acts as a modulator to bridge the 
c-Jun/Sp1 interaction and plays a role in EGF-mediated gene expression under
normoxic conditions.

PMID: 20508969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cutan Ocul Toxicol. 2010 Sep;29(3):171-92. doi: 10.3109/15569527.2010.483869.

A new in vitro method for identifying chemical sensitizers combining peptide
binding with ARE/EpRE-mediated gene expression in human skin cells.

McKim JM Jr(1), Keller DJ 3rd, Gorski JR.

Author information: 
(1)CeeTox Inc., Kalamazoo, Michigan 49008, USA. jmckim@ceetox.com

Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) is a significant safety concern for developers 
of cosmetic, personal care, chemical, pharmaceutical, and medical device
products. The guinea pig maximization test (GMPT) and the murine local lymph node
assay (LLNA) are accepted methods for determining chemical sensitization. Recent 
legislative initiatives in Europe require the development of new in vitro
alternatives to animal tests for chemical sensitization. The aim of this project 
was to develop an in vitro screening method that uses a human skin cell line
(HaCaT), chemical reactivity, and gene expression profiling to identify positive 
and negative responses, to place chemicals into potency categories of
extreme/strong (ES), moderate (M), weak (W), and nonsensitizers (N), and to
provide an estimate of corresponding LLNA values. The method and processing
algorithm were developed from a training set of 39 chemicals possessing a wide
range of sensitization potencies. Three cationic metals, chromium (Cr), nickel
(Ni), and silver (Ag), were also evaluated in this model. Chemical reactivity was
determined by measuring glutathione (GSH) depletion in a cell free matrix. Three 
signaling pathways (Keap1/Nrf 2/ARE/EpRE, ARNT/AhR/XRE, and Nrf1/MTF/MRE) that
are known to be activated by sensitizing agents were monitored by measuring the
relative abundance of 11 genes whose expression is controlled by one of these 3
pathways. Final exposure concentrations were based on toxicity and solubility. A 
range-finding experiment was conducted with each compound to determine
cytotoxicity and solubility. Six exposure concentrations (0.1 to 2,500 microM)
and an exposure time of 24 hours were used in the final experiments. Glutathione 
depletion alone did not provide the accuracy necessary to differentiate potency
categories. However, chemical reactivity combined with gene expression profiles
significantly improved the in vitro predictions. A predicted toxicity index (PTI)
was determined for each test chemical. A comparison of LLNA values with PTI
values revealed an inverse relationship. The large variation in LLNA data for
compounds in the same potency category makes direct extrapolation from PTI to
LLNA difficult. To challenge the system, 58 additional compounds were submitted
in a blinded manner. Compounds placed into ES and M categories were considered
positive, whereas compounds classified as W or N were considered negative.
Accuracy was approximately 84%, with a sensitivity of 81% and a specificity of
92%. The model correctly identified 2 of 3 cationic metals as positive. In
conclusion, the method described here demonstrates a valuable in vitro method for
identifying chemicals and metals that induce skin sensitization.

PMID: 20491607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Dermatol Sci. 2010 Jun;58(3):211-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2010.04.003. Epub
2010 Apr 18.

B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 1 is a novel target gene of aryl
hydrocarbon receptor.

Ikuta T(1), Ohba M, Zouboulis CC, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Kawajiri K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Clinical Oncology, Saitama Cancer Center, 818 Komuro,
Ina-machi, Kitaadachi-gun, Saitama 362-0806, Japan. togo@cancer-c.pref.saitama.jp

BACKGROUND: The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated
transcription factor. When environmental pollutants, including chemical
carcinogens, bind to AhR, the receptor translocates to nucleus and
transcriptionally activates target genes including drug metabolizing enzymes such
as P450s. Recent studies have shown that AhR mediates various responses,
including cellular growth, differentiation, immune system and development.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we investigated the physiological function of AhR in
skin.
METHODS: Distribution of AhR in murine skin was examined by immunohistochemistry.
Expression of a target gene which is transcriptionally activated by AhR is
analysed by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: We found that AhR co-localizes with the transcriptional repressor B
lymphocyte maturation protein 1 (Blimp1) in sebaceous gland. In this report, we
show that expression of Blimp1 is induced by treatment with AhR ligands, such as 
methylcolanthrene (MC) in sebocyte and keratinocyte cell lines. Exposure to
ultraviolet B, which has been reported to generate AhR ligand intracellularly,
also increased Blimp1 mRNA. This ligand-dependent induction of Blimp1 requires
the expression of both AhR and ARNT, since transfection of siRNA specific to
either AhR or ARNT significantly reduced Blimp1 mRNA in response to MC. Analysis 
using kinase inhibitors revealed that ligand-dependent induction of Blimp1, but
not that of CYP1A1, is inhibited by staurosporine. TPA, a potent activator of
protein kinase C, increased Blimp1 mRNA but not CYP1A1.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that Blimp1 is a novel AhR-target gene in
epidermal keratinocyte and sebocyte.

Copyright 2010 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20478695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Cancer. 2010 May 17;9:108. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-108.

MicroRNA-101 negatively regulates Ezh2 and its expression is modulated by
androgen receptor and HIF-1alpha/HIF-1beta.

Cao P(1), Deng Z, Wan M, Huang W, Cramer SD, Xu J, Lei M, Sui G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

BACKGROUND: In prostate cancer (PCa), the common treatment involving androgen
ablation alleviates the disease temporarily, but results in the recurrence of
highly aggressive and androgen-independent metastatic cancer. Therefore, more
effective therapeutic approaches are needed. It is known that aberrant
epigenetics contributes to prostate malignancy. Unlike genetic changes, these
epigenetic alterations are reversible, which makes them attractive targets in PCa
therapy to impede cancer progression. As a histone methyltransferase, Ezh2 plays 
an essential role in epigenetic regulation. Since Ezh2 is overexpressed and acts 
as an oncogene in PCa, it has been proposed as a bona fide target of PCa therapy.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate gene expression through modulating protein
translation. Recently, the contribution of miRNAs in cancer development is
increasingly appreciated. In this report, we present our study showing that
microRNA-101 (miR-101) inhibits Ezh2 expression and differentially regulates
prostate cancer cells. In addition, the expression of miR-101 alters upon
androgen treatment and HIF-1alpha/HIF-1beta induction.
RESULT: In our reporter assays, both miR-101 and miR-26a inhibit the expression
of a reporter construct containing the 3'-UTR of Ezh2. When ectopically expressed
in PC-3, DU145 and LNCaP cells, miR-101 inhibits endogenous Ezh2 expression in
all three cell lines, while miR-26a only decreases Ezh2 in DU145. Ectopic miR-101
reduces the invasion ability of PC-3 cells, while restored Ezh2 expression
rescues the invasiveness of PC-3 cells. Similarly, miR-101 also inhibits cell
invasion and migration of DU145 and LNCaP cells, respectively. Interestingly,
ectopic miR-101 exhibits differential effects on the proliferation of PC-3,
DU-145 and LNCaP cells and also causes morphological changes of LNCaP cells. In
addition, the expression of miR-101 is regulated by androgen receptor and
HIF-1alpha/HIF-1beta. While HIF-1alpha/HIF-1beta induced by deferoxamine mesylate
(DFO) decreases miR-101 levels, the overall effects of R-1881 on miR-101
expression are stimulatory.
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that miR-101 targets Ezh2 and decreases the
invasiveness of PCa cells, suggesting that miR-101 introduction is a potential
therapeutic strategy to combat PCa. MiR-101 differentially regulates prostate
cell proliferation. Meanwhile, the expression of miR-101 is also modulated at
different physiological conditions, such as androgen stimulation and
HIF-1alpha/HIF-1beta induction.

PMCID: PMC2881117
PMID: 20478051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Mol Biol. 2010 Jul 16;400(3):477-86. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.05.019. Epub 2010 
May 13.

Addition at the molecular level: signal integration in designed Per-ARNT-Sim
receptor proteins.

Möglich A(1), Ayers RA, Moffat K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute for Biophysical
Dynamics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
moeglich@uchicago.edu

Survival of organisms in dynamic environments requires accurate perception and
integration of signals. At the molecular level, signal detection is mediated by
signal receptor proteins that largely are of modular composition. Sensor modules,
such as the widespread Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domains, detect signals and, in
response, regulate the biological activity of effector modules. Here, we exploit 
the modularity of signal receptors to design and engineer synthetic receptors
that comprise two PAS sensor domains responsive to different signals, and we use 
these signals to control the activity of a histidine kinase effector. Designed
two-input PAS receptors detected oxygen and blue light in a positive cooperative 
manner. The extent of the response to the signals was dictated by domain
topology: the dominant regulatory effect was exerted by the PAS domain proximal
to the effector domain. The presence of one sensor domain modulated the signal
response function of the other. Sequence and structural data on natural receptors
with tandem PAS domains show that these are predominantly linked by short
amphipathic alpha-helices. Signals from multiple sensor domains could be
integrated and propagated to the effector domain as torques. Our results inform
the rational design of receptors that integrate multiple signals to modulate
cellular behavior.

2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20471402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Schizophr Res. 2010 Jul;120(1-3):143-9. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2010.04.002. Epub
2010 May 14.

Association of NPAS3 exonic variation with schizophrenia.

Macintyre G(1), Alford T, Xiong L, Rouleau GA, Tibbo PG, Cox DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada. gm3@ualberta.ca

BACKGROUND: We previously identified the neuronal PAS3 (NPAS3) gene as a
candidate gene for schizophrenia. A mother and daughter, both with schizophrenia,
were carriers of a translocation, t(9;14)(q34;q13), that disrupts the NPAS3 gene.
The gene is located at 14q13, a region implicated in schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder in various linkage studies. NPAS3 belongs to the basic helix-loop-helix 
Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS) transcription factor family, involved in diverse
processes including the regulation of cell differentiation and circadian rhythms,
and the development and function of the nervous system.
METHODS: The 12 exons encoding NPAS3 were sequenced in DNA from individuals with 
schizophrenia. NPAS3 variants were identified in exons 6 and 12, initially in 12 
patients only. These two exons were then sequenced in 83 patients and 83
controls.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Three common variants of NPAS3, also found in controls,
showed a positive association with schizophrenia (NM_001164749: rs12434716,
c.1654G>C, p=0.009; rs10141940, c.2208C>T, p=0.01; rs10142034, c.2262C>G,
p=0.01). The c.1654G>C variant, results in an p.Ala552Pro change and may affect
NPAS3 protein function directly. Alternatively, the three SNPs may affect the
splicing of NPAS3 transcripts, as they are each located within putative exonic
splicing enhancer (ESE) motifs (ESEFinder). A c.726C>T variant, identified in
three patients, is located in an ESE element and is predicted to reduce the
function of the motif. Other variants, identified in controls, included c.2089G>A
(p.Gly697Ser) and c.2097T>C. Our identification of potentially defective NPAS3
variants supports recent studies that implicate perturbations in NPAS3 pathways
in impaired neurogenesis and psychosis.

(c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20466522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2010 Sep 1;501(1):134-41. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2010.05.002.
Epub 2010 May 5.

Suppression mechanisms of flavonoids on aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated signal
transduction.

Mukai R(1), Shirai Y, Saito N, Fukuda I, Nishiumi S, Yoshida K, Ashida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agrobioscience, School of Agricultural Science, Kobe University,
1-1 Rokkodai-cho, Nada-ku, Kobe 657-8501, Japan.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that mediates biological and toxicological effects by binding to its agonists
such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Previously we demonstrated
that flavonoids suppressed the TCDD-induced DNA-binding activity of the AhR in a 
structure-dependent manner. In this study, we investigated the mechanisms by
which flavonoids suppressed the AhR-mediated signal transduction in mouse
hepatoma Hepa-1c1c7 cells. Flavones and flavonols suppressed the TCDD-induced
nuclear translocation of the AhR and dissociation of its partner proteins, heat
shock protein 90 and X-associated protein 2, whereas flavanones and catechins did
not. Flavonoids of all these four subclasses suppressed the phosphorylation of
both AhR and Arnt and the formation of a heterodimer consisting of these
proteins. Since certain flavonoids are known to inhibit mitogen-activated protein
kinases (MAPKs), we confirmed the contribution of MAPK/ERK kinase (MEK) to the
AhR-mediated signal transduction by using U0126, an inhibitor of MEK1/2. U0126
suppressed TCDD-induced phosphorylation of the AhR and Arnt followed by the
DNA-binding activity of the AhR. Flavanones and catechins suppressed the
TCDD-induced phosphorylation of ERK1/2. The inhibition of MEK/ERK phosphorylation
is one of the mechanisms by which flavanones and catechins suppress the
AhR-mediated signal transduction in Hepa-1c1c7 cells.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20450880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Clin Invest. 2010 Jun;120(6):2171-83. doi: 10.1172/JCI35846. Epub 2010 May 3.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha regulates beta cell function in mouse and human
islets.

Cheng K(1), Ho K, Stokes R, Scott C, Lau SM, Hawthorne WJ, O'Connell PJ,
Loudovaris T, Kay TW, Kulkarni RN, Okada T, Wang XL, Yim SH, Shah Y, Grey ST,
Biankin AV, Kench JG, Laybutt DR, Gonzalez FJ, Kahn CR, Gunton JE.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Transcription Factors Group, Garvan Institute of Medical Research
(GIMR), Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) is a transcription factor that
regulates cellular stress responses. While the levels of HIF-1alpha protein are
tightly regulated, recent studies suggest that it can be active under normoxic
conditions. We hypothesized that HIF-1alpha is required for normal beta cell
function and reserve and that dysregulation may contribute to the pathogenesis of
type 2 diabetes (T2D). Here we show that HIF-1alpha protein is present at low
levels in mouse and human normoxic beta cells and islets. Decreased levels of
HIF-1alpha impaired glucose-stimulated ATP generation and beta cell function.
C57BL/6 mice with beta cell-specific Hif1a disruption (referred to herein as
beta-Hif1a-null mice) exhibited glucose intolerance, beta cell dysfunction, and
developed severe glucose intolerance on a high-fat diet. Increasing HIF-1alpha
levels by inhibiting its degradation through iron chelation markedly improved
insulin secretion and glucose tolerance in control mice fed a high-fat diet but
not in beta-Hif1a-null mice. Increasing HIF-1alpha levels markedly increased
expression of ARNT and other genes in human T2D islets and improved their
function. Further analysis indicated that HIF-1alpha was bound to the Arnt
promoter in a mouse beta cell line, suggesting direct regulation. Taken together,
these findings suggest an important role for HIF-1alpha in beta cell reserve and 
regulation of ARNT expression and demonstrate that HIF-1alpha is a potential
therapeutic target for the beta cell dysfunction of T2D.

PMCID: PMC2877560
PMID: 20440072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2010 Aug;152(2):224-31. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpc.2010.04.010. Epub 2010 Apr 22.

Effects of in ovo exposure to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin on hepatic
AHR/ARNT-CYP1A signaling pathways in common cormorants (Phalacrocorax carbo).

Iwata H(1), Nagahama N, Kim EY, Watanabe MX, Sudo A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Marine Environmental Studies, Ehime University, Bunkyo-cho 2-5,
Matsuyama 790-8577, Japan. iwatah@agr.ehime-u.ac.jp

Our previous studies have isolated multiple isoforms of aryl hydrocarbon
receptors (AHRs) and AHR nuclear translocators (ARNTs) in avian species. However,
roles of such genes on cytochrome P450 1A (CYP1A) expression are not fully
understood. To investigate the effects of dioxins on the hepatic expression
profiles of AHR1, AHR2, ARNT1 and ARNT2 in avian species, and whether the
expression levels of AHRs and ARNTs affect the transcriptions of CYP1A4 and
CYP1A5 genes, the eggs of common (great) cormorants (Phalacrocorax carbo)
collected from Lake Biwa, Japan, were in ovo administrated with 0, 1500 and
4500pg/g egg of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), and the hepatic
expression levels of AHRs, ARNTs and CYP1As in embryos were monitored with
two-step real-time RT-PCR. In young and adult cormorants collected from the same 
location, the hepatic expressions of these genes were also measured to understand
the effects of growth stage. The residue levels of TCDD and other chlorinated
dioxin-like congeners (DLCs) in the body of cormorants were quantified with
high-resolution gas chromatography equipped with mass-spectrometry. There was no 
observable effect of in ovo TCDD treatment even at the highest dosage on
mortality, body weight and morphology of the liver, heart, spleen, kidney and
lung in the embryos. The mRNA expression of ARNT2 was slightly suppressed by the 
treatment with TCDD, while no alteration was observed for the expression of AHR1,
AHR2 and ARNT1. Expressions of CYP1A4 and CYP1A5 were dose-dependently enhanced
by TCDD, but CYP1A4 mRNA level increased more prominently than CYP1A5, indicating
the difference in induction efficiency between the CYP1A isozymes. Comparison of 
hepatic mRNA levels of these genes among embryonic, young and adult cormorants
revealed that young and adult cormorants had greater CYP1A5 expression levels
than embryos, independently of the accumulation levels of DLCs. These results
suggest that the hepatic induction of each CYP1A by DLCs in cormorants occurs in 
an isoform-specific manner and CYP1A5 expression, at least partially, depends on 
the factors related to the growth of cormorants, but the transcriptional
processes of CYP1As are not related to the expression levels of AHRs and ARNTs.
This study yielded results supporting our previous observations that in reality, 
high accumulation of DLCs induces hepatic CYP1A4 and 1A5 expressions in the wild 
cormorant population.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20417310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. FASEB J. 2010 Sep;24(9):3239-54. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-144592. Epub 2010 Apr 21.

Characterization of the human biliverdin reductase gene structure and regulatory 
elements: promoter activity is enhanced by hypoxia and suppressed by
TNF-alpha-activated NF-kappaB.

Gibbs PE(1), Miralem T, Maines MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

hBVR is a Ser/Thr/Tyr kinase/scaffold protein/transcription factor/intracellular 
transporter of regulators. hBVR is an upstream activator of the
insulin/IGF-1/MAPK/PI3K signaling pathway, and of NF-kappaB. As a reductase, it
converts biliverdin to the antioxidant, bilirubin. hBVR gene has 8 exons; exon 1 
is not translated. We report the characterization of hBVR promoter and its
negative and positive regulation, respectively, by TNF-alpha and hypoxia. The 5' 
end of exon 1 was defined by primer extension analyses; deletion of an inhibitor 
sequence 350-425 bp upstream of this exon enhanced the promoter activity. One of 
two NF-kappaB binding sites in the 836-bp promoter was functional; the P65
subunit of NF-kappaB and TNF-alpha acted as inhibitors. On the basis of EMSA and 
ChIP assays, TNF-alpha treatment increases binding of NF-kappaB to its regulatory
element. Overexpression of IkappaB increased hBVR mRNA. Biliverdin, but not
bilirubin, was as effective as TNF-alpha in inhibiting hBVR promoter activity.
Only one of 4 hypoxia responsive elements (HREs) bound to HIF-1alpha and ARNT
expressed in HEK293A cells. An abasic site was introduced at the 3' G of the HRE.
This element bound HIF-1 in the gel shift and in in-cell luciferase assays. hBVR 
was detected in the nucleus at 1, 2, and 4 h after hypoxia (1% O(2)), at which
times its kinase and reductase activities were increased. Because hypoxia
positively influences hBVR promoter and phosphorylation and TNF-alpha activated
NF-kappaB inhibits the promoter, while biliverdin inhibits both NF-kappaB
activity and hBVR promoter, we propose a regulatory mechanism for NF-kappaB by
hypoxia and TNF-alpha centered on hBVR/biliverdin.

PMCID: PMC3231108
PMID: 20410444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Jul;299(1):G126-35. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00522.2010. Epub 2010 Apr 15.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor and NF-E2-related factor 2 are key regulators of human 
MRP4 expression.

Xu S(1), Weerachayaphorn J, Cai SY, Soroka CJ, Boyer JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Liver Center, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT 06520-8019, USA.

Multidrug resistance protein 4 (MRP4; ABCC4) is an ATP binding cassette
transporter that facilitates the excretion of bile salt conjugates and other
conjugated steroids in hepatocytes and renal proximal tubule epithelium.
MRP4/Mrp4 undergoes adaptive upregulation in response to oxidative and
cholestatic liver injury in human and animal models of cholestasis. However, the 
molecular mechanism of this regulation remains to be determined. The aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) play important roles
in protecting cells from oxidative stress. Here we examine the role of these two 
nuclear factors in the regulation of the expression of human MRP4. HepG2 cells
and human hepatocytes were treated with the AhR and Nrf2 activators,
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), 3-methylcholanthrene (3-MC), or
oltipraz and other nuclear receptor agonists. TCDD, 3-MC, and oltipraz
significantly increased MRP4 expression at mRNA and protein levels. Computer
program analysis revealed three Xenobiotic response element (XRE) and one Maf
response element sites within the first 500 bp of the MRP4 proximal promoter.
Luciferase reporter assay detected strong promoter activity (53-fold higher than 
vector control) in this region. TCDD and 3-MC also induced promoter activity in
the reporter assays. Mutation of any of these XRE sites significantly decreased
MRP4 promoter activity in reporter assays, although XRE2 demonstrated the
strongest effects on both basal and TCDD-inducible activity. EMSA and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays further confirmed that both AhR and Nrf2 bind to the
proximal promoter of MRP4. Our findings indicate that AhR and Nrf2 play important
roles in regulating MRP4 expression and suggest that agents that activate their
activity may be of therapeutic benefit for cholestasis.

PMCID: PMC2904108
PMID: 20395535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Microbiol. 2010 Jun;76(6):1444-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07150.x.
Epub 2010 Apr 1.

Activation of PmrA inhibits LpxT-dependent phosphorylation of lipid A promoting
resistance to antimicrobial peptides.

Herrera CM(1), Hankins JV, Trent MS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

During its transport to the bacterial surface, the phosphate groups of the lipid 
A anchor of Escherichia coli and Salmonella lipopolysaccharide are modified by
membrane enzymes including ArnT, EptA and LpxT. ArnT and EptA catalyse the
periplasmic addition of the positively charged substituents
4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose and phosphoethanolamine respectively. These
modifications are controlled by the PmrA transcriptional regulator and confer
resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptides, including polymyxin. LpxT,
however, catalyses the phosphorylation of lipid A at the 1-position forming
1-diphosphate lipid A increasing the negative charge of the bacterial surface.
Here, we report that PmrA is involved in the regulation of LpxT. Interestingly,
this regulation does not occur at the level of transcription, but rather
following the assembly of LpxT into the inner membrane. PmrA-dependent inhibition
of LpxT is required for phosphoethanolamine decoration of lipid A, which is shown
here to be critical for E. coli to resist the bactericidal activity of polymyxin.
Furthermore, although Salmonella lipid A is more prevalently modified with
l-4-aminoarabinose, we demonstrate that loss of Salmonella lpxT greatly increases
EptA modification. The current work is an example of the complexities associated 
with the structural remodelling of Gram-negative lipopolysaccharides promoting
bacterial survival.

PMCID: PMC2904496
PMID: 20384697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Toxicol Lett. 2010 Jun 16;196(1):28-32. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2010.03.020. Epub
2010 Apr 3.

The clock genes period 1 and period 2 mediate diurnal rhythms in dioxin-induced
Cyp1A1 expression in the mouse mammary gland and liver.

Qu X(1), Metz RP, Porter WW, Neuendorff N, Earnest BJ, Earnest DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Research on Biological Clocks, Texas A&M 
University, College Station, TX 77843-3258, USA.

Transcription factors expressing Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domains are key components of
the mammalian circadian clockworks found in most cells and tissues. Because these
transcription factors interact with other PAS genes mediating xenobiotic
metabolism and because toxin responses are often marked by daily variation, we
determined whether the toxin-mediated activation of the signaling pathway
involving several PAS genes, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and AhR nuclear 
translocator (ARNT), fluctuates rhythmically and whether this diurnal oscillation
is affected by targeted disruption of key PAS genes in the circadian clockworks, 
Period 1 (Per1) and Per2. Treatment with the prototypical Ahr ligand,
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), had inductive effects on a key target
of AhR signaling, Cyp1A1, in both the mammary gland and liver of all animals. In 
wild type mice, the amplitude of this TCDD-induced Cyp1A1 expression in the
mammary gland and liver was significantly greater (23-43-fold) during the night
than during the daytime. However, the diurnal variation in the TCDD induction of 
mammary gland and liver Cyp1A1 expression was abolished in Per1(ldc), Per2(ldc)
and Per1(ldc)/Per2(ldc) mutant mice, suggesting that Per1, Per2 and their
timekeeping function in the circadian clockworks mediate the diurnal modulation
of AhR-regulated responses to TCDD in the mammary gland and liver.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2872133
PMID: 20371273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Apr 6;107(14):6334-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0911082107. Epub 2010 Mar 22.

P53-induced microRNA-107 inhibits HIF-1 and tumor angiogenesis.

Yamakuchi M(1), Lotterman CD, Bao C, Hruban RH, Karim B, Mendell JT, Huso D,
Lowenstein CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Aab Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of
Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
munekazu_yamakuchi@urmc.rochester

The pathway involving the tumor suppressor gene TP53 can regulate tumor
angiogenesis by unclear mechanisms. Here we show that p53 regulates hypoxic
signaling through the transcriptional regulation of microRNA-107 (miR-107). We
found that miR-107 is a microRNA expressed by human colon cancer specimens and
regulated by p53. miR-107 decreases hypoxia signaling by suppressing expression
of hypoxia inducible factor-1beta (HIF-1beta). Knockdown of endogenous miR-107
enhances HIF-1beta expression and hypoxic signaling in human colon cancer cells. 
Conversely, overexpression of miR-107 inhibits HIF-1beta expression and hypoxic
signaling. Furthermore, overexpression of miR-107 in tumor cells suppresses tumor
angiogenesis, tumor growth, and tumor VEGF expression in mice. Finally, in human 
colon cancer specimens, expression of miR-107 is inversely associated with
expression of HIF-1beta. Taken together these data suggest that miR-107 can
mediate p53 regulation of hypoxic signaling and tumor angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2851979
PMID: 20308559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 15;5(3):e9691. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009691.

Time-dependent c-Myc transactomes mapped by Array-based nuclear run-on reveal
transcriptional modules in human B cells.

Fan J(1), Zeller K, Chen YC, Watkins T, Barnes KC, Becker KG, Dang CV, Cheadle C.

Author information: 
(1)Lowe Family Genomics Core, Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology,
Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The definition of transcriptional networks through measurements of
changes in gene expression profiles and mapping of transcription factor binding
sites is limited by the moderate overlap between binding and gene expression
changes and the inability to directly measure global nuclear transcription
(coined "transactome").
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We developed a method to measure nascent nuclear 
gene transcription with an Array-based Nuclear Run-On (ANRO) assay using
commercial microarray platforms. This strategy provides the missing component,
the transactome, to fully map transcriptional networks. ANRO measurements in an
inducible c-Myc expressing human P493-6 B cell model reveals time-dependent waves
of transcription, with a transactome early after c-Myc induction that does not
persist at a late, steady-state phase, when genes that are regulated by c-Myc and
E2F predominate. Gene set matrix analysis further uncovers functionally related
groups of genes putatively regulated by waves of transcription factor motifs
following Myc induction, starting with AP1 and CREB that are followed by EGR1,
NFkB and STAT, and ending with E2F, Myc and ARNT/HIF motifs.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: By coupling ANRO with previous global mapping of c-Myc 
binding sites by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) in P493-6 cells, we define 
a set of transcriptionally regulated direct c-Myc target genes and pave the way
for the use of ANRO to comprehensively map any transcriptional network.

PMCID: PMC2837740
PMID: 20300622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Biochem Soc Trans. 2010 Apr;38(2):710-6. doi: 10.1042/BST0380710.

Phytochrome three-dimensional structures and functions.

Hughes J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Physiology, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, Germany.
jon.hughes@uni-giessen.de

The complete three-dimensional sensory module structures of the Pr ground state
of Synechocystis 6803 Cph1 and the unusual Pfr ground state of the
bacteriophytochrome PaBphP (PDB codes 2VEA and 3C2W respectively) have now been
solved, revealing an asymmetrical dumbbell form made up of a PAS
(Period/ARNT/Singleminded)-GAF (cGMP phosphodiesterase/adenylate cyclase/FhlA)
bidomain carrying the chromophore and the smaller PHY (phytochrome-specific)
domain. The PHY domain is structurally related to the GAF family, but carries an 
unusual tongue-like structure which contacts the larger lobe to seal the
chromophore pocket. In 2VEA, the tongue makes intimate contact with the helical
N-terminus; both the N-terminus and the tongue structures are quite different in 
3C2W. As expected, the structures reveal ZZZssa and ZZEssa chromophore
conformations in 2VEA and 3C2W respectively, associated with tautomeric
differences in several nearby tyrosine residues. Two salt bridges on opposite
sides of the chromophore, as well as the associations of the C-ring propionates
also differ. It is still unclear, however, which of these structural differences 
are associated with bacteriophytochromes compared with Cph1 and plant-type
phytochromes, the unusual 3C2W Pfr ground state functionality compared with the
Pr ground state or the Pr compared with Pfr photoisomerism. To access the latter 
unambiguously, both Pr and Pfr structures of the same molecule are required. New 
solid-phase NMR data for Cph1 in the Pr, Pfr and freeze-trapped intermediate
states reveal unexpected changes in the chromophore during Pfr-->Pr
photoconversion. These, together with our efforts to solve the three-dimensional 
structure of a complete phytochrome molecule are also described.

PMID: 20298248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 7;285(19):14558-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.076323. Epub 2010
Mar 12.

Diminished carcinogen detoxification is a novel mechanism for hypoxia-inducible
factor 1-mediated genetic instability.

Schults MA(1), Timmermans L, Godschalk RW, Theys J, Wouters BG, van Schooten FJ, 
Chiu RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Risk Analysis and Toxicology, NUTRIM Research Institute, 
The Netherlands.

The hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) pathway is induced in many tumors and
associated with poorer outcome. The hypoxia-responsive transcription factor
HIF-1alpha dimerizes with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT), which is also an important binding partner for the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR). AhR is an important mediator in the metabolic activation and
detoxification of carcinogens, such as the environmental pollutant benzo[a]pyrene
(BaP). We hypothesized that HIF-1alpha activation attenuates BaP-induced
AhR-mediated gene expression, which may lead to increased genetic instability and
malignant progression. Human lung carcinoma cells (A549) were simultaneously
stimulated with CoCl(2), which leads to HIF-1alpha stabilization and varying
concentrations of BaP. Both quantitative PCR and immunoblot analysis indicated
that induction of the hypoxia response pathway significantly reduced the levels
of AhR downstream targets CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 and AhR protein binding to ARNT. We
further demonstrate that the BaP-induced hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase mutation frequency and gamma-H2AX foci were markedly
amplified when the HIF-1 pathway was induced. BaP-DNA adducts were only
marginally increased, and transient strand breaks were diminished by HIF-1
induction, indicating changes in DNA repair. These data indicate that concurrent 
exposure of tumor cells to hypoxia and exogenous genotoxins can enhance genetic
instability.

PMCID: PMC2863189
PMID: 20228066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Phys Chem B. 2010 Apr 8;114(13):4652-63. doi: 10.1021/jp9100224.

Prediction of hydration structures around hydrophilic surfaces of proteins by
using the empirical hydration distribution functions from a database analysis.

Matsuoka D(1), Nakasako M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Faculty of Science and Technology, Keio University,
3-14-1 Hiyoshi, Kohoku-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 223-8522, Japan.

We developed a knowledge-based program to predict hydration structures around
hydrophilic surfaces of proteins as probability density. In the program, we
assume that the three-dimensional distribution of hydration water molecules on a 
hydrophilic surface is reconstructed by summing up the empirical hydration
distribution function of each solvent-exposed polar atom composing the surface.
The probability functions of polar atoms in the CO, NH(n) (n = 1,3), and OH
groups were calculated from the 17 984 protein structures solved by X-ray
crystallography better than resolutions of 2.2 A (Matsuoka, D.; Nakasako, M. J.
Phys. Chem. B 2009, 113, 11274-11292). The program was first tested for human
lysozyme. The predicted probability density enveloped more than 85% of crystal
water sites found in the crystal structure refined at a resolution of 0.95 A, and
the density peaks suggested as hydration sites were located within 1.5 A from
more than 75% of the crystal water sites. The density reproduced the hydration
structure in a solvent accessible narrow channel from the surface to the lysozyme
interior. We also tested the feasibility of the program to predict the water
clusters existing in the transmembrane channels of bacteriorhodopsin and
aquaporin. In bacteriorhodopsin, the distributions were distinct between the
ground state and the photoreaction intermediate indispensable for its function.
The program reproduced the interfacial hydration in Per-Arnt-Sim-related
protein-protein complex and the hydration of metastable conformations in domain
motion of glutamate dehydrogenase. Taking the results for the various types of
protein hydration, the present program may be a useful tool to characterize the
surface properties of proteins and discuss the relevance of hydration structures 
to the biological functions of proteins. In addition, it will be used to predict 
hydration structures of proteins available at resolutions insufficient to
identify water molecules.

PMID: 20201497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Reproduction. 2010 Jun;139(6):1077-90. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0523. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

Reproductive biology of female Bmal1 null mice.

Boden MJ(1), Varcoe TJ, Voultsios A, Kennaway DJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, Robinson Institute, Research
Centre for Reproductive Health, Discipline of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia.

The light/dark cycle and suprachiasmatic nucleus rhythmicity are known to have
important influences on reproductive function of rodents. We studied reproductive
function in female heterozygous and homozygous brain and muscle ARNT-like protein
1 (Bmal1, also known as Arntl) null mice, which lack central and peripheral
cellular rhythms. Heterozygous Bmal1 mice developed normally and were fertile,
with apparent normal pregnancy progression and litter size, although postnatal
mortality up to weaning was high (1.1-1.3/litter). The genotype distribution was 
skewed with both heterozygous and null genotypes underrepresented (1.0:1.7:0.7;
P<0.05), suggesting loss of a single Bmal1 allele may impact on postnatal
survival. Homozygous Bmal1 null mice were 30% lighter at weaning, and while they 
grew at a similar rate to the wild-type mice, they never achieved a comparable
body weight. They had delayed vaginal opening (4 days), disrupted estrus
cyclicity, and reduced ovarian weight (30%). Bmal1 null mice had a 40% reduction 
in ductal length and a 43% reduction in ductal branches in the mammary gland.
Surprisingly, the Bmal1 mice ovulated, but progesterone synthesis was reduced in 
conjunction with altered corpora lutea formation. Pregnancy failed prior to
implantation presumably due to poor embryo development. While Bmal1 null ovaries 
responded to pregnant mare serum gonadotropin/human chorionic gonadotropin
stimulation, ovulation rate was reduced, and the fertilized oocytes progressed
poorly to blastocysts and failed to implant. The loss of Bmal1 gene expression
resulted in a loss of rhythmicity of many genes in the ovary and downregulation
of Star. In conclusion, it is clear that the profound infertility of Bmal1 null
mice is multifactorial.

PMID: 20200203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Nutr. 2010 May;140(5):908-14. doi: 10.3945/jn.109.116749. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

Restricted feeding phase shifts clock gene and sodium glucose cotransporter 1
(SGLT1) expression in rats.

Balakrishnan A(1), Stearns AT, Ashley SW, Tavakkolizadeh A, Rhoads DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. anita.balakrishnan@doctors.org.uk

The intestine exhibits striking diurnal rhythmicity in glucose uptake, mediated
by the sodium glucose cotransporter (SGLT1); however, regulatory pathways for
these rhythms remain incompletely characterized. We hypothesized that SGLT1
rhythmicity is linked to the circadian clock. To investigate this, we examined
rhythmicity of Sglt1 and individual clock genes in rats that consumed food ad
libitum (AL). We further compared phase shifts of Sglt1 and clock genes in a
second group of rats following restricted feeding to either the dark (DF) or
light (LF) phase. Rats fed during the DF were pair-fed to rats fed during the LF.
Jejunal mucosa was harvested across the diurnal period to generate expression
profiles of Sglt1 and clock genes Clock, Bmal1 (brain-muscle Arnt-like 1),
ReverbA/B, Per(Period) 1/2, and Cry (Cryptochrome) 1/2. All clock genes were
rhythmic in AL rats (P < 0.05). Sglt1 also exhibited diurnal rhythmicity, with
peak expression preceding nutrient arrival (P < 0.05). Light-restricted feeding
shifted the expression rhythms of Sglt1 and most clock genes (Bmal1, ReverbA and 
B, Per1, Per2, and Cry1) compared with dark-restricted feeding (P < 0.05). The
Sglt1 rhythm shifted in parallel with rhythms of Per1 and ReverbB. These effects 
of restricted feeding highlight luminal nutrients as a key Zeitgeber in the
intestine, capable of simultaneously shifting the phases of transporter and clock
gene expression, and suggest a role for clock genes in regulating Sglt1 and
therefore glucose uptake. Understanding the regulatory cues governing rhythms in 
intestinal function may allow new therapeutic options for conditions of
dysregulated absorption such as diabetes and obesity.

PMCID: PMC2855260
PMID: 20200113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Biol Pharm Bull. 2010;33(3):389-97.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor functions as a potent coactivator of E2F1-dependent
trascription activity.

Watabe Y(1), Nazuka N, Tezuka M, Shimba S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Science, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University,
Funabashi, Chiba 274-8555,Japan.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that mediates a spectrum of toxic and biological effects of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and related compounds. Several reports have
shown that the AhR plays an important role in the control of cell-cycle
progression, and this function is thought to be partly associated with the tumor 
promotion activity of dioxin. However, the underling mechanisms are not fully
understood. We have previously shown that overexpression of AhR, as well as AhR
ligand treatment, stimulates cell proliferation of human lung cancer A549 cells. 
In AhR-activated cells, the expression levels of DNA synthesis-related genes such
as proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and RFC38 are notably increased.
Expression of these genes is mainly regulated by E2F1, a transcription factor
that is crucial for transition of the cell cycle from G1 to S phase. We show here
that the transcriptional activity of E2F1 is increased by the AhR agonist
treatment and that this effect depends on the presence of AhR. Functional mapping
of AhR showed that the Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) B domain is required for promotion of
E2F1 activity. The mechanism involves formation of a complex of AhR and E2F1 on
the regulatory region in the E2F1 target gene, followed by recruitment of
coactivator activator for thyroid hormone and retinoid receptors (ACTR).
Consequently, the results in this study indicate the physiological function of
AhR as a potent transcriptional coactivator of E2F1-dependent transcription and
implicate the AhR-E2F1 interaction as a part of the mechanism by which AhR/Arnt
promotes cell proliferation.

PMID: 20190398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2010 Apr 15;44(4):199-206. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2010.01.005. 
Epub 2010 Feb 19.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor: regulation of hematopoiesis and involvement in the
progression of blood diseases.

Casado FL(1), Singh KP, Gasiewicz TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester School of
Medicine, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Box EHSC, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a basic helix-loop-helix protein that
belongs to the superfamily of environment-sensing PAS (Per-ARNT-Sim) proteins. A 
large number of ligands have been described to bind AhR and promote its nuclear
translocation. In the nucleus, the AhR and its dimerization partner the AhR
nuclear translocator (ARNT) form a DNA-binding complex that acts as a
transcriptional regulator. Animal and human data suggest that, beyond its
mediating responses to xenobiotic and/or unknown endogenous ligands, the AhR has 
a role, although as yet undefined, in the regulation of cell cycle and
inflammation. The AhR also appears to regulate the hematopoietic and immune
systems during development and adult life in a cell-specific manner. While
accidental exposure to xenobiotic AhR ligands has been associated with leukemia
in humans, the specific mechanisms of AhR involvement are still not completely
understood. However, recent data are consistent with a functional role of the AhR
in the maintenance of hematopoietic stem and/or progenitor cells (HSCs/HPCs).
Studies highlighting AhR regulation of HSCs/HPCs provide a rational framework to 
understand their biology, a role of the AhR in hematopoietic diseases, and a
means to develop interventions for these diseases.

PMCID: PMC2846979
PMID: 20171126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Annu Rev Physiol. 2010;72:625-45. doi: 10.1146/annurev-physiol-021909-135922.

Mammalian Per-Arnt-Sim proteins in environmental adaptation.

McIntosh BE(1), Hogenesch JB, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, School of Medicine and Public Health, 
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA. bemcintosh@wisc.edu

The Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain is conserved across the kingdoms of life and found 
in an ever-growing list of proteins. This domain can bind to and sense endogenous
or xenobiotic small molecules such as molecular oxygen, cellular metabolites, or 
polyaromatic hydrocarbons. Members of this family are often found in pathways
that regulate responses to environmental change; in mammals these include the
hypoxia, circadian, and dioxin response pathways. These pathways function in
development and throughout life to regulate cellular, organ, and whole-organism
adaptive responses. Remarkably, in the case of the clock, this adaptation
includes anticipation of environmental change. In this review, we summarize the
roles of PAS domain-containing proteins in mammals. We provide structural
evidence that functionally classifies both known and unknown biological roles.
Finally, we discuss the role of PAS proteins in anticipation of and adaptation to
environmental change.

PMID: 20148691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Neurosci Res. 2010 Jul;88(9):2007-16. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22366.

Adenosine A(2)A receptor but not HIF-1 mediates Tyrosine hydroxylase induction in
hypoxic PC12 cells.

Gammella E(1), Cairo G, Tacchini L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Morphology and Biomedical Sciences, Città Studi,
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.

Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) is the rate-limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of
catecholamines released by oxygen-sensitive cells in response to hypoxic
conditions. Adenosine is released in response to hypoxia in the central nervous
system and CGS21680, an adenosine A(2)A receptor agonist, induces TH
transcription. As we have previously demonstrated the A(2)A receptor-mediated
induction of HIF-1 in macrophages and hepatocytes, we investigated the
involvement of HIF-1 in the adenosine-mediated activation of TH expression.
Exposure to adenosine or CGS21680 increased TH mRNA and protein levels in PC12
cells. Transcription of a reporter gene under the control of the wild type rat TH
promoter was induced 3.5-fold in CGS21680-treated cells, but neither the mutation
of the hypoxia responsive element in the TH promoter nor the co-transfection of a
dominant negative of the HIF-1 beta subunit prevented the increase in
transcription; furthermore, CGS21680 increased CREB binding activity but did not 
induce HIF-1 DNA binding activity or protein levels. To investigate whether HIF-1
was involved in the hypoxia-mediated induction of TH, PC12 cells were exposed to 
hypoxia in the presence of the A(2)A receptor antagonist ZM241385, which
prevented hypoxia-dependent TH induction despite HIF-1 activation; in line with
this finding, the inhibition of HIF-1 did not abolish TH induction in hypoxic
PC12 cells. These results indicate that, under hypoxic conditions, TH (a key
factor in systemic adaptation to reduced oxygen availability) is not regulated by
HIF-1, the primary modulator of the response to hypoxia, but by the adenosine
A(2)A receptor-mediated signalling pathway.

PMID: 20143408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Stem Cells. 2010 Apr;28(4):799-809. doi: 10.1002/stem.316.

Hypoxia influences the vascular expansion and differentiation of embryonic stem
cell cultures through the temporal expression of vascular endothelial growth
factor receptors in an ARNT-dependent manner.

Han Y(1), Kuang SZ, Gomer A, Ramirez-Bergeron DL.

Author information: 
(1)Case Cardiovascular Research Institute, University Hospitals
Harrington-McLaughlin Heart and Vascular Institute, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Adaptive responses to low oxygen (O(2)) tension (hypoxia) are mediated by the
heterodimeric transcription factor hypoxia inducible factor (HIF). When
stabilized by hypoxia, bHLH-PAS alpha- and beta- (HIF-1beta or ARNT) HIF complex 
regulate the expression of multiple genes, including vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF). To investigate the mechanism(s) through which hypoxia contributes 
to blood vessel development, we used embryonic stem cell (ESC) differentiation
cultures that develop into embryoid bodies (EBs) mimicking early embryonic
development. Significantly, low O(2) levels promote vascular development and
maturation in wild-type (WT) ESC cultures measured by an increase in the numbers 
of CD31(+) endothelial cells (ECs) and sprouting angiogenic EBs, but refractory
in Arnt(-/-) and Vegf(-/-) ESC cultures. Thus, we propose that hypoxia promotes
the production of ECs and contributes to the development and maturation of
vessels. Our findings further demonstrate that hypoxia alters the temporal
expression of VEGF receptors Flk-1 (VEGFR-2) and the membrane and soluble forms
of the antagonistic receptor Flt-1 (VEGFR-1). Moreover, these receptors are
distinctly expressed in differentiating Arnt(-/-) and Vegf(-/-) EBs. These
results support existing models in which VEGF signaling is tightly regulated
during specific biologic events, but also provide important novel evidence that, 
in response to physiologic hypoxia, HIF mediates a distinct stoichiometric
pattern of VEGF receptors throughout EB differentiation analogous to the
formation of vascular networks during embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2989499
PMID: 20135683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Jun;223(3):553-7. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22067.

Coactivator recruitment: a new role for PAS domains in transcriptional regulation
by the bHLH-PAS family.

Partch CL(1), Gardner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75390-8816, USA.

Transcriptional regulation is dependent on layers of interactions between
transcription factors and coactivators, controlling the specificity, temporal
regulation, and extent to which transcriptional programs are executed. A key
issue in the field of transcriptional regulation is to identify structural
mechanisms by which transcription factors and coactivators build hierarchical
protein assemblies. The basic helix-loop-helix Per-ARNT-Sim domain (bHLH-PAS)
family of transcriptional regulators comprises both transcription factors and
coactivators, which have different functions despite conserved domain
architecture. Within this family, the tandem PAS domains typically mediate
dimerization of the transcription factors, while C-terminal transactivation
domains facilitate the dynamic interplay between transcription factors and
coactivators. However, recent studies have shown that the modular PAS domains
play an important role in regulating coactivator recruitment and oligomerization 
status. In this study, we provide a brief overview of the structural and
functional studies that have identified a novel protein interaction interface on 
PAS domains utilized by both transcription factors and coactivators within the
bHLH-PAS family.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2872778
PMID: 20112293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010 May;35(6):1315-24. doi: 10.1038/npp.2009.235. Epub 
2010 Jan 27.

A common polymorphism in the cannabinoid receptor 1 (CNR1) gene is associated
with antipsychotic-induced weight gain in Schizophrenia.

Tiwari AK(1), Zai CC, Likhodi O, Lisker A, Singh D, Souza RP, Batra P, Zaidi SH, 
Chen S, Liu F, Puls I, Meltzer HY, Lieberman JA, Kennedy JL, Müller DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Neurogenetics Section, Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Antipsychotic-induced weight gain has emerged as a serious complication in the
treatment of patients with atypical antipsychotic drugs. The cannabinoid receptor
1 (CNR1) is expressed centrally in the hypothalamic region and associated with
appetite and satiety, as well as peripherally. An antagonist of CNR1 (rimonabant)
has been effective in causing weight loss in obese patients indicating that CNR1 
might be important in antipsychotic-induced weight gain. Twenty tag SNPs were
analyzed in 183 patients who underwent treatment (with either clozapine,
olanzapine, haloperidol, or risperidone) for chronic schizophrenia were evaluated
for antipsychotic-induced weight gain for up to 14 weeks. The polymorphism
rs806378 was nominally associated with weight gain in patients of European
ancestry treated with clozapine or olanzapine. 'T' allele carriers (CT+TT) gained
more weight (5.96%), than the CC carriers (2.76%, p=0.008, FDR q-value=0.12).
This translated into approximately 2.2 kg more weight gain in patients carrying
the T allele than the patients homozygous for the CC genotype (CC vs CT+TT,
2.21+/-4.51 vs 4.33+/-3.89 kg; p=0.022). This was reflected in the allelic
analysis (C vs T allele, 3.84 vs 5.83%, p=0.035). We conducted electrophoretic
mobility shift assays which showed that the presence of the T allele created a
binding site for arylhydrocarbon receptor translocator (ARNT), a member of the
basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim protein family. In this study, we provide
evidence that the CNR1 gene may be associated with antipsychotic-induced weight
gain in chronic schizophrenia patients. However, these observations were made in 
a relatively small patient population; therefore these results need to be
replicated in larger sample sets.

PMCID: PMC3055343
PMID: 20107430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Toxicol Sci. 2010 May;115(1):98-108. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq022. Epub 2010 Jan
27.

Disruption of CLOCK-BMAL1 transcriptional activity is responsible for aryl
hydrocarbon receptor-mediated regulation of Period1 gene.

Xu CX(1), Krager SL, Liao DF, Tischkau SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine,
Springfield, Illinois 62974-9629, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a period-aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
transporter-simple minded domain transcription factor that shares structural
similarity with circadian clock genes and readily interacts with components of
the molecular clock. Activation of AhR by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) alters behavioral circadian rhythms and represses the Period1 (Per1) gene 
in murine hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Per1 expression is driven by
circadian locomotor activity cycles kaput-brain muscle ARNT-like
(CLOCK-BMAL1)-dependent activation of Eboxes in the Per1 promoter. We
hypothesized that the effects of AhR activation on the circadian clock are
mediated by disruption of CLOCK-BMAL1 function and subsequent Per1 gene
suppression. Effects of AhR activation on rhythmic Per1 transcripts were examined
in livers of mice after treatment with the AhR agonist, TCDD; the molecular
mechanisms of Per1 repression by AhR were determined in hepatoma cells using TCDD
and beta-napthoflavone as AhR activators. This study reports, for the first time,
that AhR activation by TCDD alters the Per1 rhythm in the mouse liver and that
Per1 gene suppression depends upon the presence of AhR. Furthermore, AhR
interaction with BMAL1 attenuates CLOCK-BMAL1 activity and decreases CLOCK
binding at Ebox1 and Ebox3 in the Per1 promoter. Taken together, these data
suggest that AhR activation represses Per1 through disrupting CLOCK-BMAL1
activity, producing dysregulation of rhythmic Per1 gene expression. These data
define alteration of the Per1 rhythm as novel signaling events downstream of AhR 
activation. Downregulation of Per1 could contribute to metabolic disease, cancer,
and other detrimental effects resulting from exposure to certain environmental
pollutants.

PMCID: PMC2855348
PMID: 20106950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Chemosphere. 2010 Mar;79(1):67-71. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2009.12.067. Epub
2010 Jan 22.

Effects of glyphosate and methidathion on the expression of the Dhb, Vtg, Arnt,
CYP4 and CYP314 in Daphnia magna.

Le TH(1), Lim ES, Lee SK, Choi YW, Kim YH, Min J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioprocess Engineering, Chonbuk National University, 664-14
Duckjin-dong, Jeonju 561-756, South Korea.

In this study, the expression of five stress responsive genes was quantified and 
analyzed using a semi-quantitative RT-PCR to study the changes in their
expression in Daphnia magna after exposure to known pesticides, glyphosate and
methidathion. Hemoglobin (Dhb), which was used to show the effect of the oxygen
level in the aquatic system, was significantly expressed in D. magna after
exposure to glyphosate and methidathion. Additionally, aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
nuclear translocator (Arnt), a gene related to the metabolism of aryl
hydrocarbons, had lower expression levels in D. magna than within the control.
CYP4, which was used among cytochrome P450s (CYPs) to show the effects on the
fatty acid and steroids metabolisms, was down-regulated in D. magna exposed to
glyphosate. However, methidathion affected the expression of CYP314, which was
used to show effects of ecdysis, not CYP4 in D. magna. Therefore, glyphosate and 
methidathion probably caused physiological effects with different patterns in D. 
magna, especially metabolisms related to CYPs. On the other hand, only
vitellogenin (Vtg), which was responsive to the estrogenic potency, did not show 
any differences in D. magna after exposure to glyphosate or methidathion.

Crown Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20096918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Agric Food Chem. 2010 Feb 10;58(3):1603-8. doi: 10.1021/jf9036062.

Dehydroglyasperin C isolated from licorice caused Nrf2-mediated induction of
detoxifying enzymes.

Seo JY(1), Lee YS, Kim HJ, Lim SS, Lim JS, Lee IA, Lee CH, Yoon Park JH, Kim JS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Applied Biosciences, Kyungpook National University, Deagu 702-701,
Republic of Korea.

Our preliminary experiment demonstrated that a n-hexane/EtOH (9:1, volume)
extract of Glycyrrhiza uralensis (licorice) caused a significant induction of
NAD(P)H:oxidoquinone reductase (NQO1), one of the well-known phase 2 detoxifying 
enzymes. We isolated dehydroglyasperin C (DGC) as a potent phase 2 enzyme inducer
from licorice. DGC induced NQO1 both in wild-type murine hepatoma Hepa1c1c7 and
ARNT-lacking BPRc1 cells, indicating that the compound is a monofunctional
inducer. The compound induced not only NQO1 but also some other phase 2
detoxifying/antioxidant enzymes, such as glutathione S-transferase,
gamma-glutamylcysteine synthase, glutathione reductase, and heme oxygenase 1.
Similar to most monofunctional inducers, DGC caused the accumulation of Nrf2 in
the nucleus in dose- and time-dependent manners and thereby activated expression 
of phase 2 detoxifying enzymes. It also resulted in a dose-dependent increase in 
the luciferase activity in the reporter assay, in which HepG2-C8 cells
transfected with antioxidant response element (ARE)-luciferase construct were
used, suggesting that the induction of phase 2 detoxifying and antioxidant
enzymes could be achieved through the interaction of Nrf2 with the ARE sequence
in the promoter region of their genes.

PMID: 20088509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2010 May;23(5):337-46. doi: 10.1093/protein/gzp082. Epub
2010 Jan 19.

Reengineering natural design by rational design and in vivo library selection:
the HLH subdomain in bHLHZ proteins is a unique requirement for DNA-binding
function.

Xu J(1), De Jong AT, Chen G, Chow HK, Damaso CO, Schwartz Mittelman A, Shin JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Mississauga, ON L5L1C6,
Canada.

To explore the role of the HLH subdomain in bHLHZ proteins, we designed sets of
minimalist proteins based on bHLHZ protein Max, bHLH/PAS protein Arnt and bZIP
protein C/EBP. In the first, the Max bHLH and C/EBP leucine zipper were fused
such that the leucine heptad repeats were not in register; therefore, the protein
dimerization interface was disrupted. Max1bHLH-C/EBP showed little ability to
activate transcription from the E-box (5'-CACGTG) in the yeast one-hybrid assay, 
and no E-box binding by quantitative fluorescence anisotropy. Max1bHLH-C/EBP's
activity was significantly improved after library selection (three amino acids
randomized between HLH and leucine zipper), despite the Max bHLH and C/EBP zipper
still being out of register: a representative mutant gave a high nanomolar K(d)
value for E-box binding. Thus, selection proved to be a powerful tool for
salvaging the flawed Max1bHLH-C/EBP, although the out-of-register mutants still
did not achieve the strong DNA-binding affinities displayed by their in-register 
counterparts. ArntbHLH-C/EBP hybrids further demonstrated the importance of
maintaining register, as out-of-register mutants showed no E-box-responsive
activity, whereas the in-register hybrid showed moderate activity. In another
design, we eliminated the HLH altogether and fused the Max basic region to the
C/EBP zipper to generate bZIP-like hybrids. Despite numerous designs and
selections, these hybrids possessed no E-box-responsive activity. Finally, we
tested the importance of the loop sequence in MaxbHLHZ by fluorescence and
circular dichroism. In one mutant, the loop was shortened by two residues; in the
other, the Lys57:DNA-backbone interaction was abolished by mutation to Gly57.
Both showed markedly decreased E-box-binding relative to MaxbHLHZ. Our results
suggest that, in contrast to the more rigid bZIP, the HLH is capable of
significant conformational adaptation to enable gene-regulatory function and is
required for protein dimerization and positioning the basic region for DNA
recognition.

PMCID: PMC2851444
PMID: 20086039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Front Pharmacol. 2010 Nov 2;1:129. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2010.00129. eCollection
2010.

Pathway-Targeted Pharmacogenomics of CYP1A2 in Human Liver.

Klein K(1), Winter S, Turpeinen M, Schwab M, Zanger UM.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, University of 
Tuebingen Stuttgart, Germany.

The human drug metabolizing cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A2, is one of the major P450
isoforms contributing by about 5-20% to the hepatic P450 pool and catalyzing
oxidative biotransformation of up to 10% of clinically relevant drugs including
clozapine and caffeine. CYP1A2 activity is interindividually highly variable and 
although twin studies have suggested a high heritability, underlying genetic
factors are still unknown. Here we adopted a pathway-oriented approach using a
large human liver bank (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>150) to elucidate whether variants in candidate genes
of constitutive, ligand-inducible, and pathophysiological inhibitory regulatory
pathways may explain different hepatic CYP1A2 phenotypes. Samples were phenotyped
for phenacetin O-deethylase activity, and the expression of CYP1A2 protein and
mRNA was determined. CYP1A2 expression and function was increased in smokers and 
decreased in patients with inflammation and cholestasis. Of 169 SNPs in 17
candidate genes including the CYP1A locus, 136 non-redundant SNPs with minor
allele frequency >5% were analyzed by univariate and multivariate methods. A
total of 13 strong significant associations were identified, of which 10 SNPs in 
the ARNT, AhRR, HNF1a, IL1ß, SRC-1, and VDR genes showed consistent changes for
at least two phenotypes by univariate analysis. Multivariate linear modeling
indicated that the polymorphisms and non-genetic factors together explained 42,
38, and 33% of CYP1A2 variation at activity, protein and mRNA levels,
respectively. In conclusion, we identified novel trans-associations between
regulatory genes and hepatic CYP1A2 function and expression, but additional
genetic factors must be assumed to explain the full extent of CYP1A2
heritability.

PMCID: PMC3171976
PMID: 21918647  [PubMed]


117. J Anesth. 2010 Feb;24(1):54-60. doi: 10.1007/s00540-009-0829-1. Epub 2009 Dec 29.

The intravenous anesthetic propofol inhibits lipopolysaccharide-induced
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 activation and suppresses the glucose metabolism in
macrophages.

Tanaka T(1), Takabuchi S, Nishi K, Oda S, Wakamatsu T, Daijo H, Fukuda K, Hirota 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia, Kyoto University Hospital, 54 Shogoin-Kawaracho,
Sakyo-Ku, Kyoto, 6060-8507, Japan.

PURPOSE: Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a master transcription factor of
hypoxia-induced gene expression. Anesthetics and perioperative drugs have been
reported to affect HIF-1 activity. However, the effect of propofol on HIF-1
activity is not well documented. In this study, we investigated the effect of
propofol on HIF-1 activation using macrophage-differentiated THP-1 cells.
METHODS: Cells were exposed to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) under 20 or 1% O(2)
conditions with or without propofol treatment. The cell lysate was subjected to
Western blot analysis using anti-HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta antibodies.
HIF-1-dependent gene expression was investigated by quantitative real-time
reverse-transcriptase PCR analysis and luciferase assay. The amount of cellular
lactate and ATP was assayed.
RESULTS: Propofol suppressed HIF-1alpha protein accumulation induced by LPS, but 
not by hypoxia in the THP-1 cells in a dose-dependent manner by inhibiting the
neo-synthesis of HIF-1alpha protein. Induction of the HIF-1 downstream gene
expression including glucose transporter 1, enolase 1, lactate dehydrogenase A,
pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase-1 and vascular endothelial growth factor was
inhibited by propofol. Propofol suppressed LPS-induced lactate accumulation and
ATP content in THP-1 cells.
CONCLUSION: Our experimental results indicate that propofol inhibits HIF-1
activation and downstream gene expression induced by LPS and suppressed
HIF-1-dependent glucose metabolic reprogramming. HIF-1 suppression by propofol in
macrophages may explain molecular mechanisms behind the inhibitory effect of
propofol on cellular inflammatory responses.

PMID: 20039079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Am J Pathol. 2010 Feb;176(2):733-43. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090524. Epub 2009
Dec 24.

Deregulation of growth factor, circadian clock, and cell cycle signaling in
regenerating hepatocyte RXRalpha-deficient mouse livers.

Yang X(1), Guo M, Wan YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutics, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Activation of the nuclear receptors constitutive androstane receptor, pregnane X 
receptor, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha results in
hepatomegaly, and these nuclear receptors are implicated in the regulation of
liver regeneration. Retinoid X receptor (RXR)alpha is an essential partner of
these nuclear receptors. Therefore, we studied the role of hepatocyte RXRalpha in
liver regeneration using partial hepatectomy model. The results showed that
hepatocyte RXRalpha deficiency caused an approximately 20-hour delay in
hepatocyte proliferation after partial hepatectomy. Several pathways, including
growth factors and the circadian cell cycle, were impaired due to hepatocyte
RXRalpha deficiency. In addition, the expression patterns of hepatocyte growth
factor, fibroblast growth factor 2, platelet-derived growth factor, and
transforming growth factor alpha were altered due to lack of RXRalpha.
Furthermore, the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha/brain and
muscle Arnt-like protein 1/Rev-erbalpha/P21 pathway was compromised, and
Cry1/Cry2 and Wee1/Per1 expression was deregulated in regenerating RXRalpha-null 
livers. Accordingly, the expression and regulation of cyclin D1/Cyclin- dependent
Kinase (Cdk)4, cyclin E1/Cdk2, cyclin A2/Cdk2, and cyclin B1/Cdk1 after partial
hepatectomy were altered in regenerating RXRalpha-null livers. Hepatocyte
RXRalpha deficiency also affected the basal, as well as regeneration-induced
cyclin E1 expression levels. Activation of RXRalpha by retinoic acids increased
the cyclin E1 promoter activity indicating retinoic acid-mediated signaling
positively controls cyclin E1 gene expression. As many of these observed changes 
were not documented in the regenerating livers of other nuclear receptor knockout
mice, these observed effects may be hepatocyte RXRalpha specific.

PMCID: PMC2808080
PMID: 20035057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2010 Feb;29(3):242-7. doi: 10.1159/000267849. Epub 2009 Dec 18.

The -928 G/C and -362 G/C single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the promoter of
MCP-1: Increased transcriptional activity and novel binding sites.

Nyquist P(1), Zhang J, De Graba TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurosciences Critical Care and Departments of Neurology,
Anesthesiology-Critical Care Medicine and Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Bethesda, MD, USA. pnyquis1@jhmi.edu

BACKGROUND: The -928 guanine (G)/cytosine (C) and -362 G/C single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the proximal promoter region of the monocyte
chemoattractant protein 1 gene have been associated with an increased risk for
intimal medial thickness and carotid atherosclerosis, respectively. We
characterized the transcriptional activity of these two SNPs in vitro and
identified transcription factors that bind to them.
METHODS: The proximal promoter region spanning bases -2746 to +440 was sequenced 
in subjects with carotid atherosclerosis. Two SNPs consisting of C-for-G
substitution at bases -928 and -362 were characterized. Each observed haplotype
was inserted into a luciferase reporter and transfected into mammalian cells.
RESULTS: Stimulation with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate increased
transcriptional activity of the -928 C plasmid (p = 0.005). The basal
transcription activities of the plasmids containing -928 C and -362 C were also
increased (p < 0.001 and p < 0.0001, respectively). Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) and DNA footprinting identified an Ah receptor nuclear
translocator protein (ARNT) binding site at the -928 C SNP. EMSA data indicated
signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) binding at the -362 G
SNP. A nuclear binding protein, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) 1, was
purified from the -928 C SNP site and identified by mass spectroscopy.
CONCLUSION: The -928 C SNP and the -362 C SNP are associated with increased
transcriptional activity in vitro, but the -362 G site is not. The -928 C SNP is 
associated with PARP-1 and ARNT binding, and the -362 G is associated with a STAT
binding site.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20029197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Aug;43(8):705-9.

[Construction of the dioxin bioassay method based on the clonal expressed aryl
hydrocarbon receptor system].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Z(1), Zhao N, Shen J, Wang Y, Tang NJ, Wu YT, Zhang WQ, Mi HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Non-Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, Tianjin Center 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Tianjin 300011, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the specific binding of the artificial clonal aryl
hydrocarbon receptor translocator (ARNT) with the natural aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) and the recolonization by polyclonal antibody. The dose-response
relationship with tetrachlo-rodibenzo-dioxin (TCDD) was also studied to develop
TCDD detection method and the binding degree related to dose response.
METHODS: (1) The target genes including AhR-PAS, AhR-C and ARNT-PAS were
amplified by RT-PCR by using the total RNA purified from the liver cells of
C57BL/6J mice as templates to construct pGEX-5X1 recombinants. The recombinant
plasmids were expressed in E. coli. (2) The rabbits were immuned by the clonal
fusion proteins: AhR-PAS, AhR-C to prepare the polyclonal antibody. (3) The
natural AhR from the hepatic cytosol of C57BL/6J mice was extracted. The
artificial cloning expressed fusion protein:GST-ARNT-PAS and the natural AhR were
incubated in different dose of TCDD. The quantity of the heterodimer through
affinity adsorption and Western blots were measured.
RESULTS: (1) The target proteins including AhR-PAS, AhR-C and ARNT-PAS were
successfully cloned and expressed in E. coli. (2) The detection limit of
polyclonal antibody AhR-PAS and AhR-C were 5 ng and 1 ng, respectively. (3) The
total protein concentration prepared from the liver cells was 60.5 mg/ml. The
artificial clonal protein ARNT-PAS could specifically bind to the natural AhR
complex with the existence of TCDD. The detection limit of TCDD was 0.25 pmol
which was 80 pg approximately.
CONCLUSION: A TCDD detection method based on the aryl hydrocarbon receptor system
was established and the detection limit might reach pg grade.

PMID: 20021851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010 Apr 15;79(8):1125-33. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.12.010.
Epub 2009 Dec 16.

Beta tubulin affects the aryl hydrocarbon receptor function via an Arnt-mediated 
mechanism.

Zhang T(1), Wang X, Shinn A, Jin J, Chan WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, University of the
Pacific, Stockton, CA 95211, USA.

We have been studying the requirement for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (Arnt)-dependent DNA complex formation, which precedes the
activation of gene transcription. Using DEAE chromatography, we have obtained a
Sf9 insect fraction F5 that is highly enriched with beta-tubulin. F5 inhibits the
formation of the AhR gel shift complex and this inhibition is sensitive to
protease, suggesting that proteins that are present in this F5 fraction are
responsible for the inhibition. Additional experiments have revealed that this
inhibition is less pronounced in the presence of anti-beta-tubulin IgG and
beta-tubulin enriched fraction from pig brain also inhibits the AhR gel shift
formation. Sf9 beta-tubulin interacts with Arnt and suppresses the binding of the
AhR/Arnt heterodimer to its corresponding enhancer. Human beta4-tubulin, which
shares high sequence identity with Sf9 beta-tubulin, suppresses the AhR-dependent
luciferase expression by reducing the nuclear Arnt content and retaining Arnt in 
the cytoplasm. Fluorescence studies using the GFP fusion of human beta4-tubulin
have revealed that beta4-tubulin prevents the localization of Arnt in Sf9 cells. 
Here we have provided evidence suggesting that beta-tubulin may regulate the
physiological content of Arnt.

2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2823942
PMID: 20006590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Heart Rhythm. 2010;7(2):260-5. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2009.09.026. Epub 2009 Sep
24.

Takotsubo cardiomyopathy and congenital long QT syndrome in a patient with a
novel duplication in the Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain of hERG1.

Grilo LS(1), Pruvot E, Grobéty M, Castella V, Fellmann F, Abriel H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Research, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

PMID: 20004623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2009 Dec;124(6):2134-41. doi: 10.1097/PRS.0b013e3181bf8353.

Tensioned reverse abdominoplasty.

Deos MF(1), Arnt RA, Gus EI.

Author information: 
(1)Mauro Deos-Clínica de Cirurgia Plástica, Porto Alegre, RS, CEP 90510-003,
Brazil. mdeos@terra.com.br

BACKGROUND: Deformities of the upper portion of the abdominal wall can be
difficult to solve, as in many cases abdominoplasties or mini-abdominoplasties
lead to unsatisfactory results. Direct approaches to this region through
inframammary incisions can be a good therapeutic option, once adequate patient
selection has been performed and certain surgical principles are followed.
METHODS: This technique should be primarily indicated for patients complaining of
skin laxity predominantly in the upper abdomen and for patients who will have
such excess after liposuction. In patients who require resection of a large
amount of tissue, a single, broad, U-shaped dissection should be used, associated
with midline fascia plication, when required (group 1). In patients with a
smaller amount of tissue to be resected, two oblique tunnels can be made toward
the navel, with no incision unification at the midline, to provide less evident
scars (group 2).
RESULTS: Eighteen procedures were performed: 12 in group 1 and six in group 2.
Patients and surgeons were satisfied with the results. Only minor complications
occurred, and they did not result in definitive sequelae.
CONCLUSIONS: The principle of progressive tension suture, previously utilized in 
conventional abdominoplasties, is now originally employed in reverse
abdominoplasties as a continuous suture, enabling proper flap positioning,
keeping the inframammary sulcus at its original position, and preventing tension 
on the resulting scar. Tensioned reverse abdominoplasty is an easily applicable
technique that provides good results and should be considered in cases of
abdominal laxity predominantly in the upper abdomen.

PMID: 19952671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010 Apr 15;79(8):1182-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.11.021. Epub
2009 Nov 29.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon metabolizing cytochrome P450s in freshly prepared
uncultured rat blood lymphocytes.

Saurabh K(1), Sharma A, Yadav S, Parmar D.

Author information: 
(1)Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow, U.P., India.

In an attempt to develop blood lymphocyte cytochrome P450 expression profile as a
surrogate to monitor tissue enzyme, the present study aimed to identify the
expression and regulation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) responsive
CYPs in freshly prepared rat blood lymphocytes. Semi-quantitative and RT-PCR
studies demonstrated constitutive and inducible mRNA expression of CYP1A1, 1A2,
1B1 isoenzymes and the associated transcription factors, aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) and AhR translocator (ARNT) in blood lymphocytes. Absolute
quantification using RT-PCR revealed several fold lower basal expression of
CYP1A1, 1A2 and 1B1 in lymphocytes when compared to the liver. However,
significant increase in the mRNA expression of these isoenzymes as well as AhR
and ARNT in lymphocytes following pretreatment with 3-methylcholanthrene (MC)
have demonstrated that responsiveness is retained in the blood lymphocytes,
though the magnitude of increase is several fold lower when compared to liver.
This increase in the mRNA expression was found to be associated with an increase 
in the protein expression of CYP1A1 and 1A2 in blood lymphocytes. Further, CYPs
expressed in blood lymphocytes catalysed the O-dealkylation of 7-ethoxy- and
7-methoxyresorufins (ER or MR), though the reactivity was several fold lower in
lymphocytes when compared to the liver enzyme. Our data providing quantitative
evidence for similarities in the regulation of PAH-regulated CYP in uncultured
and non-mitogen stimulated blood lymphocytes with the liver enzyme has led us to 
suggest that blood lymphocytes could be used as a surrogate to monitor tissue
expression of CYPs.

2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19951702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Am Chem Soc. 2009 Dec 9;131(48):17647-54. doi: 10.1021/ja9073062.

Principles of ligand binding within a completely buried cavity in HIF2alpha
PAS-B.

Key J(1), Scheuermann TH, Anderson PC, Daggett V, Gardner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, Texas 75390-8816, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) are heterodimeric transcription factors
responsible for the metazoan hypoxia response and promote tumor growth,
metastasis, and resistance to cancer treatment. The C-terminal Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS)
domain of HIF2alpha (HIF2alpha PAS-B) contains a preformed solvent-inaccessible
cavity that binds artificial ligands that allosterically perturb the formation of
the HIF heterodimer. To better understand how small molecules bind within this
domain, we examined the structures and equilibrium and transition-state
thermodynamics of HIF2alpha PAS-B with several artificial ligands using
isothermal titration calorimetry, NMR exchange spectroscopy, and X-ray
crystallography. Rapid association rates reveal that ligand binding is not
dependent upon a slow conformational change in the protein to permit ligand
access, despite the closed conformation observed in the NMR and crystal
structures. Compensating enthalpic and entropic contributions to the
thermodynamic barrier for ligand binding suggest a binding-competent transition
state characterized by increased structural disorder. Finally, molecular dynamics
simulations reveal conversion between open and closed conformations of the
protein and pathways of ligand entry into the binding pocket.

PMCID: PMC2819816
PMID: 19950993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Bacteriol. 2010 Feb;192(3):755-62. doi: 10.1128/JB.00826-09. Epub 2009 Nov 30.

Red light activates the sigmaB-mediated general stress response of Bacillus
subtilis via the energy branch of the upstream signaling cascade.

Avila-Pérez M(1), van der Steen JB, Kort R, Hellingwerf KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Microbiology, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences,
University of Amsterdam, Nieuwe Achtergracht 166, 1018 WV Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

The sigma(B)-dependent general stress response in the common soil bacterium
Bacillus subtilis can be elicited by a range of stress factors, such as
starvation or an ethanol, salt, or heat shock, via a complex upstream signaling
cascade. Additionally, sigma(B) can be activated by blue light via the
phototropin homologue YtvA, a component of the environmental branch of the
signaling cascade. Here we use a reporter-gene fusion to show that sigma(B) can
also be activated by red light via the energy branch of its upstream signaling
cascade. Deletion mutagenesis and homologous overproduction experiments indicate 
that the RsbP protein (composed of an N-terminal Per-ARNT-Sim [PAS] domain and a 
C-terminal PP2C-type phosphatase domain) is involved in the red light response.
This second light input pathway functions complementarily to YtvA; it shows
broader spectral sensitivity but requires higher light intensities. These results
are confirmed by transcriptome analyses, which show that both light effects
result in upregulation of the sigma(B) regulon, with minimal activation of other 
responses.

PMCID: PMC2812468
PMID: 19948797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Biochemistry. 2010 Jan 12;49(1):29-35. doi: 10.1021/bi901572f.

Identification of a functionally important loop in Salmonella typhimurium ArnT.

Impellitteri NA(1), Merten JA, Bretscher LE, Klug CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank
Road, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA.

ArnT confers resistance to the antibiotic polymyxin in Salmonella typhimurium and
Escherichia coli through the modification of lipid A, a major component of the
outer surface of gram-negative bacteria. ArnT transfers a neutral aminoarabinose 
moiety onto the negative phosphate groups of lipid A, reducing the surface charge
of the bacteria and preventing cationic peptides such as polymyxin from
electrostatically recognizing and killing the bacteria. We previously reported
the first expression, purification, and functional analysis of ArnT from S.
typhimurium [Bretscher, L. E., Morrell, M. T., Funk, A. L., and Klug, C. S.
(2006) Protein Expression Purif. 46, 33-39]. Our studies showed that ArnT is
highly alpha-helical and described a new in vivo functional growth assay. Here,
we use the cysteine-specific mPEG-mal to demonstrate that all eight of the native
cysteines in S. typhimurium ArnT are in the reduced form and not involved in
disulfide bonds and show that the cysteine-free protein is structurally and
functionally intact as characterized by circular dichroism and the in vivo growth
assay. Following this initial characterization, in vivo expression and function
profiles were surveyed for 31 consecutive mutations within a putative ArnT loop. 
These studies identify for the first time 14 residues that are essential for
function of the ArnT transferase and 3 additional residues that completely
disrupt protein folding or insertion into the bacterial inner membrane.

PMCID: PMC2805049
PMID: 19947657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mol Microbiol. 2010 Jan;75(1):61-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2009.06956.x. Epub 
2009 Nov 10.

Quaternary structure changes in a second Per-Arnt-Sim domain mediate
intramolecular redox signal relay in the NifL regulatory protein.

Slavny P(1), Little R, Salinas P, Clarke TA, Dixon R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, John Innes Centre, Norwich, NR4 7UH, UK.

Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domains play a critical role in signal transduction in
multidomain proteins by sensing diverse environmental signals and regulating the 
activity of output domains. Multiple PAS domains are often found within a single 
protein. The NifL regulatory protein from Azotobacter vinelandii contains tandem 
PAS domains, the most N-terminal of which, PAS1, contains a FAD cofactor and is
responsible for redox sensing, whereas the second PAS domain, PAS2, has no
apparent cofactor and its function is unknown. Amino acid substitutions in PAS2
were identified that either lock NifL in a form that constitutively inhibits NifA
or that fail to respond to the redox status, suggesting that PAS2 plays a pivotal
role in transducing the redox signal from PAS1 to the C-terminal output domains. 
The isolated PAS2 domain is a homodimer in solution and the subunits are in rapid
exchange. PAS2 dimerization is maintained in the redox signal transduction
mutants, but is inhibited by substitutions in PAS2 that lock NifL in the
inhibitory conformer. Our results support a model for signal transduction in
NifL, whereby redox-dependent conformational changes in PAS1 are relayed to the
C-terminal domains via changes in the quaternary structure of the PAS2 domain.

PMID: 19906177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Chem Biol Interact. 2010 Mar 19;184(1-2):246-51. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2009.10.019. 
Epub 2009 Nov 5.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor has an important role in the regulation of
hematopoiesis: implications for benzene-induced hematopoietic toxicity.

Gasiewicz TA(1), Singh KP, Casado FL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, 
601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. tom_gasiewicz@urmc.rochester.edu

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) belongs to the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) 
Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) family of transcription factors. Many of these proteins are
involved in regulating responses to signals in the tissue environment such as
hypoxia, oxidation-reduction status, and circadian rhythms. Although the AhR is
well studied as a mediator of the toxicity of certain xenobiotics, the normal
physiological function remains unknown. However, accumulating data support a
hypothesis that the AhR has an important function in the regulation of
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Persistent AhR activation by dioxin, a potent
xenobiotic AhR agonist, results in altered numbers and function of HSCs in mouse 
bone marrow. Analysis of HSCs from AhR null-allele mice also indicates that lack 
of AhR expression results in altered characteristics and function of these cells.
HSCs from these animals are hyperproliferative and have altered cell cycle. In
addition, aging AhR-KO mice show characteristics consistent with premature bone
marrow senescence and are prone to hematopoietic disease. Finally, some data
suggest that the expression of the Ahr gene is regulated under conditions that
control HSC proliferation. The presence of a normal functioning AhR may provide
an important advantage to organisms by regulating the balance between quiescence 
and proliferation and preventing the premature exhaustion of HSCs and sensitivity
to genetic alterations. This function assists in the preservation of HSC function
and long-term multi-lineage generation over the lifespan of the organism. This
also implicates a role for the AhR in the aging process. Furthermore, these
functions may affect the sensitivity of HSCs to certain xenobiotics, including
benzene. Defining the molecular mechanisms by which these events occur may lead
to the identification of previously undefined roles of this transcription factor 
in human diseases, particularly those caused or affected by xenobiotics.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2846208
PMID: 19896476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2010 Jan;208(1):23-36. doi: 10.1007/s00213-009-1702-5.
Epub 2009 Oct 23.

Sertindole improves sub-chronic PCP-induced reversal learning and episodic memory
deficits in rodents: involvement of 5-HT(6) and 5-HT (2A) receptor mechanisms.

Idris N(1), Neill J, Grayson B, Bang-Andersen B, Witten LM, Brennum LT, Arnt J.

Author information: 
(1)Bradford School of Pharmacy, The University of Bradford, Bradford, West
Yorkshire, BD7 1DP, UK.

AIM: This study examined the efficacy of sertindole in comparison with a
selective 5-HT(6) and a 5-HT(2A) receptor antagonist to reverse sub-chronic
phencyclidine (PCP)-induced cognitive deficits in female rats.
METHODS: In the first test, adult female hooded Lister rats were trained to
perform an operant reversal learning task to 90% criterion. After training, rats 
were treated with PCP at 2 mg/kg (i.p.) or vehicle twice daily for 7 days,
followed by 7 days washout. For the second test, novel object recognition (NOR), 
a separate batch of rats, had the same sub-chronic PCP dosing regime and washout 
period. In reversal learning, rats were treated acutely with sertindole, the
selective 5-HT(2A) receptor antagonist M100.907 or the selective 5-HT(6) receptor
antagonist SB-742457.
RESULTS: The PCP-induced selective reversal learning deficit was significantly
improved by sertindole, M100.907 and SB-742457. Sertindole also significantly
improved the sub-chronic PCP-induced deficit in NOR, a test of episodic memory
following a 1 min and 1 h inter-trial interval. In vivo binding studies showed
that the dose-response relationship for sertindole in this study most closely
correlates with affinity for 5-HT(6) receptor in vivo binding in striatum,
although contribution from binding to 5-HT(2A) receptors in vivo in cortex may
also provide an important mechanism.
CONCLUSION: The efficacies of selective 5-HT(2A) and 5-HT(6) receptor antagonists
suggest potential mechanisms mediating the effects of sertindole, which has high 
affinity for these 5-HT receptor subtypes. The sertindole-induced improvement in 
cognitive function in this animal model suggests relevance for the management of 
cognitive deficit symptoms in schizophrenia.

PMID: 19851757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Am J Pathol. 2009 Dec;175(6):2501-7. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.081131. Epub 2009
Oct 22.

The expression of AIP-related molecules in elucidation of cellular pathways in
pituitary adenomas.

Heliövaara E(1), Raitila A, Launonen V, Paetau A, Arola J, Lehtonen H, Sane T,
Weil RJ, Vierimaa O, Salmela P, Tuppurainen K, Mäkinen M, Aaltonen LA, Karhu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Genome-Scale Biology Research Program,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Germline mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP)
gene predispose to the development of pituitary adenomas. Here, we characterized 
AIP mutation positive (AIPmut+) and AIP mutation negative (AIPmut-) pituitary
adenomas by immunohistochemistry. The expressions of the AIP-related proteins
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT),
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B encoding p27(Kip1), and hypoxia-inducible
factor 1-alpha were examined in 14 AIPmut+ and 53 AIPmut- pituitary adenomas to
detect possible expression differences. In addition, the expression of CD34, an
endothelial and hematopoietic stem cell marker, was analyzed. We found ARNT to be
less frequently expressed in AIPmut+ pituitary adenomas (P = 0.001), suggesting
that AIP regulates the ARNT levels. AIP small interfering RNA-treated HeLa,
HEK293, or Aip-null mouse embryonic fibroblast cells did not show lowered
expression of ARNT. Instead, in the pituitary adenoma cell line GH3, Aip
silencing caused a partial reduction of Arnt and a clear increase in cell
proliferation. We also observed a trend for increased expression of nuclear AHR
in AIPmut+ samples, although the difference was not statistically significant (P 
= 0.06). The expressions of p27(Kip1), hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha, or CD34 
did not differ between tumor types. The present study shows that the expression
of ARNT protein is significantly reduced in AIPmut+ tumors. We suggest that the
down-regulation of ARNT may be connected to an imbalance in AHR/ARNT complex
formation arising from aberrant cAMP signaling.

PMCID: PMC2789606
PMID: 19850893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Oct;1177:74-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05029.x.

Molecular imaging: into in vivo interaction of HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha with
ARNT.

Konietzny R(1), König A, Wotzlaw C, Bernadini A, Berchner-Pfannschmidt U, Fandrey
J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Physiology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

Fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) combined with confocal laser
microscopy is a powerful tool to analyze protein-protein interaction in vivo. We 
have applied this combination to study the assembly of the hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF) complex in living cells under hypoxic conditions. In hypoxia, the
basic helix-loop-helix/Period/ARNT/Single-minded (PAS) proteins HIF-1alpha and
HIF-2alpha accumulate and are translocated into the nucleus. Here, HIF-1alpha and
HIF-2alpha dimerize with HIF-1beta, also known as aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT), to form HIF-1/HIF-2 complexes, which control the
expression of specific target genes. Therefore, a new Java-based analyzing
program was developed at our institute to calculate the nanometer distance
between alpha and beta subunits of the transcriptionally active HIF-1/-2 complex 
bound to DNA. Fusion proteins of HIF subunits and variants of green fluorescent
proteins (cyan and yellow fluorescent proteins) were expressed in living cells
and protein-protein interactions were imaged in vivo by means of FRET.

PMID: 19845609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Structure. 2009 Oct 14;17(10):1282-94. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2009.08.011.

Structure and signaling mechanism of Per-ARNT-Sim domains.

Möglich A(1), Ayers RA, Moffat K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute for Biophysical
Dynamics, University of Chicago, 929 East 57th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domains serve as versatile sensor and interaction modules in
signal transduction proteins. PAS sensors detect chemical and physical stimuli
and regulate the activity of functionally diverse effector domains. In contrast
to this chemical, physical, and functional diversity, the structure of the core
of PAS domains is broadly conserved and comprises a five-stranded antiparallel
beta sheet and several alpha helices. Signals originate within the conserved core
and generate structural and dynamic changes predominantly within the beta sheet, 
from which they propagate via amphipathic alpha-helical and coiled-coil linkers
at the N or C termini of the core to the covalently attached effector domain.
Effector domains are typically dimeric; their activity appears to be largely
regulated by signal-dependent changes in quaternary structure and dynamics. The
signaling mechanisms of PAS and other signaling domains share common features,
and these commonalities can be exploited to enable structure-based design of
artificial photosensors and chemosensors.

PMCID: PMC3092527
PMID: 19836329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Diabetes. 2010 Jan;59(1):153-60. doi: 10.2337/db08-0868. Epub 2009 Oct 15.

Carbohydrate-responsive element-binding protein (ChREBP) is a negative regulator 
of ARNT/HIF-1beta gene expression in pancreatic islet beta-cells.

Noordeen NA(1), Khera TK, Sun G, Longbottom ER, Pullen TJ, da Silva Xavier G,
Rutter GA, Leclerc I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Medicine, Division of Medicine,
Imperial College, London, U.K.

OBJECTIVE: Carbohydrate-responsive element-binding protein (ChREBP) is a
transcription factor that has been shown to regulate carbohydrate metabolism in
the liver and pancreatic beta-cells in response to elevated glucose
concentrations. Because few genes have been identified so far as bona fide
ChREBP-target genes, we have performed a genome-wide analysis of the ChREBP
transcriptome in pancreatic beta-cells.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation and high-density
oligonucleotide tiling arrays (ChIP-chip; Agilent Technologies) using MIN6
pancreatic beta-cell extracts were performed together with transcriptional and
other analysis using standard techniques.
RESULTS: One of the genes identified by ChIP-chip and linked to glucose sensing
and insulin secretion was aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT)/hypoxia-inducible factor-1beta (HIF-1beta), a transcription factor
implicated in altered gene expression and pancreatic-islet dysfunction in type 2 
diabetes. We first confirmed that elevated glucose concentrations decreased
ARNT/HIF-1beta levels in INS-1 (832/13) cells and primary mouse islets.
Demonstrating a role for ChREBP in ARNT gene regulation, ChREBP silencing
increased ARNT mRNA levels in INS-1 (832/13) cells, and ChREBP overexpression
decreased ARNT mRNA in INS-1 (832/13) cells and primary mouse islets. We
demonstrated that ChREBP and Max-like protein X (MLX) bind on the ARNT/HIF-1beta 
promoter on the proximal region that also confers the negative glucose
responsiveness.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that ChREBP acts as a novel repressor of
the ARNT/HIF-1beta gene and might contribute to beta-cell dysfunction induced by 
glucotoxicity.

PMCID: PMC2797916
PMID: 19833882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Feb;42(2):241-52. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2009.10.002. Epub 2009 Oct 12.

HIF-1beta determines ABCA1 expression under hypoxia in human macrophages.

Ugocsai P(1), Hohenstatt A, Paragh G, Liebisch G, Langmann T, Wolf Z, Weiss T,
Groitl P, Dobner T, Kasprzak P, Göbölös L, Falkert A, Seelbach-Goebel B, Gellhaus
A, Winterhager E, Schmidt M, Semenza GL, Schmitz G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University Hospital 
Regensburg, Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, Regensburg, Germany.

ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 plays (ABCA1) a major role in reverse
cholesterol transport, a process closely related to atherogenesis. In the
thickening atherosclerotic lesions lipid loaded macrophages are exposed to
regions of local hypoxia that may influence reverse cholesterol transport. Here
we studied the effect of hypoxia on ABCA1 regulation and cholesterol efflux in
human macrophages. We found that the hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1)
specifically binds to the HIF-1 response element of the ABCA1 promoter and the
HIF-1 complex increases ABCA1 promoter activity along with ABCA1 expression.
Primary human macrophages exposed to hypoxia or expressing constitutively active 
HIF-1alpha responded with a potent change in ABCA1 expression, which showed a
strong correlation with HIF-1beta expression (r: 0.95-0.91). Moreover,
ABCA1-mediated cholesterol efflux was also found to be regulated by HIF-1beta
under hypoxia. In vivo, in macrophages prepared from human atherosclerotic
lesions ABCA1 levels showed a strong correlation with HIF-1beta expression. This 
in vivo regulatory mechanism was confirmed in human pre-eclamptic placentas, a
clinical condition with severe local hypoxia. These results demonstrate that
HIF-1beta availability determines ABCA1 expression and cholesterol efflux in
macrophages under hypoxia and may contribute to the interpersonal variability of 
atherosclerotic lesion progression.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19828131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. BMC Med Genet. 2009 Oct 13;10:105. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-10-105.

Identification of a novel functional deletion variant in the 5'-UTR of the DJ-1
gene.

Keyser RJ(1), van der Merwe L, Venter M, Kinnear C, Warnich L, Carr J, Bardien S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Stellenbosch, Cape Town, 8001, South Africa. rowenak@sun.ac.za

BACKGROUND: DJ-1 forms part of the neuronal cellular defence mechanism against
oxidative insults, due to its ability to undergo self-oxidation. Oxidative stress
has been implicated in the pathogenesis of central nervous system damage in
different neurodegenerative disorders including Alzheimer's disease and
Parkinson's disease (PD). Various mutations in the DJ-1 (PARK7) gene have been
shown to cause the autosomal recessive form of PD. In the present study South
African PD patients were screened for mutations in DJ-1 and we aimed to
investigate the functional significance of a novel 16 bp deletion variant
identified in one patient.
METHODS: The possible effect of the deletion on promoter activity was
investigated using a Dual-Luciferase Reporter assay. The DJ-1 5'-UTR region
containing the sequence flanking the 16 bp deletion was cloned into a
pGL4.10-Basic luciferase-reporter vector and transfected into HEK293 and
BE(2)-M17 neuroblastoma cells. Promoter activity under hydrogen peroxide-induced 
oxidative stress conditions was also investigated. Computational (in silico)
cis-regulatory analysis of DJ-1 promoter sequence was performed using the
transcription factor-binding site database, TRANSFAC via the PATCH and rVISTA
platforms.
RESULTS: A novel 16 bp deletion variant (g.-6_+10del) was identified in DJ-1
which spans the transcription start site and is situated 93 bp 3' from a Sp1
site. The deletion caused a reduction in luciferase activity of approximately 47%
in HEK293 cells and 60% in BE(2)-M17 cells compared to the wild-type (P <
0.0001), indicating the importance of the 16 bp sequence in transcription
regulation. The activity of both constructs was up-regulated during oxidative
stress. Bioinformatic analysis revealed putative binding sites for three
transcription factors AhR, ARNT, HIF-1 within the 16 bp sequence. The frequency
of the g.-6_+10del variant was determined to be 0.7% in South African PD patients
(2 heterozygotes in 148 individuals).
CONCLUSION: This is the first report of a functional DJ-1 promoter variant, which
has the potential to influence transcript stability or translation efficiency.
Further work is necessary to determine the extent to which the g.-6_+10del
variant affects the normal function of the DJ-1 promoter and whether this variant
confers a risk for PD.

PMCID: PMC2767350
PMID: 19825160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mol Carcinog. 2010 Feb;49(2):157-65. doi: 10.1002/mc.20585.

Aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (hypoxia inducible factor 1beta) activity
is required more during early than late tumor growth.

Shi S(1), Yoon DY, Hodge-Bell K, Huerta-Yepez S, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095-1732, USA.

c4 is a derivative of the mouse hepatoma cell line, Hepa-1, that harbors a
mutation in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator gene (Arnt, or
hypoxia inducible factor 1beta [HIF-1beta]) leading to loss of activity. Clone 3 
cells were generated by introducing a doxycycline-repressible Arnt expression
vector into c4 cells. Clone 3 cells were injected subcutaneously into
immunosuppressed mice, which were treated with doxycyline (a) throughout the
growth of the subsequent tumor xenografts, or (b) from day 7 through to the end
of the experiment (day 30), or not treated (c). Tumors in all groups grew
exponentially between days 14 and 30, and at rates that were indistinguishable
from each other. However, tumors in group a were smaller than those of the other 
two groups throughout the measurable growth period, while tumor volumes in groups
b and c were not significantly different from each other. The degrees of
vascularity and apoptosis did not correlate with the differences in degrees of
growth between the different groups. Thus, Arnt is required during the early
stages of growth of the tumors but less in later stages. Since Arnt does not
detectably effect the growth kinetics of Hepa-1 cells either during hypoxia or
normoxia, this requirement is unlikely to reflect a direct effect of Arnt on cell
proliferation, and is therefore probably a consequence of altered interaction(s) 
between the tumor cells and the host. These studies suggest that Arnt (and
HIF-1alpha/HIF-2alpha) inhibitors will be particularly effective against smaller 
tumors, including micrometastases.

PMCID: PMC2938742
PMID: 19824022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Dec;29(24):6391-400. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00337-09. Epub 2009 Oct
12.

Hypersensitivity of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-deficient mice to
lipopolysaccharide-induced septic shock.

Sekine H(1), Mimura J, Oshima M, Okawa H, Kanno J, Igarashi K, Gonzalez FJ, Ikuta
T, Kawajiri K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance and Institute of Basic
Medical Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba 305-8577,
Japan.

Comment in
    Cell Res. 2014 Oct;24(10):1155-6.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a ligand-activated transcription factor, is
known to mediate a wide variety of pharmacological and toxicological effects
caused by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Recent studies have revealed that AhR
is involved in the normal development and homeostasis of many organs. Here, we
demonstrate that AhR knockout (AhR KO) mice are hypersensitive to
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced septic shock, mainly due to the dysfunction of
their macrophages. In response to LPS, bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDM) of 
AhR KO mice secreted an enhanced amount of interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta). Since
the enhanced IL-1beta secretion was suppressed by supplementing Plasminogen
activator inhibitor-2 (Pai-2) expression through transduction with
Pai-2-expressing adenoviruses, reduced Pai-2 expression could be a cause of the
increased IL-1beta secretion by AhR KO mouse BMDM. Analysis of gene expression
revealed that AhR directly regulates the expression of Pai-2 through a mechanism 
involving NF-kappaB but not AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt), in an LPS-dependent 
manner. Together with the result that administration of the AhR ligand
3-methylcholanthrene partially protected mice with wild-type AhR from
endotoxin-induced death, these results raise the possibility that an appropriate 
AhR ligand may be useful for treating patients with inflammatory disorders.

PMCID: PMC2786870
PMID: 19822660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2010 Jan;118(1-2):51-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2009.09.017. Epub 2009 Oct 6.

Four and a half LIM domain 2 alters the impact of aryl hydrocarbon receptor on
androgen receptor transcriptional activity.

Kollara A(1), Brown TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) ligands modulate androgen receptor (AR) signaling
in prostate cancer cells through partially defined mechanisms. Furthermore, these
facilitatory and inhibitory effects of AhR on AR signaling appear to be cell or
context specific. In the present study we demonstrate that both AhR and
AhR-nuclear translocator (ARNT) interact with AR. AhR but not ARNT enhanced the
AR-transcriptional activity which was independent of exogenous AhR ligand
treatment (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, TCDD). We then tested if
coactivators common to both receptors alter the facilitatory effect of AhR on AR 
activity. NcoA4 overexpression did not alter the AhR facilitatory effect on AR,
whereas SRC1 overexpression further enhanced the effect. In contrast, FHL2
overexpression blocked the facilitatory effect of AhR. In the presence of
exogenous FHL2 expression, AhR repressed AR activity, whereas at low endogenous
levels of FHL2 expression, AhR overexpression enhanced AR activity. At high FHL2 
expression levels, TCDD treatment decreased AR activity and this effect was
reversed by AhR overexpression. These findings demonstrate that AhR modulation of
AR activity is differentially altered by the level of FHL2 and AhR present in the
cell.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19815066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 20;106(42):17910-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0909353106. Epub 2009 Oct 1.

Acriflavine inhibits HIF-1 dimerization, tumor growth, and vascularization.

Lee K(1), Zhang H, Qian DZ, Rey S, Liu JO, Semenza GL.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Program, Institute for Cell Engineering, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

HIF-1 is a heterodimeric transcription factor that mediates adaptive responses to
hypoxia and plays critical roles in cancer progression. Using a cell-based
screening assay we have identified acriflavine as a drug that binds directly to
HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha and inhibits HIF-1 dimerization and transcriptional
activity. Pretreatment of mice bearing prostate cancer xenografts with
acriflavine prevented tumor growth and treatment of mice bearing established
tumors resulted in growth arrest. Acriflavine treatment inhibited intratumoral
expression of angiogenic cytokines, mobilization of angiogenic cells into
peripheral blood, and tumor vascularization. These results provide proof of
principle that small molecules can inhibit dimerization of HIF-1 and have potent 
inhibitory effects on tumor growth and vascularization.

PMCID: PMC2764905
PMID: 19805192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Eur J Heart Fail. 2009 Oct;11(10):1014-20. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfp121.

Staged heart transplantation and chemotherapy as a treatment option in patients
with severe cardiac light-chain amyloidosis.

Kristen AV(1), Sack FU, Schonland SO, Hegenbart U, Helmke BM, Koch A, Schnabel
PA, Röcken C, Hardt S, Remppis A, Goldschmidt H, Karck M, Ho AD, Katus HA,
Dengler TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Angiology, and Respiratory Medicine, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 410, Heidelberg D-69120, Germany.
arnt_kristen@med.uni-heidelberg.de

AIMS: The prognosis of advanced cardiac light-chain amyloidosis is poor. Heart
transplantation might enable causative therapy and ultimately improve prognosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Nineteen patients with cardiac amyloidosis but no obvious
involvement of other organs were scheduled for heart transplantation. Four to 6
months later, high-dose melphalan chemotherapy and autologous stem cell
transplantation (HDM-ASCT) was planned in patients not in complete remission.
Seven of nineteen patients died while waiting for heart transplantation. The
remaining 12 patients (complete remission, n = 4) underwent surgery. Chemotherapy
in patients not in complete remission consisted of HDM-ASCT (n = 5/12; subsequent
complete remission, n = 2; partial remission, n = 3) or melphalan-prednisolone
(partial remission, n = 1). Two of twelve patients were ineligible for any
chemotherapy. Three of twelve patients died [423.5 (105-2131) days] from
progressive disease, relapse, or sepsis. The 1- and 3-year survival rates were 83
and 83%, respectively, similar to those of patients undergoing heart
transplantation for standard indications. Corresponding survival rates stratified
by haematological response were 100 and 100% for complete remission (partial
remission, 100 and 100%; progressive disease, 0 and 0%).
CONCLUSION: Heart transplantation in advanced cardiac amyloidosis is a promising 
approach to interrupting the vicious circle of ineligibility for potential
curative chemotherapeutic treatment and extremely poor prognosis of cardiac
amyloidosis without chemotherapy. Highly urgent heart transplantation combined
with subsequent HDM-ASCT appears to offer a successful treatment option to
improve the poor outcome of cardiac amyloidosis. However, it should be restricted
to highly selected patients in specialized centres.

PMID: 19789405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Neuroendocrinology. 2010;91(1):110-20. doi: 10.1159/000243163. Epub 2009 Sep 26.

In vivo circadian rhythms in gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons.

Hickok JR(1), Tischkau SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Ill 62794-9629, USA.

Although it is generally accepted that the circadian clock provides a timing
signal for the luteinizing hormone (LH) surge, mechanistic explanations of this
phenomenon remain underexplored. It is known, for example, that circadian
locomotor output cycles kaput (clock) mutant mice have severely dampened LH
surges, but whether this phenotype derives from a loss of circadian rhythmicity
in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) or altered circadian function in
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons has not been resolved. GnRH neurons
can be stimulated to cycle with a circadian period in vitro and disruption of
that cycle disturbs secretion of the GnRH decapeptide. We show that both period-2
(PER2) and brain muscle Arnt-like-1 (BMAL1) proteins cycle with a circadian
period in the GnRH population in vivo. PER2 and BMAL1 expression both oscillate
with a 24-hour period, with PER2 peaking during the night and BMAL1 peaking
during the day. The population, however, is not as homogeneous as other
oscillatory tissues with only about 50% of the population sharing peak expression
levels of BMAL1 at zeitgeber time 4 (ZT4) and PER2 at ZT16. Further, a light
pulse that induced a phase delay in the activity rhythm of the GnRH-eGFP mice
caused a similar delay in peak expression levels of BMAL1 and PER2. These studies
provide direct evidence for a functional circadian clock in native GnRH neurons
with a phase that closely follows that of the SCN.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19786732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Biochemistry. 2009 Nov 3;48(43):10275-85. doi: 10.1021/bi901121w.

A flavin cofactor-binding PAS domain regulates c-di-GMP synthesis in AxDGC2 from 
Acetobacter xylinum.

Qi Y(1), Rao F, Luo Z, Liang ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemical Biology and Biotechnology, School of Biological Sciences,
Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551.

The cytoplasmic protein AxDGC2 regulates cellulose synthesis in the obligate
aerobe Acetobacter xylinum by controlling the cellular concentration of the
cyclic dinucleotide messenger c-di-GMP. AxDGC2 contains a Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS)
domain and two putative catalytic domains (GGDEF and EAL) for c-di-GMP
metabolism. We found that the PAS domain of AxDGC2 binds a flavin adenine
dinucleotide (FAD) cofactor noncovalently. The redox status of the FAD cofactor
modulates the catalytic activity of the GGDEF domain for c-di-GMP synthesis, with
the oxidized form exhibiting higher catalytic activity and stronger substrate
inhibition. The results suggest that AxDGC2 is a signaling protein that regulates
the cellular c-di-GMP level in response to the change in cellular redox status or
oxygen concentration. Moreover, several residues predicated to be involved in FAD
binding and signal transduction were mutated to examine the impact on redox
potential and catalytic activity. Despite the minor perturbation of redox
potential and unexpected modification of FAD in one of the mutants, none of the
single mutations was able to completely disrupt the transmission of the signal to
the GGDEF domain, indicating that the change in the FAD redox state can still
trigger structural changes in the PAS domain probably by using substituted
hydrogen-bonded water networks. Meanwhile, although the EAL domain of AxDGC2 was 
found to be catalytically inactive toward c-di-GMP, it was capable of hydrolyzing
some phosphodiester bond-containing nonphysiological substrates. Together with
the previously reported oxygen-dependent activity of the homologous AxPDEA1, the 
results provided new insight into relationships among oxygen level, c-di-GMP
concentration, and cellulose synthesis in A. xylinum.

PMID: 19785462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Toxicology. 2010 Feb 9;268(3):132-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2009.09.007. Epub 2009
Sep 22.

AhR and ARNT modulate ER signaling.

Swedenborg E(1), Pongratz I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet at Novum, S-141
57 Huddinge, Sweden.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), in complex with its binding partner ARNT,
mediates the cellular response to xenobiotic compounds such as the environmental 
pollutant dioxin. In addition, the AhR has important regulatory roles in normal
physiology. For instance, there is extensive data showing an intricate
relationship between the AhR and estrogen receptor (ER) pathways. This review
focuses on the regulatory roles of AhR and ARNT, beyond the response to
xenobiotics. In particular, the effects of AhR agonists on the estrogen signaling
pathways and the role of ARNT as a modulator of ER activity are discussed.

(c) 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19778576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Internist (Berl). 2010 Feb;51(2):207-12. doi: 10.1007/s00108-009-2445-4.

[60-year old woman with round lesion of the right upper lobe of the lung after
heart transplantation].

[Article in German]

Kristen AV(1), Zimmermann S, Helmke BM, Hosch W, Katus HA, Meyer FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Innere Medizin III, Medizinische Universitätsklinik Heidelberg, 
Im Neuenheimer Feld 410, 69120 Heidelberg. Arnt_Kristen@med.uni-heidelberg.de

We report on a woman presenting with fever and novel round lesion in the lung
four months after heart transplantation. Microbiologic assessment of bronchial
lavage and operative specimen revealed pulmonary nocardiosis. Furthermore,
cerebral involvement has been observed. Antibiotic treatment according to the
microbiological sensitivity test for eleven months resulted in complete remission
of pulmonary and cerebral nocardiosis. Immunosuppressive treatment increases the 
risk for opportunistic infections early after transplantation as well as
malignancies during the late course.

PMID: 19756439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Nov;30(11):1957-61. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp201. Epub 2009
Sep 15.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) is required for tumor
initiation by benzo[a]pyrene.

Shi S(1), Yoon DY, Hodge-Bell KC, Bebenek IG, Whitekus MJ, Zhang R, Cochran AJ,
Huerta-Yepez S, Yim SH, Gonzalez FJ, Jaiswal AK, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P) is a ligand for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Ahr). After
binding ligand, Ahr dimerizes with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (Arnt) protein, and the dimer upregulates the transcription of
Cyp1a1, Cyp1b1 and other enzymes involved in the metabolic activation of B[a]P.
Arnt null mice die in utero. Mice in which Arnt deletion occurs constitutively in
the epidermis die perinatally. In the current study, mice were developed in which
the Arnt gene could be deleted specifically in adult skin epidermis. This
deletion had no overt pathological effect. Homozygosity for a null reduced
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (phosphate): quinone oxidoreductase allele was 
introduced into the above mouse strain to render it more susceptible to tumor
initiation by B[a]P. Deletion of Arnt in the epidermis of this strain completely 
prevented the induction of skin tumors in a tumor initiation-promotion protocol
in which a single topical application of B[a]P acted as the tumor-initiating
event, and tumor promotion was provided by repeated topical applications of
12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate (TPA). In contrast, deletion of Arnt did
not prevent the induction of skin tumors in a protocol also using TPA as the
promoter but using as the initiator N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine, whose
activity is unlikely to be affected by the activity of Ahr, Arnt or their target 
genes. These observations demonstrate that Arnt is required for tumor initiation 
by B[a]P in this system.

PMCID: PMC2791324
PMID: 19755658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Curr Med Chem. 2009;16(31):4066-218.

Synthetic and natural compounds that interact with human cytochrome P450 1A2 and 
implications in drug development.

Wang B(1), Zhou SF.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Chinese Medicine, School of Health Sciences, RMIT University,
Bundoora, Victoria, Australia.

Human cytochrome P450 1A2 (CYP1A2) is one of the major CYPs in the liver (
approximately 13%) and metabolizes about 20% of clinically used drugs. CYP1A2 is 
a 515-residue protein with a molecular mass of 58,294 Dal. The recently published
crystal structure of CYP1A2 in complex with alpha-naphthoflavone has showed a
rather compact active site with a relatively small volume of the cavity of 375
A(3), which is 44.2% and 49.3% larger than that of CYP2A6 (260 A(3)) and CYP2E1
(190 A(3)), respectively. A series of residues in the substrate recognition
regions of CYP1A2 (e.g. Arg108, Thr124, Thr223, Glu225, Phe226, Lys250, Arg251,
Lys253, Asn312, Asp313, Glu318, Thr319, Asp320, Thr321, Val322, Leu382, Thr385,
and Ile386) have been shown to play important roles in ligand-enzyme binding
based on site-directed mutagenesis and homology modeling studies. Typical CYP1A2 
substrates generally contain planar ring that can fit the narrow and planar
active site of the enzyme, such as propranolol, clozapine, guanabenz, flutamide, 
imatinib, thalidomide, carbamazepine, lidocaine, theophylline, tacrine,
tizanidine, zolpidem, riluzole, zileuton, and leflunomide. CYP1A2 is one of the
major enzymes that bioactivate a number of procarcinogens including polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (e.g., benzo[a]pyrene), heterocyclic aromatic amines/amides
(e.g. 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine), mycotoxins (e.g.
aflatoxin B(1)) and some natural compounds such as aristolochic acids present in 
several Chinese herbal medicines. This enzyme also metabolizes several important 
endogenous compounds including retinols, melatonin, steroids, uroporphyrinogen
and arachidonic acids. Like many of other CYPs, CYP1A2 is subject to induction
and inhibition by a number of compounds. In particular, several therapeutic drugs
including antofloxacin, carbamazepine, dihydralazine, furafylline, isoniazid,
rofecoxib, clorgyline, thiabendazole, and zileuton are mechanism-based inhibitors
of CYP1A2. Reversible and irreversible inhibition of by drugs CYP1A2 may provide 
an explanation for some clinical drug-drug interactions. Similar to CYP1A1 and
1B1, CYP1A2 is primarily regulated by the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a 
ligand-activated transcription factor and a basic helix-loop-helix protein
belonging to the Per-Arnt-Sim family of transcription factors. CYP1A2 is
polymorphic and a number of genetic mutations in CYP1A2 have been reported. It
has been suggested that approximately 35 to 75% of the interindividual
variability in CYP1A2 activity is due to genetic factors. Some of the mutations
of CYP1A2 have been found to alter the clearance of drugs that are extensively
metabolized by CYP1A2. Collectively, CYP1A2 plays a major role in drug
metabolism, procarcinogen activation and some drug-drug interactions; it is
important to identify whether a new drug is a substrate, inducer or inhibitor in 
drug development. This candidate selection might eventually lead to a less
prominent role of this enzyme in the future for drug metabolism and minimize the 
potential for significant polymorphic metabolism in humans and drug-drug
interactions when used in combination with CYP1A2 inhibitors.

PMID: 19754423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Am Chem Soc. 2009 Aug 19;131(32):11306-7. doi: 10.1021/ja9048338.

Slow transition between two beta-strand registers is dictated by protein
unfolding.

Evans MR(1), Gardner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is a promiscuous, basic
helix-loop-helix Period/ARNT/Single-minded protein that forms dimeric
transcriptional regulator complexes with other bHLH-PAS proteins to regulate
various biological pathways. Intriguingly, the introduction of a single point
mutation into the C-terminal PAS-B domain resulted in a protein that can
simultaneously exist in two distinct conformations. The difference between these 
two structures is a +3 slip and inversion of a central Ibeta-strand and an
accompanying N448-P449 peptide bond isomerization in the preceding HI loop.
Previous studies have indicated these two forms of Y456T interconvert on the
approximate time scale of tens of minutes, allowing these two conformations to be
separated by ion exchange chromatography. Here, we use time-resolved solution NMR
spectroscopy to quantitatively characterize this rate and its temperature
dependence, providing information into the transition state. When compared with
fluorescence measurements of protein unfolding rates, we find data that suggest a
linkage between interconversion and unfolding based on comparable temperature
dependence and corresponding energetics of these processes. Notably, the
N448-P449 peptide bond also plays a critical role for the interconversion between
states, with a mutant unable to adopt a cis configuration at this bond
(P449A/Y456T) being kinetically trapped under nondenaturing conditions. Taken
together, these data provide information about a rare equilibrium model system
for beta-strand slippage.

PMCID: PMC2739125
PMID: 19722642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Med Chem. 2009 Sep 24;52(18):5635-41. doi: 10.1021/jm900199u.

Modeling of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) ligand binding domain and its
utility in virtual ligand screening to predict new AhR ligands.

Bisson WH(1), Koch DC, O'Donnell EF, Khalil SM, Kerkvliet NI, Tanguay RL, Abagyan
R, Kolluri SK.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Laboratory, Environmental Health Sciences Center, Oregon State 
University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor;
the AhR Per-AhR/Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain binds ligands. We developed homology models
of the AhR PAS domain to characterize previously observed intra- and interspecies
differences in ligand binding using molecular docking. In silico structure-based 
virtual ligand screening using our model resulted in the identification of
pinocembrin and 5-hydroxy-7-methoxyflavone, which promoted nuclear translocation 
and transcriptional activation of AhR and AhR-dependent induction of endogenous
target genes.

PMCID: PMC3289977
PMID: 19719119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biosci Bioeng. 2009 Oct;108(4):277-81. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2009.04.015.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated induction of the cytosolic phospholipase
A(2)alpha gene by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in mouse hepatoma
Hepa-1c1c7 cells.

Kinehara M(1), Fukuda I, Yoshida K, Ashida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agrobioscience, Kobe University, Rokkodai, Nada-ku, Hyogo,
Japan.

Upon binding to ligands such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), an
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is activated to form a heterodimer with an aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt). This complex binds to DNA. It
has been shown that the AhR bonds to a DNA sequence called the dioxin response
element (DRE), which controls the expression of battery genes. It is reported
that TCDD releases arachidonic acid from membrane phospholipids via activation of
phospholipase A(2)s (PLA(2)s) in various cell types. Recently, we demonstrated
that the TCDD-activated AhR binds to the second intron of the Pla2g4a gene, which
encodes cytosolic phospholipase A(2)alpha (cPLA(2)alpha), in mouse hepatoma
Hepa-1c1c7 cells. This result suggests that Pla2g4a appears to be a target gene
of the AhR. In the present study, we investigated whether the transcriptional
regulation of Pla2g4a is dependent on the AhR in Hepa-1c1c7 cells. Treatment of
the cells with TCDD increased mRNA expression of Pla2g4a and enzymatic activity
of PLA(2,) while this increased expression was not observed in AhR-defective c12 
cells. After transient transfection of an Ahr gene-expressing plasmid into the
c12 cells, expression of Pla2g4a was increased by TCDD. These results indicate
that Pla2g4a may be a novel target gene of the AhR, and its transcriptional
induction is mediated through binding of the AhR to the second intron of Pla2g4a,
although this target site does not have a typical DRE sequence.

PMID: 19716514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Mar;1801(3):289-98. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2009.08.006.
Epub 2009 Aug 26.

Glucolipotoxicity of the pancreatic beta cell.

Poitout V(1), Amyot J, Semache M, Zarrouki B, Hagman D, Fontés G.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Diabetes Research Center, CRCHUM, Department of Medicine, University 
of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. Vincent.poitout@umontreal.ca

The concept of glucolipotoxicity refers to the combined, deleterious effects of
elevated glucose and fatty acid levels on pancreatic beta-cell function and
survival. Significant progress has been made in recent years towards a better
understanding of the cellular and molecular basis of glucolipotoxicity in the
beta cell. The permissive effect of elevated glucose on the detrimental actions
of fatty acids stems from the influence of glucose on intracellular fatty acid
metabolism, promoting the synthesis of cellular lipids. The combination of
excessive levels of fatty acids and glucose therefore leads to decreased insulin 
secretion, impaired insulin gene expression, and beta-cell death by apoptosis,
all of which probably have distinct underlying mechanisms. Recent studies from
our laboratory have identified several pathways implicated in fatty acid
inhibition of insulin gene expression, including the extracellular-regulated
kinase (ERK1/2) pathway, the metabolic sensor Per-Arnt-Sim kinase (PASK), and the
ATF6 branch of the unfolded protein response. We have also confirmed in vivo in
rats that the decrease in insulin gene expression is an early defect which
precedes any detectable abnormality in insulin secretion. While the role of
glucolipotoxicity in humans is still debated, the inhibitory effects of
chronically elevated fatty acid levels has been clearly demonstrated in several
studies, at least in individuals genetically predisposed to developing type 2
diabetes. It is therefore likely that glucolipotoxicity contributes to beta-cell 
failure in type 2 diabetes as well as to the decline in beta-cell function
observed after the onset of the disease.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2824006
PMID: 19715772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Microb Pathog. 2009 Nov;47(5):258-66. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2009.08.004. Epub
2009 Aug 26.

Beta-naphthoflavone causes an AhR-independent inhibition of invasion and
intracellular multiplication of Listeria monocytogenes in murine hepatocytes.

Shi LZ(1), Czuprynski CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
53706, USA. lewis.shi@stjude.org

We recently reported a heretofore unknown role for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
in host resistance to listeriosis in mice. Hepatocytes are an important site for 
Listeria monocytogenes multiplication in vivo. In this study, we investigated
whether activation of AhR in TIB73 murine embryonic hepatocytes affects the
ingestion and intracellular multiplication of L. monocytogenes. Treatment of
TIB73 cells with the AhR agonist beta-naphthoflavone (BNF) significantly
inhibited the ingestion and intracellular growth of L. monocytogenes. The
inhibitory effects of BNF were dose-dependent and correlated with up-regulation
of CYP1A1. Surprisingly, pretreatment with AhR antagonists (3'-MNF or
alpha-naphthoflavone) or knocking-down of AhR with siRNA did not abolish the
inhibitory effects of BNF. Moreover, the inhibitory effects of BNF on invasion
and intracellular growth of L. monocytogenes by BNF were observed in
AhR-deficient (CRL-2710), or ARNT-dysfunctional (CRL-2717) Hepa cells. We also
observed similar inhibitory effects of BNF treatment using primary hepatocytes
recovered from AhR(+/-) or AhR(-/-) mice. Moreover, the prototypic AhR agonist
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) did not inhibit the invasion and
intracellular growth of L. monocytogenes in TIB73 cells. Mechanistic studies
demonstrated that ROS, but not TNF-alpha or iNOS, plays an important role in
mediating BNF-induced inhibition. In conclusion, BNF caused an AhR-independent
inhibition of ingestion and intracellular multiplication of L. monocytogenes in
murine hepatocytes, mediated in part by production of ROS.

PMCID: PMC2767476
PMID: 19715752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Plant Signal Behav. 2008 Nov;3(11):966-8.

PAS/LOV proteins: A proposed new class of plant blue light receptor.

Ogura Y(1), Tokutomi S, Wada M, Kiyosue T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genome Analysis and Genetic Research; Life Science Research
Center; Institute of Research Promotion; Kagawa University; Kagawa Japan.

The light, oxygen or voltage (LOV) domain belongs to the Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS)
superfamily of domains, and functions with the flavin chromophore as a module for
sensing blue light in plants and fungi. The Arabidopsis thaliana PAS/LOV proteins
(PLPs), of unknown function, possess an N-terminal PAS domain and a C-terminal
LOV domain. Our recent analysis using yeast two-hybrid and Escherichia coli
protein production systems reveals that the interactions of Arabidopsis PLPs with
several proteins diminish under blue light illumination and that the PLP LOV
domain may bind to a flavin chromophore. These results suggest that PLP functions
as a blue light receptor. Homologs of PLP exist in rice, tomato and moss. The LOV
domains of these PLP homologs form a distinct group in phylogenetic analysis.
These facts suggest that PLP belongs to a new class of plant blue light receptor.

PMCID: PMC2633744
PMID: 19704421  [PubMed]


154. Curr Drug Metab. 2009 Sep;10(7):713-29.

Insights into the structure, function, and regulation of human cytochrome P450
1A2.

Zhou SF(1), Chan E, Zhou ZW, Xue CC, Lai X, Duan W.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, RMIT University, Victoria 3083, Australia.
shufeng.zhou@rmit.edu.au

CYP1A2 is one of the major CYPs in human liver ( approximately 13%) and
metabolises a variety of clinically important drugs, such as clozapine,
lidocaine, theophylline, tacrine, and leflunomide. CYP1A2 is one of the major
enzymes that bioactivate a number of procarcinogens and thus induction of CYP1A2 
may increase the carcinogenicity of these compounds. This enzyme also metabolizes
several important endogenous compounds including steroids, retinols, melatonin,
uroporphyrinogen and arachidonic acid. In the recently published crystal
structure of CYP1A2 in complex with alpha-naphthoflavone, its compact active site
is closed without clear solvent or substrate access channels. Not surprisingly,
CYP1A2 has a relatively small volume of the active site cavity of 375 A(3), which
is 44.2% larger than that of CYP2A6 (260 A(3)), but much smaller than that of
CYP3A4 (1385 A(3)) and 2C8 (1438 A(3)). Generally, CYP1A2 substrates contain
planar ring that can fit the narrow and planar active site of the enzyme. Like
many of other CYPs, CYP1A2 is subject to induction and inhibition by a number of 
compounds. Similar to CYP1A1 and 1B1, CYP1A2 is primarily regulated by the
aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a ligand-activated transcription factor and 
a basic helix-loop-helix protein belonging to the Per-Arnt-Sim family of
transcription factors. Knockout of Cyp1a2 in mice has provided a very useful tool
for the functional investigation of this gene. Further studies are needed to
explore the clinical and toxicological significance of CYP1A2.

PMID: 19702529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. FEBS Lett. 2009 Sep 17;583(18):3039-44. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.08.013. Epub 
2009 Aug 18.

A truncated human Ah receptor suppresses growth of human cervical tumor
xenografts by interfering with hypoxia signaling.

Wang D(1), Faridi JS, Li Y, Chan WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, Thomas J. Long School of 
Pharmacy and Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, CA 95211,
United States.

We used a xenograft model to investigate whether the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
deletion construct CDelta553 suppresses tumor growth. HeLa cells that were
infected with CDelta553 expressing adenovirus (Ad553) formed very small tumors
whereas the control adenovirus-infected cells formed large tumors at day 15.
CDelta553 inhibited the formation of the HIF-1 DNA complex and suppressed the
induction of the HIF-1alpha target proteins CAIX and GLUT1. The Ad553 tumors had 
less HIF-1 function since they showed reduced microvessel formation and lesser
amounts of HIF-1alpha, Arnt, phospho-Akt, CAIX, and GLUT1. Proteasome-mediated
Arnt degradation was enhanced in Ad553-infected HeLa cells and tumors.

PMCID: PMC2747505
PMID: 19695250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Curr Pharm Des. 2009;15(33):3844-52.

Regulation of HIF-1alpha at the transcriptional level.

Görlach A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Pediatric Cardiology, German Heart Center Munich, TU Munich,
Germany. goerlach@dhm.mhn.de

The hypoxia-inducible factor HIF-1 has been shown to be mandatory for the
cellular adaptation to hypoxia. In addition, evidence has been provided that
HIF-1 can mediate various stress responses and that it may play an important role
under inflammatory conditions even independently of hypoxia. HIF-1 is a
heterodimer consisting of an alpha subunit which is subject to tight regulation, 
and a beta-subunit, also termed ARNT, which appears to be constitutively
expressed. In addition to the complex network controlling the cellular content of
HIF-1alpha at the level of protein stability, recent evidence showed that
HIF-1alpha levels can also be regulated at the mRNA level. In fact,
transcriptional regulatory networks seem to be an additional way of controlling
HIF-1alpha levels and may open new therapeutic options to modulate HIF-1alpha
also under non-hypoxic conditions.

PMID: 19671046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Curr Pharm Des. 2009;15(33):3853-60.

Factors interacting with HIF-1alpha mRNA: novel therapeutic targets.

Galbán S(1), Gorospe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The heterodimeric transcription factor HIF-1 (hypoxia-inducible factor-1) induces
angiogenesis, a process that is aberrantly elevated in cancer. The HIF-1beta
subunit is constitutively expressed, but the levels of the HIF-1alpha subunit are
robustly regulated, increasing under hypoxic conditions and decreasing in
normoxia. These changes result from rapid alterations in the rates of HIF-1alpha 
production and degradation. While the regulation of HIF-1alpha degradation is
understood in significant detail, much less is known about the regulation of
HIF-1alpha biosynthesis. Here, we review recent evidence that HIF-1alpha
production is effectively controlled by post-transcriptional mechanisms. We focus
on the RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) and the non-coding RNAs that interact with the
HIF-1alpha mRNA and influence its half-life and translation rate. HIF-1alpha
mRNA-binding factors are emerging as promising pharmacological targets to control
HIF-1alpha production selectively and efficiently.

PMCID: PMC2791462
PMID: 19671045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Mar Pollut Bull. 2009 Nov;58(11):1643-8. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2009.07.004.
Epub 2009 Aug 8.

Amnesic shellfish poisoning toxin stimulates the transcription of CYP1A possibly 
through AHR and ARNT in the liver of red sea bream Pagrus major.

Wang L(1), Liang XF, Zhang WB, Mai KS, Huang Y, Shen D.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632,
China.

To investigate the role of detoxification-related liver genes in amnesic
shellfish poisoning toxin metabolism, red sea bream Pagrus major were exposed to 
domoic acid (DA, 2mugg(-1) wet weight) for 24h. Hepatic mRNA expression levels of
AHR, ARNT, CYP1 and GSTs were determined by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. The
cytosolic factors aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT) mRNA levels of DA exposure group were substantially
enhanced by 113.3% and 90.9%, respectively. Consistent with this result, the
phase I xenobiotic metabolizing enzyme (XME) cytochrome P-450 1A (CYP1A) was
significantly induced. In contrast, the transcriptions of three major phase II
XME glutathione S-transferases as well as heat shock protein 70 were not
significantly affected by DA exposure. These results suggest a possible role of
CYP1A after DA exposure in the toxin metabolism of marine fish, possibly through 
the AHR/ARNT signaling pathway.

PMID: 19665739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. BMC Cancer. 2009 Jul 20;9:241. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-241.

GLUT1 gene is a potential hypoxic marker in colorectal cancer patients.

Chung FY(1), Huang MY, Yeh CS, Chang HJ, Cheng TL, Yen LC, Wang JY, Lin SR.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan, Republic of China. fuyenchung@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Tumor hypoxia is an important factor related to tumor resistance to
radiotherapy and chemotherapy. This study investigated molecules synthesized in
colorectal cancer cells during hypoxia to explore the possibility of developing
molecular probes capable of detecting cell death and/or the efficiency of
radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
METHODS: At first, we incubated two human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell lines
SW480 (UICC stage II) and SW620 (UICC stage III) cells in hypoxic (< or =2% O2,
93% N2, and 5% CO2) and normoxic conditions (20% O2, 75% N2, and 5% CO2) for 24 h
and 48 h. The relative expression ratio of GLUT1 mRNA in hypoxic conditions was
analyzed by RT-PCR. Ten cancerous tissues collected from human colorectal cancer 
patients were examined. HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha levels were measured to
indicate the degree of hypoxia, and gene expression under hypoxic conditions was 
determined. As a comparison, HIF-1alpha, HIF-2alpha, and GLUT1 levels were
measured in the peripheral blood of 100 CRC patients.
RESULTS: Hypoxia-induced lactate was found to be elevated 3.24- to 3.36-fold in
SW480 cells, and 3.06- to 3.17-fold in SW620 cells. The increased relative
expression ratio of GLUT1 mRNA, under hypoxic conditions was higher in SW620
cells (1.39- to 1.72-fold elevation) than in SW480 cells (1.24- to 1.66-fold
elevation). HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha levels were elevated and GLUT1 genes were
significantly overexpressed in CRC tissue specimens. The elevated ratio of GLUT1 
was higher in stage III and IV CRC tissue specimens than in the stage I and II
(2.97-4.73 versus 1.44-2.11). GLUT1 mRNA was also increased in the peripheral
blood of stage II and III CRC patients as compared to stage I patients,
suggesting that GLUT1 may serve as a hypoxic indicator in CRC patients.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, this study demonstrated that GLUT1 has the potential
to be employed as a molecular marker to indicate the degree of hypoxia
experienced by tumors circulating in the blood of cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC3087329
PMID: 19619276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Chem Biol Interact. 2009 Dec 10;182(2-3):148-58. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2009.07.005. 
Epub 2009 Jul 16.

Glucocorticoid and adrenalectomy effects on the rat aryl hydrocarbon receptor
pathway depend on the dosing regimen and post-surgical time.

Mullen Grey AK(1), Riddick DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical Sciences Building,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 1A8.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that mediates the effects of aromatic hydrocarbons, such as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and 3-methylcholanthrene (MC); the
prototypical response is induction of drug-metabolizing enzymes. Factors that
regulate AHR levels in vivo are poorly understood and it is also not clear how
AHR levels affect aromatic hydrocarbon responsiveness. Our interest in
pituitary-dependent regulation of AHR levels was prompted by two findings from
our laboratory: (1) hypophysectomized rats have reduced hepatic levels of AHR
protein; and (2) glucocorticoids increase AHR expression and aromatic hydrocarbon
responsiveness in rodent hepatoma cells. To study whether adrenalectomy and
glucocorticoids contribute to hormone-dependent regulation of the hepatic AHR
pathway, male adrenalectomized (ADX) or SHAM-ADX rats were treated with
dexamethasone (DEX) or vehicle. AHR protein was depleted by 50-60% at 4 days
after ADX, but was not altered by DEX treatment. To assess whether the observed
AHR depletion affected aromatic hydrocarbon responsiveness, the induction of
hepatic cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) mRNA by MC was measured as an AHR-mediated
adaptive response. MC-induced hepatic CYP1B1 mRNA was reduced by 50% in ADX rats 
relative to SHAM-ADX. Exogenous glucocorticoid treatment (DEX - 1.5mg/kg) induced
hepatic AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) mRNA by up to 9-fold at 3 and 6h after
dosing, with no corresponding change in ARNT protein levels. These data
demonstrate that: (1) adrenal-dependent factors contribute to the physiological
maintenance of hepatic AHR protein levels; (2) the depletion of hepatic AHR
protein in ADX rats coincided with a diminished adaptive response to MC; and (3) 
exogenous glucocorticoid treatment increases hepatic ARNT mRNA levels regardless 
of adrenal status. This model is useful for studying the mechanisms of AHR and
ARNT regulation and for further characterization of the impact of AHR protein
depletion on the response to aromatic hydrocarbons in vivo.

PMID: 19615983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mol Phylogenet Evol. 2009 Nov;53(2):412-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ympev.2009.07.008.
Epub 2009 Jul 14.

Phylogenetic relationships of Ceratitis fruit flies inferred from nuclear CAD and
tango/ARNT gene fragments: testing monophyly of the subgenera Ceratitis
(Ceratitis) and C. (Pterandrus).

Barr NB(1), Wiegmann BM.

Author information: 
(1)USDA-APHIS Center for Plant Health Science and Technology, Mission Lab,
Edinburg, TX 78541, USA. Norman.B.Barr@aphis.usda.gov

Systematic studies of Ceratitis (Tephritidae) fruit flies using molecular (i.e., 
COI, ND6, and period genes) and morphological (plus host-use characters) data
have recently challenged the monophyly of the subgenera Ceratitis (Ceratitis) and
Ceratitis (Pterandrus). In this paper, we report on the phylogenetic utility of
three single-copy nuclear gene regions (two non-overlapping fragments of the
carbamoylphosphate synthetase, CPS, locus of CAD, and a fragment of tango) within
these taxa and investigate evolutionary relationships based on a concatenated ca.
3.4kb data set that includes the six protein encoding gene regions. Results
indicate that the CAD and tango genes provide useful phylogenetic signal within
the taxa and are compatible with the previously studied genes. The two subgenera,
as currently classified, are not monophyletic. Our molecular phylogenetic
analyses support a revised classification in which (1) the subgenus C.
(Pterandrus) comprises two lineages called A and B, (2) the C. (Pterandrus) B
species should be included in C. (Ceratitis), and (3) the newly defined subgenera
C. (Pterandrus) (=Pterandrus section A) and C. (Ceratitis) [=C. (Ceratitis)+C.
(Pterandrus) section B] are reciprocally monophyletic.

PMID: 19607929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009 Sep 1;617(1-3):17-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.06.060.
Epub 2009 Jul 10.

The intravenous anesthetics barbiturates inhibit hypoxia-inducible factor 1
activation.

Wakamatsu T(1), Tanaka T, Oda S, Nishi K, Harada H, Daijo H, Takabuchi S, Kai S, 
Fukuda K, Hirota K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
Japan.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a master transcription factor of
hypoxia-induced gene expression. Anesthetics and perioperative drugs have been
reported to affect HIF-1 activity. However, the effect of barbiturates on HIF-1
activity has not been reported. In this study, we investigated the effect of
thiopental and thiamylal on HIF-1 activity using the neuronal SH-SY5Y cells, the 
non-neuronal HEK293 cells, and the macrophage-differentiated THP-1 cells. Cells
were exposed to 20% or 1% O(2) conditions with or without thiopental or thiamylal
treatment. The cell lysate were subjected to Western blot analysis using
anti-HIF-1alpha and -HIF-1beta antibodies. HIF-1-dependent gene expression was
investigated by semi-quantitative real-time RT-PCR and luciferase assay.
Hydroxylation of HIF-1alpha protein was evaluated by in vitro pulldown assay
using recombinant protein. Both thiopental and thiamylal reversibly suppressed
hypoxia-induced HIF-1 activation in the neuronal and the non-neuronal cells in a 
dose-dependent manner. Moreover, the barbiturates inhibited
lipopolysaccharide-induced HIF-1alpha expression in THP-1 cells. The
HIF-1-downstream gene expression was also inhibited by the barbiturates.
HIFalpha-hydroxylases activity and HIF-1alpha stability were not affected but the
HIF-1alpha protein neosynthesis was inhibited by the barbiturates. Our
experimental results indicate that barbiturates inhibit induced HIF-1 activation 
and downstream genes expression.

PMID: 19595685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Interv. 2009 Jun;9(3):116-8. doi: 10.1124/mi.9.3.4.

Repression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor transcriptional activity by epidermal
growth factor.

Hankinson O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, and Molecular Toxicology Program, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. ohank@mednet.ucla.edu

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) mediates most, if not all, of the many
toxicological effects of the environmental pollutant 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo- 
p-dioxin [(TCDD) or dioxin]. The "classical" pathway of AHR action involves
dimerization of the liganded AHR with the aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator
(ARNT) protein, and the AHR-ARNT dimer specifically associates with the enhancer 
regions of dioxin-responsive genes, leading to their increased transcription.
Sutter and coworkers recently reported that epidermal growth factor (EGF)
represses the dioxin-mediated induction of CYP1A1 in cultured normal human
keratinocytes by inhibiting the recruitment of the transcriptional coactivator
protein p300 to the CYP1A1 gene. EGF also inhibits the dioxin-dependent induction
of certain parameters in keratinocytes that are reflective of dioxin-induced
chloracne. These findings point to the potential usefulness of EGF for the
treatment of chloracne and also describe a novel mechanism for repression of
dioxin-induced gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC3139379
PMID: 19592671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Biophys J. 2009 Jul 8;97(1):238-47. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2009.03.047.

Conformational heterogeneity and propagation of structural changes in the
LOV2/Jalpha domain from Avena sativa phototropin 1 as recorded by
temperature-dependent FTIR spectroscopy.

Alexandre MT(1), van Grondelle R, Hellingwerf KJ, Kennis JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Faculty of Sciences, Vrije Universiteit, 1081HV
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Phototropins control phototropism, chloroplast movement, stomatal opening, and
leaf expansion in plants. Phototropin 1 (phot1) is composed of a kinase domain
linked to two blue light-sensing domains, LOV2 and LOV1, which bind flavin
mononucleotide. Disruption of the interaction between the LOV2 domain and a
helical segment named Jalpha, joining LOV to the kinase domain, induces the
subsequent kinase activity of phototropin 1 and further-downstream signal
transduction. Here we study the effects of temperature and hydration on the
light-triggered signal propagation in the phot1 LOV2 domain of Avena sativa
(AsLOV2/Jalpha), using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy to unravel part of
the molecular mechanism of phototropin 1. We report that AsLOV2/Jalpha shows an
intense signal in the amide I and II regions, arising mainly from beta-sheet
changes and the unbinding of the Jalpha helix from the Per-ARNT-Sim core and its 
subsequent partial unfolding. Importantly, these structural changes only occur
under conditions of full hydration and at temperatures above 280 K. We
characterized a newly isolated low-hydration intermediate that shows a downshift 
of high-frequency amide I signals and that possibly corresponds to loop
tightening, without large beta-sheet or Jalpha structural changes. In addition,
we report a heterogeneity in AsLOV2/Jalpha involving two different C(4)=O
conformer populations, coexisting in the dark state and characterized by C(4)=O
carbonyl frequencies at 1712 cm(-1) and 1694 cm(-1) that are attributable to a
single H-bond and two H-bonds at this site, respectively. Such conformers display
slightly shifted absorption spectra and cause a splitting of the 475-nm band in
the ultraviolet/visible spectra of LOV domains at low temperature.

PMCID: PMC2711381
PMID: 19580761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Br J Haematol. 2009 Aug;146(4):396-407. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.07761.x.
Epub 2009 Jun 22.

Cytolytic T-cell response to the PASD1 cancer testis antigen in patients with
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Ait-Tahar K(1), Liggins AP, Collins GP, Campbell A, Barnardo M, Lawrie C, Moir D,
Hatton C, Banham AH, Pulford K.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.

The identification of immunogenic cancer testis antigens (CTAs) as
immunotherapeutic targets represents one approach to improve treatment options
for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). We previously identified PASD1 [PAS
(Per ARNT Sim) domain containing 1 (PASD1)], a DLBCL-associated CTA that was
expressed in a range of hematopoietic malignancies. The aim of the present study 
was to investigate the presence of a cytotoxic T-cell (CTL) response to PASD1 in 
DLBCL patients. A significant gamma-interferon (IFN) release was detected in
21/29 HLA-A*0201-positive DLBCL patients (18 de novo DLBCL, two transformed DLBCL
and one T-cell rich B-cell lymphoma) following short-term culture of their
peripheral blood mononuclear cells stimulated with five HLA-A*0201-restricted
PASD1 peptides. No significant responses were detected in 21 HLA-A*0201-negative 
DLBCL patients (12 de novo DLBCL, seven transformed DLBCL, two T-cell rich B-cell
lymphoma) or six normal subjects. CTL cell lines were able to lyse PASD1-positive
tumour cells in a major histocompatibility complex-Class I dependent manner. The 
presence of a gamma-IFN response correlated with PASD1 protein expression in the 
tumour cells in 12/15 cases studied. This is the first report of a CTL response
to a CTA in DLBCL. Our results provide additional valuable evidence supporting
PASD1 as a potential immunotherapeutic target for the treatment of DLBCL and
other malignancies.

PMID: 19552722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2009 Sep;150(3):383-9. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpc.2009.06.003. Epub 2009 Jun 16.

Hypoxia inhibits induction of aryl hydrocarbon receptor activity in topminnow
hepatocarcinoma cells in an ARNT-dependent manner.

Fleming CR(1), Billiard SM, Di Giulio RT.

Author information: 
(1)Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA.
Crf10@duke.edu

Hypoxic events often occur in waters contaminated with toxic chemicals, including
agonists of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). HIF-1alpha, the mediator of
cellular responses to hypoxia, shares a dimerization partner (ARNT) with AhR and 
reciprocal crosstalk may occur. Studies addressing AhR/hypoxia crosstalk in
mammalian cells have produced contradictory results regarding whether reciprocal 
crosstalk actually occurs between these pathways and the role ARNT plays in this 
interaction. We assessed hypoxia-AhR crosstalk in fish cells (PLHC-1) treated
with hypoxia (1% O(2)) or normoxia (21% O(2)) and AhR agonists (benzo[a]pyrene
(BaP), 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB-126), and benzo[k]fluoranthene (BkF))
with and without overexpression of ARNT. Hypoxia limited the induction of a
transiently transfected AhR reporter by all three of the AhR agonists;
overexpression of ARNT eliminated this effect. PCB-126 had no effect on induction
of a transiently transfected hypoxia reporter. BkF caused a minor increase in
basal and induced hypoxia reporter activity. BaP decreased basal and induced
hypoxia reporter activity; overexpression of ARNT did not alter this effect
indicating that this interference with hypoxia pathway activity occurs through an
alternate mechanism. Reduced hypoxia pathway activity with BaP treatment may be
the result of a metabolite. This study supports the hypothesis that HIF-1alpha is
able to sequester ARNT from AhR and limit the activity of the AhR pathway, but
suggests that the converse is not true.

PMCID: PMC3118667
PMID: 19539049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Environ Microbiol. 2009 Sep;11(9):2388-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2009.01967.x.
Epub 2009 Jun 16.

Novel blue light-sensitive proteins from a metagenomic approach.

Pathak GP(1), Ehrenreich A, Losi A, Streit WR, Gärtner W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Bioinorganic Chemistry, Mülheim, Germany.

A microarray-based approach was used to screen a soil metagenome for the presence
of blue light (BL) photoreceptor-encoding genes. The microarray carried 149
different 54-mer oligonucleotides, derived from consensus sequences of light,
oxygen and voltage (LOV) domain BL photoreceptor genes. Calibration of the
microarrays allowed the detection of minimally 50 ng of genomic DNA against a
background of 2-5 microg of genomic DNA. Identification of a positive cosmid
clone was still possible for an amount of 0.25 ng against a background of 10
microg of labelled DNA clones. The array could readily identify targets carrying 
4% sequence mismatch. Using the LOV microarray, up to 1200 library clones in
concentrations of c. 20 ng each with a c. 40 kb insert size could be screened in 
a single batch. After calibration and reliability controls, the microarray was
probed with cosmid-cloned DNA from the thermophilic fraction of a soil sample.
From this approach, a novel gene was isolated that encodes a protein consisting
of several Per-Arnt-Sim domains, a LOV domain associated to a histidine kinase
and a response regulator domain. The novel gene showed highest similarity to a
known sequence from Kineococcus radiotolerans SRS30216 (58% identity for the LOV 
domain only) and to a gene from Methylibium petroleiphilum PM1 (57% identity).
The gene, designated as ht-met1 (Hamburg Thermophile Metagenome 1), was isolated 
and fully sequenced (3615 bp). ht-met1 is followed by a second open reading frame
encoding a Fe-chelatase, an arrangement quite frequent for BL photoreceptors. The
LOV domain region of ht-met1 was subcloned and expressed yielding a fully
functional, flavin-containing LOV domain. Irradiation generated the typical LOV
photochemistry, with the transient formation of a flavin-protein photoadduct. The
dark recovery lifetime was found as tau(REC) = 120 s (20 degrees C) and is among 
the fastest ones determined so far for bacterial LOV domains.

PMID: 19538504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2009 Sep;206(1):39-49. doi: 10.1007/s00213-009-1578-4.
Epub 2009 Jun 9.

Effect of sertindole on extracellular dopamine, acetylcholine, and glutamate in
the medial prefrontal cortex of conscious rats: a comparison with risperidone and
exploration of mechanisms involved.

Mørk A(1), Witten LM, Arnt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurophysiology, Discovery Pharmacology Research, H. Lundbeck
A/S, Ottiliavej 9, 2500, Valby, Copenhagen, Denmark. arm@lundbeck.com

RATIONALE: Second-generation antipsychotics have some beneficial effect on
cognition. Recent studies, furthermore, indicate differential effects of
second-generation antipsychotics on impairment in executive cognitive function.
OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the effect of the second-generation antipsychotic drug,
sertindole, on extracellular levels of dopamine (DA), acetylcholine (ACh), and
glutamate (Glu) in the rat medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). Risperidone was
studied for comparison. Moreover, selective serotonin 5-HT(2A), 5-HT(2C), and
5-HT(6) receptor antagonists were used, given alone and in combination with the
preferential DA D(2) receptor antagonist, haloperidol, to further clarify the
action of the two drugs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Rats were treated acutely with vehicle or drugs, and
extracellular levels of neurotransmitters were assessed by microdialysis in
freely moving animals.
RESULTS: Sertindole and risperidone significantly increased extracellular levels 
of DA. Haloperidol; the 5-HT(2A) receptor antagonist, M100907; the 5-HT(2C)
receptor antagonist, SB242084; and the 5-HT(6) receptor antagonist, GSK-742457,
induced minor increases in levels of DA, but the three latter compounds raised
the DA levels notably in combination with haloperidol. Sertindole and risperidone
significantly increased the extracellular levels of ACh but only sertindole
raised the extracellular levels of Glu. The selective 5-HT(6) receptor
antagonist, SB-271046, significantly increased the extracellular levels of Glu.
CONCLUSION: Sertindole and risperidone markedly increased extracellular levels of
DA in mPFC. The built-in 5-HT(2A)/5-HT(2C)/D(2) receptor antagonism of the two
drugs might be involved in this action. Both drugs increased the extracellular
levels of ACh but only sertindole enhanced Glu levels. The high affinity of
sertindole for the 5-HT(6) receptor compared to risperidone may differentiate
sertindole from risperidone.

PMID: 19506838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Diabetes. 2009 Sep;58(9):2048-58. doi: 10.2337/db08-0579. Epub 2009 Jun 5.

Involvement of Per-Arnt-Sim Kinase and extracellular-regulated kinases-1/2 in
palmitate inhibition of insulin gene expression in pancreatic beta-cells.

Fontés G(1), Semache M, Hagman DK, Tremblay C, Shah R, Rhodes CJ, Rutter J,
Poitout V.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Diabetes Research Center, CRCHUM, University of Montréal, Québec,
Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Prolonged exposure of pancreatic beta-cells to simultaneously elevated
levels of fatty acids and glucose (glucolipotoxicity) impairs insulin gene
transcription. However, the intracellular signaling pathways mediating these
effects are mostly unknown. This study aimed to ascertain the role of
extracellular-regulated kinases (ERKs)1/2, protein kinase B (PKB), and
Per-Arnt-Sim kinase (PASK) in palmitate inhibition of insulin gene expression in 
pancreatic beta-cells.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: MIN6 cells and isolated rat islets were cultured in 
the presence of elevated glucose, with or without palmitate or ceramide. ERK1/2
phosphorylation, PKB phosphorylation, and PASK expression were examined by
immunoblotting and real-time PCR. The role of these kinases in insulin gene
expression was assessed using pharmacological and molecular approaches.
RESULTS: Exposure of MIN6 cells and islets to elevated glucose induced ERK1/2 and
PKB phosphorylation, which was further enhanced by palmitate. Inhibition of
ERK1/2, but not of PKB, partially prevented the inhibition of insulin gene
expression in the presence of palmitate or ceramide. Glucose-induced expression
of PASK mRNA and protein levels was reduced in the presence of palmitate.
Overexpression of wild-type PASK increased insulin and pancreatic duodenal
homeobox-1 gene expression in MIN6 cells and rat islets incubated with glucose
and palmitate, whereas overexpression of a kinase-dead PASK mutant in rat islets 
decreased expression of insulin and pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1 and increased 
C/EBPbeta expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Both the PASK and ERK1/2 signaling pathways mediate palmitate
inhibition of insulin gene expression. These findings identify PASK as a novel
mediator of glucolipotoxicity on the insulin gene in pancreatic beta-cells.

PMCID: PMC2731539
PMID: 19502418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2010 Jul-Aug;19(4):228-35. doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2009.04.005.
Epub 2009 Jun 6.

High prevalence of amyloid in 150 surgically removed heart valves--a comparison
of histological and clinical data reveals a correlation to atheroinflammatory
conditions.

Kristen AV(1), Schnabel PA, Winter B, Helmke BM, Longerich T, Hardt S, Koch A,
Sack FU, Katus HA, Linke RP, Dengler TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Angiology, and Respiratory Medicine, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld, Heidelberg, Germany.
arnt_kristen@med.uni-heidelberg.de

INTRODUCTION: The prevalence, pathophysiology, and clinical indicators of
valvular amyloid deposition have not been clarified yet.
METHODS: One hundred fifty surgically resected heart valve specimens [67.4+/-1.0 
years; aortic stenosis (AS), n=100; aortic regurgitation, n=19; mitral stenosis, 
n=7; mitral regurgitation, n=24] were qualitatively, semiquantitatively, and
immunohistochemically analyzed and correlated with clinical data.
RESULTS: Amyloid was found in 83/150 specimens with highest prevalence in AS
(74/100), intermediate prevalence in mitral stenosis (2/7) and regurgitation
(7/24), and lowest prevalence in aortic regurgitation (2/19). Severe and
polymorphic amyloid deposits were almost exclusively found in AS (35/100).
Filamentous cloudy amyloid patterns occurred with the same frequency in AS
(29/100). A combination of both was found only in AS (n=7/100). By
immunohistochemistry, none of the most common amyloid proteins was identified
except for a weak staining by the apolipoprotein AI antibody, but more intense
adjacent to amyloid deposits. Amyloid correlated with valvular thickening
(P<.05), hyperlipidemia (P=.07), coronary artery disease (P=.084), and obesity
(P=.082).
CONCLUSIONS: Localized valvular amyloid is predominantly found in stenotic aortic
valves. It appears to depend on atheroinflammatory conditions and high
shear-stress hemodynamics. Further studies are needed to identify the underlying 
protein.

PMID: 19502085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2009 Jun 1;65(Pt 6):559-61.
doi: 10.1107/S1744309109014158. Epub 2009 May 22.

Expression, crystallization and preliminary crystallographic analysis of the PAS 
domain of RsbP, a stress-response phosphatase from Bacillus subtilis.

Makino M(1), Kondo S, Kaneko T, Baba S, Hirata K, Kumasaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute/SPring-8, Japan.

RsbP, a regulator of RNA polymerase sigma(B) activity in Bacillus subtilis, is a 
phosphatase containing a Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain in its N-terminal region that 
is expected to sense energy stresses such as carbon, phosphate or oxygen
starvation. Energy-stress signals are transmitted to the PAS domain and activate 
the C-terminal phosphatase domain of RsbP, leading to activation of the
downstream anti-anti-sigma(B) factor RsbV. Finally, the general stress response
is induced to protect the cells against further stresses. The recombinant PAS
domain of RsbP was crystallized by the sitting-drop vapour-diffusion technique
using 40% PEG 400 as a precipitant. The crystals belonged to space group P2(1),
with unit-cell parameters a = 55.2, b = 71.7, c = 60.2 A, beta = 92.1 degrees .
Diffraction data were collected to a resolution of 1.6 A.

PMCID: PMC2688409
PMID: 19478430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Jun;7(6):977-86. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0396. Epub
2009 May 26.

Estrogen receptor subtype- and promoter-specific modulation of aryl hydrocarbon
receptor-dependent transcription.

Wihlén B(1), Ahmed S, Inzunza J, Matthews J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition at Novum, Karolinska Institutet,
Huddinge, Sweden.

In this study, we examined the role of estrogen receptors (ER) in aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)-dependent transactivation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that AHR agonists differentially induced
recruitment of ERalpha to the AHR target genes CYP1A1 and CYP1B1. Cotreatment
with 17beta-estradiol significantly increased beta-naphthoflavone (BNF)- and
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-induced recruitment of ERalpha to CYP1A1,
whereas 3,3'-diindolylmethane induced promoter occupancy of ERalpha at CYP1A1
that was unaffected by cotreatment with 17beta-estradiol. Cyclical recruitment of
AHR and ERalpha to CYP1A1 was only observed in cells treated with BNF. Stable and
subtype-specific knockdown of ERalpha or ERbeta using shRNA showed that
suppression of ERalpha significantly reduced, whereas knockdown of ERbeta
significantly enhanced, AHR agonist-induced Cyp1a1 expression in HC11 mouse
mammary epithelial cells. AHR agonist-induced Cyp1b1 expression was reduced by
ERbeta knockdown but unaffected by ERalpha knockdown. The siRNA-mediated
knockdown of ERalpha in MCF-7 human breast cancer cells did not affect
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-dependent regulation of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1
mRNA expression. In agreement with our in vitro findings in the HC11 cells,
ERalpha knockout mice exhibit reduced BNF-dependent induction of Cyp1a1 mRNA.
These results establish ligand- and promoter-specific influences on the cyclical 
recruitment patterns for AHR and show ER species-, subtype-, and
promoter-specific modulation of AHR-dependent transcription.

PMID: 19470599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Biochemistry. 2009 Jun 30;48(25):5972-83. doi: 10.1021/bi900259z.

Detection of the TCDD binding-fingerprint within the Ah receptor ligand binding
domain by structurally driven mutagenesis and functional analysis.

Pandini A(1), Soshilov AA, Song Y, Zhao J, Bonati L, Denison MS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mathematical Biology, National Institute for Medical Research, The
Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-dependent, basic helix-loop-helix
Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS)-containing transcription factor that can bind and be activated
by structurally diverse chemicals, including the toxic environmental contaminant 
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Our previous three-dimensional
homology model of the mouse AhR (mAhR) PAS B ligand binding domain allowed
identification of the binding site and its experimental validation. We have
extended this analysis by conducting comparative structural modeling studies of
the ligand binding domains of six additional high-affinity mammalian AhRs. These 
results, coupled with site-directed mutagenesis and AhR functional analysis, have
allowed detection of the "TCDD binding-fingerprint" of conserved residues within 
the ligand binding cavity necessary for high-affinity TCDD binding and
TCDD-dependent AhR transformation DNA binding. The essential role of selected
residues was further evaluated using molecular docking simulations of TCDD with
both wild-type and mutant mAhRs. Taken together, our results dramatically improve
our understanding of the molecular determinants of TCDD binding and provide a
basis for future studies directed toward rationalizing the observed species
differences in AhR sensitivity to TCDD and understanding the mechanistic basis
for the dramatic diversity in AhR ligand structure.

PMCID: PMC2859071
PMID: 19456125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Planta Med. 2009 Oct;75(12):1314-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1185685. Epub 2009 May
18.

Induction of the phase II detoxification enzyme NQO1 in hepatocarcinoma cells by 
lignans from the fruit of Schisandra chinensis through nuclear accumulation of
Nrf2.

Lee SB(1), Kim CY, Lee HJ, Yun JH, Nho CW.

Author information: 
(1)Natural Products Research Center, KIST Gangneung Institute, Gangneung,
Gangwon-do, Korea.

The upregulation of phase II detoxification genes is believed to play an
important role in cancer prevention. The molecular mechanism underlying the
changes in gene expression that accompany cancer prevention involves activation
of the transcription factor, NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2). In traditional
medicine, the fruit of Schisandra chinensis Baill is used as a tonic, an
anti-tussive and an anti-aging drug. In the current study, nine lignans were
isolated from S. chinensis and tested for their ability to induce quinone
reductase (QR) activity in Hepa1c1c7 mouse hepatocarcinoma cells. Tigloylgomisin 
H (TGH) and angeloylgomisin H (AGH) significantly induced QR activity and
exhibited a relatively high chemoprevention index (CI) (10.80 and 4.59,
respectively) as compared to control. TGH also induced QR activity in BPrc1 mouse
hepatocarcinoma cells as well, which are defective in aryl hydrocarbon nuclear
translocator (Arnt). In HepG2 human hepatocarcinoma cells, TGH significantly
activated gene expression mediated by the antioxidant response element (ARE), a
key regulatory region in the promoters of detoxification enzymes, through the
nuclear accumulation of Nrf2. The results of the current study suggest that TGH
functions as a novel monofunctional inducer that specifically upregulates phase
II enzymes through the Nrf2-ARE pathway. TGH thus represents a potential liver
cancer prevention agent.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart, New York.

PMID: 19452436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Neurosci Lett. 2009 Aug 21;460(1):82-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2009.05.035. Epub
2009 May 18.

Bifeprunox and aripiprazole suppress in vivo VTA dopaminergic neuronal activity
via D2 and not D3 dopamine autoreceptor activation.

Etievant A(1), Bétry C, Arnt J, Haddjeri N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuropharmacology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Claude
Bernard Lyon I, FRE CNRS 3006, 8 Avenue Rockefeller, 69373 Lyon Cedex 08, France.

Bifeprunox and aripiprazole are two novel antipsychotics presenting partial
agonistic activity for the D(2) and D(3) dopamine (DA) receptors. Using in vivo
electrophysiological paradigms in anaesthetized rats, we have previously shown
that both drugs independently inhibit the spontaneous firing and bursting
activity of ventral tegmental area (VTA) dopaminergic neurons and partially
reverse the suppressing effect of the full DA receptor agonist apomorphine.
Moreover, we have also shown that the D(2/3) receptor antagonist haloperidol
prevents the inhibitory effects of these antipsychotics, confirming their partial
D(2)-like agonistic activities [L. Dahan, H. Husum, O. Mnie-Filali, J. Arnt, P.
Hertel, N. Haddjeri, Effects of bifeprunox and aripiprazole on rat serotonin and 
dopamine neuronal activity and anxiolytic behaviour, J. Psychopharmacol. (2009)].
In the present electrophysiological study, selective antagonists of D(2) and D(3)
receptors were used to further characterize the inhibitory role of bifeprunox and
aripiprazole on the D(2) and D(3) receptors in vivo. Administration of bifeprunox
(250 microg/kg, i.v.) or aripiprazole (300 microg/kg, i.v.) reduced the firing
activity of VTA DA neurons by 40-50%. The bursting activity was reduced by 95%
and 77% by bifeprunox and aripiprazole, respectively. Systemic administration of 
the preferential D(3) receptor antagonist GR218,231 (200 microg/kg, i.v.) did not
modify the inhibitory effect of bifeprunox or aripiprazole, either on the firing 
or on the bursting activity. On the other hand, the preferential D(2) receptor
antagonist L741,626 (500 microg/kg, i.v.) completely blocked the inhibitory
effect of both bifeprunox and aripiprazole on the VTA DA neuronal activity. The
present study shows that bifeprunox and aripiprazole behave as partial D(2), but 
not D(3), receptor agonists in vivo, inhibiting the firing activity
(preferentially the phasic activity) of VTA DA cells.

PMID: 19450663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Drug Metab Dispos. 2009 Aug;37(8):1576-80. doi: 10.1124/dmd.109.027821. Epub 2009
May 15.

The glycogen synthase kinase inhibitor
3-(2,4-dichlorophenyl)-4-(1-methyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1H-pyrrole-2,5-dione (SB216763)
is a partial agonist of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor.

Braeuning A(1), Buchmann A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tübingen, Institute of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology
and Toxicology, Department of Toxicology, Wilhelmstrasse 56, 72074 Tübingen,
Germany. albert.braeuning@uni-tuebingen.de

Kinase inhibitors are frequently used tools in signal transduction research.
3-(2,4-Dichlorophenyl)-4-(1-methyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1H-pyrrole-2,5-dione
(SB216763), a potent inhibitor of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta), is
frequently used to activate beta-catenin signaling by mimicking the action of Wnt
molecules. beta-Catenin is a crucial player in the regulation of hepatic drug
metabolism. Thus, it is of particular importance to know whether the tools used
to study the effects of beta-catenin signaling may affect the respective
drug-metabolizing target enzymes in an unwanted manner. In this study, we show
that SB216763 is able to induce cytochrome P450 1a1 (Cyp1a1) expression in a
dose-dependent manner in mouse hepatoma cells. Moreover, SB216763 is able to
inhibit Cyp1a1 induction by the prototype aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) ligand 
2,3,7,8-tetrachloro-p-dibenzodioxin. Cyp1a1 induction by SB216763 is independent 
of GSK3beta and the beta-catenin pathway. Instead, SB216763 induces Cyp1a1 by
activation of AhR-mediated transcription. The present results suggest that
SB216763 acts as a partial agonist of the AhR.

PMID: 19448134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 10;284(28):19077-89. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.004424. Epub
2009 May 11.

Magnesium deficiency causes loss of response to intermittent hypoxia in
paraganglion cells.

Torii S(1), Kobayashi K, Takahashi M, Katahira K, Goryo K, Matsushita N, Yasumoto
K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Sogawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku 
University, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

Magnesium deficiency is suggested to contribute to many age-related diseases.
Hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) is known to be a master regulator of
hypoxic response. Here we show that hypomagnesemia suppresses reactive oxygen
species (ROS)-induced HIF-1alpha activity in paraganglion cells of the adrenal
medulla and carotid body. In PC12 cells cultured in the low magnesium medium and 
treated with cobalt chloride (CoCl(2)) or exposed to intermittent hypoxia,
ROS-mediated HIF-1alpha activity was suppressed. This suppression was due to
up-regulation of inhibitory PAS (Per/Arnt/Sim) domain protein (IPAS) that was
caused by NF-kappaB activation, which resulted from ROS and calcium influx mainly
through the T-type calcium channels. Induction of tyrosine hydroxylase, a target 
of HIF-1, by CoCl(2) injection was suppressed in the adrenal medulla of
magnesium-deficient mice because of up-regulation of IPAS. Also in the carotid
body of magnesium-deficient mice, CoCl(2) and chronic intermittent hypoxia failed
to enhance the tyrosine hydroxylase expression. These results demonstrate that
serum magnesium levels are a key determinant for ROS-induced hypoxic responses.

PMCID: PMC2707206
PMID: 19433582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Toxicology. 2009 May 17;259(3):91-6. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2009.02.006. Epub 2009
Feb 28.

Influence of aryl hydrocarbon- (Ah) receptor and genotoxins on DNA repair gene
expression and cell survival of mouse hepatoma cells.

Schreck I(1), Chudziak D, Schneider S, Seidel A, Platt KL, Oesch F, Weiss C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, 76344
Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) mediates toxicity of a variety of
environmental pollutants such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and
dioxins. However, the underlying mechanisms and genetic programmes regulated by
AhR to cause adverse effects but also to counteract poisoning are still poorly
understood. Here we analysed the effects of two AhR ligands, benzo[a]pyrene
(B[a]P), a DNA damaging tumour initiator and promotor and
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), a pure tumour promoter, on cell
survival and on nucleotide excision repair (NER) gene expression. NER deals with 
so called "bulky" DNA adducts including those generated by enzymatically
activated B[a]P. Therefore, the hypothesis that AhR may enhance NER gene
expression to trigger DNA repair in the presence of genotoxic AhR ligands was
tested. Furthermore, we investigated a potential cytoprotective effect of AhR
activation by the non-genotoxic ligand TCDD against cell death induced by various
genotoxins. Finally, the actions of genotoxins themselves on NER gene expression 
were studied. As a cell culture model we used mouse hepatoma cells (Hepa-c7)
proficient for AhR and its partner protein ARNT as well as subclones deficient in
AhR (Hepa-c12) or ARNT (Hepa-c4) to study involvement of AhR and ARNT in response
to B[a]P and TCDD. Indeed, the mRNA levels of the two NER genes XP-C and DNA
polymerase kappa were increased by B[a]P and TCDD, however, this was not
accompanied by an increase in the amount of the respective proteins. Pretreatment
of cells with TCDD did not reduce cytotoxicity induced by various genotoxins.
Thus, in Hepa-c7 cells AhR has no major effects on the expression of these
crucial NER proteins and does not prevent genotoxin-provoked cell death. As
expected, the genotoxins B[a]P and cis-platin led to p53 accumulation and
induction of its target p21. Interestingly, however, NER gene expression was not 
enhanced but rather decreased. As two NER genes, XP-C and DNA damage binding
protein ddb2, are up-regulated by p53 and ultraviolet radiation in human cells
these findings suggest cell type, species or lesion specific actions of p53 on
DNA repair gene expression. Importantly, in cells with damaged DNA up-regulation 
of p53 may not suffice to enhance DNA repair gene expression.

PMID: 19428948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cell Metab. 2009 May;9(5):428-39. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2009.04.001.

Ablation of ARNT/HIF1beta in liver alters gluconeogenesis, lipogenic gene
expression, and serum ketones.

Wang XL(1), Suzuki R, Lee K, Tran T, Gunton JE, Saha AK, Patti ME, Goldfine A,
Ruderman NB, Gonzalez FJ, Kahn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell Metab. 2009 Jun;9(6):565.

We have previously shown that expression of the transcription factor
ARNT/HIF1beta is reduced in islets of humans with type 2 diabetes. We have now
found that ARNT is also reduced in livers of diabetics. To study the functional
effect of its reduction, we created mice with liver-specific ablation (L-ARNT KO)
using ARNT loxP mice and adenoviral-mediated delivery of Cre. L-ARNT KO mice had 
normal blood glucose but increased fed insulin levels. These mice also exhibited 
features of type 2 diabetes with increased hepatic gluconeogenesis, increased
lipogenic gene expression, and low serum beta-hydroxybutyrate. These effects
appear to be secondary to increased expression of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein 
alpha (C/EBPalpha), farnesoid X receptor (FXR), and sterol response
element-binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c) and a reduction in phosphorylation of AMPK 
without changes in the expression of enzymes in ketogenesis, fatty acid
oxidation, or FGF21. These results demonstrate that a deficiency of ARNT action
in the liver, coupled with that in beta cells, could contribute to the metabolic 
phenotype of human type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2803070
PMID: 19416713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. PLoS Biol. 2009 Apr 28;7(4):e94. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000094.

Structural and functional analyses of PAS domain interactions of the clock
proteins Drosophila PERIOD and mouse PERIOD2.

Hennig S(1), Strauss HM, Vanselow K, Yildiz O, Schulze S, Arens J, Kramer A, Wolf
E.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, Department of Structural
Biology, Dortmund, Germany.

PERIOD proteins are central components of the Drosophila and mammalian circadian 
clocks. The crystal structure of a Drosophila PERIOD (dPER) fragment comprising
two PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) domains (PAS-A and PAS-B) and two additional C-terminal
alpha-helices (alphaE and alphaF) has revealed a homodimer mediated by
intermolecular interactions of PAS-A with tryptophane 482 in PAS-B and helix
alphaF. Here we present the crystal structure of a monomeric PAS domain fragment 
of dPER lacking the alphaF helix. Moreover, we have solved the crystal structure 
of a PAS domain fragment of the mouse PERIOD homologue mPER2. The mPER2 structure
shows a different dimer interface than dPER, which is stabilized by interactions 
of the PAS-B beta-sheet surface including tryptophane 419 (equivalent to
Trp482dPER). We have validated and quantitatively analysed the homodimer
interactions of dPER and mPER2 by site-directed mutagenesis using analytical gel 
filtration, analytical ultracentrifugation, and co-immunoprecipitation
experiments. Furthermore we show, by yeast-two-hybrid experiments, that the PAS-B
beta-sheet surface of dPER mediates interactions with TIMELESS (dTIM). Our study 
reveals quantitative and qualitative differences between the homodimeric PAS
domain interactions of dPER and its mammalian homologue mPER2. In addition, we
identify the PAS-B beta-sheet surface as a versatile interaction site mediating
mPER2 homodimerization in the mammalian system and dPER-dTIM heterodimer
formation in the Drosophila system.

PMCID: PMC2671562
PMID: 19402751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Anal Biochem. 2008 Nov 15;382(2):101-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2008.07.026. Epub 2008 
Jul 31.

AhR/Arnt:XRE interaction: turning false negatives into true positives in the
modified yeast one-hybrid assay.

Chen G(1), Shin JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Mississauga, Ont., Canada
L5L1C6.

Given the frequent occurrence of false negatives in yeast genetic assays, it is
both interesting and practical to address the possible mechanisms of false
negatives and, more important, to turn false negatives into true positives. We
recently developed a modified yeast one-hybrid system (MY1H) useful for
investigation of simultaneous protein-protein and protein:DNA interactions in
vivo. We coexpressed the basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH/PAS) domains
of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (Arnt)--namely NAhR and NArnt, respectively--which are known to form
heterodimers and bind the cognate xenobiotic response element (XRE) sequence both
in vitro and in vivo, as a positive control in the study of XRE-binding proteins 
in the MY1H system. However, we observed negative results, that is, no positive
signal detected from binding of the NAhR/NArnt heterodimer and XRE site. We
demonstrate that by increasing the copy number of XRE sites integrated into the
yeast genome and using double GAL4 activation domains, the NAhR/NArnt heterodimer
forms and specifically binds the cognate XRE sequence, an interaction that is now
clearly detectable in the MY1H system. This methodology may be helpful in
troubleshooting and correcting false negatives that arise from unproductive
transcription in yeast genetic assays.

PMCID: PMC2643841
PMID: 18722998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. FEBS Lett. 2008 Sep 22;582(21-22):3167-73. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.08.007.
Epub 2008 Aug 15.

Cyclophilin-40 has a cellular role in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor signaling.

Luu TC(1), Bhattacharya P, Chan WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, Thomas J. Long School of 
Pharmacy and Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, CA 95211, USA.

Cyclophilin-40 (CyP40) promotes the formation of the gel shift complex that
contains the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt) and
dioxin response element (DRE) using baculovirus expressed proteins. Here we
reported that CyP40 plays a role in the AhR signaling. When the CyP40 content in 
MCF-7 cells is reduced, up-regulation of cyp1a1 and cyp1b1 by
3-methylchloranthrene (3MC) is also reduced, suggesting that CyP40 is essential
for maximal AhR function. The CyP40 region containing amino acids 186-215, but
not the peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase and tetratricopeptide repeat domains,
is essential for forming the AhR/Arnt/DRE complex. CyP40 is found in the cell
nucleus after 3MC treatment and appears to promote the DRE binding form of the
AhR/Arnt heterodimer.

PMCID: PMC2630774
PMID: 18708059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. PLoS Genet. 2008 Aug 15;4(8):e1000158. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000158.

Mutant screen distinguishes between residues necessary for light-signal
perception and signal transfer by phytochrome B.

Oka Y(1), Matsushita T, Mochizuki N, Quail PH, Nagatani A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan.

The phytochromes (phyA to phyE) are a major plant photoreceptor family that
regulate a diversity of developmental processes in response to light. The
N-terminal 651-amino acid domain of phyB (N651), which binds an open tetrapyrrole
chromophore, acts to perceive and transduce regulatory light signals in the cell 
nucleus. The N651 domain comprises several subdomains: the N-terminal extension, 
the Per/Arnt/Sim (PAS)-like subdomain (PLD), the cGMP phosphodiesterase/adenyl
cyclase/FhlA (GAF) subdomain, and the phytochrome (PHY) subdomain. To define
functional roles for these subdomains, we mutagenized an Arabidopsis thaliana
line expressing N651 fused in tandem to green fluorescent protein,
beta-glucuronidase, and a nuclear localization signal. A large-scale screen for
long hypocotyl mutants identified 14 novel intragenic missense mutations in the
N651 moiety. These new mutations, along with eight previously identified
mutations, were distributed throughout N651, indicating that each subdomain has
an important function. In vitro analysis of the spectral properties of these
mutants enabled them to be classified into two principal classes: light-signal
perception mutants (those with defective spectral activity), and signaling
mutants (those normal in light perception but defective in intracellular signal
transfer). Most spectral mutants were found in the GAF and PHY subdomains. On the
other hand, the signaling mutants tend to be located in the N-terminal extension 
and PLD. These observations indicate that the N-terminal extension and PLD are
mainly involved in signal transfer, but that the C-terminal GAF and PHY
subdomains are responsible for light perception. Among the signaling mutants,
R110Q, G111D, G112D, and R325K were particularly interesting. Alignment with the 
recently described three-dimensional structure of the PAS-GAF domain of a
bacterial phytochrome suggests that these four mutations reside in the vicinity
of the phytochrome light-sensing knot.

PMCID: PMC2494609
PMID: 18704165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Toxicol Sci. 2008 Nov;106(1):83-92. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfn149. Epub 2008 Jul 27.

Abnormal liver development and resistance to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin 
toxicity in mice carrying a mutation in the DNA-binding domain of the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor.

Bunger MK(1), Glover E, Moran SM, Walisser JA, Lahvis GP, Hsu EL, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is known for its role in the adaptive and
toxic responses to a large number of environmental contaminants, as well as its
role in hepatovascular development. The classical AHR pathway involves ligand
binding, nuclear translocation, heterodimerization with the AHR nuclear
translocator (ARNT), and binding of the heterodimer to dioxin response elements
(DREs), thereby modulating the transcription of an array of genes. The AHR has
also been implicated in signaling events independent of nuclear localization and 
DNA binding, and it has been suggested that such pathways may play important
roles in the toxicity of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Here, we
report the generation of a mouse model that expresses an AHR protein capable of
ligand binding, interactions with chaperone proteins, functional
heterodimerization with ARNT, and nuclear translocation, but is unable to bind
DREs. Using this model, we provide evidence that DNA binding is required
AHR-mediated liver development, as Ahr(dbd/dbd) mice exhibit a patent ductus
venosus, similar to what is seen in Ahr(-/-) mice. Furthermore, Ahr(dbd/dbd) mice
are resistant to TCDD-induced toxicity for all endpoints tested. These data
suggest that DNA binding is necessary for AHR-mediated developmental and toxic
signaling.

PMCID: PMC2563146
PMID: 18660548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Oct;29(10):1955-62. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn163. Epub 2008
Jul 16.

Bladder cancer risk and genetic variation in AKR1C3 and other metabolizing genes.

Figueroa JD(1), Malats N, García-Closas M, Real FX, Silverman D, Kogevinas M,
Chanock S, Welch R, Dosemeci M, Lan Q, Tardón A, Serra C, Carrato A,
García-Closas R, Castaño-Vinyals G, Rothman N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, USA.
figueroaj@mail.nih.gov

Aromatic amines (AAs) and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are carcinogens
present in tobacco smoke and functional polymorphisms in NAT2 and GSTM1
metabolizing genes are associated with increased bladder cancer risk. We
evaluated whether genetic variation in other candidate metabolizing genes are
also associated with risk. Candidates included genes that control the
transcription of metabolizing genes [aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), AHRR and
aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT)] and genes that activate/detoxify AA
or PAH (AKR1C3, CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, CYP3A4, EPHX1, EPHX2, NQO1, MPO, UGT1A4, 
SULT1A1 and SULT1A2). Using genotype data from 1150 cases of urothelial
carcinomas and 1149 controls from the Spanish Bladder Cancer Study, we estimated 
odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) adjusting for age, gender,
region and smoking status. Based on a test for trend, we observed 10
non-redundant single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in five genes (AKR1C3, ARNT,
CYP1A1, CYP1B1 and SULT1A2) significantly associated with bladder cancer risk. We
observed an inverse association with risk for the AKR1C3 promoter SNP rs1937845
[OR (95% CI) for heterozygote and homozygote variant compared with common
homozygote genotype were 0.86 (0.70-1.06) and 0.74 (0.57-0.96), respectively; P
for trend = 0.02]. Interestingly, genetic variation in this region has been
associated with lung, non-Hodgkin lymphoma and prostate cancer risk. Analysis of 
additional SNPs to capture most (approximately 90%) of common genetic variation
in AKR1C3 and haplotype walking analyses based on all AKR1C3 SNPs (n = 25)
suggest two separate regions associated with bladder cancer risk. These results
indicate that genetic variation in carcinogen-metabolizing genes, particularly
AKR1C3, could be associated with bladder cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC2556968
PMID: 18632753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Microbiol. 2008 Sep;69(5):1091-103. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06357.x.
Epub 2008 Jul 10.

Characterization of CetA and CetB, a bipartite energy taxis system in
Campylobacter jejuni.

Elliott KT(1), Dirita VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
MI 48109, USA.

The energy taxis receptor Aer, in Escherichia coli, senses changes in the redox
state of the electron transport system via an flavin adenine dinucleotide
cofactor bound to a PAS domain. The PAS domain (a sensory domain named after
three proteins Per, ARNT and Sim, where it was first identified) is thought to
interact directly with the Aer HAMP domain to transmit this signal to the highly 
conserved domain (HCD) found in chemotaxis receptors. An apparent energy taxis
system in Campylobacter jejuni is composed of two proteins, CetA and CetB, that
have the domains of Aer divided between them. CetB has a PAS domain, while CetA
has a predicted transmembrane region, HAMP domain and the HCD. In this study, we 
examined the expression of cetA and cetB and the biochemical properties of the
proteins they encode. cetA and cetB are co-transcribed independently of the
flagellar regulon. CetA has two transmembrane helices in a helical hairpin while 
CetB is a peripheral membrane protein tightly associated with the membrane. CetB 
levels are CetA dependent. Additionally, we demonstrated that both CetA and CetB 
participate in complexes, including a likely CetB dimer and a complex that may
include both CetA and CetB. This study provides a foundation for further
characterization of signal transduction mechanisms within CetA/CetB.

PMCID: PMC2628428
PMID: 18631239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Comp Funct Genomics. 2005;6(5-6):268-76. doi: 10.1002/cfg.483.

Atypical CTSK transcripts and ARNT transcription read-through into CTSK.

Giraudeau FS(1), Walhin JP, Murdock PR, Spurr NK, Gray IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Discovery Genetics, GlaxoSmithKline Research and Development,
New Frontiers Science Park, Harlow, UK.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) and cathepsin K (CTSK) 
genes lie in a tandem head-to-tail arrangement on human chromosome 1. The two
genes are in extremely close proximity; the usual CTSK transcription start site
is less than 1.4 kb downstream of the end of the longest reported ARNT
transcript. By generating an RT-PCR product that overlaps both the 3' end of ARNT
and the 5' end of CTSK, we show that ARNT transcripts may extend through the
ARNT-CTSK intergenic region and progress into the CTSK gene. Furthermore, by
using quantitative RT-PCR from several tissues to detect the ARNT expression
signature in CTSK introns, we show that ARNT transcripts can read through into
CTSK as far as CTSK intron 3, extending approximately 3.7 kb downstream of the
end of the longest previously described ARNT mRNA. Given that ARNT and CTSK are
expressed in an overlapping range of tissues, ARNT read-through may have a
negative impact on CTSK transcript levels by interfering with CTSK expression. We
also present evidence for novel CTSK transcripts following sequence analysis of
CTSK-derived ESTs and RT-PCR products. These transcripts show alternate 5'
splicing and or 5' extension and are sometimes initiated from a cryptic
alternative promoter which is upstream of the known CTSK promoter and possibly in
the 3' UTR of ARNT.

PMCID: PMC2447513
PMID: 18629217  [PubMed]


248. J Biomed Sci. 2008 Nov;15(6):833-40. doi: 10.1007/s11373-008-9267-6. Epub 2008
Jul 5.

Establishment of a fluorescence resonance energy transfer-based bioassay for
detecting dioxin-like compounds.

Lin CI(1), Hsieh CH, Lee SS, Lee WS, Chang-Chien GP, Pan CY, Lee H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Roosevelt Rd., Sec.
4, Taipei, 106, Taiwan, ROC.

Dioxins comprise a group of compounds which contain a double aromatic ring-like
structure. They are among the most prevalent and toxic environmental pollutants. 
Accumulation of dioxins in human tissues poses a potential threat to human
health. Currently, analytical chemical procedures dominate dioxin-detection
protocols. In this study, we established a fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET)-based dioxin-detection bioassay. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and AHR
nuclear translocator (ARNT) fused-cyan fluorescent protein (CFP) and -yellow
fluorescent protein (YFP) constructed were transiently co-transfected into rat
hepatoma cell line, H4IIEC3 cells. Our results showed that no FRET signals were
detected in AHR-CFP- and ARNT-YFP-transfected H4IIEC3 cells. However, dioxin
treatments upregulated FRET signals in these transfected cells in a
dose-dependent manner. This work highlighted the potential of FRET technique in
the detection of dioxin-like compounds.

PMID: 18604597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Eur Respir J. 2008 Jul;32(1):210-7. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00013408.

Imaging of the hypoxia-inducible factor pathway: insights into oxygen sensing.

Berchner-Pfannschmidt U(1), Frede S, Wotzlaw C, Fandrey J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55,
45122 Essen, Germany.

The transcription factor complex hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 controls the
expression of most genes involved in adaptation to hypoxic conditions. HIF-1 is a
heterodimer composed of oxygen-labile HIF-alpha and constitutively expressed
HIF-beta subunits. The oxygen-dependent regulation of HIF-alpha is a multistep
process that includes degradation under normoxia but stabilisation, translocation
into the nucleus and activation under hypoxic conditions. The present paper
summarises the contributions of optical methods to the understanding of
oxygen-dependent regulation of the HIF-1 pathway. The tissue- and cell-specific
distribution of HIF-alpha was visualised immunohistochemically and by
immunofluorescence. Transcriptional activity of HIF-1 was monitored using green
fluorescent protein as a reporter under control of hypoxia response elements in
living cells, spheroids and tumour tissues in living mice. With cyan and yellow
variants of green fluorescent protein fused to HIF subunits and regulatory
proteins, subcellular distribution, migration and interaction were imaged in vivo
by means of fluorescence recovery after photo-bleaching and fluorescence
resonance energy transfer. Noninvasive imaging of these cellular and molecular
processes by laser scanning microscopy complements ex vivo molecular biology
assays and provides an additional spatial and temporal dimension to the
understanding of the HIF-1 pathway.

PMID: 18591338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Mol Biol. 2008 Sep 5;381(3):718-33. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.06.033. Epub 2008
Jun 18.

Structural basis of the LOV1 dimerization of Arabidopsis phototropins 1 and 2.

Nakasako M(1), Zikihara K, Matsuoka D, Katsura H, Tokutomi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Faculty of Science and Technology, Keio University,
3-14-1 Hiyoshi, Kohoku-ku, Kanagawa 223-8522, Japan. nakasako@phys.keio.ac.jp

Phototropin (phot) is a blue-light receptor protein that triggers phototropic
responses, chloroplast relocation, and stomata opening to maximize the efficiency
of photosynthesis in higher plants. Phot is composed of three functional domains.
The N-terminal half folds into two light-oxygen-voltage-sensing domains called
LOV1 and LOV2, each binding a flavin mononucleotide to absorb blue light. The
C-terminal half is a serine/threonine kinase domain that causes light-dependent
autophosphorylation leading to cellular signaling cascades. LOV2 domain is
primarily responsible for activation of the kinase, and LOV1 domain is thought to
act as a dimerization site and to regulate sensitivity to activation by blue
light. Here we show the crystal structures of LOV1 domains of Arabidopsis phot1
and phot2 in the dark at resolutions of 2.1 A and 2.0 A, respectively. Either
LOV1 domain forms a dimer through face-to-face association of beta-scaffolds in
the crystallographic asymmetric unit. Three types of interactions stabilizing the
dimer structures found are as follows: contacts of side chains in their
beta-scaffolds, hydrophobic interactions of a short helix found in the N-terminus
of a subunit with the beta-scaffolds of both subunits, and hydrogen bonds
mediated by hydration water molecules filling the dimer interface. The critical
residues for dimerization are Cys261, forming a disulfide bridge between subunits
in phot1-LOV1 domain, and Thr217 and Met232 in phot2-LOV1. The topology in
homodimeric associations of the LOV1 domains is discussed when referring to those
of homodimers or heterodimers of light-oxygen-voltage-sensing or Per-ARNT-Sim
domains. The present results also provide clues to understanding structural basis
in dimeric interactions of Per-ARNT-Sim protein modules in cellular signaling.

PMID: 18585389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Drug Metab Dispos. 2008 Sep;36(9):1819-27. doi: 10.1124/dmd.108.021154. Epub 2008
Jun 9.

Down-regulation of the carcinogen-metabolizing enzyme cytochrome P450 1a1 by
vanadium.

Anwar-Mohamed A(1), El-Kadi AO.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 3126 Dentistry/Pharmacy
Centre, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. aelkadi@pharmacy.ualberta.ca

Vanadium (V(5+)), a heavy metal contaminant with important toxicological
consequences, has received considerable attention as an anticancer agent,
although the mechanisms remain unknown. As a first step to investigate these
mechanisms, we examined the effect of V(5+) (as ammonium metavanadate,
NH(4)VO(3)) on the expression of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-regulated
gene: cytochrome P450 1a1 (Cyp1a1) at each step of the AhR signal transduction
pathway, using Hepa 1c1c7 cells. Our results showed a significant reduction in
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-mediated induction of Cyp1a1 mRNA,
protein and activity levels after V(5+) treatments in a dose-dependent manner.
Investigation of the effect of coexposure to V(5+) and TCDD at transcriptional
levels revealed that V(5+) significantly inhibited TCDD-mediated induction of
AhR-dependent luciferase reporter gene expression. Furthermore, despite not
affecting the direct activation of the cytosolic AhR by TCDD and subsequently
transforming it to a DNA-binding form, V(5+) inhibited the nuclear accumulation
of liganded AhR and subsequent formation of the AhR/aryl hydrocarbon nuclear
translocator (Arnt)/xenobiotic responsive element (XRE) complex. Importantly, the
V(5+)-mediated inhibition of AhR/Arnt/XRE complex formation coincided with a
significant decrease in ecto-ATPase activity. Looking at the post-transcriptional
and post-translational effects of V(5+) on existing Cyp1a1 mRNA and protein
levels, we showed that V(5+) did not affect Cyp1a1 mRNA or protein stability,
thus eliminating possible role of V(5+) in modifying Cyp1a1 gene expression
through these mechanisms. This study provides the first evidence that V(5+)
down-regulates the expression of Cyp1a1 at the transcriptional level through an
ATP-dependent mechanism.

PMID: 18541696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2008;18(3):207-50.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex and the control of gene expression.

Beischlag TV(1), Luis Morales J, Hollingshead BD, Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that controls the expression of a diverse set of genes. The toxicity of the
potent AhR ligand 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin is almost exclusively
mediated through this receptor. However, the key alterations in gene expression
that mediate toxicity are poorly understood. It has been established through
characterization of AhR-null mice that the AhR has a required physiological
function, yet how endogenous mediators regulate this orphan receptor remains to
be established. A picture as to how the AhR/ARNT heterodimer actually mediates
gene transcription is starting to emerge. The AhR/ARNT complex can alter
transcription both by binding to its cognate response element and through
tethering to other transcription factors. In addition, many of the coregulatory
proteins necessary for AhR-mediated transcription have been identified. Cross
talk between the estrogen receptor and the AhR at the promoter of target genes
appears to be an important mode of regulation. Inflammatory signaling pathways
and the AhR also appear to be another important site of cross talk at the level
of transcription. A major focus of this review is to highlight experimental
efforts to characterize nonclassical mechanisms of AhR-mediated modulation of
gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC2583464
PMID: 18540824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Mol Microbiol. 2008 Jul;69(2):503-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06303.x.

The PhoQ histidine kinases of Salmonella and Pseudomonas spp. are structurally
and functionally different: evidence that pH and antimicrobial peptide sensing
contribute to mammalian pathogenesis.

Prost LR(1), Daley ME, Bader MW, Klevit RE, Miller SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, 
WA 98195, USA.

The PhoQ sensor kinase is essential for Salmonella typhimurium virulence for
animals, and a homologue exists in the environmental organism and opportunistic
pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. S. typhimurium PhoQ (ST-PhoQ) is repressed by
millimolar concentrations of divalent cations and activated by antimicrobial
peptides and at acidic pH. ST-PhoQ has a periplasmic Per-ARNT-Sim domain, a fold 
commonly employed for ligand binding. However, substrate binding is instead
accomplished by an acidic patch in the periplasmic domain that interacts with the
inner membrane through divalent cation bridges. The DNA sequence encoding this
acidic patch is absent from Pseudomonas phoQ (PA-PhoQ). Here, we demonstrate that
PA-PhoQ binds and is repressed by divalent cations, and can functionally
complement a S. typhimurium phoQ-null mutant. Mutational analysis and NMR
spectroscopy of the periplasmic domains of ST-PhoQ and PA-PhoQ indicate distinct 
mechanisms of binding divalent cation. The data are consistent with PA-PhoQ
binding metal in a specific ligand-binding pocket. PA-PhoQ was partially
activated by acidic pH but not by antimicrobial peptides. S. typhimurium
expressing PA-PhoQ protein were attenuated for virulence in a mouse model,
suggesting that the ability of Salmonella to sense host environments via
antimicrobial peptides and acidic pH is an important contribution to
pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2555970
PMID: 18532985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Psychopharmacol. 2009 Mar;23(2):177-89. doi: 10.1177/0269881108089586. Epub
2008 May 30.

Effects of bifeprunox and aripiprazole on rat serotonin and dopamine neuronal
activity and anxiolytic behaviour.

Dahan L(1), Husum H, Mnie-Filali O, Arnt J, Hertel P, Haddjeri N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuropharmacology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Claude
Bernard Lyon I, Lyon, France.

The atypical antipsychotic bifeprunox is a partial dopamine D(2) and 5-HT(1A)
receptor agonist. Using in-vivo electrophysiological and behavioural paradigms in
the rat, the effects of bifeprunox and aripiprazole were assessed on ventral
tegmental area (VTA) dopamine and dorsal raphe serotonin (5-HT) cell activity and
on foot shock-induced ultrasonic vocalisation (USV). In VTA, bifeprunox and
aripiprazole decreased (by 20-50%) firing of dopamine neurons. Interestingly,
bursting activity was markedly reduced (by 70-100%), bursting being associated
with a larger synaptic dopamine release than single spike firing. Both ligands
reduced inhibition of firing rate induced by the full dopamine receptor agonist
apomorphine, whereas the D(2) receptor antagonist haloperidol prevented these
inhibitory effects, confirming partial D(2)-like agonistic properties. On 5-HT
neurons, bifeprunox was more potent than aripiprazole to suppress firing
activity. The 5-HT(1A) receptor antagonist WAY-100,635 prevented their effects.
In the USV test of anxiolytic-like activity, bifeprunox had higher potency than
aripiprazole to reduce vocalisations. Both WAY-100,635 and haloperidol reversed
the effects of both agonists. The present in-vivo study shows that bifeprunox is 
a potent partial D(2)-like and 5-HT(1A) receptor agonist reducing preferentially 
the phasic activity of dopamine neurons. Thus, bifeprunox would be expected to be
an effective compound against positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia.

PMID: 18515444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Aug;29(8):1528-37. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn125. Epub 2008 May
29.

HIF and reactive oxygen species regulate oxidative phosphorylation in cancer.

Hervouet E(1), Cízková A, Demont J, Vojtísková A, Pecina P, Franssen-van Hal NL, 
Keijer J, Simonnet H, Ivánek R, Kmoch S, Godinot C, Houstek J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR 5534, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Claude Bernard University of Lyon 1, 43 Boulevard du onze
novembre, 69622 Villeurbanne, Cedex, France.

A decrease in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) is characteristic of many cancer
types and, in particular, of clear cell renal carcinoma (CCRC) deficient in von
Hippel-Lindau (vhl) gene. In the absence of functional pVHL, hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF) 1-alpha and HIF2-alpha subunits are stabilized, which induces the
transcription of many genes including those involved in glycolysis and reactive
oxygen species (ROS) metabolism. Transfection of these cells with vhl is known to
restore HIF-alpha subunit degradation and to reduce glycolytic genes
transcription. We show that such transfection with vhl of 786-0 CCRC (which are
devoid of HIF1-alpha) also increased the content of respiratory chain subunits.
However, the levels of most transcripts encoding OXPHOS subunits were not
modified. Inhibition of HIF2-alpha synthesis by RNA interference in
pVHL-deficient 786-0 CCRC also restored respiratory chain subunit content and
clearly demonstrated a key role of HIF in OXPHOS regulation. In agreement with
these observations, stabilization of HIF-alpha subunit by CoCl(2) decreased
respiratory chain subunit levels in CCRC cells expressing pVHL. In addition, HIF 
stimulated ROS production and mitochondrial manganese superoxide dismutase
content. OXPHOS subunit content was also decreased by added H(2)O(2.)
Interestingly, desferrioxamine (DFO) that also stabilized HIF did not decrease
respiratory chain subunit level. While CoCl(2) significantly stimulates ROS
production, DFO is known to prevent hydroxyl radical production by inhibiting
Fenton reactions. This indicates that the HIF-induced decrease in OXPHOS is at
least in part mediated by hydroxyl radical production.

PMID: 18515279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2008 Aug;295(2):R649-58. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00876.2007. Epub 2008 May 28.

Ventilatory responses to acute and chronic hypoxia are altered in female but not 
male Paskin-deficient mice.

Soliz J(1), Soulage C, Borter E, van Patot MT, Gassmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Physiology, Vetsuisse Faculty and Zurich Center for
Integrative Human Physiology, ZIHP Winterthurerstrasse 260, CH-8057 Zurich,
Switzerland. jsoliz@access.uzh.ch

Proteins harboring a Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain are versatile and allow archaea,
bacteria, and plants to sense oxygen partial pressure, as well as light intensity
and redox potential. A PAS domain associated with a histidine kinase domain is
found in FixL, the oxygen sensor molecule of Rhizobium species. PASKIN is the
mammalian homolog of FixL, but its function is far from being understood. Using
whole body plethysmography, we evaluated the ventilatory response to acute and
chronic hypoxia of homozygous deficient male and female PASKIN mice (Paskin-/-). 
Although only slight ventilatory differences were found in males, female
Paskin-/- mice increased ventilatory response to acute hypoxia. Unexpectedly,
females had an impaired ability to reach ventilatory acclimatization in response 
to chronic hypoxia. Central control of ventilation occurs in the brain stem
respiratory centers and is modulated by catecholamines via tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH) activity. We observed that TH activity was altered in male and female
Paskin-/- mice. Peripheral chemoreceptor effects on ventilation were evaluated by
exposing animals to hyperoxia (Dejours test) and domperidone, a peripheral
ventilatory stimulant drug directly affecting the carotid sinus nerve discharge. 
Male and female Paskin-/- had normal peripheral chemosensory (carotid bodies)
responses. In summary, our observations suggest that PASKIN is involved in the
central control of hypoxic ventilation, modulating ventilation in a
gender-dependent manner.

PMID: 18509100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Biol Rhythms. 2008 Jun;23(3):200-10. doi: 10.1177/0748730408316022.

Behavioral rhythmicity of mice lacking AhR and attenuation of light-induced phase
shift by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Mukai M(1), Lin TM, Peterson RE, Cooke PS, Tischkau SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, USA.

Transcription factors belonging to the Per/Arnt/Sim (PAS) domain family are
highly conserved and many are involved in circadian rhythm regulation. One member
of this family, aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), is an orphan receptor whose
physiological role is unknown. Recent findings have led to the hypothesis that
AhR has a role in circadian rhythm, which is the focus of the present
investigation. First, time-of-day-dependent mRNA expression of AhR and its
signaling target, cytochrome p4501A1 (Cyp1a1), was determined in C57BL/6J mice by
quantitative RT-PCR. Circadian expression of AhR and Cyp1a1 was observed both in 
the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) and liver. Next, the circadian phenotype of
mice lacking AhR (AhRKO) was investigated using behavioral monitoring. Intact
AhRKO mice had robust circadian rhythmicity with a similar tau under constant
conditions compared to wild-type mice, but a significant difference in tau was
observed between genotypes in ovariectomized female mice. Time to reentrainment
following 6-h advances or delays of the light/dark cycle was not significantly
different between genotypes. However, mice exposed to the AhR agonist
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD; 1 microg/kg of body weight) displayed 
decreased phase shifts in response to light and had altered expression of Per1
and Bmal1. These results suggest that chronic activation of AhR may affect the
ability of the circadian timekeeping system to adjust to alterations in
environmental lighting by affecting canonical clock genes. Further studies are
necessary to decipher the mechanism of how AhR agonists could disrupt
light-induced phase shifts. If AhR does have a role in circadian rhythm, it may
share redundant roles with other PAS domain proteins and/or the role of AhR may
not be exhibited in the behavioral activity rhythm, but could be important
elsewhere in the peripheral circadian system.

PMCID: PMC2597295
PMID: 18487412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jun;36(11):3716-27. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn247. Epub 2008
May 14.

The bHLH/Per-Arnt-Sim transcription factor SIM2 regulates muscle transcript
myomesin2 via a novel, non-canonical E-box sequence.

Woods S(1), Farrall A, Procko C, Whitelaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular & Biomedical Science (Biochemistry) and the Centre for the
Molecular Genetics of Development, University of Adelaide, South Australia 5005, 
Australia. susan.woods@ucsf.edu

Despite a growing number of descriptive studies that show Single-minded 2 (Sim2) 
is not only essential for murine survival, but also upregulated in colon,
prostate and pancreatic tumours, there is a lack of direct target genes
identified for this basic helix-loop-helix/PAS transcription factor. We have
performed a set of microarray experiments aimed at identifying genes that are
differentially regulated by SIM2, and successfully verified that the Myomesin2
(Myom2) gene is SIM2-responsive. Although SIM2 has been reported to be a
transcription repressor, we find that SIM2 induces transcription of Myom2 and
activates the Myom2 promoter sequence when co-expressed with the heterodimeric
partner protein, ARNT1, in human embryonic kidney cells. Truncation and mutation 
of the Myom2 promoter sequence, combined with chromatin immunoprecipitation
studies in cells, has lead to the delineation of a non-canonical E-box sequence
5'-AACGTG-3' that is bound by SIM2/ARNT1 heterodimers. Interestingly, in
immortalized human myoblasts knock down of Sim2 results in increased levels of
Myom2 RNA, suggesting that SIM2 is acting as a repressor in these cells and so
its activity is likely to be highly context dependent. This is the first report
of a direct SIM2/ARNT1 target gene with accompanying analysis of a functional
response element.

PMCID: PMC2441813
PMID: 18480125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Exp Mol Med. 2008 Apr 30;40(2):208-19.

Transcriptional profiling in human HaCaT keratinocytes in response to kaempferol 
and identification of potential transcription factors for regulating differential
gene expression.

Kang BY(1), Kim S, Lee KH, Lee YS, Hong I, Lee MO, Min D, Chang I, Hwang JS, Park
JS, Kim DH, Kim BG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University,
Seoul 151-742, Korea.

Kaempferol is the major flavonol in green tea and exhibits many biomedically
useful properties such as antioxidative, cytoprotective and anti-apoptotic
activities. To elucidate its effects on the skin, we investigated the
transcriptional profiles of kaempferol-treated HaCaT cells using cDNA microarray 
analysis and identified 147 transcripts that exhibited significant changes in
expression. Of these, 18 were up-regulated and 129 were down-regulated. These
transcripts were then classified into 12 categories according to their functional
roles: cell adhesion/cytoskeleton, cell cycle, redox homeostasis, immune/defense 
responses, metabolism, protein biosynthesis/modification, intracellular
transport, RNA processing, DNA modification/ replication, regulation of
transcription, signal transduction and transport. We then analyzed the promoter
sequences of differentially-regulated genes and identified over-represented
regulatory sites and candidate transcription factors (TFs) for gene regulation by
kaempferol. These included c-REL, SAP-1, Ahr-ARNT, Nrf-2, Elk-1, SPI-B, NF-kappaB
and p65. In addition, we validated the microarray results and promoter analyses
using conventional methods such as real-time PCR and ELISA-based transcription
factor assay. Our microarray analysis has provided useful information for
determining the genetic regulatory network affected by kaempferol, and this
approach will be useful for elucidating gene-phytochemical interactions.

PMCID: PMC2679307
PMID: 18446059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Gastroenterology. 2008 Jun;134(7):2036-48, 2048.e1-3. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2008.03.009. Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Hypoxia-inducible factor augments experimental colitis through an MIF-dependent
inflammatory signaling cascade.

Shah YM(1), Ito S, Morimura K, Chen C, Yim SH, Haase VH, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Colon epithelial cells are critical for barrier function and
contain a highly developed immune response. A previous study has shown
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) as a critical regulator of barrier protection
during colon epithelial injury. However, the role of HIF signaling in colon
mucosal immunity is not known.
METHODS: With the use of cre/loxP technology, intestinal-specific disruption of
von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein (Vhl), hypoxia-inducible factor
(Hif)-1alpha, and aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (Arnt) was generated.
Colon inflammation was induced using a dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced
colitis model, and the mice were analyzed by histologic analysis, Western blot
analysis, and quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: In mice, colonic epithelium disruption of Vhl resulted in constitutive
expression of HIF, which initiated an increase in inflammatory infiltrates and
edema in the colon. These effects were ameliorated in mice by disruption of both 
Vhl and Arnt/Hif1beta (which inactivates HIF). In a DSS-induced colitis model,
increased HIF expression correlated with more severe clinical symptoms and an
increase in histologic damage, while disruption of both Vhl and Arnt in the colon
epithelium inhibited these effects. Furthermore, colons with constitutive
activation of HIF displayed increased expression of proinflammatory mediators
that were synergistically potentiated following DSS administration and reduced by
inhibition of the proinflammatory and direct HIF target gene macrophage migration
inhibitory factor.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study shows that a chronic increase in HIF signaling in 
the colon epithelial cells initiates a hyperinflammatory reaction that may have
important implications in developing therapeutic strategies for inflammatory
bowel disease.

PMCID: PMC2533811
PMID: 18439915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Bacteriol. 2008 Jun;190(12):4281-90. doi: 10.1128/JB.01875-07. Epub 2008 Apr
18.

Glucosamine found as a substituent of both phosphate groups in Bordetella lipid A
backbones: role of a BvgAS-activated ArnT ortholog.

Marr N(1), Tirsoaga A, Blanot D, Fernandez R, Caroff M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6T 1Z3.

Endotoxins are amphipathic lipopolysaccharides (LPSs), major constituents of the 
outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria. They consist of a lipid region,
covalently linked to a core oligosaccharide, to which may be linked a repetitive 
glycosidic chain carrying antigenic determinants. Most of the biological
activities of endotoxins have been associated with the lipid moiety of the
molecule: unique to gram-negative bacteria, LPS is a ligand of the mammalian
TLR4-MD2-CD14 pathogen recognition receptor complex. Lipid A preparations are
often heterogeneous with respect to both the numbers and the lengths of fatty
acids and the natures of substituents on the phosphate groups when present. The
variants can significantly affect host immune responses. Nine species in the
Bordetella genus have been described, and the fine LPS structures of seven of
them have been published. In this report, lipids A from Bordetella pertussis
Tohama I and B. bronchiseptica strain 4650 were further characterized and
revealed to have a glucosamine substituting both lipid A phosphate groups of the 
diglucosamine backbone. These substitutions have not been previously described
for bordetellae. Moreover, a B. pertussis transposon mutation that maps within a 
gene encoding a Bordetella ArnT (formerly PmrK) glycosyl transferase ortholog
does not carry this substitution, thus providing a genetic basis for the
modification. Reverse transcriptase PCR of this locus showed that it is Bvg
regulated, suggesting that the ability of Bordetella to modify lipid A via this
glucosamine modification is a potential virulence trait.

PMCID: PMC2446747
PMID: 18424515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Photochem Photobiol. 2008 Jul-Aug;84(4):956-69. doi:
10.1111/j.1751-1097.2008.00335.x. Epub 2008 Apr 9.

Identification of six new photoactive yellow proteins--diversity and
structure-function relationships in a bacterial blue light photoreceptor.

Kumauchi M(1), Hara MT, Stalcup P, Xie A, Hoff WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Oklahoma State University, 
Stillwater, OK, USA.

Photoactive yellow proteins (PYP) are bacterial photoreceptors with a
Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain fold. We report the identification of six new PYPs,
thus nearly doubling the size of this protein family. This extends the taxonomic 
diversity of PYP-containing bacteria from photosynthetic to nonphotosynthetic
bacteria, from aquatic to soil-dwelling organisms, and from Proteobacteria to
Salinibacter ruber from the phylum Bacteriodetes. The new PYPs greatly increase
the sequence diversity of the PYP family, reducing the most prevalent pair-wise
identity from 45% to 25%. Sequence alignments and analysis indicate that all 14
PYPs share a common structure with 13 highly conserved residues that form the
chromophore binding pocket. Nevertheless, the functional properties of the PYPs
vary greatly--the absorbance maximum extends from 432 to 465 nm, the pK(a) of the
chromophore varies from pH 2.8 to 10.2, and the lifetime of the presumed PYP
signaling state ranges from 1 ms to 1 h. Thus, the PYP family offers an excellent
opportunity to investigate how functional properties are tuned over a wide range,
while maintaining the same overall protein structural fold. We discuss the
implications of these results for structure-function relationships in the PYP
family.

PMID: 18399917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Toxicol Sci. 2008 May;103(1):1-3. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfn032.

Why does ARNT2 behave differently from ARNT?

Hankinson O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.
ohank@mednet.ucla.edu

PMCID: PMC2938178
PMID: 18397918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Aug;29(8):1493-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn088. Epub 2008 Apr 
1.

Regulation of hypoxia-inducible genes by ETS1 transcription factor.

Salnikow K(1), Aprelikova O, Ivanov S, Tackett S, Kaczmarek M, Karaczyn A, Yee H,
Kasprzak KS, Niederhuber J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Comparative Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute at
Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. salnikow@ncifcrf.gov

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1) regulates the expression of genes that
facilitate tumor cell survival by making them more resistant to therapeutic
intervention. Recent evidence suggests that the activation of other transcription
factors, in cooperation with HIF-1 or acting alone, is involved in the
upregulation of hypoxia-inducible genes. Here we report that high cell density, a
condition that might mimic the physiologic situation in growing tumor and most
probably representing nutritional starvation, upregulates hypoxia-inducible
genes. This upregulation can occur in HIF-independent manner since
hypoxia-inducible genes carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9), lysyloxidase like 2 (LOXL2)
and n-myc-down regulated 1 (NDRG1)/calcium activated protein (Cap43) can be
upregulated by increased cell density under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions 
in both HIF-1 alpha-proficient and -deficient mouse fibroblasts. Moreover, cell
density upregulates the same genes in 1HAEo- and A549 human lung epithelial
cells. Searching for other transcription factors involved in the regulation of
hypoxia-inducible genes by cell density, we focused our attention on ETS1. As
reported previously, members of v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog
(ETS) family transcription factors participate in the upregulation of
hypoxia-inducible genes. Here, we provide evidence that ETS1 protein is
upregulated at high cell density in both human and mouse cells. The involvement
of ETS1 in the upregulation of hypoxia-inducible genes was further confirmed in a
luciferase reporter assay using cotransfection of ETS1 expression vector with
NDRG1/Cap43 promoter construct. The downregulation of ETS1 expression with small 
interfering RNA (siRNA) inhibited the upregulation of CA9 and NDRG1/Cap43 caused 
by increased cell density. Collectively, our data indicate the involvement of
ETS1 along with HIF-1 in regulating hypoxia-inducible genes.

PMCID: PMC2516492
PMID: 18381358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. FASEB J. 2008 Aug;22(8):2662-75. doi: 10.1096/fj.07-097709. Epub 2008 Mar 28.

Transglutaminase 2 protects against ischemic insult, interacts with HIF1beta, and
attenuates HIF1 signaling.

Filiano AJ(1), Bailey CD, Tucholski J, Gundemir S, Johnson GV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, USA.

Transglutaminase 2 (TG2) is a multifunctional enzyme that has been implicated in 
the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases, ischemia, and stroke. The
mechanism by which TG2 modulates disease progression have not been elucidated. In
this study we investigate the role of TG2 in the cellular response to ischemia
and hypoxia. TG2 is up-regulated in neurons exposed to oxygen and glucose
deprivation (OGD), and increased TG2 expression protects neurons against
OGD-induced cell death independent of its transamidating activity. We identified 
hypoxia inducible factor 1beta (HIF1beta) as a TG2 binding partner. HIF1beta and 
HIF1alpha together form the heterodimeric transcription factor hypoxia inducible 
factor 1 (HIF1). TG2 and the transaminase-inactive mutant C277S-TG2 inhibited a
HIF-dependent transcription reporter assay under hypoxic conditions without
affecting nuclear protein levels for HIF1alpha or HIF1beta, their ability to form
the HIF1 heterodimeric transcription factor, or HIF1 binding to its DNA response 
element. Interestingly, TG2 attenuates the up-regulation of the HIF-dependent
proapoptotic gene Bnip3 in response to OGD but had no effect on the expression of
VEGF, which has been linked to prosurvival processes. This study demonstrates for
the first time that TG2 protects against OGD, interacts with HIF1beta, and
attenuates the HIF1 hypoxic response pathway. These results indicate that TG2 may
play an important role in protecting against the delayed neuronal cell death in
ischemia and stroke.

PMCID: PMC2493449
PMID: 18375543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 6;283(23):16084-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710223200. Epub 2008 
Mar 27.

CUL2 is required for the activity of hypoxia-inducible factor and vasculogenesis.

Maeda Y(1), Suzuki T, Pan X, Chen G, Pan S, Bartman T, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

CULLIN 2 (CUL2) is a component of the ElonginB/C-CUL2-RBX-1-Von Hippel-Lindau
(VHL) tumor suppressor complex that ubiquitinates and degrades hypoxia-inducible 
factor alpha (HIFalpha). HIFalpha is a transcription factor that mediates the
expression of hypoxia-sensitive genes, including vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), which in turn regulates vasculogenesis. Whereas CUL2 participates 
in the degradation of HIFalpha, the potential role of CUL2 in the regulation of
other cellular processes is less well established. In the present study,
suppression of CUL2 expression by Cul2 siRNA inhibited HIFalpha transcriptional
activation of the VEGF gene in vitro, indicating that CUL2 plays a role distinct 
from its known function in HIFalpha degradation. Because ARNT heterodimerizes
with HIFalpha, we assessed whether CUL2 influenced ARNT expression. Cul2 siRNA
inhibited the expression of endogenous ARNT. Ectopically expressed ARNT reversed 
the inhibition of HIF activity by Cul2 siRNA in the VEGF promoter, suggesting
that CUL2 regulates HIF activation through ARNT. In 786-O cells lacking VHL, Cul2
siRNA suppressed the expression of both ARNT and VEGF, indicating that CUL2
regulates HIF activity independently of VHL. In transgenic zebrafish expressing
GFP driven by the Flk promoter (a known HIF target), zCul2 morpholino blocked
embryonic vasculogenesis in a manner similar to that caused by inhibition of
VEGF-A. In the zebrafish embryos, zCul2 inhibited the expression of CUL2, VEGF,
and Flk-GFP protein, indicating that CUL2 is required for expression of other
vasculogenic HIF targets. Taken together, CUL2 is required for normal
vasculogenesis, at least in part mediated by its regulation of HIF-mediated
transcription.

PMCID: PMC2414293
PMID: 18372249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Mar 17;9:16. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-16.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) gene as a positional and
functional candidate for type 2 diabetes and prediabetic intermediate traits:
Mutation detection, case-control studies, and gene expression analysis.

Das SK(1), Sharma NK, Chu WS, Wang H, Elbein SC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, College of
Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas,
USA. skdas@uams.edu

BACKGROUND: ARNT, a member of the basic helix-loop-helix family of transcription 
factors, is located on human chromosome 1q21-q24, a region which showed well
replicated linkage to type 2 diabetes. We hypothesized that common polymorphisms 
in the ARNT gene might increase the susceptibility to type 2 diabetes through
impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion.
METHODS: We selected 9 single nucleotide polymorphisms to tag common variation
across the ARNT gene. Additionally we searched for novel variants in functional
coding domains in European American and African American samples. Case-control
studies were performed in 191 European American individuals with type 2 diabetes 
and 187 nondiabetic European American control individuals, and in 372 African
American individuals with type 2 diabetes and 194 African American control
individuals. Metabolic effects of ARNT variants were examined in 122 members of
26 European American families from Utah and in 225 unrelated individuals from
Arkansas. Gene expression was tested in 8 sibling pairs discordant for type 2
diabetes.
RESULTS: No nonsynonymous variants or novel polymorphisms were identified. No SNP
was associated with type 2 diabetes in either African Americans or European
Americans, but among nondiabetic European American individuals, ARNT SNPs
rs188970 and rs11204735 were associated with acute insulin response (AIRg; p = or
< 0.005). SNP rs2134688 interacted with body mass index to alter beta-cell
compensation to insulin resistance (disposition index; p = 0.004). No significant
difference in ARNT mRNA levels was observed in transformed lymphocytes from
sibling pairs discordant for type 2 diabetes.
CONCLUSION: Common ARNT variants are unlikely to explain the linkage signal on
chromosome 1q, but may alter insulin secretion in nondiabetic subjects. Our
studies cannot exclude a role for rare variants or variants of small (< 1.6)
effect size.

PMCID: PMC2323364
PMID: 18366646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Carcinogenesis. 2008 May;29(5):1077-82. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn069. Epub 2008 Mar
20.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) inhibits vanadate-induced vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) production in TRAMP prostates.

Fritz WA(1), Lin TM, Peterson RE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy,University of Wisconsin, 777 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI
53705, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1alpha) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT) are basic helix-loop-helix/per-arnt-sim (PAS) family 
transcription factors. During angiogenesis and tumor growth, HIF-1alpha dimerizes
with ARNT, inducing expression of many genes, including vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF). ARNT also dimerizes with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR). AhR-null (Ahr(-/-)) transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate
(TRAMP) mice develop prostate tumors with greater frequency than AhR wild-type
(Ahr(+/+)) TRAMP mice, even though prevalence of prostate epithelial hyperplasia 
is not inhibited. This suggests that Ahr inhibits prostate carcinogenesis. In
TRAMP mice, prostatic epithelial hyperplasia results in stabilized HIF-1alpha,
inducing expression of VEGF, a prerequisite for tumor growth and angiogenesis.
Since ARNT is a common dimerization partner of AhR and HIF-1alpha, we
hypothesized that the AhR inhibits prostate tumor formation by competing with
HIF-1alpha for ARNT, thereby limiting VEGF production. Prostates from Ahr(+/+),
Ahr(+/-) and Ahr(-/-) C57BL/6J TRAMP mice were cultured in the presence of graded
concentrations of vanadate, an inducer of VEGF through the HIF-1alpha-ARNT
pathway. Vanadate induced VEGF protein in a dose-dependent fashion in Ahr(+/-)
and Ahr(-/-) TRAMP cultures, but not in Ahr(+/+) cultures. However, vanadate
induced upstream proteins in the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-signaling cascade 
to a similar extent in TRAMPs of each Ahr genotype, evidenced by v-akt murine
thymoma viral oncogene homolog (Akt) phosphorylation. These findings suggest that
AhR sequesters ARNT, decreasing interaction with HIF-1alpha reducing VEGF
production. Since VEGF is required for tumor vascularization and growth, these
studies further suggest that reduction in VEGF correlates with inhibited prostate
carcinogenesis in Ahr(+/+) TRAMP mice.

PMCID: PMC2902385
PMID: 18359762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2008;115(3):513-9. doi: 10.1007/s00702-007-0844-z. Epub
2008 Mar 12.

Comprehensive analysis of polymorphisms throughout GAD1 gene: a family-based
association study in schizophrenia.

Du J(1), Duan S, Wang H, Chen W, Zhao X, Zhang A, Wang L, Xuan J, Yu L, Wu S,
Tang W, Li X, Li H, Feng G, Xing Q, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Center, Shanghai JiaoTong University, Shanghai, People's Republic of
China.

Studies suggest that GAD1 gene is a functional candidate susceptibility gene for 
schizophrenia. In order to investigate the contribution of GAD1 gene to the
etiology of schizophrenia in Chinese, we carried out a family-based association
study between GAD1 gene and schizophrenia in 235 Chinese Han family trios. The
GAD1 gene is comprehensively analyzed using a systematic mutation scan and the
following-up association studies between common SNPs and schizophrenia in both
single-locus and haplotype levels. Altogether, we have found 17 variants
including 10 SNPs in 5'-flanking regions, 4 SNPs and one novel in-del in intronic
regions and 2 SNPs (one novel SNP) in the 3'-untranslated region (UTR). Using the
transmission disequilibrium test of the 9 common SNPs out of 17 variants,
Significant evidence of SNP rs3791878-G allele in 5'-flanking region of GAD1 was 
preferentially transmitted to both the all offsprings of the trios (P = 0.0063,
respectively; odds ratio = 1.83; 95% confidence interval: 1.26-2.65) and the male
offsprings the trios (P = 0.0045, respectively; odds ratio = 2.21; 95% confidence
interval: 1.37-3.56). Haplotype analysis suggested that
rs3762556(C)-rs3791878(G)-rs6755102(C) is the major risky haplotype
preferentially transmitted in both all the trios and male-offspring trios (Global
P = 0.016 and 0.012, respectively). The gender-dependent of the risk of SNP
rs3791878 suggest the complexity of GAD1 gene in schizophrenia. Given that the
switch from G to T in SNP rs3791878 might cause the loss of ARNT and XBP1
transcriptional factor binding sites using a bioinformatics approach, our
positive findings of this SNP support the hypothesis that the abruption of GAD1
gene is important to the risk of schizophrenia.

PMID: 18335162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Biochemistry. 2008 Apr 1;47(13):4051-64. doi: 10.1021/bi7021156. Epub 2008 Mar 7.

Changes at the KinA PAS-A dimerization interface influence histidine kinase
function.

Lee J(1), Tomchick DR, Brautigam CA, Machius M, Kort R, Hellingwerf KJ, Gardner
KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, UT Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines
Blvd., Dallas, Texas 75390-8816, USA.

The Bacillus subtilis KinA protein is a histidine protein kinase that controls
the commitment of this organism to sporulate in response to nutrient deprivation 
and several other conditions. Prior studies indicated that the N-terminal
Per-ARNT-Sim domain (PAS-A) plays a critical role in the catalytic activity of
this enzyme, as demonstrated by the significant decrease of the
autophosphorylation rate of a KinA protein lacking this domain. On the basis of
the environmental sensing role played by PAS domains in a wide range of proteins,
including other bacterial sensor kinases, it has been suggested that the PAS-A
domain plays an important regulatory role in KinA function. We have investigated 
this potential by using a combination of biophysical and biochemical methods to
examine PAS-A structure and function, both in isolation and within the intact
protein. Here, we present the X-ray crystal structure of the KinA PAS-A domain,
showing that it crystallizes as a homodimer using beta-sheet/beta-sheet packing
interactions as observed for several other PAS domain complexes. Notably, we
observed two dimers with tertiary and quaternary structure differences in the
crystalline lattice, indicating significant structural flexibility in these
domains. To confirm that KinA PAS-A also forms dimers in solution, we used a
combination of NMR spectroscopy, gel filtration chromatography, and analytical
ultracentrifugation, the results of which are all consistent with the
crystallographic results. We experimentally tested the importance of several
residues at the dimer interface using site-directed mutagenesis, finding changes 
in the PAS-A domain that significantly alter KinA enzymatic activity in vitro and
in vivo. These results support the importance of PAS domains within KinA and
other histidine kinases and suggest possible routes for natural or artificial
regulation of kinase activity.

PMID: 18324779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Bone. 2008 May;42(5):861-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2007.12.226. Epub 2008 Jan 26.

Circadian mechanisms in murine and human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
following dexamethasone exposure.

Wu X(1), Yu G, Parks H, Hebert T, Goh BC, Dietrich MA, Pelled G, Izadpanah R,
Gazit D, Bunnell BA, Gimble JM.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, LA, 
USA.

A core group of regulatory factors control circadian rhythms in mammalian cells. 
While the suprachiasmatic nucleus in the brain serves as the central core
circadian oscillator, circadian clocks also exist within peripheral tissues and
cells. A growing body of evidence has demonstrated that >20% of expressed mRNAs
in bone and adipose tissues oscillate in a circadian manner. The current
manuscript reports evidence of the core circadian transcriptional apparatus
within primary cultures of murine and human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem 
cells (BMSCs). Exposure of confluent, quiescent BMSCs to dexamethasone
synchronized the oscillating expression of the mRNAs encoding the albumin D
binding protein (dbp), brain-muscle arnt-like 1 (bmal1), period 3 (per3), rev-erb
alpha (Rev A), and rev-erb beta (Rev B). The genes displayed a mean oscillatory
period of 22.2 to 24.3 h. The acrophase or peak expression of mRNAs encoding
"positive" (bmal1) and "negative" (per3) components of the circadian regulatory
apparatus were out of phase with each other by approximately 8-12 h, consistent
with in vivo observations. In vivo, phosphyrylation by glycogen synthase kinase
3beta (GSK3beta) is known to regulate the turnover of per3 and components of the 
core circadian regulatory apparatus. In vitro addition of lithium chloride, a
GSK3beta inhibitor, significantly shifted the acrophase of all genes by 4.2-4.7 h
oscillation in BMSCs; however, only the male murine BMSCs displayed a significant
increase in the length of the period of oscillation. We conclude that human and
murine BMSCs represent a valid in vitro model for the analysis of circadian
mechanisms in bone metabolism and stem cell biology.

PMCID: PMC2423188
PMID: 18302991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. FEBS Lett. 2008 Mar 5;582(5):805-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.01.062. Epub 2008
Feb 12.

TraR auto-inducer enhances protein backbone fluctuations in DNA binding domain.

Vreede J(1), Hellingwerf KJ, Crielaard W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbial Physiology, Swammerdam Institute for Life
Sciences, Faculty of Science, Universiteit van Amsterdam, Nieuwe Achtergracht
166, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. vreede@science.uva.nl

The bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens mediates quorum sensing via TraR, a
N-3-oxo-octanoyl-l-homoserine lactone (OOHL) signaling transcription factor. TraR
consists of an N-terminal Per-Arnt-Sim domain (PAS-domain) containing OOHL and a 
C-terminal helix-turn-helix motif (HTF-motif) binding DNA, thus comprising a
complete signaling pathway. Using Molecular Dynamics, we investigate the
influence of OOHL on the dynamics of the protein. The OOHL binding pocket is in
contact with water, leading to dynamic changes in OOHL-protein interactions.
These rearrangements increase fluctuations in the PAS-domain, and, interestingly,
also enhance fluctuations in the HTF-motif. Our results imply OOHL in inducing
fluctuations in TraR that may facilitate DNA binding.

PMID: 18275856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2008 Nov;62(6):965-75. doi:
10.1007/s00280-008-0686-x. Epub 2008 Feb 8.

BRCA1 transcriptional activity is enhanced by interactions between its AD1 domain
and AhR.

Kang HJ(1), Kim HJ, Cho CH, Hu Y, Li R, Bae I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, 3970 Reservoir Road, NW, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

PURPOSE: We previously reported that BRCA1 interacts with aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) and that this interaction affects
TCDD-induced CYP1A1 gene expression (Kang et al., J Biol Chem 281:14654-14662,
2006). In this study we continue this investigation and begin to define the
significance of this interaction for the regulation of stress-induced
transcription.
METHODS: Immunoprecipitations (IPs), western blot (WB) analysis, GST pull-down
assays and promoter reporter assays were used to investigate whether the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) can regulate transcription that is dependent on the
activation domain 1 (AD1) domain of BRCA1.
RESULTS: We show that AhR, a transcription factor, can bind specifically to AD1
in the C-terminal region of BRCA1 and affect BRCA1's ability to regulate
transcription activity. We found that xenobiotics that positively and negatively 
affect AhR's activity as a transcription factor (e.g., dioxin and
alpha-naphthoflavone, respectively), have similar effects on AhR's ability to
affect AD1-domain-dependent transcription. These physical and functional AhR-AD1 
interactions may require the coiled-coil motif in AD1 because point-mutations in 
this motif reduce these interactions.
CONCLUSION: Xenobiotic-activated AhR can function in two ways, as a component of 
the AhR/ARNT transcription factor and a regulator of AD1-dependent transcription.
Consequently, BRCA1 has two distinct mechanisms for sensing xenobiotics and
regulating AhR-dependent stress responses to these xenobiotics. We speculate that
the normal functioning of this interaction could play a role in BRCA1's tumor
suppressing ability.

PMCID: PMC2702208
PMID: 18259752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Environ Toxicol. 2008 Aug;23(4):423-34. doi: 10.1002/tox.20335.

Effects of tobacco compounds on gene expression in fetal lung fibroblasts.

Sohn SH(1), Kim KN, Kim IK, Lee EI, Ryu JJ, Kim MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Korea
University, Seoul 136-705, Korea.

The goal of this study was to determine the effects of tobacco compounds on gene 
expression in a human fetal lung cell line (WI38). In the present study, we
investigated the effects of tobacco compounds (nicotine, benzo(a)pyrene (B(a)P), 
and 2-Naphthylamine) on gene expression profiles in human fetal fibroblasts using
cDNA microarray and real-time PCR. WI38 cells were cultured in Eagle's minimum
essential medium (MEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2% 200 mM
L-glutamine, and a 2% penicillin and streptomycin solution. Tissue culture flasks
(T-25 cm(2)) containing confluent lung fibroblasts were incubated at 37 degrees C
for 24 h with 5 mL of medium supplemented with 10 microM of a tobacco compound
(nicotine, B(a)P, or 2-Naphthylamine). The gene expression profiles for the W138 
cells varied depending on the tobacco compound. The cDNA microarray analysis
revealed that apoptosis-related genes such as DNASE2, MADD, MST1, NME3, RARG,
TNFRSF1A, BAD, and DFFB genes were down-regulated in tobacco compound-treated
WI38 cells. We also observed significant increases in Arnt gene expression by
real-time PCR in tobacco compound-treated WI38 cells. Tobacco compounds can
affect apoptosis, immunity, and growth in WI38 cells. A microarray-based genomic 
survey is a high-throughput approach for the evaluation of gene expression in
cell lines treated with tobacco compounds.

PMID: 18247414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Cell Physiol. 2008 May;215(2):292-308. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21394.

Transcriptional profiling defines the roles of ERK and p38 kinases in epidermal
keratinocytes.

Gazel A(1), Nijhawan RI, Walsh R, Blumenberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, The Cancer Institute, NYU School of Medicine, New
York, New York 10016, USA. blumem01@med.nyu.edu

Epidermal keratinocytes respond to extracellular influences by activating
cytoplasmic signal transduction pathways that change gene expression. Using
pathway-specific transcriptional profiling, we identified the genes regulated by 
two such pathways, p38 and ERK. These pathways are at the fulcrum of epidermal
differentiation, proliferative and inflammatory skin diseases. We used SB203580
and PD98059 as specific inhibitors and Affymetrix Hu133Av2 microarrays, to
identify the genes regulated after 1, 4, 24, and 48 h and compared them to genes 
regulated by JNK. Unexpectedly, inhibition of MAPK pathways is compensated by
activation of the NFkappaB pathway and suppression of the DUSP enzymes. Both
pathways promote epidermal differentiation; however, there is a surprising
disconnect between the expression of steroid synthesis enzymes and
differentiation markers. The p38 pathway induces the expression of extracellular 
matrix and proliferation-associated genes, while suppressing
microtubule-associated genes. The ERK pathway induces nuclear envelope and mRNA
splicing proteins, while suppressing steroid synthesis and mitochondrial energy
production enzymes. Transcription factors SRY, c-FOS, and N-Myc are the principal
targets of the p38 pathway, Elk-1 SAP1 and HLH2 of ERK, while FREAC-4, ARNT and
USF are shared. The results suggest a list of targets potentially useful in
therapeutic interventions in cutaneous diseases and wound healing.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18247374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Am J Pathol. 2008 Mar;172(3):738-47. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.070097. Epub 2008
Feb 2.

Iron depletion by deferoxamine up-regulates glucose uptake and insulin signaling 
in hepatoma cells and in rat liver.

Dongiovanni P(1), Valenti L, Ludovica Fracanzani A, Gatti S, Cairo G, Fargion S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico Mangiagalli
Regina Elena Istituto Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Milano, Italy.

Iron depletion improves insulin resistance in patients with nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease and diabetes and also stabilizes the hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF)-1, resulting in increased glucose uptake in vitro. This study investigated 
the effect of iron depletion by deferoxamine on insulin signaling and glucose
uptake in HepG2 hepatocytes and in rat liver. In HepG2 cells, deferoxamine
stabilized HIF-1alpha and induced the constitutive glucose transporter Glut1 and 
the insulin receptor. Up-regulation of insulin receptor by deferoxamine was
mimicked by the intracellular iron chelator deferasirox and the hypoxia inducer
CoCl2 and required the HIF-1 obligate partner ARNT/HIF-1beta. Iron depletion
increased insulin receptor activity, whereas iron supplementation had the
opposite effect. Deferoxamine consistently increased the phosphorylation status
of Akt/PKB and its targets FoxO1 and Gsk3beta, which mediate the effect of
insulin on gluconeogenesis and glycogen synthesis, and up-regulated genes
involved in glucose uptake and utilization. Iron depletion of Sprague-Dawley rats
increased HIF-1alpha expression, improved glucose clearance, and was associated
with up-regulation of insulin receptor and Akt/PKB levels and of glucose
transport in hepatic tissue. Conversely, gluconeogenic genes were not affected.
In rats with fatty liver because of a high-calorie and high-fat diet, glucose
clearance was increased by iron depletion and decreased by iron supplementation. 
Thus, iron depletion by deferoxamine up-regulates glucose uptake, and increases
insulin receptor activity and signaling in hepatocytes in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2258266
PMID: 18245813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Heart Rhythm. 2008 Feb;5(2):235-40. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2007.10.016. Epub 2007
Oct 9.

Prophylactic implantation of cardioverter-defibrillator in patients with severe
cardiac amyloidosis and high risk for sudden cardiac death.

Kristen AV(1), Dengler TJ, Hegenbart U, Schonland SO, Goldschmidt H, Sack FU,
Voss F, Becker R, Katus HA, Bauer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Angiology, and Respiratory Medicine, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Arnt_Kristen@med.uni-heidelberg.de

BACKGROUND: Cardiac light-chain amyloidosis carries a high risk for death
predominantly from progressive cardiomyopathy or sudden death (SCD). Independent 
risk factors for SCD are syncope and complex nonsustained ventricular
arrhythmias.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to test whether prophylactic placement
of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) reduces SCD in patients with
cardiac amyloidosis.
METHODS: Nineteen patients with histologically proven cardiac amyloidosis and a
history of syncope and/or ventricular extra beats (Lown grade IVa or higher)
received an ICD.
RESULTS: During a mean follow-up of 811 +/- 151 days, two patients with sustained
ventricular tachyarrhythmias were successfully treated by the ICD. Two patients
underwent heart transplantation, and seven patients died due to electromechanical
dissociation (n = 6) or glioblastoma (n = 1). Nonsurvivors more often showed
progression of left ventricular wall thickness, low-voltage pattern, ventricular 
arrhythmias (Lown grade IVa or higher), and higher N-terminal pro-brain
natriuretic peptide levels than did survivors. Bradycardias requiring ventricular
pacing (VVI 40/min <1%, DDD 60/min 6% +/- 1%) occurred only rarely.
CONCLUSION: Patients with cardiac amyloidosis predominantly die as a result of
electromechanical dissociation and other diagnoses not amenable to ICD therapy.
Selected patients with cardiac amyloidosis may benefit from ICD placement. Better
predictors of arrhythmia-associated SCD and randomized trials are required to
elucidate the impact of ICD placement in high-risk patients with cardiac
amyloidosis.

PMID: 18242546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Genes Cells. 2008 Feb;13(2):131-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2007.01153.x.

Basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor DEC2 negatively regulates
vascular endothelial growth factor expression.

Sato F(1), Bhawal UK, Kawamoto T, Fujimoto K, Imaizumi T, Imanaka T, Kondo J,
Koyanagi S, Noshiro M, Yoshida H, Kusumi T, Kato Y, Kijima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Hirosaki
036-8562, Japan. fsato@cc.hirosaki-u.ac.jp

DEC1 (BHLHB2/Sharp2/Stra13) and DEC2 (BHLHB3/Sharp1) are basic-helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factors, involved in cellular differentiation, responses to 
hypoxia and circadian rhythms. We recently showed that the expression of DEC1 and
DEC2 was up-regulated by hypoxia; however, the functions of these two factors
under hypoxic conditions have not been elucidated in detail. It is well
established that the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is
up-regulated by hypoxia, and the expression of VEGF in response to hypoxia
depends on transcriptional activation by a heterodimer comprising
hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator 1 (ARNT1). In the present study, we showed that DEC2, but not DEC1, 
suppressed VEGF gene expression under hypoxic conditions. DEC2 protein was
co-immunoprecipitated with HIF-1alpha but not with ARNT1. The binding of
HIF-1alpha to the hypoxia response element (HRE) in the VEGF promoter was
decreased by DEC2 over-expression, and increased by DEC2 knockdown. We also
showed that the circadian expression of VEGF showed a reciprocal pattern to that 
of DEC2 in cartilage. DEC2 had a circadian oscillation in implanted Sarcoma 180
cells. We conclude that DEC2 negatively regulates VEGF expression and plays an
important role in the pathological conditions in which VEGF is involved.

PMID: 18233956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2007;2(3):229-40.

Influenza: the virus and prophylaxis with inactivated influenza vaccine in "at
risk" groups, including COPD patients.

Hovden AO(1), Cox RJ, Haaheim LR.

Author information: 
(1)The Influenza Centre, The Gade Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Bergen, Bergen, Norway. arnt-ove.hovden@gades.uib.no

Influenza is a major respiratory pathogen, which exerts a huge human and economic
toll on society. Influenza is a vaccine preventable disease, however, the vaccine
strains must be annually updated due to the continuous antigenic changes in the
virus. Inactivated influenza vaccines have been used for over 50 years and have
an excellent safety record. Annual vaccination is therefore recommended for all
individuals with serious medical conditions, like COPD, and protects the vaccinee
against influenza illness and also against hospitalization and death. In COPD
patients, influenza infection can lead to exacerbations resulting in reduced
quality of life, hospitalization and death in the most severe cases. Although
there is only limited literature on the use of influenza vaccination solely in
COPD patients, there is clearly enough evidence to recommend annual vaccination
in this group. This review will focus on influenza virus and prophylaxis with
inactivated influenza vaccines in COPD patients and other "at risk" groups to
reduce morbidity, save lives, and reduce health care costs.

PMCID: PMC2695195
PMID: 18229561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Biophys J. 2008 May 1;94(9):3620-8. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.107.123414. Epub 2008
Jan 28.

Diverse roles of glycine residues conserved in photoactive yellow proteins.

Imamoto Y(1), Tatsumi S, Harigai M, Yamazaki Y, Kamikubo H, Kataoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto 
606-8502, Japan. imamoto@vision-kyoto-u.jp

The role of glycine residues was studied by alanine-scanning mutagenesis using
photoactive yellow protein, a structural prototype of PER ARNT SIM domain
proteins, as a template. Mutation of glycine located close to the end of
beta-strands with dihedral angles disallowed for alanine (Gly-37, Gly-59, Gly-86,
and Gly-115) induces destabilization of the protein structure. On the other hand,
substitution for Gly-77 and Gly-82, incorporated into the fifth alpha-helix,
slows the photocycle by 15-20 times, suggesting that these residues regulate the 
light-induced structural switch between dark-state structure and signaling-state 
structure. Most importantly, a significant amount of G29A is in the bleached
state and showed a 1000-fold slower photocycle. As O(epsilon2) of the carboxylic 
acid of Glu-46 is close enough for contact with C(alpha) of Gly-29, alanine
mutation perturbs this packing. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
demonstrated that the C=O(epsilon2) stretching mode of Glu-46 is 6 cm(-1)
upshifted in G29A, suggesting that C(alpha) of Gly-29 acts as a proton donor for 
the C(alpha)-H...O(epsilon2) hydrogen bond with Glu-46, which stabilizes the
dark-state structure. During the photocycle, Glu-46 becomes negatively charged by
donating a proton to the chromophore, resulting in breakage of this hydrophobic
packing and consequent conformational change of the protein.

PMCID: PMC2292373
PMID: 18227128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Hypertension. 2008 Mar;51(3):803-9. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.107.100586. Epub
2008 Jan 22.

Loss of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor induces hypoxemia, endothelin-1, and
systemic hypertension at modest altitude.

Lund AK(1), Agbor LN, Zhang N, Baker A, Zhao H, Fink GD, Kanagy NL, Walker MK.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center,
Albuquerque, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a basic helix-loop-helix Per-Arnt-Sim
transcription factor that mediates induction of metabolic enzymes and toxicity of
certain environmental pollutants. Although AHR knockout (KO) mice develop cardiac
hypertrophy, conflicting reports associate this pathology with hypotension or
endothelin (ET)-1-dependent hypertension. Because hypertension occurred at modest
altitude, we tested the hypothesis that loss of AHR increases the sensitivity to 
hypoxia-induced ET-1, contributing to systemic hypertension. We found that AHR KO
mice were hypertensive at modest altitude (1632 m) but hypotensive at low
altitude (225 m). When AHR KO mice residing at 1632 m were exposed to the partial
pressure of inspired oxygen (PIO(2)) at sea level for 11 days, blood pressure
declined to levels measured at 225 m. Although plasma ET-1 in AHR KO mice was
significantly elevated at 1632 m and decreased at 225 m and sea level PIO(2),
pulmonary prepro-ET-1 mRNA was significantly reduced at 1632 m and decreased
further at 225 m and sea level PIO(2). Blood gas analysis revealed that AHR KO
mice were hypoxemic, hypercapnic, and acidotic at 1632 m, values that were
attenuated and normalized after 24 hours and 11 days under sea level PIO(2),
respectively. Lastly, AHR inactivation in endothelial cells by small interfering 
RNA significantly reduced basal prepro-ET-1 mRNA but did not alter
hypoxia-induced expression. Our studies establish the AHR KO mouse as a model in 
which modest decreases in PIO(2) lead to hypoxemia, increased plasma ET-1, and
systemic hypertension without increased pulmonary prepro-ET-1 mRNA expression.

PMID: 18212270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Bacteriol. 2008 Mar;190(6):2118-27. doi: 10.1128/JB.01858-07. Epub 2008 Jan 18.

Structure-function relationships in the HAMP and proximal signaling domains of
the aerotaxis receptor Aer.

Watts KJ(1), Johnson MS, Taylor BL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Loma Linda University, Loma
Linda, CA 92350, USA.

Aer, the Escherichia coli aerotaxis receptor, faces the cytoplasm, where the PAS 
(Per-ARNT-Sim)-flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) domain senses redox changes in
the electron transport system or cytoplasm. PAS-FAD interacts with a HAMP
(histidine kinase, adenylyl cyclase, methyl-accepting protein, and phosphatase)
domain to form an input-output module for Aer signaling. In this study, the
structure of the Aer HAMP and proximal signaling domains was probed to elucidate 
structure-function relationships important for signaling. Aer residues 210 to 290
were individually replaced with cysteine and then cross-linked in vivo. The
results confirmed that the Aer HAMP domain is composed of two alpha-helices
separated by a structured loop. The proximal signaling domain consisted of two
alpha-helices separated by a short undetermined structure. The Af1503 HAMP domain
from Archaeoglobus fulgidus was recently shown to be a four-helix bundle. To test
whether the Af1503 HAMP domain is a prototype for the Aer HAMP domain, the latter
was modeled using coordinates from Af1503. Several findings supported the
hypothesis that Aer has a four-helix HAMP structure: (i) cross-linking
independently identified the same residues at the dimer interface that were
predicted by the model, (ii) the rate of cross-linking for residue pairs was
inversely proportional to the beta-carbon distances measured on the model, and
(iii) clockwise lesions that were not contiguous in the linear Aer sequence were 
clustered in one region in the folded HAMP model, defining a potential site of
PAS-HAMP interaction during signaling. In silico modeling of mutant Aer proteins 
indicated that the four-helix HAMP structure was important for Aer stability or
maturation. The significance of the HAMP and proximal signaling domain structure 
for signal transduction is discussed.

PMCID: PMC2258896
PMID: 18203838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. BMC Mol Biol. 2008 Jan 4;9:1. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-9-1.

A direct repeat of E-box-like elements is required for cell-autonomous circadian 
rhythm of clock genes.

Nakahata Y(1), Yoshida M, Takano A, Soma H, Yamamoto T, Yasuda A, Nakatsu T,
Takumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Osaka Bioscience Institute, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan.
yasu_nakahata@yahoo.co.jp

BACKGROUND: The circadian expression of the mammalian clock genes is based on
transcriptional feedback loops. Two basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) PAS (for
Period-Arnt-Sim) domain-containing transcriptional activators, CLOCK and BMAL1,
are known to regulate gene expression by interacting with a promoter element
termed the E-box (CACGTG). The non-canonical E-boxes or E-box-like sequences have
also been reported to be necessary for circadian oscillation.
RESULTS: We report a new cis-element required for cell-autonomous circadian
transcription of clock genes. This new element consists of a canonical E-box or a
non-canonical E-box and an E-box-like sequence in tandem with the latter with a
short interval, 6 base pairs, between them. We demonstrate that both E-box or
E-box-like sequences are needed to generate cell-autonomous oscillation. We also 
verify that the spacing nucleotides with constant length between these 2
E-elements are crucial for robust oscillation. Furthermore, by in silico analysis
we conclude that several clock and clock-controlled genes possess a direct repeat
of the E-box-like elements in their promoter region.
CONCLUSION: We propose a novel possible mechanism regulated by double E-box-like 
elements, not to a single E-box, for circadian transcriptional oscillation. The
direct repeat of the E-box-like elements identified in this study is the minimal 
required element for the generation of cell-autonomous transcriptional
oscillation of clock and clock-controlled genes.

PMCID: PMC2254435
PMID: 18177499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 11;283(15):9909-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710601200. Epub 2008 
Jan 3.

Glucose and endoplasmic reticulum calcium channels regulate HIF-1beta via
presenilin in pancreatic beta-cells.

Dror V(1), Kalynyak TB, Bychkivska Y, Frey MH, Tee M, Jeffrey KD, Nguyen V,
Luciani DS, Johnson JD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Signaling in Diabetes, Diabetes Research Group,
Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Pancreatic beta-cell death is a critical event in type 1 diabetes, type 2
diabetes, and clinical islet transplantation. We have previously shown that
prolonged block of ryanodine receptor (RyR)-gated release from intracellular
Ca(2+) stores activates calpain-10-dependent apoptosis in beta-cells. In the
present study, we further characterized intracellular Ca(2+) channel expression
and function in human islets and the MIN6 beta-cell line. All three RyR isoforms 
were identified in human islets and MIN6 cells, and these endoplasmic reticulum
channels were observed in close proximity to mitochondria. Blocking RyR channels,
but not sarco/endoplasmic reticulum ATPase (SERCA) pumps, reduced the ATP/ADP
ratio. Blocking Ca(2+) flux through RyR or inositol trisphosphate receptor
channels, but not SERCA pumps, increased the expression of hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF-1beta). Moreover, inhibition of RyR or inositol trisphosphate
receptor channels, but not SERCA pumps, increased the expression of presenilin-1.
Both HIF-1beta and presenilin-1 expression were also induced by low glucose.
Overexpression of presenilin-1 increased HIF-1beta, suggesting that HIF is
downstream of presenilin. Our results provide the first evidence of a
presenilin-HIF signaling network in beta-cells. We demonstrate that this pathway 
is controlled by Ca(2+) flux through intracellular channels, likely via changes
in mitochondrial metabolism and ATP. These findings provide a mechanistic
understanding of the signaling pathways activated when intracellular Ca(2+)
homeostasis and metabolic activity are suppressed in diabetes and islet
transplantation.

PMID: 18174159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Curr Microbiol. 2008 Feb;56(2):115-21. doi: 10.1007/s00284-007-9080-x. Epub 2008 
Jan 3.

Cloning and characterization of the BLR2, the homologue of the blue-light
regulator of Neurospora crassa WC-2, in the phytopathogenic fungus Bipolaris
oryzae.

Moriwaki A(1), Katsube H, Ueno M, Arase S, Kihara J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life and Environmental Science, Shimane University, Matsue, Shimane
690-8504, Japan.

Bipolaris oryzae is a filamentous ascomycetous fungus that causes brown leaf spot
disease in rice. We isolated and characterized BLR2, a gene that encodes a
putative blue-light regulator similar to Neurospora crassa white collar-2 (WC-2).
The deduced amino acid sequence of the BLR2 showed significant homology to other 
fungal blue-light regulator proteins in the Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) protein-protein
interaction domain, nuclear localization signal, and GATA zinc finger DNA-binding
domains. The BLR2-silenced transformants hardly produced conidia in the
subsequent dark condition after near-ultraviolet (NUV) irradiation. Furthermore, 
the BLR2-silenced transformants suppressed the photolyase (PHR1) gene expression 
enhanced by NUV irradiation. These results indicate that BLR2 is necessary not
only for conidial formation, but also for NUV radiation-enhanced photolyase gene 
expression in B. oryzae.

PMID: 18172720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Clin Invest. 2008 Feb;118(2):640-50. doi: 10.1172/JCI30024.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor is a putative tumor suppressor gene in
multiple human cancers.

Zudaire E(1), Cuesta N, Murty V, Woodson K, Adams L, Gonzalez N, Martínez A,
Narayan G, Kirsch I, Franklin W, Hirsch F, Birrer M, Cuttitta F.

Author information: 
(1)Angiogenesis Core Facility, NCI, NIH, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20892-4605, USA. 
zudairee@mail.nih.gov

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AHRR) is a bHLH/Per-ARNT-Sim
transcription factor located in a region of chromosome 5 (5p15.3) that has been
proposed to contain one or more tumor suppressor genes. We report here consistent
downregulation of AHRR mRNA in human malignant tissue from different anatomical
origins, including colon, breast, lung, stomach, cervix, and ovary, and
demonstrate DNA hypermethylation as the regulatory mechanism of AHRR gene
silencing. Knockdown of AHRR gene expression in a human lung cancer cell line
using siRNA significantly enhanced in vitro anchorage-dependent and -independent 
cell growth as well as cell growth after transplantation into immunocompromised
mice. In addition, knockdown of AHRR in non-clonable normal human mammary
epithelial cells enabled them to grow in an anchorage-independent manner.
Further, downregulation of AHRR expression in the human lung cancer cell line
conferred resistance to apoptotic signals and enhanced motility and invasion in
vitro and angiogenic potential in vivo. Ectopic expression of AHRR in tumor cells
resulted in diminished anchorage-dependent and -independent cell growth and
reduced angiogenic potential. These results therefore demonstrate that AHRR is a 
putative new tumor suppressor gene in multiple types of human cancers.

PMCID: PMC2157559
PMID: 18172554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Mar;28(6):1936-46. Epub 2007 Dec 26.

Loss of singleminded-2s in the mouse mammary gland induces an
epithelial-mesenchymal transition associated with up-regulation of slug and
matrix metalloprotease 2.

Laffin B(1), Wellberg E, Kwak HI, Burghardt RC, Metz RP, Gustafson T, Schedin P, 
Porter WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA.

The short splice variant of the basic helix-loop-helix Per-Arnt-Sim transcription
factor Singleminded-2, SIM2s, has been implicated in development and is
frequently lost or reduced in primary breast tumors. Here, we show that loss of
Sim2s causes aberrant mouse mammary gland ductal development with features
suggestive of malignant transformation, including increased proliferation, loss
of polarity, down-regulation of E-cadherin, and invasion of the surrounding
stroma. Additionally, knockdown of SIM2s in MCF-7 breast cancer cells contributed
to an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and increased tumorigenesis. In
both Sim2(-/-) mammary glands and SIM2s-depleted MCF7 cells, these changes were
associated with increased SLUG and MMP2 levels. SIM2s protein was detectable on
the SLUG promoter, and overexpression of SIM2s repressed expression from a
SLUG-controlled reporter in a dose-dependent manner. To our knowledge, SIM2s is
the first protein shown to bind and repress the SLUG promoter, providing a
plausible explanation for the development role and breast tumor-suppressive
activity of SIM2s. Together, our results suggest that SIM2s is a key regulator of
mammary-ductal development and that loss of SIM2s expression is associated with
an invasive, EMT-like phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2268409
PMID: 18160708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008 Mar 1;227(2):313-24. Epub 2007 Nov 13.

Activation of estrogen receptor signaling by the dioxin-like aryl hydrocarbon
receptor agonist, 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB126) in salmon in vitro
system.

Mortensen AS(1), Arukwe A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), 
Høgskoleringen 5, 7491 Trondheim, Norway.

Erratum in
    Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011 Feb 1;250(3):346.

Available toxicological evidence indicates that environmental contaminants with
strong affinity to the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) have anti-estrogenic
properties in both mammalian and non-mammalian in vivo and in vitro studies. The 
primary objective of the present study was to investigate the interactions
between the AhR and estrogen receptor (ER) in salmon in vitro system. Two
separate experiments were performed and gene expression patterns were analyzed
using real-time PCR, while protein analysis was done by immunoblotting. Firstly, 
salmon primary hepatocytes were exposed to the dioxin-like PCB126 at 1, 10 and 50
nM [corrected] and ER agonist nonylphenol (NP) at 5 and 10 microM, singly or in
combination. Our data showed increased levels of ER-mediated gene expression
(vitellogenin: Vtg, zona radiata protein: Zr-protein, ERalpha, ERbeta and
vigilin) as well as increased cellular ERalpha protein levels after treatment
with NP and PCB126, singly or in combination. PCB126 treatment alone produced, as
expected, increased transcription of AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt), CYP1A1 and 
AhR repressor (AhRR) mRNA, and these responses were reduced in the presence of NP
concentrations. PCB126 exposure alone did not produce significant effect on
AhR2alpha mRNA but increased (at 1 and 50 pM) and decreased (at 10 pM) AhR2beta
mRNA below control level. For AhR2delta and AhR2gamma isotypes, PCB126 (at 1 nM) 
[corrected] produced significant decreases (total inhibition for AhR2gamma) of
mRNA levels but was indifferent at 10 and 50 pM, compared to control. NP exposure
alone produced concentration-dependent significant decrease of AhR2beta mRNA. In 
contrast, while 5 microM NP produced an indifferent effect on AhR2delta and
AhR2gamma, 10 microM NP produced significant decrease (total inhibition for
AhR2gamma) and the presence of NP produced apparent PCB126 concentration-specific
modulation of all AhR isotypes. A second experiment was performed to evaluate the
involvement of ER isoforms in PCB126 mediated estrogenicity. Here, cells were
treated with the different concentrations of PCB126, alone or in combination with
ICI182,780 (ICI) and sampled at 12, 24 and 48 h post-exposure. Our data showed
that PCB126 produced a time- and concentration-specific increase of ERalpha and
Vtg expressions and these responses were decreased in the presence of ICI. In
general, these responses show a direct PCB126 induced transcriptional activation 
of ERalpha and estrogenic responses in the absence of ER agonists. Although not
conclusive, our findings represent the first study showing the activation of
estrogenic responses by a dioxin-like PCB in fish in vitro system and resemble
the "ER-hijacking" hypothesis that was recently proposed. Thus, the direct
estrogenic actions of PCB126 observed in the present study add new insight on the
mechanisms of ER-AhR cross-talk, prompting a new wave of discussion on whether
AhR-mediated anti-estrogenicity is an exception rather than rule of action.

PMID: 18155262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Toxicol Sci. 2008 May;103(1):191-206. Epub 2007 Dec 20.

Analysis of Ah receptor-ARNT and Ah receptor-ARNT2 complexes in vitro and in cell
culture.

Dougherty EJ(1), Pollenz RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, Department of
Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620, USA.

ARNT and ARNT2 proteins are expressed in mammalian and aquatic species and
exhibit a high level of amino acid identity in the basic-helix loop-helix
PER/ARNT/SIM domains involved in protein interactions and DNA binding. Since the 
analysis of ARNT2 function at the protein level has been limited, ARNT2 function 
in aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)-mediated signaling was evaluated and compared 
to ARNT. In vitro, ARNT and ARNT2 dimerized equally with the AHR in the presence 
of 2,3,7,8-tetracholorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and ARNT2 outcompeted ARNT for
binding to the AHR when expressed in excess. In contrast, activation of the AHR
with 3-methylcholanthrene or benzo[a]pyrene resulted in predominant formation of 
AHR*ARNT complexes. ARNT2 expressed in Hepa-1 cell culture lines with reduced
ARNT protein resulted in minimal induction of endogenous CYP1A1 protein compared 
to cells expressing ARNT, and mutation of the putative proline residue at amino
acid 352 to histidine failed to produce an ARNT2 that could function in
AHR-mediated signaling. However, the expression of ARNT2 in wild-type Hepa-1
cells reduced TCDD-mediated induction of endogenous CYP1A1 protein by 30%, even
though AHR*ARNT2 complexes could not be detected in nuclear extracts. Western
blot analysis of numerous mouse tissues and various cell culture lines showed
that both endogenous ARNT and ARNT2 could be detected in cells derived from
kidney, central nervous system, and retinal epithelium. Thus, ARNT2 has the
ability to dimerize with the liganded AHR in vitro and is influenced by the
activating ligand yet appears to be limited in its ability to influence
AHR-mediated signaling in cell culture.

PMCID: PMC2396590
PMID: 18096572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008 Oct;33(11):2657-66. Epub 2007 Dec 19.

Reversal of subchronic PCP-induced deficits in attentional set shifting in rats
by sertindole and a 5-HT6 receptor antagonist: comparison among antipsychotics.

Rodefer JS(1), Nguyen TN, Karlsson JJ, Arnt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
joshua-rodefer@uiowa.edu

Currently accepted treatments for schizophrenia can effectively control positive 
symptoms but have limited impact on cognitive deficits in schizophrenia. The
purpose of these experiments was to address this unmet need by characterizing the
effects of classical and second-generation antipsychotics on cognitive
impairments associated with schizophrenia. An additional aim was to characterize 
the part(s) of the pharmacological profile of drugs that were important to
reverse deficits. Cognitive deficits were assessed using a frontally mediated
attentional set-shifting task in rats that is analogous to tasks used in humans
and nonhuman primates that assess executive function. Mirroring findings in
patients with schizophrenia, the classical antipsychotic haloperidol was
ineffective in treating set-shifting deficits induced by subchronic treatment
with phencyclidine (PCP). Similarly, second-generation antipsychotics,
risperidone, clozapine, and olanzapine were ineffective. In contrast, selected
doses of sertindole and the 5-HT(6) receptor antagonist SB 271046 attenuated
PCP-induced set-shifting deficits. Finally, the 5-HT(2A) receptor antagonist
M100907 was without effect. Further examination revealed that repeated treatment 
(21 days) with sertindole, but not olanzapine, also was effective in reversing
the executive function deficit. These data suggest that the combination of
5-HT(6) antagonistic activity and the absence of antimuscarinic activity may
represent key characteristics of the pharmacological profile for improved
antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia.

PMID: 18094666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008 Mar 1;227(2):275-83. Epub 2007 Nov 21.

Rats fed soy protein isolate (SPI) have impaired hepatic CYP1A1 induction by
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons as a result of interference with aryl
hydrocarbon receptor signaling.

Singhal R(1), Badger TM, Ronis MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.

Consumption of soy diets has been found to reduce cancer incidence in animals and
is associated with reduced cancer risk in humans. Previously, we have
demonstrated that female Sprague-Dawley rats fed purified AIN-93G diets with soy 
protein isolate (SPI) as the sole protein source had reduced CYP1A1 induction and
basal aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) levels relative to those fed the same diet 
containing casein (CAS). In the present study, the molecular mechanisms
underlying reduced AhR expression have been studied. The SPI-effect on AhR was
not observed after feeding diets containing the purified soy isoflavones
genistein or daidzein. Rat hepatoma FGC-4 cells were treated with the serum
obtained from rats fed CAS- or SPI-containing diets. Reduced AhR levels (P<0.05) 
were observed after 24 h exposure to SPI-serum without any changes in the overall
expression of chaperone proteins--HSP90 and XAP2. SPI-serum-stimulated AhR
degradation was inhibited by treating the cells with the proteasome inhibitor,
MG132, and was observed to be preceded by ubiquitination of the receptor. A
reduced association of XAP2 with the immunoprecipitated AhR complex was observed.
SPI-serum-mediated AhR degradation was preceded by nuclear translocation of the
receptor. However, the translocated receptor was found to be unable to
heterodimerize with ARNT or to bind to XRE elements on the CYP1A1 enhancer. These
data suggest that feeding SPI-containing diets antagonizes AhR signaling by a
novel mechanism which differs from those established for known AhR antagonists.

PMID: 18078967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2008 Sep;62(4):689-97. Epub 2007 Dec 12.

BRCA1 modulates sensitivity to 5F-203 by regulating xenobiotic stress-inducible
protein levels and EROD activity.

Kang HJ(1), Kim HJ, Kwon SH, Kang BD, Eling TE, Lee SH, Bae I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, 3970 Reservoir Road, NW, Washington DC, 20057-1469, USA.

PURPOSE: We have investigated the effects of BRCA1 over-expression and knockdown 
on 5F-203-induced gene expression and cytotoxicity in human breast cancer cells. 
5F-203 is a chemotherapeutic prodrug that both induces a p450 enzyme, CYP1A1, and
is metabolically activated by CYP1A1.
METHODS: We used several molecular biological techniques to confirm our findings.
BRCA1 regulates sensitivity to 5F-203 by regulating the expression of CYP1A1 mRNA
and its EROD activity. XRE-Luc reporter assays, semi-quantitative RT-PCR, Western
blot analysis, EROD activity measurements, gene knockdown and MTT cell survival
assays were used for this study.
RESULTS: Our results show that the ability of 5F-203 treatments to increase
CYP1A1 mRNA level and CYP1A1 enzymatic activity (EROD activity) are affected by
BRCA1 protein levels. In addition, the ability of 5F-203 treatments to induce
proteins, P53 and P53 target genes such as P21, is significantly decreased in
BRCA1 knockdown cells, suggesting that BRCA1-related effects could at least
partially explain why BRCA1 knockdown increases resistance to 5F-203-mediated
cytotoxicity. We also observed altered expression of the two major transcription 
factors (AhR and ARNT) that affect CYP1A1 expression when BRCA1 protein levels
are altered.
CONCLUSION: BRCA1 is an important protein, which affects 5F-203-mediated
cytotoxicity. Our findings are potentially clinically significant; they suggest
that those patients most likely to respond to this new prodrug will have tumors
containing normal amounts of BRCA1.

PMID: 18074135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Chem Res Toxicol. 2008 Feb;21(2):341-8. Epub 2007 Dec 12.

Significance of prolyl hydroxylase 2 in the interference of aryl hydrocarbon
receptor and hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha signaling.

Seifert A(1), Katschinski DM, Tonack S, Fischer B, Navarrete Santos A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Martin Luther University Faculty of
Medicine, D-06097 Halle (Saale), Germany. anja.seifert@medizin.uni-halle.de

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1 alpha) and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
(AhR) work as environmental sensors in human tissues. These proteins are members 
of the helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-SIM transcription factor family and form
heterodimers with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator. HIF-1 alpha
can be activated by low oxygen concentrations and hypoxia-inducing agents. The
AhR is activated by xenobiotica such as dioxins. Here, we analyze the
interference between the AhR signaling, activated by 10 nM
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo- p-dioxin (TCDD), and the HIF-1 alpha pathway, induced
by hypoxia (5% O2), in two human cell lines, the breast carcinoma cell line MCF-7
and the hepatocyte cell line HepG2. In both cell lines, treatment with TCDD and
hypoxia clearly reduced the stabilization of HIF-1 alpha and HRE-mediated
promoter activity when compared to the induction under hypoxia alone. Because
these effects were not observed after alpha-naphthoflavone treatment and HIF-1
alpha mRNA was not down-regulated, HIF-1 alpha stabilization was revealed to be
the target by TCDD in an AhR-depended mechanism. Under exposure to TCDD or
hypoxia, the main regulator of HIF-1 alpha stability, the prolyl hydroxylase
domain containing protein 2 (PHD2) showed an increase in promoter activity,
transcript numbers, and protein amount. Therefore, PHD2 expression is regulated
in an AhR-dependent manner under normoxia. The AhR-dependent regulation of PHD2
under normoxia, however, is overwritten by the TCDD-mediated destabilization of
HIF-1 alpha. The destabilization of HIF-1 alpha is the dominant effect causing
the reduced PHD2 expression after simultaneous exposure to TCDD and hypoxia. We
conclude that PHD2 does not mediate the TCDD-mediated HIF-1 alpha destabilization
and does not control the interference of AhR and HIF-1 alpha pathways.

PMID: 18072750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Feb;28(4):1285-97. Epub 2007 Dec 10.

Abnormal heart development and lung remodeling in mice lacking the
hypoxia-inducible factor-related basic helix-loop-helix PAS protein NEPAS.

Yamashita T(1), Ohneda O, Nagano M, Iemitsu M, Makino Y, Tanaka H, Miyauchi T,
Goto K, Ohneda K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Poellinger L, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba 305-8575, Japan.

Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) are crucial for oxygen homeostasis during both
embryonic development and postnatal life. Here we show that a novel HIF family
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) protein, which is expressed
predominantly during embryonic and neonatal stages and thereby designated NEPAS
(neonatal and embryonic PAS), acts as a negative regulator of HIF-mediated gene
expression. NEPAS mRNA is derived from the HIF-3alpha gene by alternative
splicing, replacing the first exon of HIF-3alpha with that of inhibitory PAS.
NEPAS can dimerize with Arnt and exhibits only low levels of transcriptional
activity, similar to that of HIF-3alpha. NEPAS suppressed reporter gene
expression driven by HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha. By generating mice with a
targeted disruption of the NEPAS/HIF-3alpha locus, we found that homozygous
mutant mice (NEPAS/HIF-3alpha(-)(/)(-)) were viable but displayed enlargement of 
the right ventricle and impaired lung remodeling. The expression of endothelin 1 
and platelet-derived growth factor beta was increased in the lung endothelial
cells of NEPAS/HIF-3alpha-null mice. These results demonstrate a novel regulatory
mechanism in which the activities of HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha are negatively
regulated by NEPAS in endothelial cells, which is pertinent to lung and heart
development during the embryonic and neonatal stages.

PMCID: PMC2258751
PMID: 18070924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jan 11;283(2):1167-78. Epub 2007 Nov 15.

PAS-mediated dimerization of soluble guanylyl cyclase revealed by signal
transduction histidine kinase domain crystal structure.

Ma X(1), Sayed N, Baskaran P, Beuve A, van den Akker F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/RT500, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, 
Ohio 44106, USA.

Signal transduction histidine kinases (STHK) are key for sensing environmental
stresses, crucial for cell survival, and attain their sensing ability using small
molecule binding domains. The N-terminal domain in an STHK from Nostoc
punctiforme is of unknown function yet is homologous to the central region in
soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC), the main receptor for nitric oxide (NO). This
domain is termed H-NOXA (or H-NOBA) because it is often associated with the
heme-nitric oxide/oxygen binding (H-NOX) domain. A structure-function approach
was taken to investigate the role of H-NOXA in STHK and sGC. We report the 2.1 A 
resolution crystal structure of the dimerized H-NOXA domain of STHK, which
reveals a Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) fold. The H-NOXA monomers dimerize in a parallel
arrangement juxtaposing their N-terminal helices and preceding residues. Such PAS
dimerization is similar to that previously observed for EcDOS, AvNifL, and
RmFixL. Deletion of 7 N-terminal residues affected dimer organization. Alanine
scanning mutagenesis in sGC indicates that the H-NOXA domains of sGC could adopt 
a similar dimer organization. Although most putative interface mutations did
decrease sGCbeta1 H-NOXA homodimerization, heterodimerization of full-length
heterodimeric sGC was mostly unaffected, likely due to the additional
dimerization contacts of sGC in the coiled-coil and catalytic domains. Exceptions
are mutations sGCalpha1 F285A and sGCbeta1 F217A, which each caused a drastic
drop in NO stimulated activity, and mutations sGCalpha1 Q368A and sGCbeta1 Q309A,
which resulted in both a complete lack of activity and heterodimerization. Our
structural and mutational results provide new insights into sGC and STHK
dimerization and overall architecture.

PMCID: PMC3010369
PMID: 18006497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Biochemistry. 2007 Dec 11;46(49):14001-9. Epub 2007 Nov 15.

N- and C-terminal flanking regions modulate light-induced signal transduction in 
the LOV2 domain of the blue light sensor phototropin 1 from Avena sativa.

Halavaty AS(1), Moffat K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Chicago,
929 East 57th Street, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Light sensing by photoreceptors controls phototropism, chloroplast movement,
stomatal opening, and leaf expansion in plants. Understanding the molecular
mechanism by which these processes are regulated requires a quantitative
description of photoreceptor dynamics. We focus on a light-driven signal
transduction mechanism in the LOV2 domain (LOV, light, oxygen, voltage) of the
blue light photoreceptor phototropin 1 from Avena sativa (oat). High-resolution
crystal structures of the dark and light states of an oat LOV2 construct
including residues Leu404 through Leu546 (LOV2 (404-546)) have been determined at
105 and 293 K. In all four structures, LOV2 (404-546) exhibits the typical
Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) fold, flanked by an additional conserved N-terminal
turn-helix-turn motif and a C-terminal flanking region containing an amphipathic 
Jalpha helix. These regions dock on the LOV2 core domain and bury several
hydrophobic residues of the central beta-sheet of the core domain that would
otherwise be exposed to solvent. Light structures of LOV2 (404-546) reveal that
formation of the covalent bond between Cys450 and the C4a atom of the flavin
mononucleotide (FMN) results in local rearrangement of the hydrogen-bonding
network in the FMN binding pocket. These rearrangements are associated with
disruption of the Asn414-Asp515 hydrogen bond on the surface of the protein and
displacement of the N- and C-terminal flanking regions of LOV2 (404-546), both of
which constitute a structural signal.

PMID: 18001137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mol Pharmacol. 2008 Feb;73(2):387-98. Epub 2007 Nov 13.

Repression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) signaling by AHR repressor: role of
DNA binding and competition for AHR nuclear translocator.

Evans BR(1), Karchner SI, Allan LL, Pollenz RS, Tanguay RL, Jenny MJ, Sherr DH,
Hahn ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, MS#32, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods
Hole, MA 02543, USA. mhahn@whoi.edu

Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin causes altered gene expression and toxicity. 
The AHR repressor (AHRR) inhibits AHR signaling through a proposed mechanism
involving competition with AHR for dimerization with AHR nuclear translocator
(ARNT) and binding to AHR-responsive enhancer elements (AHREs). We sought to
delineate the relative roles of competition for ARNT and AHREs in the mechanism
of repression. In transient transfections in which AHR2-dependent transactivation
was repressed by AHRR1 or AHRR2, increasing ARNT expression failed to reverse the
repression, suggesting that AHRR inhibition of AHR signaling does not occur
through sequestration of ARNT. An AHRR1 point mutant (AHRR1-Y9F) that could not
bind to AHREs but that retained its nuclear localization was only slightly
reduced in its ability to repress AHR2, demonstrating that AHRR repression does
not occur solely through competition for AHREs. When both proposed mechanisms
were blocked (AHRR1-Y9F plus excess ARNT), AHRR remained functional. AHRR1
neither blocked AHR nuclear translocation nor reduced the levels of AHR2 protein.
Experiments using AHRR1 C-terminal deletion mutants showed that amino acids 270
to 550 are dispensable for repression. These results demonstrate that repression 
of AHR transactivation by AHRR involves the N-terminal portion of AHRR; does not 
involve competition for ARNT; and does not require binding to AHREs, although
AHRE binding can contribute to the repression. We propose a mechanism of AHRR
action involving "transrepression" of AHR signaling through protein-protein
interactions rather than by inhibition of the formation or DNA binding of the
AHR-ARNT complex.

PMCID: PMC3263532
PMID: 18000031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Methods Enzymol. 2007;435:463-78.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha under the control of nitric oxide.

Brüne B(1), Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry I/ZAFES, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University,
Frankfurt, Germany.

Decreased oxygen availability evokes adaptive responses, which are primarily
under the gene regulatory control of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1). HIF-1 is
a heterodimer composed of the basic helix-loop-helix Per-ARNT-Sim (bHLH-PAS)
protein HIF-1alpha (alpha) and the aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT), 
also known as HIF-1beta (beta). The HIF-1 transcriptional system senses decreased
oxygen availability and transmits this signal into pathophysiological responses, 
such as angiogenesis, erythropoiesis, vasomotor control, an altered energy
metabolism, and/or cell survival decisions. It is now appreciated that nitric
oxide (NO) and/or derived reactive nitrogen species (RNS) participate in
stability control of HIF-1alpha. Although initial observations showed that NO
inhibits hypoxia-induced HIF-1alpha stabilization and HIF-1 transcriptional
activation, later studies revealed that the exposure of cells from different
species to chemically diverse NO donors, or conditions of endogenous NO
formation, induced HIF-1alpha accumulation, HIF-1-DNA binding, and activation of 
downstream target gene expression under normoxic conditions. The opposing effects
of NO under hypoxia versus normoxia are discussed based on direct and indirect
reaction properties of NO, taking metal interactions as well as secondary
reaction products, generated in the presence of oxygen or superoxide, into
account. Considering HIF-1alpha as a target that is controlled by the
bioavailability of NO helps in the understanding of how signaling mechanisms are 
attributed to physiological and pathological transmission of NO actions with
broad implications for medicine.

PMID: 17998069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Methods Enzymol. 2007;435:123-44.

Cellular and developmental adaptations to hypoxia: a Drosophila perspective.

Romero NM(1), Dekanty A, Wappner P.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Leloir, Patricias Argentinas, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, a widely utilized genetic model, is highly
resistant to oxygen starvation and is beginning to be used for studying
physiological, developmental, and cellular adaptations to hypoxia. The Drosophila
respiratory (tracheal) system has features in common with the mammalian
circulatory system so that an angiogenesis-like response occurs upon exposure of 
Drosophila larvae to hypoxia. A hypoxia-responsive system homologous to mammalian
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) has been described in the fruit fly, where Fatiga 
is a Drosophila oxygen-dependent HIF prolyl hydroxylase, and the basic
helix-loop-helix Per/ARNT/Sim (bHLH-PAS) proteins Sima and Tango are,
respectively, the Drosophila homologues of mammalian HIF-alpha (alpha) and
HIF-beta (beta). Tango is constitutively expressed regardless of oxygen tension
and, like in mammalian cells, Sima is controlled at the level of protein
degradation and subcellular localization. Sima is critically required for
development in hypoxia, but, unlike mammalian model systems, it is dispensable
for development in normoxia. In contrast, fatiga mutant alleles are all lethal;
however, strikingly, viability to adulthood is restored in fatiga sima double
mutants, although these double mutants are not entirely normal, suggesting that
Fatiga has Sima-independent functions in fly development. Studies in cell culture
and in vivo have revealed that Sima is activated by the insulin receptor (InR)
and target-of-rapamycin (TOR) pathways. Paradoxically, Sima is a negative
regulator of growth. This suggests that Sima is engaged in a negative feedback
loop that limits growth upon stimulation of InR/TOR pathways.

PMID: 17998052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Methods Enzymol. 2007;435:3-24.

Hypoxia-inducible factors Per/ARNT/Sim domains: structure and function.

Scheuermann TH(1), Yang J, Zhang L, Gardner KH, Bruick RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) are key transcriptional regulators of genes
involved in cellular adaptation to reduced oxygen availability through effects on
anaerobic metabolism, oxygen delivery, angiogenesis, and cellular survival and
proliferation. As such, HIFs contribute to the pathogenesis of diseases in which 
oxygen availability is compromised, notably ischemia and tumorigenesis. Though
tremendous progress has been made in elucidating the mechanisms underlying
O(2)-dependent regulation of HIF by Fe(II)- and 2-oxoglutarate-dependent
dioxygenases, HIF induction can be uncoupled from these modes of regulation in
diseases such as cancer. Consequently, renewed interest has developed in
understanding the structure/function relationships of individual P(er)/ARNT/S(im)
(PAS) domains that are important for maintaining transcriptionally active HIF
complexes, regardless of the manner by which HIF is induced. This review
highlights strategies for the biophysical and biochemical characterization of the
PAS domains found within both HIF subunits and provides a platform for future
efforts to exploit these domains in therapeutic settings.

PMID: 17998046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Feb;22(2):304-16. Epub 2007 Nov 8.

The transcription factor aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator functions
as an estrogen receptor beta-selective coactivator, and its recruitment to
alternative pathways mediates antiestrogenic effects of dioxin.

Rüegg J(1), Swedenborg E, Wahlström D, Escande A, Balaguer P, Pettersson K,
Pongratz I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge,
Sweden.

The biological effects of dioxins are mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR) and its dimerization partner, the AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT), and
include interference with hormonal signaling pathways like the response to
estrogens. The effects of estrogens are mediated by two estrogen receptor (ER)
isoforms, ERalpha and ERbeta, which belong to the family of nuclear receptors. We
have previously shown that ARNT can act as coactivator of the ERs. In this study,
we show that recruitment of ARNT to AhR or hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
signaling pathways as well as small interfering RNA-mediated down-regulation of
ARNT levels lead to a reduction in ER transcriptional activity. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we demonstrate that this decrease coincides with
reduced recruitment of ARNT to estradiol-regulated promoters. We show further
that coactivation by ARNT as well as inhibition by dioxin acts stronger on ERbeta
than on ERalpha activity. Additionally, we demonstrate that the effects of ARNT
are dependent on the A/B domain of the ERs with the A/B domain of ERbeta being
considerably stronger in mediating the coactivating effects of ARNT. Taken
together, our studies show that recruitment of ARNT to the AhR after dioxin
treatment can account for the antiestrogenic effect of dioxins. Moreover, we show
for the first time that the inhibitory effects of dioxin are more pronounced on
ERbeta than on ERalpha.

PMID: 17991765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Plant Res. 2008 Jan;121(1):97-105. Epub 2007 Nov 3.

Blue light diminishes interaction of PAS/LOV proteins, putative blue light
receptors in Arabidopsis thaliana, with their interacting partners.

Ogura Y(1), Komatsu A, Zikihara K, Nanjo T, Tokutomi S, Wada M, Kiyosue T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genome Analysis and Genetic Research, Life Science Research
Center, Institute of Research Promotion, Kagawa University, 2393 Ikenobe,
Miki-cho, Kita-gun, Kagawa 761-0795, Japan.

The light, oxygen, or voltage (LOV) domain that belongs to the Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS)
domain superfamily is a blue light sensory module. The Arabidopsis thaliana
PAS/LOV PROTEIN (PLP) gene encodes three putative blue light receptor proteins,
PLPA, PLPB, and PLPC, because of its mRNA splicing variation. PLPA and PLPB each 
contain one PAS domain at the N-terminal region and one LOV domain at the
C-terminal region, while the LOV domain is truncated in PLPC. RNA gel blot
analysis showed that PLP mRNA was markedly expressed after exposure to salt or
dehydration stress. Yeast two-hybrid screening led to the isolation of VITAMIN C 
DEFECTIVE 2 (VTC2), VTC2-LIKE (VTC2L), and BEL1-LIKE HOMEODOMAIN 10 proteins
(BLH10A and BLH10B) as PLP-interacting proteins. The molecular interaction of
PLPA with VTC2L, BLH10A or BLH10B, and that of PLPB with VTC2L were diminished
when yeasts were grown under blue light illumination. Furthermore, the possible
binding of flavin chromophore to PLPA and PLPB was demonstrated. These results
imply that the LOV domain of PLPA and PLPB functions as a blue light sensor, and 
suggest the applicability of these interactions to blue light-dependent switching
in transcriptional regulation in yeast or other organisms.

PMID: 17982713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Dec 28;364(4):1026-31. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Identification of intracellular localization signals and of mechanisms
underlining the nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of human aryl hydrocarbon receptor
repressor.

Kanno Y(1), Miyama Y, Takane Y, Nakahama T, Inouye Y.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Toho University, 2-2-1 Miyama, Funabashi, 
Chiba 247-8510, Japan. ykanno@phar.toho-u.ac.jp

Two members of the 'AhR family' (a family which is part of the bHLH-PAS
superfamily), aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and AhR repressor (AhRR),
originated from a common ancestor and form a regulatory circuit in xenobiotic
signal transduction. AhRR is a nucleocytoplasmic shuttle protein, harboring both 
a nuclear localization signal (NLS) and a nuclear export signal (NES). Because
NLS is dominant over NES, AhRR resides predominantly in the nuclear compartment. 
The NES of AhRR resembles that of AhR in sensitivity to leptomycin B, whereas the
NLS of AhRR is monopartite and is, therefore, distinguished from the reported
bipartite NLS of AhR. The NLS deletion mutant of GFP-AhRR was transported into
the nuclear compartment in the presence of AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt),
suggesting the assembly of an AhRR/Arnt heterodimer complex in the cytoplasmic
compartment and Arnt-dependent nuclear translocation of this complex.

PMID: 17980155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Jan;294(1):E120-30. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

Clock mutation facilitates accumulation of cholesterol in the liver of mice fed a
cholesterol and/or cholic acid diet.

Kudo T(1), Kawashima M, Tamagawa T, Shibata S.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Physiology and Pharmacology, School of Science and Engineering,
Waseda University, Higashifushimi 2-7-5, Nishitokyo-Shi, Tokyo 202-0021, Japan.

Cholesterol (CH) homeostasis in the liver is regulated by enzymes of CH synthesis
such as 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR) and catabolic
enzymes such as cytochrome P-450, family 7, subfamily A, and polypeptide 1
(CYP7A1). Since a circadian clock controls the gene expression of these enzymes, 
these genes exhibit circadian rhythm in the liver. In this study, we examined the
relationship between a diet containing CH and/or cholic acid (CA) and the
circadian regulation of Hmgcr, low-density lipoprotein receptor (Ldlr), and
Cyp7a1 gene expression in the mouse liver. A 4-wk CA diet lowered and eventually 
abolished the circadian expression of these genes. Not only clock genes such as
period homolog 2 (Drosophila) (Per2) and brain and muscle arnt-like protein-1
(Bmal1) but also clock-controlled genes such as Hmgcr, Ldlr, and Cyp7a1 showed a 
reduced and arrhythmic expression pattern in the liver of Clock mutant mice. The 
reduced gene expression of Cyp7a1 in mice fed a diet containing CA or CH + CA was
remarkable in the liver of Clock mutants compared with wild-type mice, and high
liver CH accumulation was apparent in Clock mutant mice. In contrast, a CH diet
without CA only elevated Cyp7a1 expression in both wild-type and Clock mutant
mice. The present findings indicate that normal circadian clock function is
important for the regulation of CH homeostasis in the mouse liver, especially in 
conjunction with a diet containing high CH and CA.

PMID: 17971517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Amyloid. 2007 Dec;14(4):283-7.

Transthyretin valine-94-alanine, a novel variant associated with late-onset
systemic amyloidosis with cardiac involvement.

Kristen AV(1), Ehlermann P, Helmke B, Hund E, Haberkorn U, Linke RP, Katus HA,
Winter P, Altland K, Dengler TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Medical University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany. Arnt_Kristen@med.uni-heidelberg.de

A 63-year-old Caucasian male, diagnosed with dilated cardiomyopathy in 1993,
remained clinically stable for several years. In 2003, a marked increase of
N-terminal pro-natriuretic peptide serum level (611 ng/ml to 4926 ng/ml) was
observed; left ventricular (LV) septum thickness was 10 mm. In addition,
sensorimotor polyneuropathy and autonomic dysfunction occurred. Further
progression of heart failure occurred despite unchanged systolic LV function.
Endomyocardial biopsy in 2006 revealed transthyretin amyloidosis by Congo red and
immunohistochemical staining, as well as Val94Ala substitution by transthyretin
gene analysis. Cardiac amyloid deposition was quantified by
technetium-99m-3,3-diphosphono-1,2-propanodicarboxylic acid (99mTc-DPD)
scintigraphy. Mutational search of the relatives (n = 1) was unremarkable. The
transthyretin Val94Ala mutation is characterized by sensorimotor polyneuropathy, 
autonomic dysfunction, and gastrointestinal and cardiac involvement with amyloid.
This mutation is an addition to the growing spectrum of transthyretin mutations
with late onset of clinical symptoms, but noteworthy because of progressive,
finally disabling disease course. Final clinical assessment of severity of
cardiac involvement in the present patient is rendered complex by possible
concomitant or preceding idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy.

PMID: 17968688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Biol Chem. 2007 Dec 21;282(51):37064-73. Epub 2007 Oct 26.

Calcineurin promotes hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha expression by
dephosphorylating RACK1 and blocking RACK1 dimerization.

Liu YV(1), Hubbi ME, Pan F, McDonald KR, Mansharamani M, Cole RN, Liu JO, Semenza
GL.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Program, Institute for Cell Engineering, Department of Pharmacology
and Molecular Sciences, Mass Spectronomy Proteomics Facility, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Oxygen homeostasis represents an essential organizing principle of metazoan
evolution and biology. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a master regulator
of transcriptional responses to changes in O2 concentration. HIF-1 is a
heterodimer of HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta subunits. O2-dependent degradation of the
HIF-1alpha subunit is mediated by prolyl hydroxylase, von Hippel-Lindau protein
(VHL)/Elongin-C E3 ubiquitin ligase, and the proteasome. O2-independent
degradation of HIF-1alpha is regulated by the competition of RACK1 and HSP90 for 
binding to HIF-1alpha. RACK1 binding results in the recruitment of the Elongin-C 
E3 ubiquitin ligase, leading to VHL-independent ubiquitination and degradation of
HIF-1alpha. In this report, we show that calcineurin inhibits the ubiquitination 
and proteasomal degradation of HIF-1alpha. Calcineurin is a serine/threonine
phosphatase that is activated by calcium and calmodulin. The phosphatase activity
of calcineurin is required for its regulation of HIF-1alpha. RACK1 binds to the
catalytic domain of calcineurin and is required for HIF-1alpha degradation
induced by the calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporine A. Elongin-C and HIF-1alpha
each bind to RACK1 and dimerization of RACK1 is required to recruit Elongin-C to 
HIF-1alpha. Phosphorylation of RACK1 promotes its dimerization and
dephosphorylation by calcineurin inhibits dimerization. Serine 146 within the
dimerization domain is phosphorylated and mutation of serine 146 impairs RACK1
dimerization and HIF-1alpha degradation. These results indicate that
intracellular calcium levels can regulate HIF-1alpha expression by modulating
calcineurin activity and RACK1 dimerization.

PMCID: PMC3754800
PMID: 17965024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2008 Mar;147(2):205-15. Epub 2007 Sep
29.

Molecular and developmental effects of exposure to pyrene in the early
life-stages of Cyprinodon variegatus.

Hendon LA(1), Carlson EA, Manning S, Brouwer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Coastal Sciences, Gulf Coast Research Laboratory, University of 
Southern Mississippi, 703 East Beach Drive, Ocean Springs, MS, USA.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) have been connected to developmental
toxicity in the early life-stages of many species by their ability to bind to the
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), which dimerizes with ARNT (AHR nuclear
translocator) to induce transcription of genes such as CYP1A1. ARNT also
dimerizes with HIF (hypoxia-inducible factor alpha) to induce transcription of
genes such as VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor), suggesting that PAHs may
interfere with transcription of VEGF by competing for ARNT. Herein, we address
the molecular and developmental effects of exposures to the weak AHR agonist
pyrene on the early life-stages of the sheepshead minnow Cyprinodon variegatus.
Embryos were exposed under flow-through conditions to 0, 20, 60, or 150 ppb
pyrene up to 432 hours post-fertilization (hpf). RNA was extracted at 5 time
points (12, 24, 48, 96, and 432 hpf) and changes in CYP1A1 and VEGF expression
were assessed by real-time RT-PCR. Since few genes have been documented for the
sheepshead minnow, we first cloned and sequenced CYP1A1, VEGF and internal
standard 18S rRNA. Pyrene significantly induced the AHR-regulated gene, CYP1A1,
in a time- and dose-dependent manner, while pyrene failed to alter the
HIF-regulated gene, VEGF. However, VEGF was found to change during various stages
of normal development in this study. Although a normal hatch time (5 dpf) was
observed for all treatments, pyrene-treated embryos showed dose-dependent
abnormalities such as severe dorsal body curvature, mild pericardial and yolk-sac
edema, and increased mortality. Taken together, these data indicate that
embryonic exposure of sheepshead minnows to pyrene disrupts normal development
and alters expression of an AHR/ARNT-regulated gene. In addition, embryonic
exposure to pyrene failed to provide evidence of possible AHR-HIF pathway
cross-talk since developmental expression of VEGF was unaltered.

PMID: 17962083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Oncogene. 2008 Apr 3;27(15):2198-207. Epub 2007 Oct 22.

TCDD deregulates contact inhibition in rat liver oval cells via Ah receptor, JunD
and cyclin A.

Weiss C(1), Faust D, Schreck I, Ruff A, Farwerck T, Melenberg A, Schneider S,
Oesch-Bartlomowicz B, Zatloukalová J, Vondrácek J, Oesch F, Dietrich C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a transcription factor involved in
physiological processes, but also mediates most, if not all, toxic responses to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Activation of the AhR by TCDD leads
to its dimerization with aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT) and
transcriptional activation of several phase I and II metabolizing enzymes.
However, this classical signalling pathway so far failed to explain the
pleiotropic hazardous effects of TCDD, such as developmental toxicity and tumour 
promotion. Thus, there is an urgent need to define genetic programmes
orchestrated by AhR to unravel its role in physiology and toxicology. Here we
show that TCDD treatment of rat liver oval cells leads to induction of the
transcription factor JunD, resulting in transcriptional upregulation of the
proto-oncogene cyclin A which finally triggers a release from contact inhibition.
Ectopic expression of cyclin A in confluent cultures overcomes G(1) arrest,
indicating that increased cyclin A levels are indeed sufficient to bypass contact
inhibition. Functional interference with AhR-, but not with ARNT, abolished
TCDD-induced increase in JunD and cyclin A and prevented loss of contact
inhibition. In summary, we have discovered a novel AhR-dependent and probably
ARNT-independent signalling pathway involving JunD and cyclin A, which mediates
TCDD-induced deregulation of cell cycle control.

PMID: 17952121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Dec 14;364(2):276-82. Epub 2007 Oct 11.

Molecular mechanism of transcriptional repression of AhR repressor involving
ANKRA2, HDAC4, and HDAC5.

Oshima M(1), Mimura J, Yamamoto M, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance and Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

The Aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AhRR) has been proposed to inhibit Aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) activity by competing with AhR for forming a
heterodimer with AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt) and subsequently binding to the 
xenobiotic responsive elements (XRE). However, the precise mechanism of AhRR
inhibitory activity remains unknown. Analysis of the inhibitory activity of AhRR 
on the expression of a TK promoter-driven reporter has localized a core repressor
domain in the sequence of amino acid residue 555-701. The inhibitory activity of 
AhRR is sensitive to a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A. By
using the yeast two-hybrid screening method with the C-terminal sequence of AhRR 
as bait, we identified a binding partner, Ankyrin-repeat protein2 (ANKRA2), a
protein known to interact with HDAC4 and HDAC5. RNA interference experiments
using ANKRA2 and AhRR siRNAs indicate that ANKRA2 is important for
transcriptional repression by AhRR. We have found that under normal conditions,
CYP1A1 gene is kept silent in MEF cells by AhRR/Arnt heterodimer, which binds to 
the XRE sequence in its promoter and recruits ANKRA2, HDAC4, and HDAC5 as
co-repressors.

PMID: 17949687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Drug Metab Dispos. 2008 Jan;36(1):182-9. Epub 2007 Oct 16.

Transcription factor and drug-metabolizing enzyme gene expression in lymphocytes 
from healthy human subjects.

Siest G(1), Jeannesson E, Marteau JB, Samara A, Marie B, Pfister M,
Visvikis-Siest S.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Génétique
Cardiovasculaire CIC 9501, Faculté de Pharmacie, Université Henri Poincaré-Nancy 
I, Nancy, France. gerard.siest@pharma.uhp-nancy.fr

We aimed to measure simultaneously the expression of drug-metabolizing enzymes
(DME) and transcription factors (TF) with high importance in cardiovascular
physiopathology in lymphocytes from healthy subjects. RNA was isolated from
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of 20 subjects from the Stanislas
Cohort. We used a microarray approach to measure 16 DME and 13 TF. Cytochromes
P450 (P450s), including CYP2C19, CYP2C9, CYP2J2, CYP2D6, CYP1A1, CYP4F2, CYP4A11,
CYP2E1, CYP11B2, CYP2C18, and CYP2A6, were expressed in all the subjects. CYP3A4 
and CYP3A5 were not expressed. Glutathione S-transferases (GST) were expressed,
but GSTM1 was seen only in some subjects. Pregnane X receptor (PXR), myocyte
enhancer factor 2, vitamin D receptor, liver X receptor (LXR)-alpha, aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), T-cell factor 7, constitutive androstane receptor,
and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) were expressed in the
majority of the subjects. Glucocorticoid receptor, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-gamma, and LXRbeta were expressed only in 
some individuals. PPARalpha mRNA was found in one subject only, and farnesoid
X-activated receptor was not expressed. In addition, we found significant
correlations between the expression of AHR, ARNT, and CYP1A1 and between PXR and 
P450 involved in leukotriene metabolism (CYP2C, CYP4F2, CYP4A11, CYP2J2, and
CYP11B2). We describe here for the first time the presence of the majority of TF 
and DME in PBMC of healthy subjects without previous induction. The expression of
these genes in lymphocytes could be a useful tool for further studying the
physiological and pathological variations of DME and TF related to environment,
to drug intake, and to cardiovascular metabolic cycles.

PMID: 17940135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Biol Chem. 2007 Dec 7;282(49):36077-89. Epub 2007 Oct 10.

An undecaprenyl phosphate-aminoarabinose flippase required for polymyxin
resistance in Escherichia coli.

Yan A(1), Guan Z, Raetz CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

Modification of lipid A with the 4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose (L-Ara4N) moiety is 
required for resistance to polymyxin and cationic antimicrobial peptides in
Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium. An operon of seven genes (designated
pmrHFIJKLM in S. typhimurium), which is regulated by the PmrA transcription
factor and is also present in E. coli, is necessary for the maintenance of
polymyxin resistance. We previously elucidated the roles of pmrHFIJK in the
biosynthesis and attachment of L-Ara4N to lipid A and renamed these genes
arn-BCADT, respectively. We now propose functions for the last two genes of the
operon, pmrL and pmrM. Chromosomal inactivation of each of these genes in an E.
coli pmrA(c) parent switched its phenotype from polymyxin-resistant to
polymyxin-sensitive. Lipid A was no longer modified with L-Ara4N, even though the
levels of the lipid-linked donor of the L-Ara4N moiety, undecaprenyl
phosphate-alpha-L-Ara4N, were not reduced in the mutants. However, the
undecaprenyl phosphate-alpha-L-Ara4N present in the mutants was less concentrated
on the periplasmic surface of the inner membrane, as judged by 4-5-fold reduced
labeling with the inner membrane-impermeable amine reagent
N-hydroxysulfosuccin-imidobiotin. In an arnT mutant of the same pmrA(c) parent,
which lacks the enzyme that transfers the L-Ara4N unit to lipid A but retains the
same high levels of undecaprenyl phosphate-alpha-L-Ara4N as the parent,
N-hydroxysulfosuccinimidobiotin labeling was not reduced. These results implicate
pmrL and pmrM, but not arnT, in transporting undecaprenyl phosphate-alpha-L-Ara4N
across the inner membrane. PmrM and PmrL, now renamed ArnE and ArnF because of
their involvement in L-Ara4N modification of lipid A, may be subunits of an
undecaprenyl phosphate-alpha-L-Ara4N flippase.

PMCID: PMC2613183
PMID: 17928292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Int Immunopharmacol. 2007 Dec 5;7(12):1569-76. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Bucillamine mechanism inhibiting IL-1beta-induced VEGF production from
fibroblast-like synoviocytes.

Tsuji F(1), Seki I, Aono H, Odani N, Mizutani K, Okamoto M, Sasano M.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development Center, Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 8916-16
Takayama-cho, Ikoma-shi, Nara 630-0101, Japan. ftsuji@minuet.plala.or.jp

We investigated the bucillamine (Buc) mechanism inhibiting interleukin
(IL)-1beta-induced vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) production from
human fibroblast-like synoviocytes (HFLS) which derived from the inflamed
synovium of an RA patient using SA981, its active metabolite. HFLS did not
produce IL-1beta, spontaneously. While SA981 partially inhibited IL-1beta-induced
VEGF production at concentrations of 10 to 100 microM (10.1% and 14.2% inhibition
of total VEGF production under IL-1beta coexistence condition, respectively), it 
failed to inhibit IL-1beta-induced IL-6 production at the same concentrations.
IL-1beta induced phosphorylation of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, 
IkappaBalpha, c-Jun and Akt. SA981 at a concentration of 100 microM partially
inhibited IL-1beta-induced phosphorylation of p38MAPK and Akt (12.0% and 36.1%
inhibition of each total amount of phosphoprotein under IL-1beta coexistence
condition, respectively). The VEGF promoter includes four transcription factors: 
AP1, hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), Sp1 and AP2 binding elements. HIF-1beta, Sp1
and AP1 increased under IL-1beta coexistence conditions. At a concentration of
100 microM, SA981 attenuated increases in HIF-1beta and Sp1 (10.1% and 19.8%
inhibition of each total amount of transcription factor under IL-1beta
coexistence condition, respectively), but not AP1. These results suggest that
SA981 partially inhibits VEGF production via modifications on IL-1beta signaling.
Attenuation of the expression of HIF-1beta and Sp1 (but not AP1) may be a key
with respect to SA981's selective inhibition of VEGF production.

PMID: 17920534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Nov 23;363(3):722-6. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Involvement of RelB in aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated induction of
chemokines.

Vogel CF(1), Sciullo E, Matsumura F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis, One
Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, USA. cfvogel@ucdavis.edu

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is a well-known immunotoxic compound
affecting the expression of inflammatory genes. We found that TCDD induces the
expression of the B-cell activating factor of the tumor necrosis factor family
(BAFF), B-lymphocyte chemoattractant (BLC), CC-chemokine ligand 1 (CCL1), and the
transcription factor interferon gamma responsive factor (IFR3) in U937
macrophages in an aryl hydrocarbon receptor- (AhR) and RelB-dependent manner. The
induction was associated with increased binding activity of an AhR/RelB complex
without participation of ARNT to a NF-kappaB element that is recognized by the
NF-kappaB subunit RelB and localized on promoters of the cytokine and chemokine
genes BAFF, BLC, CCL1, and the transcription factor IRF3. The interaction of AhR 
with RelB binding on a novel type of NF-kappaB binding site represents a new
regulatory function of the AhR.

PMCID: PMC4275028
PMID: 17900530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Drug Metab Dispos. 2007 Dec;35(12):2262-9. Epub 2007 Sep 21.

Analysis of the transcriptional regulation and molecular function of the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor repressor in human cell lines.

Haarmann-Stemmann T(1), Bothe H, Kohli A, Sydlik U, Abel J, Fritsche E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Toxicology, Institut für Umweltmedizinische Forschung, Auf'm
Hennekamp 50, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AhRR) is a member of the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) signaling cascade, which mediates dioxin toxicity and 
is involved in regulation of cell growth and differentiation. The AhRR was
described as a feedback modulator, which counteracts AhR-dependent gene
expression. We investigated the molecular mechanisms of transcriptional
regulation of the human AhRR by cloning its regulatory DNA region located in
intron I of the AhRR. By means of reporter gene analyses and generation of
deletion variants, we identified a functional, 3-methylcholanthrene-sensitive
xenobiotic response element (XRE) site. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses
revealed that the AhRR binds to this XRE, displaying an autoregulatory loop of
AhRR expression. In addition we show that an adjacent GC-box is of functional
relevance for AhRR transcription, since blocking of this GC-box resulted in a
decrease of constitutive and inducible AhRR gene activity. The differences in
constitutive AhRR mRNA level observed in HepG2, primary fibroblast, and HeLa
cells are directly correlated with CYP1A1 inducibility. We show that the
nonresponsiveness of high AhRR-expressing cells toward AhR-agonists is associated
with a constitutive binding of the AhRR to XRE sites of CYP1A1. Treatment with
the histone deacetylase inhibitor sodium butyrate restored the responsiveness of 
CYP1A1 in these cell lines, due to the dissociation of AhRR from the XREs.
Furthermore, transient AhRR mRNA silencing in untreated HeLa cells was
accompanied by an increase of basal CYP1A1 expression, pointing to a constitutive
role of the AhRR in regulation of CYP1A1. The functional relevance of the AhRR in
high AhRR-expressing primary fibroblasts is discussed.

PMID: 17890447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2007 Oct 15;466(2):267-73. Epub 2007 Aug 22.

Curcumin suppresses the transformation of an aryl hydrocarbon receptor through
its phosphorylation.

Nishiumi S(1), Yoshida K, Ashida H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Kobe University, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan.

Halogenated and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons induce diverse biochemical
responses through the transformation of a cytosolic aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR). In mouse hepatoma Hepa-1c1c7 cells, curcumin, a yellow pigment of Curcuma 
longa, did not inhibit the 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-induced
translocation of the AhR into the nucleus, but rather accelerated it. In the
nucleus, curcumin inhibited the TCDD-induced heterodimerization of the AhR with
an AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt), an essential partner for the transformation, 
and also dose-dependently inhibited the TCDD-evoked phosphorylation of both the
AhR and Arnt. Moreover, curcumin significantly inhibited the TCDD-induced
activation of protein kinase C (PKC), which is involved in the transformation,
decreased the TCDD-induced DNA-binding activity of the AhR/Arnt heterodimer, and 
downregulated CYP1A1 expression. In a cell-free system, curcumin inhibited the
binding of 3-methylcholanthrene, an AhR agonist, to the receptor. These results
indicate that curcumin is able to bind to the AhR as a ligand, but suppresses its
transformation by inhibiting the phosphorylation of AhR and Arnt, probably by
PKC.

PMID: 17880909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Planta. 2007 Dec;227(1):37-45. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-mediated reporter gene expression systems in
transgenic tobacco plants.

Kodama S(1), Okada K, Inui H, Ohkawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Science and Technology, Kobe University, Kobe, Hyogo,
Japan.

In mammals, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) mediates expression of certain
genes, including CYP1A1, in response to exposure to dioxins and related
compounds. We have constructed a mouse AhR-mediated gene expression systems for a
beta-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene consisting of an AhR, an AhR nuclear
translocator (Arnt), and a xenobiotic response element (XRE)-driven promoter in
transgenic tobacco plants. On treatment with the AhR ligands 3-methylcholanthrene
(MC), beta-naphthoflavone (betaNF), and indigo, the transgenic tobacco plants
exhibited enhanced GUS activity, presumably by inducible expression of the
reporter gene. The recombinant AhR (AhRV), with the activation domain replaced by
that of the Herpes simplex virus protein VP16, induced GUS activity much more
than the wild-type AhR in the transgenic tobacco plants. Plants carrying AhRV
expressed the GUS reporter gene in a dose- and time-dependent manner when treated
with MC; GUS activity was detected at 5 nM MC on solid medium and at 12 h after
soaking in 25 microM MC. Histochemical GUS staining showed that this system was
active mainly in leaf and stem. These results suggest that the AhR-mediated
reporter gene expression system has potential for the bioassay of dioxins in the 
environment and as a novel gene expression system in plants.

PMID: 17879099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Aquat Toxicol. 2007 Nov 30;85(2):113-23. Epub 2007 Aug 17.

Effects of 17alpha-ethynylestradiol on hormonal responses and xenobiotic
biotransformation system of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar).

Mortensen AS(1), Arukwe A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), 
Høgskoleringen 5, 7491 Trondheim, Norway.

Pharmaceuticals are ubiquitous pollutants in the aquatic environment where their 
potential effects on non-target species like fish has only recently become
subject of systematic investigations. In the present study, experiments were
undertaken to examine the effects of a synthetic pharmaceutical endocrine
disruptor, ethynylestradiol (EE2), given in water at 5 or 50 ng/L and sampled at 
days 0 (control), 3 and 7 after exposure, on hepatic phase I and II
biotransformation and hormonal pathways of juvenile salmon using quantitative
(real-time) polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), Vtg ELISA and 7-ethoxyresorufin
O-deethylase (EROD) catalytic activity. Our data show that EE2 produced time- and
concentration-specific modulation of estrogen receptor isoforms (ERalpha, ERbeta)
and androgen receptor-beta (ARbeta). EE2 produced a concentration-specific
induction of vitellogenin (Vtg) and zona radiata protein (Zr-protein) at day 3
after exposure. At day 7, Vtg and Zr-protein mRNA (and plasma Vtg protein)
expression were significantly decreased in the group given 5 ng EE2/L, compared
to dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) control group. In the xenobiotic biotransformation
pathway, EE2 produced a significant increase of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-alpha
(AhRalpha) at day 3 in the group given 5 ng EE2/L and AhRbeta was decreased at
the same concentration at day 7. While CYP3A was not significantly affected by
EE2 exposure, the CYP1A1, AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt) and AhR repressor
(AhRR) mRNA showed an apparent EE2 concentration and time-dependent decrease. The
expression of uridine diphosphoglucuronosyl transferase (UGT) and glutathione
S-transferase class pi-like (GSTpi-like) mRNA were decreased after exposure to
50ng EE2/L at both day 3 and 7 after exposure. The effect of EE2 on the CYP1A1
gene expressions paralleled effect on EROD and AhRR mRNA, suggesting a direct
role of EE2 in controlling cellular detoxification machinery. Interestingly, the 
carrier vehicle, DMSO produced significant time-dependent induction of estrogenic
(ERalpha, Vtg and Zr-protein) responses, compared with blank (i.e. without DMSO) 
controls at day 7 post-exposure. The effect of DMSO totally underscored the
observed EE2 effect at day 7 after exposure. In general, these findings support
previous reports on the endocrine effects of EE2, in addition to effects on
hepatic biotransformation system. In view of the data presented here and our
recent studies, the use of DMSO as carrier vehicle in endocrine toxicological
experimental studies should be re-evaluated.

PMID: 17875331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Endocrinology. 2007 Dec;148(12):5811-21. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Evidence for circadian regulation of activating transcription factor 5 but not
tyrosine hydroxylase by the chromaffin cell clock.

Lemos DR(1), Goodspeed L, Tonelli L, Antoch MP, Ojeda SR, Urbanski HF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, 505
Northwest 185th Avenue, Beaverton, OR 97006, USA.

In mammals, adrenal medulla chromaffin cells constitute a fundamental component
of the sympathetic nervous system outflow, producing most of the circulating
adrenaline. We recently found that the rhesus monkey adrenal gland expresses
several genes in a 24-h rhythmic pattern, including TH (the rate-limiting enzyme 
in catecholamine synthesis) and Atf5 (a transcription factor involved in
apoptosis and neural cell differentiation) together with the core-clock genes. To
examine whether these core-clock genes play a role in adrenal circadian function,
we exposed rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells to a serum shock and found that it
triggered rhythmic oscillation of the clock genes rBmal1, rPer1, rRev-erbalpha,
and rCry1 and induced the circadian expression of Atf5 but not TH. Furthermore,
we found that the CLOCK/brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1) heterodimer 
could regulate Atf5 expression by binding to an E-box motif and repressing
activity of its promoter. The physiological relevance of this interaction was
evident in Bmal1 -/- mice, in which blunted circadian rhythm of Atf5 mRNA was
observed in the liver, together with significantly higher expression levels in
both liver and adrenal glands. Although we found no compelling evidence for
rhythmic expression of TH in chromaffin cells being regulated by an intrinsic
molecular clock mechanism, the Atf5 results raise the possibility that other
aspects of chromaffin cell physiology, such as cell survival and cell
differentiation, may well be intrinsically regulated.

PMID: 17823250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Nov;18(11):4528-42. Epub 2007 Sep 5.

The N-terminal transactivation domain confers target gene specificity of
hypoxia-inducible factors HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha.

Hu CJ(1), Sataur A, Wang L, Chen H, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute,University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix-Per-ARNT-Sim-proteins hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF)-1alpha and HIF-2alpha are the principal regulators of the hypoxic
transcriptional response. Although highly related, they can activate distinct
target genes. In this study, the protein domain and molecular mechanism important
for HIF target gene specificity are determined. We demonstrate that although
HIF-2alpha is unable to activate multiple endogenous HIF-1alpha-specific target
genes (e.g., glycolytic enzymes), HIF-2alpha still binds to their promoters in
vivo and activates reporter genes derived from such targets. In addition,
comparative analysis of the N-terminal DNA binding and dimerization domains of
HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha does not reveal any significant differences between the
two proteins. Importantly, replacement of the N-terminal transactivation domain
(N-TAD) (but not the DNA binding domain, dimerization domain, or C-terminal
transactivation domain [C-TAD]) of HIF-2alpha with the analogous region of
HIF-1alpha is sufficient to convert HIF-2alpha into a protein with HIF-1alpha
functional specificity. Nevertheless, both the N-TAD and C-TAD are important for 
optimal HIF transcriptional activity. Additional experiments indicate that the
ETS transcription factor ELK is required for HIF-2alpha to activate specific
target genes such as Cited-2, EPO, and PAI-1. These results demonstrate that the 
HIF-alpha TADs, particularly the N-TADs, confer HIF target gene specificity, by
interacting with additional transcriptional cofactors.

PMCID: PMC2043574
PMID: 17804822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Oncol Rep. 2007 Oct;18(4):885-91.

Reduced expression of TANGO in colon and hepatocellular carcinomas.

Arndt S(1), Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, D-93053 Regensburg, Germany.

The TANGO gene was originally identified as a new family member of the MIA gene
family. The gene codes for a 14-kDa protein of so far unknown function. Recently,
we identified TANGO as a tumor suppressor in malignant melanoma. In this study we
evaluated TANGO transcription in different colon and hepatocellular carcinoma
cell lines and tissue samples, to analyze whether loss of TANGO expression is a
more general process in tumor development. TANGO was down-regulated or lost in
all hepatocellular and colon cell lines compared to primary human hepatocytes or 
normal colon epithelial cells, respectively, and in most of the tumor samples
compared to non-tumorous tissue. These results were confirmed in situ by
immunohistochemistry on paraffin-embedded sections of colon and hepatocellular
tumors. Functional assays with exogenous TANGO treatment of colon and hepatoma
cell lines revealed reduced motility and invasion capacity. Our studies present
for the first time the down-regulation of TANGO in colon and hepatocellular
carcinoma and provide the first indications for a tumor suppressor role of the
TANGO gene in human colon and hepatocellular carcinoma. Thus, functional relevant
loss of TANGO expression may contribute to general tumor development and
progression, and may provide a new target for therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 17786351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Mol Biol. 2007 Oct 12;373(1):112-26. Epub 2007 Aug 2.

Structural basis for light-dependent signaling in the dimeric LOV domain of the
photosensor YtvA.

Möglich A(1), Moffat K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute for Biophysical
Dynamics, University of Chicago, 929 East 57th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The photosensor YtvA binds flavin mononucleotide and regulates the general stress
reaction in Bacillus subtilis in response to blue light illumination. It belongs 
to the family of light-oxygen-voltage (LOV) proteins that were first described in
plant phototropins and form a subgroup of the Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) superfamily.
Here, we report the three-dimensional structure of the LOV domain of YtvA in its 
dark and light states. The protein assumes the global fold common to all PAS
domains and dimerizes via a hydrophobic interface. Directly C-terminal to the
core of the LOV domain, an alpha-helix extends into the solvent. Light absorption
causes formation of a covalent bond between a conserved cysteine residue and atom
C(4a) of the FMN ring, which triggers rearrangements throughout the LOV domain.
Concomitantly, in the dark and light structures, the two subunits of the dimeric 
protein rotate relative to each other by 5 degrees . This small quaternary
structural change is presumably a component of the mechanism by which the
activity of YtvA is regulated in response to light. In terms of both structure
and signaling mechanism, YtvA differs from plant phototropins and more closely
resembles prokaryotic heme-binding PAS domains.

PMCID: PMC2175523
PMID: 17764689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Sep 4;104(36):14412-7. Epub 2007 Aug 29.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like (BMAL1) is associated with
susceptibility to hypertension and type 2 diabetes.

Woon PY(1), Kaisaki PJ, Bragança J, Bihoreau MT, Levy JC, Farrall M, Gauguier D.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics and Department of Cardiovascular
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom.

Many aspects of physiology and behavior follow a circadian rhythm. Brain and
muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1) is a key component of the mammalian molecular 
clock, which controls circadian oscillations. In the rat, the gene encoding Bmal1
is located within hypertension susceptibility loci. We analyzed the SNP
distribution pattern in a congenic interval associated with hypertension in the
spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR), and we show that Bmal1 maps close to a
region genetically divergent between SHR and its normotensive (Wistar-Kyoto)
counterpart. Bmal1 sequencing in rat strains identified 19 polymorphisms,
including an SHR promoter variant that significantly affects Gata-4 activation of
transcription in transient transfection experiments. A genetic association study 
designed to test the relevance of these findings in 1,304 individuals from 424
families primarily selected for type 2 diabetes showed that two BMAL1 haplotypes 
are associated with type 2 diabetes and hypertension. This comparative genetics
finding translated from mouse and rat models to human provides evidence of a
causative role of Bmal1 variants in pathological components of the metabolic
syndrome.

PMCID: PMC1958818
PMID: 17728404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Dec;82(6):1466-72. Epub 2007 Aug 28.

Interactions of TANGO and leukocyte integrin CD11c/CD18 regulate the migration of
human monocytes.

Arndt S(1), Melle C, Mondal K, Klein G, von Eggeling F, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg Medical School, Regensburg,
Germany.

The TANGO gene was originally identified as a new member of the MIA gene family. 
It codes for a protein of yet unknown function. TANGO revealed a very broad
expression pattern in contrast to the highly restricted expression pattern
determined for the other family members. The only cells lacking TANGO expression 
are cells of the hematopoietic system. One of the major differences between
mature hematopoietic cells and other tissue cells is the lack of adhesion until
these cells leave the bloodstream. In this study, we observed that TANGO
expression was induced after adhesion of human monocytic cells to substrate. To
understand the mechanism of TANGO function during monocyte adhesion we isolated
interacting proteins and found an interaction between TANGO and the
leukocyte-specific integrin CD11c. In functional assays, we observed reduced
attachment of human monocytic cells to fibrinogen, ICAM-1 and to human
microvascular endothelial cells (HMECs) after stimulation with recombinant TANGO 
protein. Additionally, the migrating capacity of premonocytic cells through
fibrinogen or HMECs was increased after stimulation of these cells with
recombinant TANGO. Therefore, we suggest that TANGO reduced the attachment to
fibrinogen or other cell adhesion molecules. As TANGO does not compete for CD11c 
ligand binding directly, we hypothesize TANGO function by modulation of integrin 
activity. Taken together, the results from this study present TANGO as a novel
ligand for CD11c, regulating migratory processes of hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 17726152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mol Pharmacol. 2007 Nov;72(5):1349-58. Epub 2007 Aug 22.

Disruption of clock gene expression alters responses of the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor signaling pathway in the mouse mammary gland.

Qu X(1), Metz RP, Porter WW, Cassone VM, Earnest DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Research on Biological Clocks, College
Station, Texas, USA.

The biological effects of many environmental toxins are mediated by genes
containing Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domains, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), and
AhR nuclear translocator. Because these transcription factors interact with other
PAS genes that form the circadian clockworks in mammals, we determined whether
targeted disruption of the clock genes, Per1 and/or Per2, alters toxin-induced
expression of known biological markers in the AhR signaling pathway.
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), a prototypical Ahr agonist, had an
inductive effect on mammary gland expression of cytochrome P450, subfamily I,
polypeptide 1 (Cyp1A1) mRNA regardless of genotype. However, TCDD-mediated Cyp1A1
induction in the mammary glands of Per1(ldc) and Per1(ldc)/Per2(ldc) mice was
significantly (17.9- and 5.9-fold) greater than that in wild-type (WT) animals.
In addition, TCDD-induced Cyp1B1 expression in Per1(ldc) and Per1(ldc)/Per2(ldc) 
mammary glands was significantly increased relative to that in WT mice. Similar
to in vivo observations, experiments using primary cultures of mammary gland
tissue demonstrated that TCDD-induced Cyp1A1 and Cyp1B1 expression in Per1(ldc)
and Per1(ldc)/Per2(ldc) mutant cells was significantly greater than that in WT
cultures. AhR mRNA levels were distinctively elevated in cells derived from all
mutant genotypes, but they were commonly decreased in WT and mutant cultures
after TCDD treatment. In WT mice, an interesting corollary is that the inductive 
effects of TCDD on mammary gland expression of Cyp1A1 and Cyp1B1 vary over time
and are significantly greater during the night. These findings suggest that clock
genes, especially Per1, may be involved in TCDD activation of AhR signaling
pathways.

PMID: 17715397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Sep-Oct;1769(9-10):569-78. Epub 2007 Jul 20.

HDAC1 bound to the Cyp1a1 promoter blocks histone acetylation associated with Ah 
receptor-mediated trans-activation.

Schnekenburger M(1), Peng L, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Genetics and Department of Environmental Health,
University of Cincinnati Medical Center, P.O. Box 670056, Cincinnati, Ohio
45267-0056, USA.

Metabolic bioactivation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, such as the
environmental procarcinogen benzo[a]pyrene, is catalyzed by a cytochrome P450
monooxygenase encoded by the substrate-inducible Cyp1a1 gene. Cyp1a1 induction
requires trans-activation by the heterodimeric transcriptional complex formed by 
the liganded Ah receptor (AHR) and its partner, ARNT. Previously, we showed that 
constitutively bound HDAC1 dissociates from Cyp1a1 promoter chromatin after
ligand-mediated induction, concomitantly with the recruitment of AHR/ARNT
complexes and p300. Here, we investigated the hypothesis that HDAC1 binding
maintains the Cyp1a1 gene in a silenced state in uninduced cells. We find that
Cyp1a1 induction by the AHR/ARNT is associated with modification of specific
chromatin marks, including hyperacetylation of histone H3K14 and H4K16,
trimethylation of histone H3K4, and phosphorylation of H3S10. HDAC1 and DNMT1
form complexes on the Cyp1a1 promoter of uninduced cells but HDAC1 inhibition
alone is not sufficient to induce Cyp1a1 expression, although it allows for the
hyperacetylation of H3K14 and H4K16 to levels similar to those found in
B[a]P-induced cells. These results show that by blocking the modification of
histone marks, HDAC1 plays a central role in Cyp1a1 expression and that its
removal is a necessary but not sufficient condition for Cyp1a1 induction,
underscoring the requirement for a concerted series of chromatin-remodeling
events to complete the initial steps of gene trans-activation by the Ah receptor.

PMCID: PMC2083643
PMID: 17707923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Eur J Pharmacol. 2007 Nov 14;573(1-3):148-60. Epub 2007 Jul 4.

Lu 35-138
((+)-(S)-3-{1-[2-(1-acetyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-indol-3-yl)ethyl]-3,6-dihydro-2H-pyridi
n-4-yl}-6-chloro-1H-indole), a dopamine D4 receptor antagonist and serotonin
reuptake inhibitor: characterisation of its in vitro profile and pre-clinical
antipsychotic potential.

Hertel P(1), Didriksen M, Pouzet B, Brennum LT, Søby KK, Larsen AK,
Christoffersen CT, Ramirez T, Marcus MM, Svensson TH, Di Matteo V, Esposito E,
Bang-Andersen B, Arnt J.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.
phe@lundbeck.com

The present study describes the pharmacological profile of the putative
antipsychotic drug Lu 35-138
((+)-(S)-3-{1-[2-(1-acetyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-indol-3-yl)ethyl]-3,6-dihydro-2H-pyridi
n-4-yl}-6-chloro-1H-indole). The in vitro receptor profile of Lu 35-138 revealed 
high affinity (K(i)=5 nM) and competitive antagonism (K(b)=8 nM) at dopamine D(4)
receptors combined with potent 5-HT uptake inhibition (IC(50)=3.2 nM) and
moderate alpha(1)-adrenoceptor affinity (K(i)=45 nM). In vivo, Lu 35-138
selectively counteracted hyperlocomotion induced by d-amphetamine (0.5 mg/kg;
ED(50)=4.0 mg/kg, s.c.) in rats and phencyclidine (PCP; 2.5 mg/kg; ED(50)=13
mg/kg, s.c.) in mice. Lu 35-138 was unable to affect hyperlocomotion induced by a
high dose of d-amphetamine (2.0 mg/kg), which indicates a preferential action on 
limbic versus striatal structures. A similar limbic selectivity of Lu 35-138 was 
indicated in voltammetric measure of dopamine output in the core and shell
subdivisions of the nucleus accumbens in rats. Furthermore, a relatively large
dose of Lu 35-138 (18 mg/kg, s.c.) counteracted d-amphetamine-induced disruption 
of pre-pulse inhibition in rats and repeated administration of Lu 35-138 (0.31 or
1.25 mg/kg, p.o. once daily for 3 weeks) reduced the number of spontaneously
active dopamine neurones in the ventral tegmental area, underlining its
antipsychotic-like profile. Lu 35-138 failed to induce catalepsy in rats or
dystonia in Cebus apella monkeys and did not deteriorate spatial memory in rats
as assessed by water maze performance. Collectively, these results suggest that
Lu 35-138 possesses antipsychotic activity combined with a low extrapyramidal and
cognitive side effect liability.

PMID: 17689529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Plant J. 2007 Sep;51(6):1050-61. Epub 2007 Jul 27.

Functional analyses of the Physcomitrella patens phytochromes in regulating
chloroplast avoidance movement.

Uenaka H(1), Kadota A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science and Engineering,
Tokyo Metropolitan University, Minami-Ohsawa 1-1, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0397,
Japan.

Red light-induced chloroplast movement in Physcomitrella patens (Pp) is mediated 
by dichroic phytochrome in the cytoplasm. To analyze the molecular function of
the photoreceptor in the cytoplasm, we developed a protoplast system in which
chloroplast photomovement was exclusively dependent on the expression of
phytochrome cDNA constructs introduced by polyethylene glycol (PEG)
transformation. YFP was fused to the phytochrome constructs and their expression 
was detected by fluorescence. The chloroplast avoidance response was induced in
the protoplasts expressing a YFP fusion of PHY1-PHY3, but not of PHY4 or YFP
alone. Phy::yfp fluorescence was detected in the cytoplasm. No change in the
location of phy1::yfp or phy2::yfp was revealed before and after photomovement.
When phy1::yfp and phy2::yfp were targeted to the nucleus by fusing a nuclear
localization signal to the constructs, red light avoidance was not induced. To
determine the domains of PHY2 essential for avoidance response, various
partially-deleted PHY2::YFP constructs were tested. The N-terminal extension
domain (NTE) was found to be necessary but the C-terminal histidine
kinase-related domain (HKRD) was dispensable. An avoidance response was not
induced under expression of phytochrome N-terminal half domain [deleting both the
PAS (Per, Arnt, Sim)-related domain (PRD) and HKRD]. GUS fusion of this
N-terminal half domain, reported to be fully functional in Arabidopsis for
several phyA- and phyB-regulated responses was not effective in chloroplast
avoidance movement. Domain requirement and GUS fusion effect were also confirmed 
in PHY1. These results indicate that Pp phy1-Pp phy3 in the cytoplasm mediate
chloroplast avoidance movement, and that NTE and PRD, but not HKRD, are required 
for their function.

PMID: 17662030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 28;282(39):28659-68. Epub 2007 Jul 25.

Transcriptional specificity of Drosophila dysfusion and the control of tracheal
fusion cell gene expression.

Jiang L(1), Crews ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Program in Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
27599-3280, USA.

The Drosophila Dysfusion basic-helix-loop-helix-PAS (bHLH-PAS) protein controls
the transcription of genes that mediate tracheal fusion. Dysfusion is highly
related to the mammalian Nxf protein that has been implicated in nervous system
gene regulation. Toward the goal of understanding how Dysfusion controls fusion
cell gene expression, the biochemical properties of Dysfusion were investigated
using protein interaction experiments, cell culture-based transcription assays,
and in vivo transgenic analyses. Dysfusion dimerizes with the Tango bHLH-PAS
protein, and together they act as a DNA binding transcriptional activator.
Dysfusion/Tango binds multiple NCGTG binding sites, with the following
preference: TCGTG > GCGTG > ACGTG > CCGTG. This binding site promiscuity differs 
from the restricted binding site preferences of other bHLH-PAS/Tango
heterodimers. However, it is identical to the binding site preferences of
mammalian Nxf/Arnt, indicating that the specificity is evolutionarily conserved. 
Germ line transformation experiments using a fragment of the CG13196 Dysfusion
target gene allowed identification of a fusion cell enhancer. Experiments in
which NCGTG sites were mutated individually and in combination revealed that
TCGTG sites were required for fusion cell expression but that the single ACGTG
and GCGTG sites present were not. Finally, a reporter transgene containing four
tandemly arranged TCGTG elements has strong expression in tracheal fusion cells. 
Transgenic misexpression of dysfusion further revealed that Dysfusion has the
ability to activate transcription in multiple cell types, although it does this
most effectively in tracheal cells and can only function at mid-embryogenesis and
later.

PMCID: PMC2742625
PMID: 17652079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2007 Jun;26(2):261-71.

Metastasis and stem cell pathways.

Barnhart BC(1), Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Recent studies have described a small population of self-renewing and multipotent
cells within tumors termed "cancer stem cells." These cells share many traits
with somatic and embryonic stem cells and are thought to be responsible for
driving tumor progression in a growing list of neoplastic diseases. Cells within 
solid tumors encounter hypoxia due to poor vascular function. Both long-standing 
and emerging data describe hypoxic effects on somatic and embryonic stem cells,
and it is likely that hypoxia also has profound effects on cancer stem cells.
These effects include the activation of pathways that induce the
dedifferentiation of cancer cells, the maintenance of stem cell identity, and
increased metastatic potential. Hypoxia may contribute to tumor progression by
specifically impacting these pathways in cancer stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3215288
PMID: 17647111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Gene. 2007 Oct 1;400(1-2):122-30. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Characterization of Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans NXF-like-factors,
putative homologs of mammalian NXF.

Ooe N(1), Saito K, Oeda K, Nakatuka I, Kaneko H.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Science Laboratory, Sumitomo Chemical Co., Ltd.,
Konohana-ku, Osaka 554-8558, Japan. ooe@sc.sumitomo-chem.co.jp

The basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS) homology protein family is an 
important class of transcriptional regulators that are involved in a wide variety
of biological processes. In a previous study, we characterized a novel bHLH-PAS
factor 'NXF' as a new member of the mammalian bHLH-PAS family. If model animals
have ortholog genes for NXF, they might have advantages for characterization of
its function and regulation in vivo. Here we document cDNA cloning and
characterization of putative NXF homolog genes (for NXF-like-factors) in
Drosophila and C. elegans. Some conservation of the exon-intron gene architecture
was noted in the bHLH-PAS domains among NXF-like-factors and human NXF. The
NXF-like-factors selectively interacted with an Arnt ortholog in vitro assay.
Moreover, they selectively associated with the mammalian NXF:Arnt2 binding
element in the presence of the Arnt ortholog, and synergistically activated a
mammalian NXF:Arnt-responsive promoter. These data strongly suggest that the
Drosophila and C. elegans NXF-like-factors reported here are homologs of
mammalian NXF. Further elucidation of whether they are true orthologs with the
same function in vivo is now necessary.

PMID: 17628356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Vet Med Sci. 2007 Jun;69(6):619-25.

Maternal exposure of low dose of TCDD modulates the expression of estrogen
receptor subunits of male gonads in offspring.

Ohyama K(1), Ohta M, Sano T, Sato K, Nakagomi Y, Shimura Y, Yamano Y.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Medical and Engineering Sciences,
University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan.

We have analyzed the effects of low-dose transplacental and lactational exposure 
of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) on gene expression relating to the 
dioxin and sexual hormone cascade, and demonstrated the effects on testicular
growth and sexual maturation in male offspring rats. TCDD (10 ng/kg) was
administered to dams on Days 7 and 14 of gestation, and on Days 0, 7 and 14 after
delivery. Gene expression of cytochrome P450 family 1 subfamily A polypeptide 1
(CYP1A1) in the liver of 17-day-old rats was significantly increased compared
with controls. Furthermore, expression of estrogen receptors (ER)alpha and ERbeta
was significantly increased at 17 and 42 days old, respectively in the testis of 
TCDD-administered rats compared with controls. Although testicular weight and the
seminiferous tubule diameter were increased in 17-day-old rats, there was no
difference in the number of germ cells between TCDD-treated and control animals. 
The expressions of androgen receptor and inhibin subunit genes were not
significantly changed. These findings suggest that low-dose exposure of TCDD
leads to unusual development of the testis by perturbation of steroid hormone
homeostasis.

PMID: 17611358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Clin Invest. 2007 Jul;117(7):1940-50.

Dietary phytochemicals regulate whole-body CYP1A1 expression through an
arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-dependent system in gut.

Ito S(1), Chen C, Satoh J, Yim S, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1) is one of the most important detoxification enzymes 
due to its broad substrate specificity and wide distribution throughout the body.
On the other hand, CYP1A1 can also produce highly carcinogenic intermediate
metabolites through oxidation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. We describe
what we believe to be a novel regulatory system for whole-body CYP1A1 expression 
by a factor originating in the gut. A mutant mouse was generated in which the
arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) gene is disrupted
predominantly in the gut epithelium. Surprisingly, CYP1A1 mRNA expression and
enzymatic activities were markedly elevated in almost all non-gut tissues in this
mouse line. The induction was even observed in early-stage embryos in pregnant
mutant females. Interestingly, the upregulation was CYP1A1 selective and lost
upon administration of a synthetic purified diet. Moreover, the increase was
recovered by addition of the natural phytochemical indole-3-carbinol to the
purified diet. These results suggest that an Arnt-dependent pathway in gut has an
important role in regulation of the metabolism of dietary CYP1A1 inducers and
whole-body CYP1A1 expression. This machinery might be involved in naturally
occurring carcinogenic processes and/or other numerous biological responses
mediated by CYP1A1 activity.

PMCID: PMC1890999
PMID: 17607366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2007 Aug 15;223(1):28-38. Epub 2007 May 25.

Cobaltous chloride and hypoxia inhibit aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated
responses in breast cancer cells.

Khan S(1), Liu S, Stoner M, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is expressed in estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive ZR-75 breast cancer cells. Treatment with
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) induces CYP1A1 protein and mRNA levels
and also activates inhibitory AhR-ERalpha crosstalk associated with
hormone-induced reporter gene expression. In ZR-75 cells grown under hypoxia,
induction of these AhR-mediated responses by TCDD was significantly inhibited.
This was not accompanied by decreased nuclear AhR levels or decreased interaction
of the AhR complex with the CYP1A1 gene promoter as determined in a chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. Hypoxia-induced loss of Ah-responsiveness was not
associated with induction of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha or other factors
that sequester the AhR nuclear translocation (Arnt) protein, and overexpression
of Arnt under hypoxia did not restore Ah-responsiveness. The p65 subunit of
NFkappaB which inhibits AhR-mediated transactivation was not induced by hypoxia
and was primarily cytosolic in ZR-75 cells grown under hypoxic and normoxic
conditions. In ZR-75 cells maintained under hypoxic conditions for 24 h, BRCA1
(an enhancer of AhR-mediated transactivation in breast cancer cells) was
significantly decreased and this contributed to loss of Ah-responsiveness. In
cells grown under hypoxia for 6 h, BRCA1 was not decreased, but induction of
CYP1A1 by TCDD was significantly decreased. Cotreatment of ZR-75 cells with TCDD 
plus the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide for 6 h enhanced CYP1A1
expression in cells grown under hypoxia and normoxia. These results suggest that 
hypoxia rapidly induces protein(s) that inhibit Ah-responsiveness and these may
be similar to constitutively expressed inhibitors of Ah-responsiveness (under
normoxia) that are also inhibited by cycloheximide.

PMCID: PMC1986799
PMID: 17599377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Hepatology. 2007 Jul;46(1):209-18.

Aryl-hydrocarbon receptor activation regulates constitutive androstane receptor
levels in murine and human liver.

Patel RD(1), Hollingshead BD, Omiecinski CJ, Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences and the Center for Molecular 
Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, The Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, PA 16802, USA.

The aryl-hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim
transcription factor that can be activated by exogenous as well as endogenous
ligands. AhR is traditionally associated with xenobiotic metabolism. In an
attempt to identify novel target genes, C57BL/6J mice were treated with
beta-naphthoflavone (BNF), a known AhR ligand, and genome-wide expression
analysis studies were performed using high-density microarrays. Constitutive
androstane receptor (CAR) was found to be one of the differentially regulated
genes. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) verified the
increase in CAR messenger RNA (mRNA) level. BNF treatment did not increase CAR
mRNA in AhR-null mice. Time-course studies in mice revealed that the regulation
of CAR mRNA mimicked that of Cyp1A1, a known AhR target gene. To demonstrate that
the increase in CAR mRNA translates to an increase in functional CAR protein,
mice were sequentially treated with BNF (6 hours) followed by the selective CAR
agonist, TCPOBOP (3 hours). qPCR revealed an increase in the mRNA level of
Cyp2b10, previously known to be regulated by CAR. This also suggests that CAR
protein is present in limiting amounts with respect to its transactivation
ability. Finally, CAR was also up-regulated in primary human hepatocytes in
response to AhR activation by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and
benzo[a]pyrene.CONCLUSION: This study identifies a mode of up-regulating CAR and 
potentially expands the role of AhR in drug metabolism. This study also
demonstrates in vivo up-regulation of CAR through chemical exposure.

PMCID: PMC4098831
PMID: 17596880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Fertil Steril. 2007 Oct;88(4):854-9. Epub 2007 Jun 7.

The contribution of genetic variations of aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway genes
to male factor infertility.

Merisalu A(1), Punab M, Altmäe S, Haller K, Tiido T, Peters M, Salumets A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu
University, Tartu, Estonia.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the polymorphisms in aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AHR), aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AHRR), and aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
nuclear translocator (ARNT) genes are associated with male factor infertility.
DESIGN: An association study.
SETTING: University research laboratory and andrology clinic.
PATIENT(S): The subjects were infertile Estonian men (n = 112) with azoospermia
or oligozoospermia and controls (n = 212) with normal sperm parameters.
INTERVENTION(S): Blood samples were obtained for DNA extraction and genotyping.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): AHR (Arg554Lys), AHRR (Pro185Ala), and ARNT (G/C allele)
polymorphisms were genotyped using allele-specific polymerase chain reaction.
Allele and genotype frequencies were compared between infertile men and controls 
and separately in the normozoospermia, oligozoospermia, and azoospermia groups.
RESULT(S): The AHRR Ala185Ala genotype was implicated in susceptibility to male
factor infertility. Ala/Ala genotype frequency increased in the following order: 
normozoospermia (18.0%), oligozoospermia (26.0%), azoospermia (42.1%). Allele and
genotype frequencies of AHR and ARNT polymorphisms were similar between cases and
controls.
CONCLUSION(S): We demonstrated that the AHRR Pro185Ala polymorphism contributed
to a predisposition to male factor infertility in the Estonian population. A
greater prevalence of the Ala/Ala genotype was found among infertile patients.

PMID: 17559847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2007 Apr;27(4):401-5.

[Preliminary study of PRL-3 gene promoter binding sites of Snail in SW480 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang FD(1), Li JM, Zhou J, Liu YH, Ding YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou 510515, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the region in PRL-3 gene promoter where the
transcriptional factor Snail can bind.
METHODS: PRL-3 promoter and the possible binding sites of the transcription
factors were analyzed by bioinformatical methods. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
and PCR were performed using the antibody specific for Snail to verify the
binding of Snail to PRL-3 promoter.
RESULTS: According to the prediction by TRED, a promoter prediction software,
PRL-3 gene promoter was located between -700 bp to 299 bp of PRL-3 gene. Many
possible transcription factor binding sites such as for Snail, n-MYC, ARNT, E74A,
NF-kappaB, NRF-2 and AML-1 were predicted by Consite, a promoter analysis web
system. Interestingly, a 5'-CACCTG-3' core sequence and other related sequences
of Snail binding sites were found in the promoter region of PRL-3 genes by
Consite software. Two regions in PRL-3 promoter were validated to allow binding
of Snail by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of SW480 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Snail regulates the activity of PRL-3 gene by binding to the
promoter of PRL-3 gene in SW480 cells.

PMID: 17545014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jun 19;104(25):10488-93. Epub 2007 May 30.

Juvenile hormone resistance gene Methoprene-tolerant controls entry into
metamorphosis in the beetle Tribolium castaneum.

Konopova B(1), Jindra M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of South Bohemia, and Biology
Center, Czech Academy of Sciences, 37005 Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jun 19;104(25):10297-8.

Besides being a spectacular developmental process, metamorphosis is key to insect
success. Entry into metamorphosis is controlled by juvenile hormone (JH). In
larvae, JH prevents pupal and adult morphogenesis, thus keeping the insect in its
immature state. How JH signals to preclude metamorphosis is poorly understood,
and a JH receptor remains unknown. One candidate for the JH receptor role is the 
Methoprene-tolerant (Met) Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain protein [also called
Resistance to JH, Rst (1)JH], whose loss confers tolerance to JH and its mimic
methoprene in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. However, Met deficiency does
not affect the larval-pupal transition, possibly because this process does not
require JH absence in Drosophila. By contrast, the red flour beetle Tribolium
castaneum is sensitive to developmental regulation by JH, thus making an ideal
system to examine the role of Met in the antimetamorphic JH action. Here we show 
that impaired function of the Met ortholog TcMet renders Tribolium resistant to
the effects of ectopic JH and, in a striking contrast to Drosophila, causes
early-stage beetle larvae to undergo precocious metamorphosis. This is evident as
TcMet-deficient larvae pupate prematurely or develop specific heterochronic
phenotypes such as pupal-like cuticular structures, appendages, and compound
eyes. Our results demonstrate that TcMet functions in JH response and provide the
critical evidence that the putative JH receptor Met mediates the antimetamorphic 
effect of JH.

PMCID: PMC1965540
PMID: 17537916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Science. 2007 May 18;316(5827):1054-7.

Conformational switching in the fungal light sensor Vivid.

Zoltowski BD(1), Schwerdtfeger C, Widom J, Loros JJ, Bilwes AM, Dunlap JC, Crane 
BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853, USA.

The Neurospora crassa photoreceptor Vivid tunes blue-light responses and
modulates gating of the circadian clock. Crystal structures of dark-state and
light-state Vivid reveal a light, oxygen, or voltage Per-Arnt-Sim domain with an 
unusual N-terminal cap region and a loop insertion that accommodates the flavin
cofactor. Photoinduced formation of a cystein-flavin adduct drives flavin
protonation to induce an N-terminal conformational change. A cysteine-to-serine
substitution remote from the flavin adenine dinucleotide binding site decouples
conformational switching from the flavin photocycle and prevents Vivid from
sending signals in Neurospora. Key elements of this activation mechanism are
conserved by other photosensors such as White Collar-1, ZEITLUPE, ENVOY, and
flavin-binding, kelch repeat, F-BOX 1 (FKF1).

PMCID: PMC3682417
PMID: 17510367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jun 22;358(1):92-8. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Mechanism of vascular endothelial growth factor expression mediated by cisplatin 
in human ovarian cancer cells.

Zhong XS(1), Liu LZ, Skinner HD, Cao Z, Ding M, Jiang BH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Cancer Center, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, China.

Cisplatin (CDDP) and its analogues are widely used for the treatment of a variety
of human solid tumors. However, the molecular mechanism of its action remains to 
be understood. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a potent inducer of
angiogenesis and is upregulated in many human cancers. In this study we
demonstrated that CDDP-inhibited VEGF expression in human ovarian cancer cells.
We found that CDDP inhibited the VEGF reporter activity in a dose-dependent
manner, indicating that CDDP-inhibited transcriptional activation of VEGF. We
also found that: (1) luciferase activity mediated by the VEGF reporter containing
a mutation of the HIF-1 binding site was much lower than that of the reporter
containing a wild-type HIF-1 binding site in ovarian cancer cells, thus
confirming that HIF-1 is a major transcriptional regulator of VEGF expression;
and that (2) CDDP greatly inhibited VEGF reporter activity containing the
wild-type but not the mutant HIF-1 binding site. This result indicates that
CDDP-inhibited VEGF transcriptional activation specifically by decreasing HIF-1
activity. Co-transfection of a dominant negative construct of HIF-1 inhibited
VEGF reporter activity in ovarian cancer cells. CDDP-inhibited VEGF
transcriptional activation specifically through the expression of HIF-1alpha, but
not HIF-1beta. We demonstrated that VEGF receptor KDR was expressed in ovarian
cancer cells, and that CDDP-inhibited VEGF expression was linked with cellular
apoptosis, which was rescued by VEGF treatment. These results suggest a novel
mechanism of CDDP's anti-tumor activity in ovarian cancer cells via HIF-1
expression and VEGF transcriptional activation.

PMID: 17470361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Gene. 2007 Jul 15;396(2):273-82. Epub 2007 Mar 24.

Molecular cloning, characterization and expression of two hypoxia-inducible
factor alpha subunits, HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha, in a hypoxia-tolerant marine
teleost, Atlantic croaker (Micropogonias undulatus).

Rahman MS(1), Thomas P.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Science Institute, The University of Texas at Austin, 750 Channel View 
Drive, Port Aransas, Texas 78373, USA. rahman@utmsi.utexas.edu

Alteration of gene expression is a crucial component of adaptation by animals to 
hypoxic conditions and is mediated by specific transcription factors,
hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs), which are composed of alpha and beta subunits. 
In this study, we report the cloning and characterization of two HIF-alpha
subunits, HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha, and their expression in various tissues of a
hypoxia-tolerant marine teleost, Atlantic croaker (Micropogonias undulatus). The 
full-length croaker HIF-1alpha (2805 bp) and HIF-2alpha (3205 bp) cDNAs contain
open reading frames encoding proteins with 720 and 847 amino acids, respectively,
which are highly homologous to the HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha proteins of other
non-mammalian species. Croaker HIF-1 alpha shares only 43% sequence identity with
the croaker HIF-2alpha subunit. However, the basic helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-Sim 
regions appear to be relatively well conserved between the two proteins, with
identities of 75-83%. The core oxygen-dependent degradation domain regions in
croaker HIFs are well conserved, suggesting a similar mechanism of HIF
degradation to that in other vertebrate species. Northern blot analysis showed
that croaker HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha mRNAs (transcript sizes 3.0-3.8 kb) are
highly expressed in the brain, heart, liver, and gonads under hypoxic conditions,
whereas muscle tissues show lower levels of expression. Short-term (1.7 mg/L
dissolved oxygen, DO for 3 days to 1 week) and long-term (1.7, 2.7 and 3.7 mg/L
DO for 3 weeks) hypoxia exposure caused significant increases in HIF-1alpha and
HIF-2alpha mRNA expression in croaker ovaries compared to mRNA levels in fish
held in normoxic conditions (DO: 6.5 mg/L). However, HIF transcript levels in
hypoxia-exposed fish had returned to control values 24 h after the DO in the
tanks was restored to normoxic levels. The results suggest that the upregulation 
of both HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha subunits at the transcriptional level is an
important component of adaptation of croaker to chronic hypoxia and HIF-alphas
are potentially useful molecular indicators of

PMID: 17467194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Mol Biol. 2007 Jun 8;369(3):640-52. Epub 2007 Apr 1.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator and upstream stimulatory factor
regulate Cytochrome P450 2a5 transcription through a common E-box site.

Arpiainen S(1), Lämsä V, Pelkonen O, Yim SH, Gonzalez FJ, Hakkola J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) belongs to the
basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors and regulates several genes
as heterodimers with other bHLH proteins. ARNT is also able to homodimerize, but 
no mammalian target genes for the homodimer have been shown. We identified a
palindromic E-box element in the 5' regulatory region of the murine cytochrome
P450 (Cyp) 2a5 gene that was found to be important for Cyp2a5 transcription in
primary hepatocytes, and was found by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays to
interact with ARNT. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assay experiments with in
vitro translated ARNT showed binding without heterodimerization partner,
indicating binding as a homodimer. Transfection studies in wild-type and
ARNT-deficient Hepa-1 cells revealed that ARNT expression is necessary for full
activity of the Cyp2a5 promoter. In the liver-specific Arnt-null mouse line, the 
level of hepatic CYP2A5 mRNA was decreased significantly. Co-transfection studies
with an ARNT expression vector lacking the transactivation domain (TAD)
demonstrated that the ARNT TAD is needed for Cyp2a5 activation, which suggests
that ARNT transactivates Cyp2a5 as a homodimer. In primary hepatocytes, the mRNA 
levels of both CYP2A5 and ARNT splice variant 1 were increased during
cultivation. Upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2a were also able to bind to the 
same E-box as ARNT, indicating that there may be competition for DNA binding
between these factors. Indeed, the upstream stimulatory factors activated the
Cyp2a5 promoter through the E-box only in the presence of hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4alpha, while ARNT transactivation was independent of hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4alpha. In conclusion, these results indicate that ARNT controls Cyp2a5
transcription and thus, for the first time, suggest active involvement of the
ARNT homodimer in mammalian gene regulation.

PMID: 17466327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Neurosci Res. 2007 Jun;85(8):1762-73.

Neuronal PAS domain protein 1 regulates tyrosine hydroxylase level in
dopaminergic neurons.

Teh CH(1), Loh CC, Lam KK, Loo JM, Yan T, Lim TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore.

Catecholamines (dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine) are all synthesized
from a common pathway in which tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) is the rate-limiting
enzyme. Dopamine is the main neurotransmitter present in dopaminergic neurons of 
the ventral midbrain, where dysfunction of these neurons can lead to Parkinson's 
disease and schizophrenia. Neuronal PAS domain protein 1 (NPAS1) was identified
as one of the genes up-regulated during dopaminergic MN9D cell differentiation.
We found that there was a corresponding decrease in TH level during MN9D
differentiation. Overexpression and siRNA experiments revealed that NPAS1, in
concert with ARNT, negatively regulates the expression of TH and that this
regulation is mediated by a direct binding of NPAS1 on the TH promoter.
Expression studies also confirmed a decrease in TH level in the ventral midbrain 
during mouse development, concomitant with an increase in NPAS1 level. These
results suggest that NPAS1 plays a novel and important role in regulating TH
level of dopaminergic neurons in the ventral midbrain during development.

Copyright (c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17457889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;27(13):4876-90. Epub 2007 Apr 23.

Functional role of CREB-binding protein in the circadian clock system of
Drosophila melanogaster.

Lim C(1), Lee J, Choi C, Kim J, Doh E, Choe J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Daejeon 305-701, South Korea.

Rhythmic histone acetylation underlies the oscillating expression of clock genes 
in the mammalian circadian clock system. Cellular factors that contain histone
acetyltransferase and histone deacetylase activity have been implicated in these 
processes by direct interactions with clock genes, but their functional relevance
remains to be assessed by use of appropriate animal models. Here, using
transgenic fly models, we show that CREB-binding protein (CBP) participates in
the transcriptional regulation of the Drosophila CLOCK/CYCLE (dCLK/CYC)
heterodimer. CBP knockdown in pigment dispersing factor-expressing cells
lengthens the period of adult locomotor rhythm with the prolonged expression of
period and timeless genes, while CBP overexpression in timeless-expressing cells 
causes arrhythmic circadian behaviors with the impaired expression of these
dCLK/CYC-induced clock genes. In contrast to the mammalian circadian clock
system, CBP overexpression attenuates the transcriptional activity of the
dCLK/CYC heterodimer in cultured cells, possibly by targeting the PER-ARNT-SIM
domain of dCLK. Our data suggest that the Drosophila circadian clock system has
evolved a distinct mechanism to tightly regulate the robust transcriptional
potency of the dCLK/CYC heterodimer.

PMCID: PMC1951493
PMID: 17452464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Comp Hepatol. 2007 Apr 13;6:2.

Interactions between estrogen- and Ah-receptor signalling pathways in primary
culture of salmon hepatocytes exposed to nonylphenol and
3,3',4,4'-tetrachlorobiphenyl (congener 77).

Mortensen AS(1), Arukwe A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Norwegian University of science and Technology (NTNU), 
Høgskoleringen 5, 7491 Trondheim, Norway. anne.mortensen@bio.ntnu.no

BACKGROUND: The estrogenic and xenobiotic biotransformation gene expressions are 
receptor-mediated processes that are ligand structure-dependent interactions with
estrogen-receptor (ER) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), probably involving
all subtypes and other co-factors. The anti-estrogenic activities of AhR agonists
have been reported. In teleost fish, exposure to AhR agonists has been associated
with reduced Vtg synthesis or impaired gonadal development in both in vivo- and
in vitro studies. Inhibitory AhR and ER cross-talk have also been demonstrated in
breast cancer cells, rodent uterus and mammary tumors. Previous studies have
shown that AhR-agonists potentiate xenoestrogen-induced responses in fish in vivo
system. Recently, several studies have shown that AhR-agonists directly activate 
ER alpha and induce estrogenic responses in mammalian in vitro systems. In this
study, two separate experiments were performed to study the molecular
interactions between ER and AhR signalling pathways using different concentration
of PCB-77 (an AhR-agonist) and time factor, respectively. Firstly, primary
Atlantic salmon hepatocytes were exposed to nonylphenol (NP: 5 microM--an ER
agonist) singly or in combination with 0.001, 0.01 and 1 microM PCB-77 and
sampled at 48 h post-exposure. Secondly, hepatocytes were exposed to NP (5
microM) or PCB-77 (1 microM) singly or in combination for 12, 24, 48 and 72 h.
Samples were analyzed using a validated real-time PCR for genes in the ER pathway
or known to be NP-responsive and AhR pathway or known to be PCB-77 responsive.
RESULTS: Our data showed a reciprocal inhibitory interaction between NP and
PCB-77. PCB-77 produced anti-NP-mediated effect by decreasing the mRNA expression
of ER-responsive genes. NP produced anti-AhR mediated effect or as inhibitor of
AhR alpha, AhRR, ARNT, CYP1A1 and UDPGT expression. A novel aspect of the present
study is that low (0.001 microM) and medium (0.01 microM) PCB-77 concentrations
increased ER alpha mRNA expression above control and NP exposed levels, and at 12
h post-exposure, PCB-77 exposure alone produced significant elevation of ER
alpha, ER beta and Zr-protein expressions above control levels.
CONCLUSION: The findings in the present study demonstrate a complex mode of
ER-AhR interactions that were dependent on time of exposure and concentration of 
individual chemicals (NP and PCB-77). This complex mode of interaction is further
supported by the effect of PCB-77 on ER alpha and ER beta (shown as increase in
transcription) with no concurrent activation of Vtg (but Zr-protein) response.
These complex interactions between two different classes of ligand-activated
receptors provide novel mechanistic insights on signalling pathways. Therefore,
the degree of simultaneous interactions between the ER and AhR gene transcripts
demonstrated in this study supports the concept of cross-talk between these
signalling pathways.

PMCID: PMC1855068
PMID: 17433103  [PubMed]


345. Endocrinology. 2007 Jul;148(7):3031-8. Epub 2007 Apr 12.

Circadian clock gene regulation of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene
expression in preovulatory ovarian follicles.

Nakao N(1), Yasuo S, Nishimura A, Yamamura T, Watanabe T, Anraku T, Okano T,
Fukada Y, Sharp PJ, Ebihara S, Yoshimura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomodeling, Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences and
Institute for Advanced Research, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 
464-8601, Japan.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2007 Jul;148(7):3029-30.

It is now known that circadian clocks are localized not only in the central
pacemaker but also in peripheral organs. An example of a clock-dependent
peripheral organ is the ovary of domestic poultry in which ovulation is induced
by the positive feedback action of ovarian progesterone on the neuroendocrine
system to generate a preovulatory release of LH during a daily 6-10 h "open
period" of the ovulatory cycle. It has been assumed previously that the timing of
ovulation in poultry is controlled solely by a clock-dependent mechanism within
the neuroendocrine system. Here, we question this assumption by demonstrating the
expression of the clock genes, Per2 (Period 2) and Per3, Clock, and Bmal1 (brain 
and muscle Arnt-like protein 1), in preovulatory follicles in laying quail.
Diurnal changes in Per2 and Per3 expression were seen in the largest preovulatory
follicle (F1) but not in smaller follicles. We next sought to identify
clock-driven genes in preovulatory follicles focusing on those involved in the
synthesis of progesterone. One such gene was identified, encoding steroidogenic
acute regulatory protein (StAR), which showed 24-h changes in expression in the
F1 follicle coinciding with those of Per2. Evidence that StAR gene expression is 
clock driven was obtained by showing that its 5' flanking region contains E-box
enhancers that bind to CLOCK/BMAL1 heterodimers to activate gene transcription.
We also showed that LH administration increased the promoter activity of chicken 
StAR. We therefore suggest that the timing of ovulation in poultry involves an
LH-responsive F1 follicular clock that is involved in the timing of the
preovulatory release of progesterone.

PMID: 17431006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007 Jun;27(6):1297-304. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

A role for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor in regulation of ischemia-induced
angiogenesis.

Ichihara S(1), Yamada Y, Ichihara G, Nakajima T, Li P, Kondo T, Gonzalez FJ,
Murohara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Functional Genomics, Life Science Research Center, Mie
University, 1577 Kurimamachiya-cho, Tsu 514-8507, Japan. saho@gene.mie-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a transcription factor that
binds to DNA as a heterodimer with the AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) after
interaction with ligands such as polycyclic and halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons
found in tobacco smoke and the environment. We have investigated the interaction 
between AHR and hypoxia signaling pathways in regulation of angiogenesis with the
use of a surgical model of ischemia.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Ischemia was induced by femoral artery occlusion in
wild-type and AHR-null mice. Ischemia-induced angiogenesis was markedly enhanced 
in AHR-null mice compared with that in wild-type animals. Ischemia-induced
upregulation of the expression of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha)
and ARNT as well as that of target genes for these transcription factors, such as
that for vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), were also enhanced in
AHR-null mice. Furthermore, the DNA binding activity of the HIF-1alpha-ARNT
complex as well as the association of HIF-1alpha and ARNT with the VEGF gene
promoter were increased by ischemia to a greater extent in AHR-null mice than in 
wild-type animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Ablation of AHR resulted in enhancement of ischemia-induced
angiogenesis. This effect was likely attributable in part to the associated
enhancement of ischemia-induced VEGF expression, which in turn may be caused by
an increased abundance and activity of the HIF-1alpha-ARNT heterodimer.

PMID: 17413038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Biol Pharm Bull. 2007 Apr;30(4):621-6.

Characterization of the molecular clock in mouse peritoneal macrophages.

Hayashi M(1), Shimba S, Tezuka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Science, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University, Japan.

Macrophages play essential roles in the innate immune system. In this study, we
show that macrophage functions such as phagocytosis and cytokine/chemokine
expressions display a circadian rhythm that is regulated by a molecular clock.
Phagocytosis, a crucial early reaction by which macrophages protect their host
against foreign particles, exhibited a circadian variation that peaks during the 
light period and bottoms during the dark period. These diurnal changes of
phagocytosis activity in macrophages were induced without exogenous stimulants
such as bacterial infection. The expression of the clock genes including brain
and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1) exhibited robust circadian rhythms in
macrophages. The expression patterns of the clock genes in macrophages were
similar to those in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and other peripheral tissues.
Among inflammation factors examined, the level of monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1 (MCP-1/JE) mRNA exhibited most robust circadian oscillation. Expression
of other cytokines such as IL-1beta, IL-6 and TNFalpha showed mild diurnal
changes. Knockdown of the BMAL1 expression resulted in a decrease of the MCP-1/JE
mRNA level in macrophages. BMAL1 increased significantly but weakly MCP-1/JE
promoter activity. MCP-1/JE promoter activity is known to be regulated by nuclear
factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB). NF-kappaB activity in BMAL1 knockdown macrophages was
lower than that in control cells. Consequently, the circadian expression of
MCP-1/JE in macrophages is regulated by BMAL1 through the activation of
NF-kappaB. The results obtained in this study indicate that the innate
immunoreactions involving macrophages are at least partly regulated by the
autonomous clock machinery.

PMID: 17409491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2007 Aug;193(2):225-33. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

Reversal of PCP-induced learning and memory deficits in the Morris' water maze by
sertindole and other antipsychotics.

Didriksen M(1), Skarsfeldt T, Arnt J.

Author information: 
(1)Disease Pharmacology, H. Lundbeck A/S, Ottiliavej 9, 2500 Valby, Denmark.
mdi@lundbeck.com

RATIONALE: In humans, the N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist phencyclidine (PCP)
induces behavioral changes that mimic schizophrenia symptoms, including positive 
and negative symptoms as well as cognitive deficits. In clinic, the cognitive
deficits are closely associated with functional outcome. Thus, improvement of
cognition may have high impact on patients' daily life.
OBJECTIVE: In the present study, three second-generation antipsychotics
(sertindole, risperidone, and clozapine) as well as the classical antipsychotic
haloperidol were tested for the ability to reverse PCP-induced cognitive deficits
in the Morris' water maze.
RESULTS: The second-generation antipsychotics reversed the PCP-induced cognitive 
impairment: sertindole (0.63-2.5 mg/kg, s.c.), risperidone (0.04 mg/kg, s.c.;
whereas 0.08 and 0.16 mg/kg were without significant effect), and clozapine (0.63
mg/kg, s.c.; while 1.3 mg/kg was without significant effect). The significant
effect of sertindole was observed from day 2 onwards, while clozapine and
risperidone only had significant effect at day 3. The classical antipsychotic
haloperidol (0.010-0.020 mg/kg, s.c.) was ineffective. No compounds influenced
swimming speed at the doses used, indicating that motor function was preserved.
CONCLUSION: These results confirm that repeated PCP administration induces marked
cognitive deficits. Further, second-generation antipsychotics like sertindole,
clozapine, and risperidone within a certain, often narrow, dose range are able to
reverse the impairment and thus might improve cognitive deficits in schizophrenic
patients, whereas classical compounds like haloperidol lack this effect. The
receptor mechanisms involved in the reversal of PCP's disruptive effect are
discussed and likely include a delicate balance between effects on dopamine D(2),
5-HT(2A/6), alpha-adrenergic, muscarinic, and histaminergic H(1) receptors.

PMID: 17406859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Free Radic Biol Med. 2007 Apr 15;42(8):1246-57. Epub 2007 Jan 19.

The role of ascorbate in the modulation of HIF-1alpha protein and HIF-dependent
transcription by chromium(VI) and nickel(II).

Kaczmarek M(1), Timofeeva OA, Karaczyn A, Malyguine A, Kasprzak KS, Salnikow K.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute at Frederick, Building 538, Room 205 E, Frederick,
MD 21701, USA.

Molecular oxygen is involved in hydroxylation and subsequent degradation of
HIF-1alpha, a subunit of HIF-1 transcription factor; therefore oxygen shortage
(hypoxia) stabilizes this protein. However, HIF-1alpha can also be stabilized by 
transition metal ions in the presence of oxygen, suggesting that a different
mechanism is involved in metal-induced hypoxic stress. Recently, we showed that
the depletion of intracellular ascorbate by metals may lead to the inhibition of 
hydroxylases. Because nickel(II) has similarity to iron(II), an alternative
hypothesis suggests that iron substitution for nickel in the enzyme inhibits
hydroxylase activity. Here we investigated the induction of HIF-1 by another
metal, chromium, which cannot replace iron in the enzyme. We show that
chromium(VI), but not chromium(III), can oxidize ascorbate both in cells and in a
cell-free system. In agreement with these data chromium(VI) stabilizes HIF-1alpha
protein in cells only until it is reduced to chromium(III). In contrast,
nickel(II) was found to be a catalyst, which facilitated continuous oxidation of 
ascorbate by ambient oxygen. These data correlate with extended stabilization of 
HIF-1alpha after acute exposure to nickel(II). The HIF-1-dependent reporter
assays revealed that 20-24 h was required to fully develop the HIF-1
transcriptional response, and the acute exposure to nickel(II), but not
chromium(VI), meets this requirement. However, repeated (chronic) exposure to
chromium(VI) can also lead to extended stabilization of HIF-1alpha. Thus, the
obtained data emphasize the important role of ascorbate in regulation of HIF-1
transcriptional activity in metal-exposed human lung cells.

PMCID: PMC1920179
PMID: 17382205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Math Biosci. 2007 Jun;207(2):204-18. Epub 2007 Feb 3.

Application of complex demodulation on bZIP and bHLH-PAS protein domains.

Wang Z(1), Smith CE, Atchley WR.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biomathematics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
NC 27695-8203, USA.

Proteins are built with molecular modular building blocks such as an alpha-helix,
beta-sheet, loop region and other structures. This is an economical way of
constructing complex molecules. Periodicity analysis of protein sequences has
allowed us to obtain meaningful information concerning their structure, function 
and evolution. In this work, complex demodulation (CDM) is introduced to detect
functional regions in protein sequences data. More specifically, we analyzed bZIP
and bHLH-PAS protein domains. Complex demodulation provided insightful
information about changing amplitudes of periodic components in protein
sequences. Furthermore, it was found that the local amplitude minimum or local
amplitude maximum of the 3.6-aa periodic component is associated with protein
structural or functional information due to the observation that the extrema are 
mainly located in the boundary area of two structural or functional regions.

PMID: 17374384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Aug 15;101(6):1545-57.

Effects of prolyl hydroxylase inhibitors on adipogenesis and hypoxia inducible
factor 1 alpha levels under normoxic conditions.

Floyd ZE(1), Kilroy G, Wu X, Gimble JM.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Laboratory and Clinical Nutrition Research Unit, Pennington
Biomedical Research Center, Louisiana State University System, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana 70808, USA. floydez@pbrc.edu

Adipocyte function is highly regulated in response to changing oxygen levels and 
physiological regulation of adipocyte formation involves factors originally
identified as hypoxia-responsive proteins. Inhibition of adipogenesis at low
oxygen tension is associated with activation of hypoxia inducible factor-1 alpha 
(HIF-1alpha), a transcription factor essential for cellular responses to
decreased oxygen levels whose activity is regulated by prolyl hydroxylase (PHD)
enzymes. However, HIF-1alpha RNA expression has been detected during the initial 
stages of adipocyte formation under aerobic conditions, suggesting a
physiological role for HIF-1alpha during adipogenesis under a range of oxygen
levels. Here we investigated the expression of HIF-1alpha during adipogenesis
using the murine 3T3-L1 adipocyte model. Our results indicate the tissue-specific
form of HIF-1alpha is upregulated during adipogenesis with maximal levels
obtained within the first 24 h after induction. The increase in HIF-1alpha l.1
gene expression corresponds to increased nuclear HIF-1alpha protein, which
gradually declines throughout adipogenesis under aerobic conditions. Each of the 
three HIF prolyl hydroxylases involved in regulating HIF-1alpha stability is
expressed during adipogenesis. The prolyl hydroxylase domain 1 (PHD1) isoform of 
the HIF prolyl hydroxylases is expressed in early adipogenesis and the PHD2 and
PHD3 isoforms are expressed during late adipogenesis. Pharmacological inhibition 
of PHD activity during the initial stages of adipogenesis abrogates the formation
of adipocytes and inhibits gene expression of each of the PHD. However,
inhibition of PHD activity does not consistently regulate HIF-1alpha l.1
expression or HIF-1alpha protein levels, suggesting that
hydroxylation-independent mechanisms are involved in regulating HIF-1alpha
expression in adipocytes under aerobic conditions.

PMID: 17370314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Mar 6;104(10):4065-70. Epub 2007 Feb 28.

Steroid receptor coactivator 3 is a coactivator for myocardin, the regulator of
smooth muscle transcription and differentiation.

Li HJ(1), Haque Z, Lu Q, Li L, Karas R, Mendelsohn M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Research Institute, Department of Medicine, and Division 
of Cardiology, New England Medical Center Hospitals, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Abnormal proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) constitutes a key 
event in atherosclerosis, neointimal hyperplasia, and the response to vascular
injury. Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) mediates the protective effects of
estrogen in injured blood vessels and regulates ligand-dependent gene expression 
in vascular cells. However, the molecular mechanisms mediating ERalpha-dependent 
VSMC gene expression and VSMC proliferation after vascular injury are not well
defined. Here, we report that the ER coactivator steroid receptor coactivator 3
(SRC3) is also a coactivator for the major VSMC transcription factor myocardin,
which is required for VSMC differentiation to the nonproliferative, contractile
state. The N terminus of SRC3, which contains a basic
helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-Sim protein-protein interaction domain, binds the
C-terminal activation domain of myocardin and enhances myocardin-mediated
transcriptional activation of VSMC-specific, CArG-containing promoters, including
the VSMC-specific genes SM22 and myosin heavy chain. Suppression of endogenous
SRC3 expression by specific small interfering RNA attenuates myocardin
transcriptional activation in cultured cells. The SRC3-myocardin interaction
identifies a site of convergence for nuclear hormone receptor-mediated and
VSMC-specific gene regulation and suggests a possible mechanism for the vascular 
protective effects of estrogen on vascular injury.

PMCID: PMC1820709
PMID: 17360478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 11;282(19):14073-82. Epub 2007 Mar 12.

Transcriptional up-regulation of inhibitory PAS domain protein gene expression by
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1): a negative feedback regulatory circuit in
HIF-1-mediated signaling in hypoxic cells.

Makino Y(1), Uenishi R, Okamoto K, Isoe T, Hosono O, Tanaka H, Kanopka A,
Poellinger L, Haneda M, Morimoto C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, Advanced Clinical Research Center, Institute 
of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1, Shirokanedai, Tokyo, Japan.
makino@asahikawa-med.ac.jp

The inhibitory PAS (Per/Arnt/Sim) domain protein (IPAS), a dominant negative
regulator of hypoxia-inducible transcription factors (HIFs), is potentially
implicated in negative regulation of angiogenesis in such tissues as the
avascular cornea of the eye. We have previously shown IPAS mRNA expression is
up-regulated in hypoxic tissues, which at least in part involves
hypoxia-dependent alternative splicing of the transcripts from the
IPAS/HIF-3alpha locus. In the present study, we demonstrate that a hypoxia-driven
transcriptional mechanism also plays a role in augmentation of IPAS gene
expression. Isolation and analyses of the promoter region flanking to the first
exon of IPAS gene revealed a functional hypoxia response element at position -834
to -799, whereas the sequence upstream of the HIF-3alpha first exon scarcely
responded to hypoxic stimuli. A transient transfection experiment demonstrated
that HIF-1alpha mediates IPAS promoter activation via the functional hypoxia
response element under hypoxic conditions and that a constitutively active form
of HIF-1alpha is sufficient for induction of the promoter in normoxic cells.
Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift assays
showed binding of the HIF-1 complex to the element in a hypoxia-dependent manner.
Taken together, HIF-1 directly up-regulates IPAS gene expression through a
mechanism distinct from RNA splicing, providing a further level of negative
feedback gene regulation in adaptive responses to hypoxic/ischemic conditions.

PMID: 17355974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2007 May 1;220(3):320-32. Epub 2007 Feb 6.

Microarray analysis of the AHR system: tissue-specific flexibility in signal and 
target genes.

Frericks M(1), Meissner M, Esser C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Umweltmedizinische Forschung (IUF) at the Heinrich
Heine-University of Düsseldorf, Auf'm Hennekamp 50, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

Data mining published microarray experiments require that expression profiles are
directly comparable. We performed linear global normalization on the data of 1967
Affymetrix U74av2 microarrays, i.e. the transcriptomes of >100 murine tissues or 
cell types. The mathematical transformation effectively nullifies
inter-experimental or inter-laboratory differences between microarrays. The
correctness of expression values was validated by quantitative RT-PCR. Using the 
database we analyze components of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) signaling
pathway in various tissues. We identified lineage and differentiation specific
variant expression of AHR, ARNT, and HIF1alpha in the T-cell lineage and high
expression of CYP1A1 in immature B cells and dendritic cells. Performing
co-expression analysis we found unorthodox expression of the AHR in the absence
of ARNT, particularly in stem cell populations, and can reject the hypothesis
that ARNT2 takes over and is highly expressed when ARNT expression is low or
absent. Furthermore the AHR shows no co-expression with any other transcript
present on the chip. Analysis of differential gene expression under 308
conditions revealed 53 conditions under which the AHR is regulated, numerous
conditions under which an intrinsic AHR action is modified as well as conditions 
activating the AHR even in the absence of known AHR ligands. Thus meta-analysis
of published expression profiles is a powerful tool to gain novel insights into
known and unknown systems.

PMID: 17350064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2007 Apr;145(3):431-41. Epub 2007 Feb
2.

Modulation of xenobiotic biotransformation system and hormonal responses in
Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) after exposure to tributyltin (TBT).

Mortensen AS(1), Arukwe A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), 
Høgskoleringen 5, N-7491 Trondheim, Norway.

Multiple biological effects of tributyltin (TBT) on juvenile salmon have been
investigated. Fish were exposed for 7 days to waterborne TBT at nominal
concentrations of 50 and 250 microg/L dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).
Hepatic samples were analyzed for gene expression patterns in the hormonal and
xenobiotic biotransformation pathways using validated real-time PCR method.
Immunochemical and several cytochrome P450 (CYP)-mediated enzyme activity
(ethoxyresorufin: EROD, benzyloxyresorufin: BROD, methoxyresorufin: MROD and
pentoxyresorufin: PROD) assays were analyzed. Our data show that TBT produced
concentration-specific decrease of estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha),
vitellogenin (Vtg), zona radiata protein (Zr-protein) and increase of estrogen
receptor-beta (ERbeta) and androgen receptor-beta (ARbeta) in the hormonal
pathway. In the xenobiotic biotransformation pathway, TBT produced apparent
increase and decrease at respective low and high concentration, on aryl
hydrocarbon receptor-alpha (AhRalpha), AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT) and AhR
repressor (AhRR) mRNA. The expression of CYP1A1 and GST showed a TBT
concentration-dependent decrease. The AhRbeta, CYP3A and uridine
diphosphoglucuronosyl transferase (UGT) mRNA expressions were significantly
induced after exposure to TBT. Immunochemical analysis of CYP3A and CYP1A1
protein levels confirmed the TBT effects observed at the transcriptional levels. 
The effect of TBT on the biotransformation enzyme gene expressions partially
co-related but did not directly parallel enzyme activity levels for EROD, BROD,
MROD and PROD. In general, these findings confirm previous reports on the
endocrine effects of TBT, in addition to effects on hepatic CYP1A isoenzyme at
the transcriptional level that transcends to protein and enzymatic levels. The
induced expression patterns of CYP3A and UGT mRNA after TBT exposure, suggest the
involvement of CYP3A and UGT in TBT metabolism in fish. The effect of TBT on
CYP3A is proposed to represent another hormonal effect of TBT not previously
reported in any fish or lower vertebrate. The proposed androgenic effect is
supported by the observation that TBT also induced ARbeta mRNA expression in a
concentration-specific manner. To our knowledge, this is the first study that has
simultaneously studied multiple responses after exposure to TBT in fish.

PMID: 17344101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Oncology. 2006;71(1-2):95-101. Epub 2007 Mar 6.

Plausible linkage of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) in uterine endometrial
cancers.

Fujimoto J(1), Sato E, Alam SM, Jahan I, Toyoki H, Hong BL, Sakaguchi H, Tamaya
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Gifu University School of Medicine,
Gifu City, Japan. jf@gifu-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: Angiogenesis is essential for the development, growth and advancement 
of solid tumors. Angiogenesis is induced by hypoxia with the angiogenic
transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF). This prompted us to study
the clinical implications of HIF relative to angiogenesis in uterine endometrial 
cancers.
METHODS: Sixty patients underwent curative resection for uterine endometrial
cancers. In the tissue of 60 uterine endometrial cancers, HIF-1alpha, HIF-2alpha 
and HIF-1beta mRNA levels, and the ratio of angiopoietin (Ang)-2 to Ang-1
(Ang-2/Ang-1) mRNA levels were determined by RT real-time PCR; histochemical
scores and localization of HIF-1alpha were determined by immunohistochemistry.
Levels of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), thymidine phosphorylase (TP) and interleukin-8 (IL-8) were
determined by enzyme immunoassay.
RESULTS: In stage I uterine endometrial cancers, HIF-1alpha histochemical scores 
and mRNA levels significantly increased with myometrial invasion of uterine
endometrial cancers. HIF-1alpha histochemical scores and mRNA levels correlated
with the levels of Ang-2/Ang-1 and IL-8.
CONCLUSION: The angiogenic mediator HIF-1alpha, linked to Angs and IL-8, might
work on angiogenesis with myometrial invasion of cancer cells in uterine
endometrial cancers.

PMID: 17341889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2007 Apr;145(3):379-93. Epub 2007 Jan
30.

Molecular characterization and tissue distribution of aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator isoforms, ARNT1 and ARNT2, and identification of novel
splice variants in common cormorant (Phalacrocorax carbo).

Lee JS(1), Kim EY, Iwata H, Tanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Marine Environmental Studies (CMES), Ehime University, Bunkyo-cho
2-5, Matsuyama 790-8577, Ehime, Japan.

High levels of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related planar
halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (PHAHs) are accumulated in fish-eating birds
including common cormorant (Phalacrocorax carbo). Most of the biochemical and
toxic effects of TCDD are mediated by a basic helix-loop-helix and a conserved
region among Per, ARNT, and Sim (bHLH/PAS) proteins, aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AHR) and AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT). To study the molecular mechanism of
TCDD toxicity in common cormorant as an avian model species, characterization of 
the AHR/ARNT signaling pathway in this species is necessary. The present study
focuses on molecular characterization of ARNT from common cormorant (ccARNT). The
cDNA of the ccARNT isoform, ccARNT1 obtained by the screening of hepatic cDNA
library contains a 2424-bp open reading frame that encodes 807 amino acids,
exhibiting high identities (92%) with chicken ARNT. This isoform contains a
unique 22 amino acid residue in 3' end of PAS A domain as is also recognized in
chicken ARNT. The ccARNT2 cDNA isolated from brain tissue has a 2151-bp open
reading frame. The deduced amino acid sequence of ccARNT2 protein (716 aa) shows 
a conservation of bHLH and PAS motif in its N-terminal region with high
similarities (96% and 78%, respectively) to that of ccARNT1. Using quantitative
RT-PCR methods, the tissue distribution profiles of ccARNT1 and ccARNT2 were
unveiled. Both ccARNT1 and ccARNT2 mRNAs were ubiquitously expressed in all
examined tissues including liver. The expression profile of ccARNT1 was
comparable with that of rodent ARNT1, but ccARNT2 was not with rodent ARNT2,
implying different roles of ARNT2 between the two species. There was a
significant positive correlation between ARNT1 and ARNT2 mRNA expression levels
in the liver of wild cormorant population, indicating that their expressions may 
be enforced by similar transcriptional regulation mechanism. Novel variants of
ccARNT1 and ccARNT2 isoforms that were supposed to arise from their splicing
process were also identified and their hepatic expression profiles were
determined. These results indicate that ccARNT1, ccARNT2 and their splice
variants may more intricately regulate the AHR/ARNT signaling pathway and
consequently may be responsible for the species diversity of toxic effects and
susceptibility to PHAHs.

PMID: 17337252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Med Chem. 2007 Apr 5;50(7):1675-84. Epub 2007 Mar 1.

(Aryloxyacetylamino)benzoic acid analogues: A new class of hypoxia-inducible
factor-1 inhibitors.

Lee K(1), Lee JH, Boovanahalli SK, Jin Y, Lee M, Jin X, Kim JH, Hong YS, Lee JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cancer Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Daejeon, Korea, 305-806.

Structural modification of a compound discovered during screening using an
HRE-dependent reporter assay has revealed a novel class of HIF-1 inhibitors,
which potently inhibit the HIF-1alpha protein accumulation and its target gene
expression under hypoxic conditions in human hepatocellular carcinoma Hep3B
cells.

PMID: 17328532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Reprod Dev. 2007 Aug;53(4):765-75. Epub 2007 Feb 27.

Short-term hormone release from adult female rat hypothalamic and pituitary
explants is not altered by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Trewin AL(1), Woller MJ, Wimpee BA, Conley LK, Baldridge MG, Hutz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Wisconsin-Platteville, Platteville,
Wisconsin 53818, USA.

2, 3, 7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) has adverse effects on reproduction,
in part due to direct actions at the ovary. It is unclear whether effects are
further mediated by glands that regulate ovarian function. We investigated
whether effects of TCDD are mediated via the hypothalamic-pituitary axis.
Hypothalamic and pituitary tissues were cultured in medium with and without TCDD.
TCDD did not alter GnRH release from hypothalamic samples. It continued to be
pulsatile with no differences in the average peak frequency, average peak
amplitude, or baseline GnRH release. TCDD did not alter GnRH-induced release of
gonadotropins from pituitary samples. There were no differences in average peak
amplitude or baseline release. AhR, ARNT or ER alpha mRNA copy numbers in
cultured pituitaries were not affected by TCDD. Our data suggest that TCDD
effects on ovarian function are not mediated through the hypothalamic or
pituitary release parameters tested in this study.

PMID: 17325452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Mar;9(3):268-75. Epub 2007 Feb 18.

CIPC is a mammalian circadian clock protein without invertebrate homologues.

Zhao WN(1), Malinin N, Yang FC, Staknis D, Gekakis N, Maier B, Reischl S, Kramer 
A, Weitz CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, 220 Longwood Avenue,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

At the core of the mammalian circadian clock is a feedback loop in which the
heterodimeric transcription factor CLOCK-Brain, Muscle Arnt-like-1 (BMAL1) drives
expression of its negative regulators, periods (PERs) and cryptochromes (CRYs).
Here, we provide evidence that CLOCK-Interacting Protein, Circadian (CIPC) is an 
additional negative-feedback regulator of the circadian clock. CIPC exhibits
circadian regulation in multiple tissues, and it is a potent and specific
inhibitor of CLOCK-BMAL1 activity that functions independently of CRYs.
CIPC-CLOCK protein complexes are present in vivo, and depletion of endogenous
CIPC shortens the circadian period length. CIPC is unrelated to known proteins
and has no recognizable homologues outside vertebrates. Our results suggest that 
negative feedback in the mammalian circadian clock is divided into distinct
pathways, and that the addition of new genes has contributed to the complexity of
vertebrate clocks.

PMID: 17310242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Chem Res Toxicol. 2007 Mar;20(3):474-88. Epub 2007 Feb 10.

Targeted salmon gene array (SalArray): a toxicogenomic tool for gene expression
profiling of interactions between estrogen and aryl hydrocarbon receptor
signalling pathways.

Mortensen AS(1), Arukwe A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), 
Høgskoleringen 5, 7491 Trondheim, Norway.

In toxicogenomics, gene arrays are valuable tools in the identification of
differentially expressed genes and potentially identify new gene biomarkers
altered by exposure of organisms to xenobiotic compounds, either singly or as
complex mixtures. In this study, we investigated the mechanisms of interaction
between estrogen receptor (ER) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Ah receptor or AhR)
signalling pathways using toxicogenomic approaches. First, we generated cDNA
libraries using suppressive subtractive hybridization (SSH) of clones containing 
differentially expressed genes from Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) separately
exposed to ER and AhR agonists. Second, a targeted gene array (SalArray) was
developed based on true-positive differentially expressed genes. In the
experimental setup, primary cultures of salmon hepatocytes isolated by a two-step
perfusion method were exposed for 48 h to nonylphenol (NP; 5 microM) and
3,3',4,4'-tetrachlorobiphenyl (TCB; 1 microM), singly and combined, in the
absence or presence of antagonists. Using a targeted SalArray, we demonstrate
that exposure of salmon to NP singly or in combination with TCB produced
differential gene expression patterns in salmon liver. Array analysis showed that
exposure of hepatocytes to NP mainly altered genes involved in the estrogenic
pathway, including genes for steroid hormone synthesis and metabolism. The
anti-estrogenic properties of TCB were demonstrated in the array analysis as
genes induced by NP were decreased by TCB. To study the effects of TCB on
ER-mediated transcription, hepatocytes were treated for 48 h with tamoxifen (Tam;
1 microM) and ICI182,780 (ICI; 1 microM). The effect of AhR on ER-mediated
transcription was investigated by blocking AhR activity with alpha-naphthoflavone
(ANF; 0.1 and 1 microM). Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reactions
confirmed the changes in expression of ERalpha, ERbeta, vitellogenin (Vtg), zona 
radiata protein (Zr-protein), and vigilin for the ER pathway and AhRalpha,
AhRbeta, AhRR, ARNT, CYP1A1, UDPGT, and a 20S proteasome beta-subunit for the AhR
pathway. We found that exposure to NP and TCB both singly and in combination
produced gene expression patterns that were negatively influenced by individual
receptor antagonists. TCB caused decreased ER-mediated gene expression, and NP
caused decreased AhR-mediated responses. Inhibition of AhR with ANF did not
reverse the effect of TCB on ER-mediated transcription suggesting that AhRs do
not have a direct role on TCB-mediated decreases of ER-mediated responses. In
contrast, the inhibition of ER with Tam and ICI reversed the transcription of
AhR-mediated responses (except AhRR). Taken together, the findings in the present
study demonstrate a complex mode of ER-AhR interaction, possibly involving
competition for common cofactors. This complex mode of interaction is further
supported by the observation that the presence of ER antagonists potentiated the 
transcription of AhR isoforms and their mediated responses when TCB was given
alone (more so for AhRbeta). Thus, the inhibitory ER-AhR interactions can be used
to further investigate specific genes found to be affected in our targeted
SalArray chip that are important for the reproductive effects of endocrine
disruptors.

PMID: 17291011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Nov 21;86(43):3082-5.

[Effects of benzo(a)pyrene on the expression of gamma-glutamate-cysteine ligase: 
a primary study with rat alveolar epithelial cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiong LH(1), Li B, Ran PX.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Medical College,
Guangzhou 510120, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of benzo(a)pyrene [B(a)P] on the expression of
gamma-glutamate-cysteine ligase (gamma-GCS) in rat alveolar epithelium cells
(CCL-149 cell line).
METHODS: Rat alveolar cells of the line CCL-149 were cultured and exposed to
B(a)P of the concentrations of 0, 100, 500, and 5000 microg/L respectively for
24, 36, 48, and 72 hours respectively. Then the A values was measured to observe 
the influence of B(a)P on the growth of the CCL-149 cells. Another CCL-149 cells 
were exposed to B(a)P of the concentration of 200 microg/L for 6 h, then the
nuclear protein was extracted. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) and
antibody supershift assay were used to observe the specific binding of aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) to the E-box element. CCL-149
cells were cultured to 95% confluent and transfected with GCLC-luc and
GCLC-delE-box-luc for 6 h, exposed to B(a)P of different concentrations (2, 20,
and 200 microg/L) for 2, 6, 12, or 24 h, then the cells were harvested and the
luciferase activity was measured. Cells treated with DMSO were used as negative
control group.
RESULTS: B(a)P of the concentrations over 5000 microg/L significantly influenced 
the growth of the CCL-149 cells (all P < 0.01). Treated with B(a)P induced
binding of AHR/ARNT to E-box element was significantly increased by treatment of 
B(a)P. Treatment of B(a)P of different concentrations at different time points
did not significantly influence the luciferase activity (all P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: B(a)P induces the binding of ARNT to the E-box element on the
gamma-GCS gene, but this interaction between E-box and ARNT seems not to have
effect on the gene expression of gamma-GCS.

PMID: 17288842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Biol Chem. 2007 Apr 13;282(15):10881-93. Epub 2007 Feb 2.

A novel promoter element containing multiple overlapping xenobiotic and hypoxia
response elements mediates induction of cytochrome P4502S1 by both dioxin and
hypoxia.

Rivera SP(1), Wang F, Saarikoski ST, Taylor RT, Chapman B, Zhang R, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Jonsson Comprehensive
Cancer Center, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Cytochrome P4502S1 (CYP2S1) is expressed at high levels in epithelial tissues and
is inducible by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (dioxin) via the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR). Transcriptional initiation of mouse Cyp2s1 was found 
to occur at three regions, approximately 198, 102, and 22 nucleotides from the
translational initiation codon. Approximately 400 nucleotides upstream of its
translational initiation codon, mouse Cyp2s1 contains three overlapping
xenobiotic-responsive element (XRE) sequences, which make a major contribution
toward dioxin inducibility. Each XRE sequence in this trimeric XRE can bind the
AHR/aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) dimer in a
dioxin-dependent fashion in vitro and can mediate dioxin-dependent transcription.
Cyp2s1 is also markedly inducible by hypoxia. Induction is dependent on
hypoxiainducible factor-1 (HIF-1) and is mediated in large part by three
overlapping hypoxia response elements (HREs) embedded within the trimeric XRE
segment. Although each HRE within this segment can bind HIF-1alpha/ARNT in vitro,
the most 3' HRE contributes the most toward hypoxia inducibility. AHR/ARNT and
HIF-1alpha/ARNT dimers bind to the region containing the trimeric XRE segment of 
the endogenous Cyp2s1 gene in vivo in a dioxin-dependent fashion and
hypoxia-dependent fashion, respectively. These observations identify a novel
regulatory cassette that mediates changes in Cyp2s1 expression.

PMID: 17277313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Biochem Pharmacol. 2007 Jun 15;73(12):1853-62. Epub 2007 Jan 7.

Coordinate regulation of Phase I and II xenobiotic metabolisms by the Ah receptor
and Nrf2.

Köhle C(1), Bock KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University
of Tübingen, Germany.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
with important roles in metabolic adaptation, normal physiology and dioxin
toxicology. Metabolic adaptation is based on coordinate regulation of a set of
xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes (XMEs), termed AhR battery. Coordination is
achieved by AhR/Arnt-binding to XREs (xenobiotic response elements), identified
in the 5' upstream region of AhR target genes. The AhR battery encodes Phase I
and II enzymes. Interestingly, these Phase II genes are linked to the Nrf2 gene
battery that encodes enzymes that are essential in protection against
oxidative/electrophile stress. Nrf2 binds to AREs (antioxidant response elements)
in the regulatory region of a large and distinct set of target genes.
Functionally characterized response elements such as XREs and AREs in the
regulatory region of target genes may provide a genetic basis to understand AhR- 
and Nrf2-induced genes. Linkage between AhR and Nrf2 batteries is probably
achieved by multiple mechanisms, including Nrf2 as a target gene of the AhR,
indirect activation of Nrf2 via CYP1A1-generated reactive oxygen species, and
direct cross-interaction of AhR/XRE and Nrf2/ARE signaling. Linkage appears to be
species- and cell-dependent. However, mechanisms linking XRE- and ARE-controlled 
Phase II genes need further investigation. Tightened coupling between Phases I
and II by AhR- and Nrf2-induced XMEs may greatly attenuate health risks posed by 
CYP1A1-generated toxic intermediates and reactive oxygen species. Better
recognition of coordinate Phase I and II metabolisms may improve risk assessment 
of reactive toxic intermediates in the extrapolation to low level endo- and
xenobiotic exposure.

PMID: 17266942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Biochemistry. 2007 Jan 23;46(3):696-708.

Structural and functional characterization of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
ligand binding domain by homology modeling and mutational analysis.

Pandini A(1), Denison MS, Song Y, Soshilov AA, Bonati L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze dell'Ambiente e del Territorio, Università degli Studi
di Milano-Bicocca, Piazza della Scienza, 1, 20126 Milano, Italy.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor
that is activated by a structurally diverse array of synthetic and natural
chemicals, including toxic halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons such as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Analysis of the molecular events
occurring in the AhR ligand binding and activation processes requires structural 
information on the AhR Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) B-containing ligand binding domain, for
which no experimentally determined structure has been reported. With the
availability of extensive structural information on homologous PAS-containing
proteins, a reliable model of the mouse AhR PAS B domain was developed by
comparative modeling techniques. The PAS domain structures of the functionally
related hypoxia-inducible factor 2alpha (HIF-2alpha) and AhR nuclear translocator
(ARNT) proteins, which exhibit the highest degree of sequence identity and
similarity with AhR, were chosen to develop a two-template model. To confirm the 
features of the modeled domain, the effects of point mutations in selected
residue positions on both TCDD binding to the AhR and TCDD-dependent
transformation and DNA binding were analyzed. Mutagenesis and functional analysis
results are consistent with the proposed model and confirm that the cavity
modeled in the interior of the domain is indeed involved in ligand binding.
Moreover, the physicochemical characteristics of some residues and of their
mutants, along with the effects of mutagenesis on TCDD and DNA binding, also
suggest some key features that are required for ligand binding and activation of 
mAhR at a molecular level, thus providing a framework for further studies.

PMCID: PMC2860805
PMID: 17223691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2007 Feb;17(1):71-7. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

Hypoxia-inducible factors: central regulators of the tumor phenotype.

Gordan JD(1), Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, PA, USA.

Low oxygen levels are a defining characteristic of solid tumors, and responses to
hypoxia contribute substantially to the malignant phenotype. Hypoxia-induced gene
transcription promotes characteristic tumor behaviors, including angiogenesis,
invasion, metastasis, de-differentiation and enhanced glycolytic metabolism.
These effects are mediated, at least in part, by targets of the hypoxia-inducible
factors (HIFs). The HIFs function as heterodimers comprising an oxygen-labile
alpha-subunit and a stable beta-subunit also referred to as ARNT. HIF-1alpha and 
HIF-2alpha stimulate the expression of overlapping as well as unique
transcriptional targets, and their induction can have distinct biological
effects. New targets and novel mechanisms of dysregulation place the HIFs in an
ever more central role in tumor biology and have led to development of
pharmacological inhibitors of their activity.

PMCID: PMC3215290
PMID: 17208433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2007 Nov;68(3):351-60. Epub 2007 Jan 4.

Effects of hydroxy-polychlorinated biphenyl (OH-PCB) congeners on the xenobiotic 
biotransformation gene expression patterns in primary culture of Atlantic salmon 
(Salmo salar) hepatocytes.

Mortensen AS(1), Braathen M, Sandvik M, Arukwe A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), 
Høgskoleringen 5, 7491 Trondheim, Norway.

Hydroxylated metabolites of PCBs [OH-PCBs] represent new health and environmental
concern because they have been shown to have agonist or antagonist interactions
with hormone receptors (HRs) or hormone-receptor mediated responses. The present 
study was designed to investigate the estrogenic potency based on anti-AhR
signalling effect of three 4-OH substituted PCB congeners (#107, #146 and #187), 
one 3-OH substituted congener (#138), and the pharmaceutical synthetic estrogen, 
ethynylestradiol (EE2) in fish in vitro system using primary culture of Atlantic 
salmon hepatocytes. The effects were studied by quantifying changes in
transcripts with gene-sequence primer pairs for a suite of gene responses
(AhRalpha, ARNT, CYP1A1, CYP3A, UGT and GST) belonging to the xenobiotic
biotransformation system. Our data show that OH-PCB congeners and EE2, decreased 
AhRalpha and ARNT transcript levels, and CYP1A1, UGT and GST gene expressions,
together with CYP3A gene expression. The decreased expression of transcripts for 
xenobiotic biotransformation system is related to the concentration of individual
OH-PCB congener and these responses are typical of reported estrogenic and
estrogen-like effects on the CYP system. Modulation of biotransformation pathways
by OH-PCBs may alter xenobiotic metabolism leading to the production of toxic
reactive molecules, altering pharmacokinetics and diminishing the clearance rate 
of individual chemicals from the organism.

PMID: 17207528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. FASEB J. 2007 Mar;21(3):700-7. Epub 2006 Dec 28.

Optical analysis of the HIF-1 complex in living cells by FRET and FRAP.

Wotzlaw C(1), Otto T, Berchner-Pfannschmidt U, Metzen E, Acker H, Fandrey J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55,
D-45122 Essen, Germany.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) coordinates the cellular response to a lack of
oxygen by controlling the expression of hypoxia-inducible genes that ensure an
adequate energy supply. Assembly of the HIF-1 complex by its oxygen-regulated
subunit HIF-1alpha and its constitutive beta subunit also known as ARNT is the
key event of the cellular genetic response to hypoxia. By two-photon microscopy, 
we studied HIF-1 assembly in living cells and the mobility of fluorophore-labeled
HIF-1 subunits by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching. We found a
significantly slower nuclear migration of HIF-1alpha than of HIF-1beta,
indicating that each subunit can move independently. We applied fluorescence
resonance energy transfer to calculate the nanometer distance between alpha and
beta subunits of the transcriptionally active HIF-1 complex bound to DNA. Both N 
termini of the fluorophore-labeled HIF-1 subunits were localized as close as 6.2 
nm, but even the N and C terminus of the HIF-1 complex were not further apart
than 7.4 nm. Our data suggest a more compact 3-dimensional organization of the
HIF complex than described so far by 2-dimensional models.

PMID: 17197389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Diabetes. 2007 Jan;56(1):113-7.

Glucose-stimulated insulin production in mice deficient for the PAS kinase
PASKIN.

Borter E(1), Niessen M, Zuellig R, Spinas GA, Spielmann P, Camenisch G, Wenger
RH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Zürich, Zürich Center for Integrative
Human Physiology, Switzerland.

The Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domain serine/threonine kinase PASKIN, or PAS kinase,
links energy flux and protein synthesis in yeast and regulates glycogen synthase 
in mammals. A recent report suggested that PASKIN mRNA, protein, and kinase
activity are increased in pancreatic islet beta-cells under hyperglycemic
conditions and that PASKIN is necessary for insulin gene expression. We
previously generated Paskin knockout mice by targeted replacement of the kinase
domain with the beta-geo fusion gene encoding beta-galactosidase reporter
activity. Here we show that no 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-ss-d-galactopyranoside 
(X-gal) staining was observed in islet beta-cells derived from Paskin knockout
mice, irrespective of the ambient glucose concentration, whereas adenoviral
expression of the lacZ gene in beta-cells showed strong X-gal staining. No
induction of PASKIN mRNA could be detected in insulinoma cell lines or in islet
beta-cells. Increasing glucose concentrations resulted in PASKIN-independent
induction of insulin mRNA levels and insulin release. PASKIN mRNA levels were
high in testes but undetectable in pancreas and in islet beta-cells. Finally,
blood glucose levels and glucose tolerance after intraperitoneal glucose
injection were indistinguishable between Paskin wild-type and knockout mice.
These results suggest that Paskin gene expression is not induced by glucose in
pancreatic beta-cells and that glucose-stimulated insulin production is
independent of PASKIN.

PMID: 17192472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Chem Biodivers. 2004 Mar;1(3):473-80.

Guanine 6-O-methylation pattern within the dioxin responsive element of the
CYP1A1 enhancer shows two critical guanines for AhR/ARNT binding.

Oesch-Bartlomowicz B(1), Janssen K, Wiss O, Oesch F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, University of Mainz, Obere Zahlbacher Strasse 67,
D-55131 Mainz. Oeschb@mail.uni-mainz.de

The core-recognition motif for TCDD-liganded AhR/ARNT complex of the
dioxin-responsive element (DRE) contains four guanine residues, three on the
antisense (5'-T(T)/(A)GCGTG-3') and one on the sense (5'-CACGC(A)/(T)A-3')
strand. It has been reported that, in methylation-protection and
methylation-interference assays, the TCDD-liganded AhR/ARNT contacts all four
guanine residues. On the other hand, it is known that some anticancer drugs, and 
various environmental and workplace chemicals, including strongly human
carcinogenic nitrosamines, lead to the highly miscoding 6-O-methylation of
guanine. In the present study, we have investigated whether specific methylation 
of guanine at the 6-O-position interferes with the binding of TCDD-liganded
AhR/ARNT complex to its recognition motif in the CYP1A1 enhancer, and how
individual 6-O-methylated guanines contribute to this interference. We found that
only two 6-O-methylguanine residues are critical: the closest to the 5'-end
within the three-nucleotide sequence (5'-GTG-3'), identical to a half-site E-box 
element, on the antisense strand, and the only guanine on the sense strand. In
contrast, the 6-O-methylguanine closest to the 5'-end (well) and the one closest 
to the 3'-end (to a lesser extent), both on the antisense strand, were still able
to bind the TCDD-liganded AhR/ARNT complex. This shows that the 6-O-methylation
of guanine in the core sequences of CYP1A1 enhancer interferes with the binding
of the ligand-activated AhR/ARNT complex in a differentially selective manner; it
fully impedes binding of this complex to DRE (the prerequisite of most of the
toxic effects of TCDD) only when one of the two particular guanines is methylated
at the 6-O-position.

PMID: 17191862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Histochem Cytochem. 2007 Apr;55(4):355-63. Epub 2006 Dec 22.

Hypoxia-inducible factors in the first trimester human lung.

Groenman F(1), Rutter M, Caniggia I, Tibboel D, Post M.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Institute of Health Research Group in Lung Development, Hospital for 
Sick Children Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada

Lung development takes place in a relatively low-oxygen environment, which is
beneficial for lung organogenesis, including vascular development.
Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 plays an important role in mediating
oxygen-regulated events. HIF-1 is stable and initiates gene transcription under
hypoxia, whereas in normoxia, interaction with the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor 
suppressor protein leads to rapid degradation of the HIF-1alpha subunit.
Interaction with VHL requires hydroxylation of HIF-1alpha proline residues by
prolyl hydroxylases (PHDs). We investigated the expression of the various
components regulating HIF-1alpha stability in first trimester (8-14 weeks) human 
lungs. Spatial expression was assessed by immunohistochemistry and temporal
expression by quantitative PCR. Immunoreactivity for PHD1, PHD3, and seven in
absentia homolog (SIAH)1 was noted in the pulmonary epithelium. PHD2 was not
expressed in the airway epithelium, but in the lung parenchyma. HIF-1alpha and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) immunoreactivity were primarily
detected in the branching epithelium. HIF-2alpha and ARNT proteins localized to
the developing epithelium as well as mesenchymal, most likely vascular,
structures in the parenchyma. VEGF receptor 2 (VEGFR2) was found in the
subepithelium as well as in vascular structures of the mesenchyme. All components
of the VEC complex (VHL, NEDD8, and Cullin2) were found in the epithelium.
Quantitative PCR analysis demonstrated that VEGF, VEGFR1, HIF-1alpha, HIF-2alpha,
ARNT, PHD1, PHD2, PHD3, and SIAH1 gene expression was constant during early
pulmonary organogenesis. Cumulatively, the data suggest that the lung develops in
a low-oxygen environment that allows for proper vascular development through
HIF-regulated pathways.

PMID: 17189520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Environ Int. 2007 May;33(4):571-5. Epub 2006 Dec 14.

Nuclear receptors and susceptibility to chemical exposure in aquatic organisms.

Bainy AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lab. Biomarcadores de Contaminação Aquática e Imunoquímica, Departamento de
Bioquímica, CCB, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, SC,
88040-900, Brazil. bainy@mbox1.ufsc.br

Nuclear receptors (NRs) constitute a superfamily of transcriptional factors that 
participate in homeostasis and development through the binding of endogenous
compounds. Despite this constitutive activity, some xenobiotics can also bind to 
NRs and disturb some signaling pathways, giving rise to the concept that NR
activity can be modulated by antagonists or competitive agonists. Some NRs, such 
as the Pregnane X receptor (PXR), Peroxisome Proliferator Activated Receptors
(PPARs) and Constitutive Androstane Receptor (CAR) have received particular
attention because after binding to xenobiotics, they activate the expression of
genes involved in Phases I, II and III of biotransformation pathways. Another
important protein involved in the signaling of toxic compounds is the aromatic
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a member of the basic helix loop-helix (bHLH)
PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) family of nuclear transcription factors. AhR modulates an
important panel of cognate genes and is remarkably prone to protein-protein
interactions interfering with transcription factors and NRs. Several observations
have been made associating the exposure to chemicals with adverse effects on
reproduction of aquatic organisms, termed endocrine disrupting compounds (EDC).
NRs are believed to play an essential role in the adverse effects elicited by EDC
and some mechanisms are addressed in this review.

PMID: 17174397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Pharm. 2006 Nov-Dec;3(6):695-703.

A truncated Ah receptor blocks the hypoxia and estrogen receptor signaling
pathways: a viable approach for breast cancer treatment.

Jensen KA(1), Luu TC, Chan WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, Thomas J. Long School of 
Pharmacy and Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, California
95211, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
which requires heterodimerization with the Ah receptor nuclear translocator
(Arnt) for function. Arnt is also a dimerization partner of the hypoxia inducible
factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) for the hypoxia signaling. Additionally, Arnt is found
to be a potent coactivator of the estrogen receptor (ER) signaling. Thus we
examined whether the presence of an increased amount of AhR may suppress both the
HIF-1alpha and ER signaling pathways by sequestering Arnt. We tested our
hypothesis using a human AhR construct C Delta553 which is capable of
heterodimerizing with Arnt in the absence of a ligand. Transient transfection
studies using a corresponding luciferase reporter plasmid in MCF-7 cells showed
that C Delta553 effectively suppressed the AhR, HIF-1alpha, and ER signaling
pathways. Reverse transcription/real-time QPCR data showed that C Delta553
blocked the up-regulation of the target genes controlled by AhR (CYP1A1),
HIF-1alpha (VEGF, aldolase C, and LDH-A), and ER (GREB1, pS2, and c-myc) in MCF-7
cells. Since both HIF-1alpha and ER are highly active in the ER-positive breast
cancer, C Delta553 has the potential to be developed as a protein drug to treat
breast cancer by blocking these two signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC2761706
PMID: 17140257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Biochemistry. 2006 Dec 5;45(48):14427-40.

Structure and biosynthesis of free lipid A molecules that replace
lipopolysaccharide in Francisella tularensis subsp. novicida.

Wang X(1), Ribeiro AA, Guan Z, McGrath SC, Cotter RJ, Raetz CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

Francisella tularensis subsp. novicida U112 phospholipids, extracted without
hydrolysis, consist mainly of phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylglycerol,
phosphatidylcholine, and two lipid A species, designated A1 and A2. These lipid A
species, present in a ratio of 7:1, comprise 15% of the total phospholipids, as
judged by 32Pi labeling. Although lipopolysaccharide is detectable in F.
tularensis subsp. novicida U112, less than 5% of the total lipid A is covalently 
linked to it. A1 and A2 were analyzed by electrospray ionization and
matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry, gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry, and NMR spectroscopy. Both compounds are
disaccharides of glucosamine, acylated with primary 3-hydroxystearoyl chains at
positions 2, 3, and 2' and a secondary palmitoyl residue at position 2'. Minor
isobaric species and some lipid A molecules containing a 3-hydroxypalmitoyl chain
in place of 3-hydroxystearate are also present. The 4'- and 3'-positions of A1
and A2 are not derivatized, and 3-deoxy-d-manno-octulosonic acid (Kdo) is not
detectable. The 1-phosphate groups of both A1 and A2 are modified with an
alpha-linked galactosamine residue, as shown by NMR spectroscopy and gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry. An alpha-linked glucose moiety is attached to
the 6'-position of A2. The lipid A released by mild acid hydrolysis of F.
tularensis subsp. novicida lipopolysaccharide consists solely of component A1. F.
tularensis subsp. novicida mutants lacking the arnT gene do not contain a
galactosamine residue on their lipid A. Formation of free lipid A in F.
tularensis subsp. novicida might be initiated by an unusual Kdo hydrolase present
in the membranes of this organism.

PMCID: PMC2569856
PMID: 17128982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Science. 2006 Nov 24;314(5803):1304-8.

Dissecting the functions of the mammalian clock protein BMAL1 by tissue-specific 
rescue in mice.

McDearmon EL(1), Patel KN, Ko CH, Walisser JA, Schook AC, Chong JL, Wilsbacher
LD, Song EJ, Hong HK, Bradfield CA, Takahashi JS.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Neurobiology and Physiology,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain transcription factor 
BMAL1 is an essential component of the mammalian circadian pacemaker. Bmal1-/-
mice lose circadian rhythmicity but also display tendon calcification and
decreased activity, body weight, and longevity. To investigate whether these
diverse functions of BMAL1 are tissue-specific, we produced transgenic mice that 
constitutively express Bmal1 in brain or muscle and examined the effects of
rescued gene expression in Bmal1-/- mice. Circadian rhythms of wheel-running
activity were restored in brain-rescued Bmal1-/- mice in a conditional manner;
however, activity levels and body weight were lower than those of wild-type mice.
In contrast, muscle-rescued Bmal1-/- mice exhibited normal activity levels and
body weight yet remained behaviorally arrhythmic. Thus, Bmal1 has distinct
tissue-specific functions that regulate integrative physiology.

PMCID: PMC3756687
PMID: 17124323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Biochem J. 2007 Mar 15;402(3):525-36.

Cryptochromes impair phosphorylation of transcriptional activators in the clock: 
a general mechanism for circadian repression.

Dardente H(1), Fortier EE, Martineau V, Cermakian N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Chronobiology, Douglas Hospital Research Centre,
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada H4H 1R3.

CLOCK and BMAL1 [brain and muscle ARNT (arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator)-like protein 1] are central components of the molecular clock in
mammals and belong to the bHLH (basic helix-loop-helix)/PAS [PER
(Period)/ARNT/SIM (single-minded)] family. Features of their dimerization have
never been investigated. Here, we demonstrate that PAS domain function requires
regions extending over the short PAS core repeats. Strikingly, while deleting PAS
core repeats does not overtly affect dimerization, it abolishes the
transcriptional activity of the heterodimer. Interestingly, these deletions also 
abolish co-dependent phosphorylation of CLOCK and BMAL1, suggesting a link
between the phosphorylation status of the heterodimer and its transactivation
potential. We demonstrate that NPAS2 (neuronal PAS domain protein 2) and BMAL2
also undergo similar posttranslational modifications, thereby establishing the
mechanism proposed for CLOCK-BMAL1 as a common feature of transcriptional
activators in the circadian clock. The discovery of two novel splice variants of 
BMAL2 confirms the crucial role of the PAS domain and further strengthens the
view that co-dependent phosphorylation is of functional significance. In
agreement with this, we demonstrate that CRY1-2 (cryptochromes 1-2) affect
transactivation and phosphorylation of transcriptional activators of the clock.
Furthermore, CRY proteins stabilize the unphosphorylated forms of BMAL1(BMAL2)
thereby shifting the phosphorylated/unphosphorylated ratio towards a
predominantly unphosphorylated (transcriptionally inactive) form. In contrast,
PER proteins, which are weak repressors, are without effect. From these results, 
we propose a general mechanism for the inhibition of CLOCK(NPAS2)-BMAL1(BMAL2)
circadian transcriptional activation by CRY1-2.

PMCID: PMC1863574
PMID: 17115977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2007 Apr;36(4):427-34. Epub 2006 Nov 16.

NPAS1 regulates branching morphogenesis in embryonic lung.

Levesque BM(1), Zhou S, Shan L, Johnston P, Kong Y, Degan S, Sunday ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Research Drive, Carl 
Building, Room 0043, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Drosophila trachealess (Trl), master regulator of tracheogenesis, has no known
functional mammalian homolog. We hypothesized that genes similar to trachealess
regulate lung development. Quantitative (Q)RT-PCR and immunostaining were used to
determine spatial and temporal patterns of npas1 gene expression in developing
murine lung. Immunostaining for alpha-smooth muscle actin demonstrated
myofibroblasts, and protein gene product (PGP)9.5 identified neuroendocrine
cells. Branching morphogenesis of embryonic lung buds was analyzed in the
presence of antisense or sense oligodeoxynucleotides (ODN). Microarray analyses
were performed to screen for changes in gene expression in antisense-treated
lungs. QRT-PCR was used to validate the altered expression of key genes
identified on the microarrays. We demonstrate that npas1 is expressed in murine
embryonic lung. npas1 mRNA peaks early at Embryonic Day (E)10.5-E11.5, then drops
to low levels. Sequencing verifies the identity of npas1 transcripts in embryonic
lung. NPAS1 immunostaining occurs in nuclei of parabronchial mesenchymal cells,
especially at the tracheal bifurcation. Arnt, the murine homolog of Tango (the
heterodimerization partner for Trl) is also expressed in developing lung but at
constant levels. npas1- or arnt-antisense ODN inhibit lung branching
morphogenesis, with altered myofibroblast development and increased pulmonary
neuroendocrine cells. On microarrays, we identify > 50 known genes down-regulated
by npas1-antisense, including multiple genes regulating cell migration and cell
differentiation. QRT-PCR confirms significantly decreased expression of the
neurogenic genes RBP-Jk and Tle, and three genes involved in muscle development: 
beta-ig-h3, claudin-11, and myocardin. Npas1 can regulate myofibroblast
distribution, branching morphogenesis, and neuroendocrine cell differentiation in
murine embryonic lung.

PMCID: PMC1899329
PMID: 17110583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Cell Sci. 2006 Dec 1;119(Pt 23):4901-12. Epub 2006 Nov 14.

Targeted ablation of Arnt in mouse epidermis results in profound defects in
desquamation and epidermal barrier function.

Geng S(1), Mezentsev A, Kalachikov S, Raith K, Roop DR, Panteleyev AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

The molecular mechanisms of skin adaptation to the environmental stress are
poorly understood. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) lies
at the intersection of several crucial adaptive pathways. Nevertheless, its role 
in adaptation of the skin to environmental stress has just begun to be unraveled.
Here we show that Arnt is expressed in human and mouse skin in a developmentally 
dependent manner. Targeted K14-driven deletion of Arnt in the mouse epidermis
resulted in early postnatal death, associated with a failure of epidermal barrier
function. Gene expression profiling of Arnt-null mouse epidermis revealed
upregulation of genes of the epidermal differentiation complex on mouse
chromosome 3, including S100a genes (S100a8, S100a9, S100a10) and genes coding
for small proline-rich proteins (Sprr1a, Sprr2i, Sprr2j, Sprrl1). HPTLC analysis 
showed significant accumulation of Cer[NS] and Cer[NH] ceramide species in
Arnt-null epidermis, suggesting alterations in lipid metabolism. Continuous
retention of corneosomes in Arnt-null epidermis that resulted in an abnormally
dense corny layer and impaired desquamation was associated with upregulation of
Slpi, an inhibitor of stratum corneum chymotryptic enzyme (SCCE) that plays a key
role in corneosome degradation. The functional defects in Arnt-null mouse
epidermis underscore the crucial role of Arnt in the maintenance of epidermal
homeostasis, especially during the perinatal transition to the ex utero
environment.

PMID: 17105764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Tsitologiia. 2006;48(9):717-22.

[A comparative study of induction regulation in cytochromes family 1 P450 in cell
cultures at different stages of tumor transformation].

[Article in Russian]

Evteev VA, Shcherbak NP, Kobliakov VA.

Lipophilic xenobiotics, including some carcinogenic agents and cytostatics, are
metabolized by cytochrome P450 isoforms (CYP). In tumours expression of CYP genes
and their inducibility are lower than in a homologous normal tissue. This
phenomenon determines the known higher cytostatic stability of tumour cells. To
clarify, at which particular stage of tumour transformation the level of family 1
CYP may change, we compared mRNA expression of CYP1A1, CYP1B1 and also of
proteins regulated CYP expression: Ah receptor, ARNT and AHRR. For this aim we
studied embryonic and fibroblast-like cells, in addition to cells of the same
types but immortalized by the Rausher virus, or spontaneously after crisis.
Besides, we investigated transformed clones obtained by means of benzo/a/pyrene
action on Rausher virus-immortalized cells. Constitutive expression of genes
studied in all cell cultures was shown. Benzo/a/anthracene induction increases
the mRNA expression of all inducible genes (CYP1A1, CYP1B1, AHRR) in the original
embryonic cells, in Rausher virus-immortalized cells, and in transformed clone
K2. In both spontaneously immortalized cells and transformed clone K1 only CYP1B1
was induced. In transformed clone K8 no inducible gene was induced. In summary,
we have shown that: (1) the ability of immortalized cells to CYP induction is
determined not only by their capacity for a non-limited persistence, but also by 
the nature of immortalization; (2) despite their common genesis, the transformed 
clones differ in their ability to induce CYP. In addition to Ah receptor and
ARNT, some other, yet unknown factors may also take part in CYP induction.

PMID: 17089626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2007 Jan 15;263(1-2):65-78. Epub 2006 Oct 31.

Cytochrome P450 aromatase in grey mullet: cDNA and promoter isolation; brain,
pituitary and ovarian expression during puberty.

Nocillado JN(1), Elizur A, Avitan A, Carrick F, Levavi-Sivan B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries, Bribie Island Aquaculture
Research Centre, 144 North Street, Woorim, Qld 4507, Australia.

In a study towards elucidating the role of aromatases during puberty in female
grey mullet, the cDNAs of the brain (muCyp19b) and ovarian (muCyp19a) aromatase
were isolated by RT-PCR and their relative expression levels were determined by
quantitative real-time RT-PCR. The muCyp19a ORF of 1515bp encoded 505 predicted
amino acid residues, while that of muCyp19b was 1485 bp and encoded 495 predicted
amino acid residues. The expression level of muCyp19b significantly increased in 
the brain as puberty advanced; however, its expression level in the pituitary
increased only slightly with pubertal development. In the ovary, the muCyp19a
expression level markedly increased as puberty progressed. The promoter regions
of the two genes were also isolated and their functionality evaluated in vitro
using luciferase as the reporter gene. The muCyp19a promoter sequence (650 bp)
contained a consensus TATA box and putative transcription factor binding sites,
including two half EREs, an SF-1, an AhR/Arnt, a PR and two GATA-3 s. The
muCyp19b promoter sequence (2500 bp) showed consensus TATA and CCAAT boxes and
putative transcription binding sites, namely: a PR, an ERE, a half ERE, a SP-1,
two GATA-binding factor, one half GATA-1, two C/EBPs, a GRE, a NFkappaB, three
STATs, a PPAR/RXR, an Ahr/Arnt and a CRE. Basal activity of serially deleted
promoter constructs transiently transfected into COS-7, alphaT3 and TE671 cells
demonstrated the enhancing and silencing roles of the putative transcription
factor binding sites. Quinpirole, a dopamine agonist, significantly reduced the
promoter activity of muCyp19b in TE671. The results suggest tissue-specific
regulation of the muCyp19 genes and a putative alternative promoter for muCyp19b.

PMID: 17079073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2006 Mar;141(3):353-6.

Expression of mRNA for several enzymes of xenobiotic detoxification in normal and
spontaneously transformed mesothelial cells and mesothelioma cells of rats.

Kobliakov VA(1), Vaiman AV, Pylev LN, Vasil'eva LA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Carcinogenesis, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow.
vakob@crc.umos.ru

Expression of mRNA for the mdr1 gene, cytochrome P450 isoforms 1A1 and 1B1, Ah
receptor, and ARNT protein regulating the concentration of cytochrome P450 mRNA
was compared in normal and spontaneously transformed mesothelial cells and
mesothelioma cells from rats. Expression of cytochrome P450 1A1 and 1B1 mRNA
decreased in transformed mesothelial and mesothelioma cells compared to normal
mesothelial cells. mRNA for the mdr1 gene was undetected in normal mesothelial
cells. Expression of mRNA for the Ah receptor and ARNT protein did not differ in 
cultured cells.

PMID: 17073158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Toxicol Lett. 2006 Dec 15;167(3):212-20. Epub 2006 Oct 4.

The effect of aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligands on the expression of AhR, AhRR,
ARNT, Hif1alpha, CYP1A1 and NQO1 genes in rat liver.

Brauze D(1), Widerak M, Cwykiel J, Szyfter K, Baer-Dubowska W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Strzeszynska 32, 
60-479 Poznan, Poland. brauzdam@man.poznan.pl

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) mediates a variety of biological responses to
ubiquitous environmental pollutants. AhR together with ARNT, AhRR, HIF1alpha
represent a novel basic helix-loop-helix/PAS family of transcriptional
regulators. Their interplay may affect the xenobiotic response. In this study,
the effect of i.p. administration of different AhR ligands on the expression of
AhR, AhRR, ARNT, HIF1alpha and CYP1A1 and NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase (NQO1),
the enzymes controlled by AhR were examined in Sprague-Dawley rat liver.
Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis revealed no changes in the mRNA expression
of ARNT and HIF1alpha following 3-methylcholanthrene (3-MC),
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) or beta-naphthoflavone (BNF)
treatment. AhRR expression was affected by TCDD but not by BNF and 3-MC.
Expression of AhR mRNA and of the markers of its activation, CYP1A1 and NQO1, was
significantly increased by administration of TCDD, 3-MC and, to lower extent,
BNF. These results indicate that binding of the ligands to AhR up-regulates the
mRNA transcription not only of CYP1A1 and NQO1, but also of AhR itself. The level
of AhR induction depends on the potency of xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes
inducer.

PMID: 17069994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Biochem Soc Trans. 2006 Nov;34(Pt 5):791-3.

Regulation by Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) kinase of pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1 nuclear
import in pancreatic beta-cells.

An R(1), da Silva Xavier G, Hao HX, Semplici F, Rutter J, Rutter GA.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Signalling Laboratories and Department of Biochemistry,
University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 ITD, UK.

The transcription factor PDX-1 (pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1) is required for
normal pancreatic development and for the function of insulin-producing islet
beta-cells in mammals. We have shown previously that glucose regulates insulin
gene expression in part through the activation and translocation of PDX-1 from
the nuclear periphery to the nucleoplasm. We have also found that PASK [PAS
(Per-Arnt-Sim) kinase], a member of the nutrient-regulated family of protein
kinases, is activated in response to glucose challenge in beta-cells and is
involved in the regulation of expression of PDX-1. Purified PASK efficiently
phosphorylated recombinant PDX-1 in vitro on a single site (Thr-152). To
determine the impact of phosphorylation at this site, we generated wild-type and 
mutant (T152A, T152D and T152E) forms of PDX-1 and examined the distribution of
each of these in clonal MIN6 beta-cells by immunocytochemical analysis.
Unexpectedly, only the T152D mutation significantly affected subcellular
distribution, increasing the ratio of nuclear/cytosolic labelling at low and high
glucose concentrations, suggesting that phosphorylation at Thr-152 inhibits
nuclear uptake in response to glucose. Based on these results, experiments to
examine the contribution of Thr-152 to the overall phosphorylation of PDX-1 in
intact cells will be undertaken.

PMID: 17052199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Bacteriol. 2006 Nov;188(21):7335-43.

BdlA, a chemotaxis regulator essential for biofilm dispersion in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa.

Morgan R(1), Kohn S, Hwang SH, Hassett DJ, Sauer K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Binghamton University, SUNY at Binghamton, 
104 Science III, NY 13902, USA.

Multiple environmental cues have been shown to trigger biofilm detachment, the
transition from surface-attached, highly organized communities known as biofilms 
to the motile lifestyle. The goal of this study was to identify a gene product
involved in sensing environmental cues that trigger biofilm dispersion in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. To do so, we focused on novel putative chemotaxis
transducer proteins that could potentially be involved in environmental sensing. 
We identified a locus encoding such a protein that played a role in detachment,
as indicated by the observation that an isogenic mutant biofilm could not
disperse in response to a variety of environmental cues. The locus was termed
bdlA for biofilm dispersion locus. The BdlA protein harbors an MCP
(methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein) domain and two PAS (Per-Arnt-Sint) domains 
that have been shown to be essential for responding to environmental signals in
other proteins. The dispersion-deficient phenotype of the bdlA mutant was
confirmed by treatment with the biocide H(2)O(2) and by microscopic observations.
The dispersion response was independent of motility. bdlA mutant biofilms were
found to have increased adherent properties and increased intracellular levels of
cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP). Our findings suggest that BdlA may be a link between
sensing environmental cues, c-di-GMP levels, and detachment. Based on our
findings, a possible involvement of BdlA in a signaling cascade resulting in
biofilm dispersion is discussed.

PMCID: PMC1636253
PMID: 17050921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Free Radic Biol Med. 2006 Nov 15;41(10):1521-33. Epub 2006 Aug 7.

Reactive oxygen species regulate epidermal growth factor-induced vascular
endothelial growth factor and hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha expression through 
activation of AKT and P70S6K1 in human ovarian cancer cells.

Liu LZ(1), Hu XW, Xia C, He J, Zhou Q, Shi X, Fang J, Jiang BH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

The epidermal growth factor (EGF) and EGF receptor (EGFR) family are often
overexpressed in various human cancers including ovarian cancer. While it is
generally believed that reactive oxygen species (ROS) are involved in the
intracellular signaling events, the role of ROS in EGF-induced angiogenesis and
carcinogenesis remains to be elucidated. The present study investigated the role 
of ROS in the regulation of AKT, p70S6K1, vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), and hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) in ovarian cancer cells. In this
study, OVCAR-3 cells were treated with EGF and catalase, an H2O2 scavenger. EGF
treatment increases H2O2 production, leading to activation of the AKT/p70S6K1
pathway, resulting in increased VEGF expression at the transcriptional level. The
inhibition of H(2)O(2) production by catalase abolished EGF-induced AKT and
p70S6K1 activation, and VEGF expression through HIF-1alpha expression. Forced
expression of p70S6K1 and HIF-1alpha reversed catalase- and rapamycin-inhibited
VEGF transcriptional activation. We also showed that rapamycin, p70S6K1 inhibitor
and catalase overexpression inhibited tumor angiogenesis. This study demonstrates
a novel mechanism of EGF-induced VEGF and HIF-1alpha expression through
production of H2O2 and activation of AKT and p70S6K1 in human ovarian cancer
cells. This study also indicates that p70S6K1 and H2O2 are important in tumor
angiogenesis. The results of the study could have an important implication in
ovarian cancer therapy.

Copyright 2006 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 17045920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Gene. 2007 Jan 15;386(1-2):73-80. Epub 2006 Aug 23.

cDNA cloning, gene organization and variant specific expression of HIF-1 alpha in
high altitude yak (Bos grunniens).

Dolt KS(1), Mishra MK, Karar J, Baig MA, Ahmed Z, Pasha MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, Mall Road, Delhi-110 007,
India.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a heterodimeric
basic-helix-loop-helix-PER-ARNT-SIM (bHLH-PAS) transcription factor consisting of
HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta subunits. HIF-1alpha is the oxygen-regulated subunit of 
HIF-1, which regulates the transcription of genes involved in oxygen homeostasis 
in response to hypoxia. Yak (Bos grunniens), a mammal native to high altitude
(HA) region ( approximately 3500-5500 m), has successfully adapted over many
generations to the chronic hypoxia of HA. In the present work, cDNA encoding
HIF-1alpha has been cloned from the blood of yak. Tissue specific expression of
the mRNA was analyzed in blood, heart, lung, liver and kidney by RT-PCR with
primers from three different regions of cDNA. The HIF-1alpha expression was liver
and blood specific. The HIF-1alpha mRNA contains 823 bp long 3'UTR that is
AU-rich and contains ten AUUUA pentamers and two overlapping copies of the
nonamer UUAUUUAUUUAUU. Three potential microRNAs,
hsa-miR-107/mmu-miR-107/rno-miR-107, hsa-miR-18b and
hsa-miR-135a/mmu-miR-135a/rno-miR-135a, targeting 3'UTR of yak HIF-1alpha, were
identified by using target prediction software. The CDS encodes for 823 residues 
of amino acids and showed 99%, 95%, 92%, 90% and 90% similarity to domestic
cattle, human, plateau pika, mouse and rat HIF-1alpha, respectively. HIF-1alpha
cDNA, cloned and sequenced in the present work has revealed the evolutionary
conservation through multiple sequence alignment. Liver and blood specific
stability of HIF-1alpha mRNA appears miR-107 regulated.

PMID: 17045424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Int J Cancer. 2006 Dec 15;119(12):2812-20.

TANGO is a tumor suppressor of malignant melanoma.

Arndt S(1), Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Molecular Pathology, University of Regensburg,
Germany.

The TANGO gene was originally identified as a new family member of the melanoma
inhibitory activity gene family. The gene codes for a 14 kDa protein of so far
unknown function. In our study we revealed that TANGO was downregulated or lost
in 9 melanoma cell lines when compared to normal melanocytes and in most of the 8
tumor samples analyzed. The losses were associated with advanced stage of the
disease. These results were confirmed in situ by immunohistochemistry on 10
paraffin-embedded sections of human malignant melanoma primary tumors and
melanoma skin metastases. A small reduction of TANGO was also seen in different
benign and atypical nevi when compared to normal skin. For functional analysis of
TANGO we evaluated TANGO re-expressing melanoma cell clones and antisense TANGO
cell clones with a complete loss of TANGO. Functional assays with TANGO
transfected or treated cell lines revealed that TANGO expression reduces
motility, whereas reduction of TANGO enhances migration. Our studies, therefore, 
indicate that reduction of TANGO expression contributes to tumor progression.
These results taken together provide the first indications for a tumor suppressor
role of TANGO gene in human malignant melanoma.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17044017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Chem Res Toxicol. 2006 Oct;19(10):1284-93.

Identification and characterization of genes susceptible to transcriptional
cross-talk between the hypoxia and dioxin signaling cascades.

Lee K A(1), Burgoon LD, Lamb L, Dere E, Zacharewski TR, Hogenesch JB, LaPres JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA.

Erratum in
    Chem Res Toxicol. 2006 Dec;19(12):1702.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) are
transcription factors that control the adaptive response to toxicants such as
dioxins and decreases in available oxygen, respectively. The AHR and HIFs utilize
the same heterodimeric partner, the aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT) 
for proper function. This requirement raises the possibility that cross-talk
exists between these critical signaling systems. Single gene and reporter assays 
have yielded conflicting results regarding the nature of the competition for
ARNT. Therefore, to determine the extent of cross-talk between the AHR and HIFs, 
a comprehensive analysis was performed using global gene expression analysis. The
results identified 767 and 430 transcripts that are sensitive to cobalt chloride 
and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-rho-dioxin (TCDD) stimulation, respectively, with 
308 and 176, respectively, exhibiting sensitivity to cross-talk. The overlap
between these two sets consists of 33 unique transcripts, including the classic
target genes CYP1A1, carbonic anhydrase IX, and those involved in lipid
metabolism and coagulation. Computational analysis of the regulatory region of
these genes identified complex relationships between HIFs, AHR, and their
respective response elements as well as other DNA motifs, including the SRF,
Sp-1, NF-kB, and AP-2 binding sites. These results suggest that HIF-AHR
cross-talk is limited to genes with regulatory regions that contain specific
motifs and architectures.

PMCID: PMC3152583
PMID: 17040097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Anal Chem. 2006 Oct 15;78(20):7138-44.

Cell-free bioassay for measurement of dioxins based on fluorescence enhancement
of fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled DNA probe.

You F(1), Zhou YF, Zhang XE, Huang Z, Bi LJ, Zhang ZP, Wen JK, Chen YY, Jiang GB,
Zheng MH.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Research Group on Analytical Pathogen Microbiology Wuhan Institute of
Virology, Wuhan 430071, China.

This study aims to develop a rapid and sensitive cell-free bioassay of dioxins.
It is known that dioxin ligand can bind heterodimeric aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR) and triggers the formation of the complex of dioxin-AhR, AhR nuclear
translocator (ARNT), and dioxin-responsive element (DRE) region of the DNA. The
hypothesis of the proposed method is that if FITC were labeled at the DRE
sequence, its fluorescence intensity would be enhanced when the complex forms
because the interaction interface of the binding components (AhR, ARNT, and DRE) 
creates a rather hydrophobic condition that is in favor of FITC emission. Effects
of modification site of FITC on the DNA probes on binding efficiency between the 
complex components and fluorescence emission enhancement were evaluated by
surface plasmon resonance and fluorescence analysis, respectively. Results showed
that the labeling site at the second base at the 5' end apart from the core
region (5'-TNGCGTG-3') of DRE did not obviously interfere with the binding
between the DNA probe and dioxin-AhR/ARNT hybrid but presented significant
fluorescence emission enhancement. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) was
used as the typical toxin in this study. The method had a linear range of 1-100
pM, with detection limit of 0.1 pM (0.64 fg/assay) and coefficient of variation
of 5.6% (n = 10, 50 pM TCDD in transformed cytosol). The whole detection cycle
was approximately 4 h. The method was also used to estimate the toxic equivalents
(TEQ) of 1,2,3,7,8-pentachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (PeCDD) and
1,2,3,4,7,8-hexachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (HxCDD). Measurement of TEQs of the
mixture of TCDD, PeCDD, and HxCDD were highly consistent with the predicted data.
The average recovery using fly ash extract was approximately 93%.

PMID: 17037913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 8;281(49):37507-16. Epub 2006 Oct 5.

Unique and overlapping transcriptional roles of arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear 
translocator (Arnt) and Arnt2 in xenobiotic and hypoxic responses.

Sekine H(1), Mimura J, Yamamoto M, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance and Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

Arnt and the homologous Arnt2 share a high degree of sequence similarity and are 
believed to function as obligate common partners for a number of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS transcription factors including arylhydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) and HIFalpha. Genetic disruption of both Arnt and Arnt2
demonstrated both unique and overlapping functions in response to environmental
stimuli and during mouse development. Either stably or transiently expressed
Arnt/Arnt2 wild type and various mutants or chimeric constructs in Hepa1-c4 cells
exhibit similar levels of hypoxic response element-driven reporter gene
expression and the induction of endogenous Glut-1 through binding with HIFalpha
in response to hypoxia. In contrast, we observed clear functional differences in 
the ability of Arnt and Arnt2 to induce xenobiotic response element-driven
reporter and endogenous CYP1A1 gene expression. In contrast with Arnt, Arnt2 was 
practically incapable of interacting with ligand-activated AhR to induce the
expression of target genes for xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes in response to
xenobiotics. The differential binding of AhR by Arnt and Arnt2 can be ascribed to
a single His/Pro amino acid difference in the PASB region of Arnt and Arnt2,
suggesting that the PASB/PASB interaction between bHLH-PAS transcription factors 
plays a selective role for their specific partner molecule.

PMID: 17023418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Oct 11;128(40):13123-9.

Amphiphilic poly(phenyleneethynylene)s can mimic antimicrobial peptide membrane
disordering effect by membrane insertion.

Ishitsuka Y(1), Arnt L, Majewski J, Frey S, Ratajczek M, Kjaer K, Tew GN, Lee KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, the Institute for Biophysical Dynamics & the James
Franck Institute, the University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are a class of peptides that are innate to various 
organisms and function as a defense agent against harmful microorganisms by means
of membrane disordering. Characteristic chemical and structural properties of
AMPs allow selective interaction and subsequent disruption of invaders' cell
membranes. Polymers based on m-phenylene ethynylenes (mPE) were designed and
synthesized to mimic the amphiphilic, cationic, and rigid structure of AMPs and
were found to be good mimics of AMPs in terms of their high potency toward
microbes and low hemolytic activities. Using a Langmuir monolayer insertion
assay, two mPEs are found to readily insert into anionic model bacterial
membranes but to differ in the degree of selectivity between bacterial and
mammalian erythrocyte model membranes. Comparison of grazing incidence X-ray
diffraction (GIXD) data before and after the insertion of mPE clearly indicates
that the insertion of mPE disrupts lipid packing, altering the tilt of the lipid 
tail. X-ray reflectivity (XR) measurements of the lipid/mPE system demonstrate
that mPE molecules insert through the headgroup region and partially into the
tail group region, thus accounting for the observed disordering of tail packing. 
This study demonstrates that mPEs can mimic AMP's membrane disordering.

PMID: 17017792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Carcinogenesis. 2007 Mar;28(3):639-47. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

Identification of kaempferol as an inhibitor of cigarette smoke-induced
activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and cell transformation.

Puppala D(1), Gairola CG, Swanson HI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Biomedical Pharmacology, MS 305 University of
Kentucky Medical Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a cytosolic receptor which upon activation
by its agonists, translocates into the nucleus and forms a dimer with ARNT (aryl 
hydrocarbon nuclear translocator). The AHR/ARNT dimer regulates the expression of
its target genes by binding to DNA recognition elements termed dioxin responsive 
elements (DREs). Many AHR agonists, like the polyaromatic hydrocarbons and
polyhalogenated hydrocarbons are known human carcinogens. Human exposure to these
compounds is common due to their presence in air pollution and cigarette smoke.
Interestingly, many dietary constituents that have chemo preventative properties 
have been found to also act as antagonists of the AHR pathway. Thus, a
chemopreventive approach that may be effective in decreasing the incidences of
many human cancers may involve a dietary regimen that includes a number of these 
naturally occurring AHR antagonists. With this idea in mind, we have assayed the 
ability of 15 flavonoids to inhibit AHR activated reporter activity and selected 
kaempferol for further analysis. Kaempferol proved to be capable of inhibiting
binding of agonist and agonist-induced formation of the AHR/ARNT DNA-binding
complex and upregulation of the AHR target gene, CYP1A1. Using an in vitro
paradigm of events that are thought to occur during cigarette-smoke-induced lung 
cancer, we found that kaempferol also inhibited the ability of cigarette smoke
condensate to induce growth of immortalized lung epithelial (BEAS-2B) cells in
soft agar. Taken together, these results illustrate the promise associated with
the use of flavonoids, that inhibit both AHR signaling and the carcinogenic
actions of AHR agonists, for chemopreventive purposes.

PMID: 17012224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Reprod Dev. 2006 Dec;52(6):751-61. Epub 2006 Sep 18.

Effects of vertically transferred 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB-126) on
the reproductive development of female rats.

Shirota M(1), Mukai M, Sakurada Y, Doyama A, Inoue K, Haishima A, Akahori F,
Shirota K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Biosciences, Azabu University, Sagamihara, Kanagawa,
Japan. shirota@azabu-u.ac.jp

In order to study the effects of vertically transferred coplanar polychlorinated 
biphenyls on female reproductive development, female rat offspring from dams of
Sprague-Dawley strain, which received daily oral administration of vehicle (corn 
oil) or 1 or 3 microg/kg of 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB-126) from 2
weeks prior to mating with intact males until 20 days after delivery were
examined from birth until puberty. Hepatic expression of the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR)-inducible enzyme cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1) was detected in all 
offspring from PCB-126-exposed dams, indicating vertical transfer of PCB-126.
Furthermore, quantification of ovarian mRNAs encoding CYP1A1, AhR and ARNT
demonstrated that the ovary equipped the AhR-signaling system through which
transcription of the CYP1A1 gene was enhanced in a dose-dependent manner.
Exposure to PCB-126 retarded the growth of offspring in both exposed groups,
while the viability of the neonates of the exposed groups was comparable to that 
of the oil-exposed controls. The exposure to 3 mug/kg/day reduced the ovarian
weight on postnatal day (PND) 24, with atresia of most of the antral follicles
and delayed vaginal opening. Exposure to 1 microg/kg/day did not produce such
effects; however, both doses of PCB-126 induced external urogenital anomalies,
such as vaginal thread and hypospadias, in all of the PCB-126-exposed female
offspring. These results indicate that vertically transferred PCB-126 is potent
enough to exert a direct effect on the ovary and adversely affect female puberty 
by altering the morphological and functional development of the female
reproductive system.

PMID: 16983182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Biol Chem. 2006 Sep;387(9):1215-8.

Identifying target genes of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(Arnt) using DNA microarray analysis.

Wang F(1), Shi S, Zhang R, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, and Jonsson Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) is a basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein that also contains a Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain.
In addition to forming heterodimers with many other bHLH-PAS proteins, including 
the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and hypoxia-inducible factors 1alpha, 2alpha 
and 3alpha, Arnt can also form homodimers when expressed from its cDNA in vitro
or in vivo. However, target genes of the Arnt/Arnt homodimer remain to be
identified. In this study, we have elucidated the profile of genes responsive to 
the reintroduction of Arnt expression in an Arnt-deficient mouse hepatoma cell
line (c4), using DNA microarray analysis. The expression of 27 genes was
upregulated by 1.5-fold or more in c4 cells infected with a retroviral vector
expressing mouse Arnt, while no genes were found to be downregulated. Among the
upregulated genes, BCL2/adenovirus E1B 19 kDa-interacting protein 1 (NIP3),
serine (or cysteine) proteinase inhibitor, clade E, member 1 (PAI1), and N-myc
downstream regulated-like (NDR1), were confirmed to be induced by Arnt using
real-time PCR. We also found that the 5' promoter region of 15 out of 20
upregulated genes contain the type 2 E-box 5'-CACGTG-3' Arnt/Arnt binding
sequence, consistent with the notion that they represent target genes for Arnt.

PMID: 16972789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Dtsch Tierarztl Wochenschr. 2006 Aug;113(8):292-7.

[Impacts and impact mechanisms of "dioxins" in humans and animals].

[Article in German]

Nau H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Lebensmitteltoxikologie und Chemische Analytik,
Lebensmitteltoxikologie, Stiftung Tierärztliche Hochschule Hannover.
Heinz.Nau@tiho-hannover.de

"Dioxins" are used to specify polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDD),
dibenzo-furanes (F) and dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB's). Many of
the congeners proved to be highly toxic; 2,3,7,8-tetrachloro-dibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) is the most toxic congener, and probably the most toxic compound ever
synthesized by man (the natural occurance of this substance is very low). The
total concentration/-toxicity of a mixture of congeners (WHO-PCDD/F-TEQ, or
including the PCB's WHO-PCDD/F-PCB-PCB-TEQ) is calculated by addition of the
individual concentrations multiplied by respective toxicity equivalence factors
TEF; the most toxic congener TCDD is defined as 1. The tolerable weekly intake
TWI set by the European Commission is 14pg WHO-PCDD/F-TEQ/kg bw. The "body
burden" of adults in industrial countries is about 2-6 ng WHO-PCDD/F-TEQ/kg bw., 
or about double this value if PCB's are also considered. There is a very broad
range of toxic effects of "dioxins". Many of the congeners can induce toxic
responses at very low "body burdens". The most sensitive effects are
immunosuppression, developmental and reproductive toxicity, as well as
neurological behavioral effects. These effects occur at "body burdens" whih are
close to background exposure of the human. Cancerogenic effects are induced at
higher exposure (Seveso, industrial exposure). TCDD was considered a "complete
carcinogen" by the IARC (Group 1). There is a broad range of carcinogenic
effects, and there is no "hallmark" effect. Most toxic effects induced by TCDD
are mediated by binding to the Ah-receptor (Ah-R) which binds together with a
second protein, ARNT, to the respone elements of a number of target genes, and
thus modulates gene expression. "Dioxins" are strong promotors, but weak
initiators. The multitude of interactions of the Ah-R and ARNT ("receptor
cross-talk") results in numerous molecular and cellular effects. The TCDD-Ah-R
complex can also bind to the response element of the estrogen receptor, and thus 
can block the effects of es-trogens. This explains the fact that TCDD can be an
estrogen antagonist reducing or preventing mamma carcinoma. Other Ah-R ligands
occur in vegetables (e.g. indoles, flavones) and will possibly be developed in
the future as functional substances. PCB's have similar properties to TCDD if
they can exist in a planar configuration (dioxin-like PCB's). The non-dioxin-like
PCB's always occur together with "dioxins"; their toxixty cannot be adequately
determined although they occur in high concenrations. The consumption of food
contaminated with "dioxins" need not directly lead to a toxic effect. Due to the 
continous cumulation of "dioxins" repeated ingestion of contaminated food could
result in an increase of the "body burden" and thus chronic toxicity. This shows 
that the exposure of the human to dioxins should be minimized wherever possible.

PMID: 16955640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2006 Sep;13(3):739-49.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 in human breast and prostate cancer.

Kimbro KS(1), Simons JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Emory School of Medicine, Winship
Cancer Institute, 1365 Clifton Road, NE, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.
sean.kimbro@emorythealthcare.org

The tumor microenvironment is best characterized as a fluctuation of hypoxia and 
nutrient deprivation, which leads to epigenetic and genetic adaptation of clones 
and increased invasiveness and metastasis. In turn, these hypoxic adaptations
make the tumors more difficult to treat and confer increased resistance to
current therapies. Part of this adaptation is the regulation of gene products in 
response to hypoxia. Many of these hypoxia-regulated genes are mediated by the
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) complex, which is composed of a heterodimer
pair of HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta. This heterodimer binds to the promoter of
hypoxia-responsive genes, while interacting with other transcription factors,
such as p300, signal and transducer of transcription 3, and Redox effector factor
1/apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease. HIF-1alpha levels itself can be regulated
by hypoxia transcriptionally and post-translationally through ubiquitination; but
the magnitude of the response is modulated by several other pathways, including
free radicals that affect crosstalk with HIF-1alpha/HIF-1beta transcriptional
activities. HIF-1alpha has emerged as an important transcription factor in breast
cancer and prostate cancer biology, and is expressed in the early stages of
mammary and prostate carcinogenesis. Its expression is correlated with diagnostic
and prognostic indicators for early relapse and metastatic disease, thus making
HIF-1alpha a potential prognostic biomarker in proteomic assessments of breast
and prostate cancers. The importance of HIF-1alpha in tumor progression makes it 
a logical target for chemoprevention strategies in patients at higher genetic
risk of breast and prostate cancer with Cox 2 inhibitors or 2-methoxyestradiol,
as well as a target for new approaches to inhibiting angiogenesis. The crosstalk 
between estrogen signaling pathways and HIF-1alpha is still not fully defined in 
breast cancer, but downstream estrogen receptor signaling may be a candidate for 
estrogen modulation of HIF-1alpha levels. In prostate cancer, androgens
upregulate HIF-1alpha through androgen-regulated autocrine receptor tyrosine
kinase receptor signaling. This review will put into perspective the role of
HIF-1alpha in endocrine oncology and present new data on HIF-1alpha signaling and
the potential for targeted therapies, including combinatory hormonal therapies.

PMID: 16954428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 10;281(45):34617-29. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Neuronal PAS domain protein 1 is a transcriptional repressor and requires
arylhydrocarbon nuclear translocator for its nuclear localization.

Teh CH(1), Lam KK, Loh CC, Loo JM, Yan T, Lim TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 14
Science Drive 4, Kent Ridge, Singapore 117542.

Neuronal PAS domain protein 1 (NPAS1), a basic helix-loop-helix-PAS transcription
factor expressed in the central nervous system, has been suggested to be involved
in neuronal differentiation. However, relatively little is known about the
molecular mechanism underlying the role of NPAS1 during development. In this
study we set out to characterize the different domains within NPAS1. We showed
that the nuclear localization of NPAS1 is dependent on the presence of ARNT. In
addition, the transcriptional potential of ARNT is not required for this
localization. In the absence of ARNT, NPAS1 is excluded from the nucleus, and
this exclusion is due to the presence of a nuclear export signal within the N
terminus of NPAS1. The interaction between NPAS1 and ARNT is via their N termini.
We found no transactivation domain within NPAS1; instead, we mapped out at least 
three repression domains within NPAS1, suggesting that NPAS1 acts as a repressor.
Furthermore, our experiments showed that NPAS1 is able to repress the
transactivation functions of ARNT and ARNT2. We suggest that NPAS1 is guided into
the nucleus by ARNT via the ARNT nuclear localization signal, and NPAS1 can
override the activation function of adjacent transcription factors, providing a
mechanism by which NPAS1 may inhibit transcription.

PMID: 16954219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Mol Biol. 2006 Oct 13;363(1):148-60. Epub 2006 Aug 1.

PAS domain allostery and light-induced conformational changes in photoactive
yellow protein upon I2 intermediate formation, probed with enhanced
hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry.

Brudler R(1), Gessner CR, Li S, Tyndall S, Getzoff ED, Woods VL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The
Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Photoactive yellow protein (PYP) is a small bacterial photoreceptor that
undergoes a light-activated reaction cycle. PYP is also the prototypical
Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain. PAS domains, found in diverse multi-domain proteins
from bacteria to humans, mediate protein-protein interactions and function as
sensors and signal transducers. Here, we investigate conformational and dynamic
changes in solution in wild-type PYP upon formation of the long-lived putative
signaling intermediate I2 with enhanced hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass
spectrometry (DXMS). The DXMS results showed that the central beta-sheet remains 
stable but specific external protein segments become strongly deprotected.
Light-induced disruption of the dark-state hydrogen bonding network in I2
produces increased flexibility and opening of PAS core helices alpha3 and alpha4,
releases the beta4-beta5 hairpin, and propagates conformational changes to the
central beta-sheet. Surprisingly, the first approximately 10 N-terminal residues,
which are essential for fast dark-state recovery from I2, become more protected. 
By combining the DXMS results with our crystallographic structures, which reveal 
detailed changes near the chromophore but limited protein conformational change, 
we propose a mechanism for I2 state formation. This mechanism integrates the
results from diverse biophysical studies of PYP, and links an allosteric T to
R-state conformational transition to three pathways for signal propagation within
the PYP fold. On the basis of the observed changes in PYP plus commonalities
shared among PAS domain proteins, we further propose that PAS domains share this 
conformational mechanism, which explains the versatile signal transduction
properties of the structurally conserved PYP/PAS module by framework-encoded
allostery.

PMCID: PMC2575420
PMID: 16952373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Nov 1;312(18):3585-94. Epub 2006 Aug 9.

Zinc finger transcription factor Slug is a novel target gene of aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor.

Ikuta T(1), Kawajiri K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Clinical Oncology, Saitama Cancer Center, 818 Komuro,
Ina-machi, Kitaadachi-gun, Saitama 362-0806, Japan.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor.
We previously showed that AhR localizes predominantly in the cytoplasm under high
cell densities of a keratinocytes cell line, HaCaT, but accumulates in the
nucleus at low cell densities. In the current report, we show that the Slug,
which is a member of the snail/slug family of zinc finger transcriptional
repressors critical for induction of epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMT), is
activated transcriptionally in accordance with nuclear accumulation of AhR. By
reporter assay of the promoter of the Slug gene, gel shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses showed AhR directly binds to xenobiotic responsive
element 5 at -0.7 kb of the gene. AhR-targeted gene silencing by small
interfering RNA duplexes led to the abolishment of not only CYP1A1 but also Slug 
induction by 3-methycholanthrene. The Slug was co-localized to the AhR at the
wound margins of HaCaT cells, where apparent nuclear distribution of AhR and Slug
was observed. The induced Slug was associated with reduction of an epithelial
marker of cytokeratin-18 and with an increase in the mesenchymal marker,
fibronectin. Taken together, these findings suggest that AhR participated in Slug
induction, which, in turn, regulates cellular physiology including cell adhesion 
and migration.

PMID: 16952353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Hepatology. 2006 Sep;44(3):550-60.

Disruption of the Arnt gene in endothelial cells causes hepatic vascular defects 
and partial embryonic lethality in mice.

Yim SH(1), Shah Y, Tomita S, Morris HD, Gavrilova O, Lambert G, Ward JM, Gonzalez
FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Vascular endothelial cells (ECs) play a critical role in angiogenesis and
organogenesis, especially in embryonic liver development. Hypoxia-inducible
transcription factors (Hifs) are a key trigger of hypoxic signals, a primary
stimulus of angiogenesis. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(Arnt), also called Hif-1beta, serves as an obligate heterodimerization partner
of Hif-1alpha and Hif-2alpha. Using Cre-Lox technology, the mouse Arnt gene was
specifically disrupted in endothelial cells. The resulting mice, designated
ArntDeltaEC, developed impaired hepatic vasculature, liver necrosis, and
degenerative lesions in cardiac myocytes at the late embryonic stage
(E16.5-E18.5), leading to approximately 90% neonatal lethality. Low serum
glucose, downregulation of glucose transporter-1 and glucose-6-phosphatase mRNA, 
and hepatocyte proliferation were observed in ArntDeltaEC embryos. Magnetic
resonance imaging on E16.5 embryonic livers revealed that ArntDeltaEC mice had a 
significant volume of avascular region. ArntDeltaEC mice that survived to the
adult stage were fertile, showed normal behavioral activity, but had smaller
livers with mild portal fibrosis, dilated blood vessels, abnormal collagen
accumulation, and remarkable iron deposition. ArntDeltaEC mice had reduced
adiposity, impaired serum lipid homeostasis, and a higher respiratory exchange
ratio, indicating they utilized relatively more carbohydrates than their ArntF/F 
counterparts. In conclusion, endothelial Arnt plays a pivotal role in embryonic
liver development. Adult ArntDeltaEC mice carrying embryonic hepatic defects
developed what was possibly an early stage of cirrhosis with consequences of
limited oxygen availability and altered lipid metabolism.

PMCID: PMC1559728
PMID: 16941684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Reproduction. 2006 Sep;132(3):379-92.

Circadian rhythms and reproduction.

Boden MJ(1), Kennaway DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Reproductive Health, Discipline of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia.

There is a growing recognition that the circadian timing system, in particular
recently discovered clock genes, plays a major role in a wide range of
physiological systems. Microarray studies, for example, have shown that the
expression of hundreds of genes changes many fold in the suprachiasmatic nucleus,
liver heart and kidney. In this review, we discuss the role of circadian
rhythmicity in the control of reproductive function in animals and humans.
Circadian rhythms and clock genes appear to be involved in optimal reproductive
performance, but there are sufficient redundancies in their function that many of
the knockout mice produced do not show overt reproductive failure. Furthermore,
important strain differences have emerged from the studies especially between the
various Clock (Circadian Locomotor Output Cycle Kaput) mutant strains.
Nevertheless, there is emerging evidence that the primary clock genes, Clock and 
Bmal1 (Brain and Muscle ARNT-like protein 1, also known as Mop3), strongly
influence reproductive competency. The extent to which the circadian timing
system affects human reproductive performance is not known, in part, because many
of the appropriate studies have not been done. With the role of Clock and Bmal1
in fertility becoming clearer, it may be time to pursue the effect of
polymorphisms in these genes in relation to the various types of infertility in
humans.

PMID: 16940279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Toxicol Sci. 2006 Nov;94(1):175-82. Epub 2006 Aug 25.

Blocking expression of AHR2 and ARNT1 in zebrafish larvae protects against
cardiac toxicity of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Antkiewicz DS(1), Peterson RE, Heideman W.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Center, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

The zebrafish (Danio rerio) has become an attractive vertebrate model for
studying developmental processes, and is emerging as a model system for studying 
the mechanisms by which xenobiotic compounds perturb normal development. Embryos 
treated with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) shortly after
fertilization exhibit a range of adverse effects on the heart: an early reduction
in cardiac myocyte number, followed by a change in heart looping and morphology, 
with an apparent compaction of the ventricle and overall decrease in heart size. 
These changes are accompanied by impaired cardiac function including a decrease
in cardiac output and eventually irreversible ventricular standstill. The
mechanisms involved in mediating effects of TCDD on the heart remain unknown.
However, it is widely accepted that aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) activation
mediates endpoints of TCDD toxicity in vertebrates. In zebrafish, there are
multiple forms of AHR and AHR nuclear translocator protein (ARNT) raising the
question about whether different endpoints of TCDD toxicity are mediated by
different components of the AHR/ARNT pathway. To address this question we used
morpholino oligonucleotide technology to specifically block the expression of
zfAHR2, zfARNT1, zfARNT2, and zfCYP1A, and assessed the previously described
effects of TCDD on heart morphology, size, and function in the developing
morphants. We report that blocking zfAHR2 and zfARNT1 expression provided
protection against the TCDD-mediated alteration in heart morphology, reduced
cardiac myocyte number, decreased cardiac output and ventricular standstill in
zebrafish larvae, while the zfarnt2 and zfcyp1a morpholinos did not block the
TCDD-induced cardiac toxicity.

PMID: 16936225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Oct;5(10):1320-6. Epub 2006 Oct 4.

Regulation of the chemokine receptor CXCR4 and metastasis by hypoxia-inducible
factor in non small cell lung cancer cell lines.

Liu YL(1), Yu JM, Song XR, Wang XW, Xing LG, Gao BB.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Radiotherapy Department, Shandong Tumor Hospital and
Institute, Jinan, Shandong Province, China.

Hypoxia promotes metastatic potential of tumor cells by largely unknown
mechanisms. Hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) is a heterodimeric transcription
factor consisting of alpha and beta (ARNT) subunits and plays an important role
in tumor microenvironment. CXCR4 is a cell surface receptor that has been shown
to mediate the metastasis of various tumors. CXCR4 induction by hypoxia is
dependent on both activation of HIF and transcript stabilization. To investigate 
the mechanisms involved in hypoxia-induced metastasis and hypoxia-mediated
chemokine receptor CXCR4 expression, we used lentiviral vector mediated RNA
interfering (RNAi) to knock down expression of HIF-1alpha or HIF-2alpha in two
NSCLC cell lines to investigate HIF-dependent invasion, migration and adhesion.
Here we show that: (1) hypoxia is an important factor in regulating CXCR4
mediated metastasis and the cells exhibited reducing invasion, adhesion and
migration in response to CXCL12 after knocking down HIF. (2) HIF-1alpha and
HIF-2alpha are essential for hypoxic cellular response to cancer invasion and
adhesion through upregulation of CXCR4. HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha are playing
important roles in tumor metastasis, which may offer for future intervention
strategies. We also show that the lentivirus mediated RNAi technology is very
effective on knocking down gene expression.

PMID: 16929169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Immunology. 2006 Dec;119(4):451-60. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

MOP3, a component of the molecular clock, regulates the development of B cells.

Sun Y(1), Yang Z, Niu Z, Peng J, Li Q, Xiong W, Langnas AN, Ma MY, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

Differentiation and proliferation of haematopoietic progenitor cells occur in
intimate contact with the bone marrow microenvironment which is composed of
stromal cells and extracellular matrix proteins. MOP3 (also known as brain and
muscle Arnt-like protein-1, BMAL1), a master regulator of circadian rhythm, plays
important roles in the regulation of cell differentiation and general physical
functions. In the present studies, MOP3-deficient mice had significantly reduced 
levels of B cells in the peripheral blood, spleen and bone marrow compared
MOP3(+/-) or MOP3(+/+) littermates. Flow cytometry analysis showed the levels of 
pre-B cells in bone marrow of MOP3(-/-) mice were similar as that in control
mice. Adoptive transfer of MOP3(-/-) bone marrow cells (BMC) to lethally
irradiated BALB/c Rag2(-/-) recipients, normal T and B cell development was
observed, whereas Adoptive transfer of BALB/c BMC to lethally irradiated
MOP3(-/-) recipients, B-cell development was significantly impaired. These
results presented herein with MOP3-deficient mice reveal the involvement of MOP3 
in the development of B cells, but not other immune cells. The effect of MOP3 on 
the differentiation of pre-B cells to mature B cells might be mediated by the
bone marrow microenvironment. This study also showed a connection between a
master regular of circadian rhythm with B-cell development in mice.

PMCID: PMC2265824
PMID: 16925591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Dev Biol. 2006 Oct 15;298(2):606-15. Epub 2006 Jul 21.

The Caenorhabditis elegans AHR-1 transcription complex controls expression of
soluble guanylate cyclase genes in the URX neurons and regulates aggregation
behavior.

Qin H(1), Zhai Z, Powell-Coffman JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Development, and Cell Biology, 2108 Molecular Biology 
Building, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011-3260, USA.

C. elegans ahr-1 is orthologous to the mammalian aryl hydrocarbon receptor, and
it functions as a transcription factor to regulate the development of certain
neurons. Here, we describe the role of ahr-1 in a specific behavior: the
aggregation of C. elegans on lawns of bacterial food. This behavior is modulated 
by nutritional cues and ambient oxygen levels, and aggregation is inhibited by
the npr-1 G protein-coupled neuropeptide receptor gene. Loss-of-function
mutations in ahr-1 or its transcription partner aha-1 (ARNT) suppress aggregation
behavior in npr-1-deficient animals. This behavioral defect is not irreparable.
Aggregation behavior can be restored to ahr-1-deficient animals by heat-shock
induction of ahr-1 transcription several hours after ahr-1-expressing neurons
have normally differentiated. We show that ahr-1 and aha-1 promote
cell-type-specific expression of soluble guanylate cyclase genes that have key
roles in aggregation behavior and hyperoxia avoidance. Aggregation behavior can
be partially restored to ahr-1 mutant animals by expression of ahr-1 in only 4
neurons, including URXR and URXL. We conclude that the AHR-1:AHA-1 transcription 
complex regulates the expression of soluble guanylate cyclase genes and other
unidentified genes that are essential for acute regulation of aggregation
behavior.

PMID: 16919260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Exp Zool A Comp Exp Biol. 2006 Sep 1;305(9):693-706.

Unexpected diversity of aryl hydrocarbon receptors in non-mammalian vertebrates: 
insights from comparative genomics.

Hahn ME(1), Karchner SI, Evans BR, Franks DG, Merson RR, Lapseritis JM.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole,
Massachusetts, USA. mhahn@whoi.edu

Ligand-activated receptors are well-known targets of environmental chemicals that
disrupt endocrine signaling. Genomic approaches are providing new opportunities
to understand the comparative biology and molecular evolution of these receptors.
One example of this is the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), a
basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) transcription factor through
which planar aromatic hydrocarbons cause altered gene expression and toxicity. In
contrast to humans and other mammals, which possess a single AHR, teleosts such
as the Atlantic killifish (Fundulus heteroclitus) have at least two AHRs (AHR1
and AHR2). Analysis of sequenced genomes has revealed additional, unexpected AHR 
diversity in non-mammalian vertebrates, including the chicken Gallus gallus
(three predicted AHR genes), bony fishes such as the pufferfish Takifugu
(formerly Fugu) rubripes (five AHR genes) and zebrafish Danio rerio (three AHR
genes), and cartilaginous fishes such as the spiny dogfish Squalus acanthias
(three AHR genes). In contrast, invertebrates appear to possess single AHRs that 
do not bind typical ligands of vertebrate AHRs. We suggest that AHR diversity in 
vertebrates arose through both gene and whole-genome duplications combined with
lineage-specific gene loss, and that sensitivity to the developmental toxicity of
planar aromatic hydrocarbons may have had its origin in the evolution of the
ligand-binding capacity of the AHR in the chordate lineage. Comparative molecular
and genomic studies are providing new insights into AHR diversity and function in
non-mammalian species, revealing additional complexity in mechanisms by which
environmental chemicals interfere with receptor-dependent signaling.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16902966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Sep 15;15(18):2732-42. Epub 2006 Aug 7.

Identification of the transcription factor ARNTL2 as a candidate gene for the
type 1 diabetes locus Idd6.

Hung MS(1), Avner P, Rogner UC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique Moléculaire Murine CNRS URA 2578, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 
France.

The Idd6 murine type 1 diabetes locus has been shown to control diabetes by
regulating the protective activity of the peripheral immune system, as
demonstrated by diabetes transfer assays using splenocytes. The analysis of three
novel subcongenic (NOD.C3H nonobese. C3H) diabetes strains has confirmed the
presence of at least two diabetes-related genes within the 5.8 Mb Idd6 interval
with the disease protection conferred by splenocyte co-transfer being located to 
the 700 kb Idd6.3 subregion. This subinterval contains the circadian
rhythm-related transcription factor Arntl2 (Bmal2), a homologue of the type 2
diabetes-associated ARNT (HIF1beta) gene. Arntl2 exhibited a six-fold
upregulation in spleens of the NOD.C3H 6.VIII congenic strain compared with the
NOD control strain, strain-specific splice variants and a large number of
polymorphisms in both coding and non-coding regions. Arntl2 upregulation was not 
associated with changes in the expression levels of other circadian genes in the 
spleen, but did correlate with the upregulation of the ARNT-binding motif
containing Pla2g4a gene, which has recently been described as being protective
for the progression of insulitis and autoimmune diabetes in the NOD mouse via
regulation of the tumour necrosis factor-alpha pathway. Our studies strongly
suggest that the HIFbeta-homologous Arntl2 gene is involved in the control of
type 1 diabetes.

PMID: 16893914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Mol Biol. 2006 Sep 8;362(1):123-39. Epub 2006 Jul 15.

The signaling pathway in histidine kinase and the response regulator complex
revealed by X-ray crystallography and solution scattering.

Yamada S(1), Akiyama S, Sugimoto H, Kumita H, Ito K, Fujisawa T, Nakamura H,
Shiro Y.

Author information: 
(1)Biometal Science Laboratory, RIKEN SPring-8 Center, Harima Institute, Hyogo
679-5148, Japan.

The structure of a histidine kinase (ThkA) complexed with a response regulator
(TrrA) in the two-component regulatory system from hyperthermophile Thermotoga
maritima was determined by a combination of X-ray crystallography at a resolution
of 4.2 A and small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). The boundary of the three
component domains (PAS-sensor, dimerization and catalytic domains) of ThkA and
the bound TrrA molecule were unambiguously assigned in the electron density map
at 4.2 A resolution. ThkA forms a dimer with crystallographic 2-fold symmetry and
two monomeric TrrAs bind to the ThkA dimer. SAXS experiments also confirmed this 
association state in solution and specific binding between ThkA and TrrA
(Kd=8.2x10(-11) M(-2)). The association interface between ThkA and TrrA contains 
the phosphotransfer His residue in the ThkA, indicative of an efficient receipt
of the phosphoryl group. One Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain does not interact with the
other PAS domain, but with the catalytic domain of the same polypeptide chain and
with one TrrA molecule. Observed inter-domain and inter-molecular interactions
reveal a definite pathway of signal transduction in the kinase/regulator complex.
In addition, we propose a responsible role of TrrA for the feedback regulation of
sensing and/or kinase activities of ThkA.

PMID: 16890956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Mol Pharmacol. 2006 Nov;70(5):1664-71. Epub 2006 Jul 31.

Curcumin inhibits hypoxia-inducible factor-1 by degrading aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator: a mechanism of tumor growth inhibition.

Choi H(1), Chun YS, Kim SW, Kim MS, Park JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 28 
Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu, Seoul 110-799, Korea.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), a transcription factor composed of HIF-1alpha
and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), plays a key role in
cell survival and angiogenesis in hypoxic tumors, and many efforts have been made
to develop anticancer agents that target HIF-1alpha. However, although ARNT is
also required for HIF-1 activity, ARNT has been disregarded as a therapeutic
target. Curcumin is a commonly used spice and coloring agent with a variety of
beneficial biological effects, which include tumor inhibition. In the present
study, we tested the possibility that curcumin inhibits tumor growth by targeting
HIF-1. The effects of curcumin on HIF-1 activity and expression were examined in 
cancer cell lines and in xenografted tumors. We found that curcumin inhibits
HIF-1 activity and that this in turn down-regulates genes targeted by HIF-1.
Moreover, of the two HIF-1 subunits, only ARNT was found to be destabilized by
curcumin in several cancer cell types, and furthermore, ARNT expression rescued
HIF-1 repression by curcumin. We also found that curcumin stimulated the
proteasomal degradation of ARNT via oxidation and ubiquitination processes. In
mice bearing Hep3B hepatoma, curcumin retarded tumor growth and suppressed ARNT, 
erythropoietin, and vascular endothelial growth factor in tumors. These results
suggest that the anticancer activity of curcumin is attributable to HIF-1
inactivation by ARNT degradation.

PMID: 16880289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Oncogene. 2007 Jan 25;26(4):604-9. Epub 2006 Aug 21.

HIF-1alpha and EPAS ubiquitination mediated by the VHL tumour suppressor involves
flexibility in the ubiquitination mechanism, similar to other RING E3 ligases.

Paltoglou S(1), Roberts BJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical, Molecular and Biomedical Sciences, University of
South Australia, Adelaide, Australia.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) degradation under normoxia is
critical to modulating vascular growth. This degradation is mediated during
normoxia by the von Hippel-Lindau tumour suppressor protein (VHL)-E3 ubiquitin
ligase in partnership with the E2 enzyme UbcH5. In current models of the
functionally similar Skp1, cullin, F-box (SCF)-E3 ligase, the E3 binds the target
protein and the E2 catalyses ubiquitin transfer to lysines in an appropriately
positioned domain. In the present study, we report that for efficient
ubiquitination of HIF-1alpha to occur, three conserved lysines are required in
both the HIF-1alpha and endothelial Per-ARNT-Sim domain protein (EPAS) sequences.
The site of ubiquitin attachment via UbcH5 was mapped, and is shown to involve
three HIF-1alpha lysines, K532, K538 and K547, and the same aligned lysines in
EPAS. Only one of these lysines need to be intact for full ubiquitination to
occur, analogous to the mechanism of Sic1 ubiquitination by the SCF/Cdc34 complex
and further strengthening the functional link between the VHL and SCF-E3
ubiquitin ligases. We also report that lysines can be moved around the HIF-1alpha
sequence with only minor losses in ubiquitination efficiency, thus suggesting
HIF-1alpha and EPAS regulation by hypoxia depends primarily on an interaction
with VHL per se, rather than the highly specific positioning of flanking lysine
acceptors.

PMID: 16862177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Cell Cycle. 2006 Aug;5(16):1847-53. Epub 2006 Aug 15.

Targeting the PAS-A domain of HIF-1alpha for development of small molecule
inhibitors of HIF-1.

Park EJ(1), Kong D, Fisher R, Cardellina J, Shoemaker RH, Melillo G.

Author information: 
(1)Science Applications International Corporation, Frederick, Inc., National
Cancer Institute at Frederick, Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

Hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a master regulator of cellular adaptation
to oxygen deprivation and activates transcription of genes involved in tumor
metabolism, angiogenesis, invasion and metastasis, all of which are implicated in
cancer progression. Several domains of HIF-1alpha mediate protein-protein
interaction, which is essential for the formation of the active heterodimer with 
HIF-1beta. Targeting specific domains of HIF-1alpha might lead to the
identification of more selective inhibitors. HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta contain two
Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domains, A and B, both of which appear to be important for
heterodimer formation. In an attempt to identify small molecule inhibitors of the
PAS-A domain of HIF-1 we expressed proteins containing amino acids 86-165 of
HIF-1alpha and amino acids 159-240 of HIF-1beta fused to a His or FLAG tag,
respectively. Expressed proteins retained functional activity as indicated by in 
vitro immunoprecipitation experiments and activation of luciferase expression in 
a mammalian two-hybrid system. Interestingly, over-expression of HIF-1alpha-PAS-A
domain was sufficient to abrogate hypoxic induction of HIF-1-dependent luciferase
expression, supporting its potential role as drug target. An ELISA based on the
interaction between FLAG-HIF-1beta-PAS-A and HIF-1alpha-PAS-A-His was developed
and used to screen libraries of synthetic compounds. NSC 50352 specifically
inhibited PAS-A-dependent interaction between HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta, but not
the interaction mediated by unrelated domains. However, NSC 50352 was devoid of
activity in cell-based assays. Our results provide proof-of-principle that the
PAS-A domain of HIF-1alpha is a valid target for development of small molecule
inhibitors.

PMID: 16861921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Eur J Pharmacol. 2006 Aug 21;544(1-3):69-76. Epub 2006 Jun 28.

Classical as well as novel antipsychotic drugs increase self-stimulation
threshold in the rat--similar mechanism of action?

Flagstad P(1), Arnt J, Olsen CK.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lundbeck A/S, Ottiliavej 9, DK-2500 Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.
PFLA@Lundbeck.com

Antipsychotic drugs given acutely increase the threshold for intracranial
self-stimulation elicited from the ventral tegmental area. As all the
antipsychotic drugs share the dopamine D2-receptor antagonism it is reasonable to
believe that this is the cause for suppression of intracranial self-stimulation
behaviour. The objective of this investigation was to examine the effect of
classical (haloperidol) as well as novel antipsychotic drugs (clozapine,
olanzapine and sertindole) on intracranial self-stimulation behaviour.
Furthermore, the effects of different specific receptor antagonists on
intracranial self-stimulation behaviour were examined. Our results showed that
both the classical (haloperidol) and the three novel antipsychotic drugs increase
the threshold for intracranial self-stimulation. The results obtained with the
receptor specific antagonists showed that dopamine D2, alpha1-adrenoceptor and
serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonisms inhibit intracranial self-stimulation
behaviour and that muscarinic receptor antagonism is without effect. Even though 
all the tested antipsychotic drugs inhibited intracranial self-stimulation
behaviour, there seems to be a difference in their ratio between doses that
inhibits intracranial self-stimulation behaviour and those that produce
antipsychotic effect in a preclinical model (amphetamine hyperactivity).
Sertindole was the only antipsychotic drug able to produce antipsychotic effect
without significant inhibition of intracranial self-stimulation behaviour at a
narrow dose interval. The remaining antipsychotic drugs all inhibited
intracranial self-stimulation behaviour at equal or lower doses than those
producing antipsychotic effect.

PMID: 16860313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Aug 1;103(31):11561-6. Epub 2006 Jul 19.

Single-molecule detection of structural changes during Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain 
activation.

Zhao JM(1), Lee H, Nome RA, Majid S, Scherer NF, Hoff WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain is a ubiquitous protein module with a common
three-dimensional fold involved in a wide range of regulatory and sensory
functions in all domains of life. The activation of these functions is thought to
involve partial unfolding of N- or C-terminal helices attached to the PAS domain.
Here we use atomic force microscopy to probe receptor activation in single
molecules of photoactive yellow protein (PYP), a prototype of the PAS domain
family. Mechanical unfolding of Cys-linked PYP multimers in the presence and
absence of illumination reveals that, in contrast to previous studies, the PAS
domain itself is extended by approximately 3 nm (at the 10-pN detection limit of 
the measurement) and destabilized by approximately 30% in the light-activated
state of PYP. Comparative measurements and steered molecular dynamics simulations
of two double-Cys PYP mutants that probe different regions of the PAS domain
quantify the anisotropy in stability and changes in local structure, thereby
demonstrating the partial unfolding of their PAS domain upon activation. These
results establish a generally applicable single-molecule approach for mapping
functional conformational changes to selected regions of a protein. In addition, 
the results have profound implications for the molecular mechanism of PAS domain 
activation and indicate that stimulus-induced partial protein unfolding can be
used as a signaling mechanism.

PMCID: PMC1544209
PMID: 16855050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Genes Dev. 2006 Jul 15;20(14):1868-73.

Early aging and age-related pathologies in mice deficient in BMAL1, the core
componentof the circadian clock.

Kondratov RV(1), Kondratova AA, Gorbacheva VY, Vykhovanets OV, Antoch MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Ohio 44195, USA. kondrar@ccf.org

Mice deficient in the circadian transcription factor BMAL1 (brain and muscle
ARNT-like protein) have impaired circadian behavior and demonstrate loss of
rhythmicity in the expression of target genes. Here we report that Bmal1(-/-)
mice have reduced lifespans and display various symptoms of premature aging
including sarcopenia, cataracts, less subcutaneous fat, organ shrinkage, and
others. The early aging phenotype correlates with increased levels of reactive
oxygen species in some tissues of the Bmal1(-/- )animals. These findings,
together with data on CLOCK/BMAL1-dependent control of stress responses, may
provide a mechanistic explanation for the early onset of age-related pathologies 
in the absence of BMAL1.

PMCID: PMC1522083
PMID: 16847346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Cardiovasc Hematol Agents Med Chem. 2006 Jul;4(3):189-97.

Cytokines and hormones in the regulation of hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha
(HIF-1alpha).

Zhou J(1), Brüne B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry I, University of Frankfurt Medical School,
Frankfurt, Germany.

Hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a central component of the oxygen sensing
system that coordinates cellular responses to conditions of decreased oxygen
availability. The hypoxia inducible transcription factor HIF-1 is a heterodimer
composed of the helix-loop-helix-Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS) proteins HIF-1alpha and 
the aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT) also known as HIF-1beta.
Transactivation of HIF-1 transmits a hypoxic signal into patho-physiological
responses such as angiogenesis, erythropoiesis, vasomotor control, an altered
energy metabolism, as well as cell survival decisions by regulating a staidly
growing number of target genes. Among recent advances are the discoveries that
cytokines and growth factors make use of the 'hypoxic signaling system' under
normoxia. Here we summarize current knowledge and existing concepts that help to 
understand how cytokines and hormones affect protein accumulation of HIF-1alpha
and discuss potential implications of activating HIF-1 under normoxia.
Considering the fundamental role of cytokines during inflammation may predict a
role of HIF-1alpha in coordinating cellular responses to pathogens and point to
the connection of cancer and inflammation. Moreover, we will address potential
feed-back mechanisms showing an impact of HIF-1 on cytokine production. These
considerations suggest an intimate signaling cross-talk between cytokines and the
HIF-1 system.

PMID: 16842205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Dev Cell. 2006 Jul;11(1):81-92.

HIF-dependent hematopoietic factors regulate the development of the embryonic
vasculature.

Ramírez-Bergeron DL(1), Runge A, Adelman DM, Gohil M, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) regulate adaptive responses to changes in oxygen
(O(2)) tension during embryogenesis, tissue ischemia, and tumorigenesis. Because 
HIF-deficient embryos exhibit a number of developmental defects, the precise role
of HIF in early vascular morphogenesis has been uncertain. Using para-aortic
splanchnopleural (P-Sp) explant cultures, we show that deletion of the HIF-beta
subunit (ARNT) results in defective hematopoiesis and the inhibition of both
vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. These defects are rescued upon the addition of
wild-type Sca-1(+) hematopoietic cells or recombinant VEGF. Arnt(-/-) embryos
exhibit reduced levels of VEGF protein and increased numbers of apoptotic
hematopoietic cells. These results suggest that HIF coordinates early endothelial
cell emergence and vessel development by promoting hematopoietic cell survival
and paracrine growth factor production.

PMCID: PMC3145415
PMID: 16824955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Aug;18(2):339-46.

Suppression of hepatocyte CYP1A2 expression by Kupffer cells via AhR pathway: the
central role of proinflammatory cytokines.

Wu R(1), Cui X, Dong W, Zhou M, Simms HH, Wang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, North Shore University Hospital, Long Island Jewish
Medical Center, Manhasset, NY 11030, USA.

The hepatic cytochrome P-450 (CYP) enzyme system provides a major aspect of liver
function, yet alterations of CYP in sepsis remain largely unknown. Although we
have recently shown that CYP1A2, one of the major isoforms of CYP in rats, is
downregulated in sepsis, the underlying mechanism and possible therapeutic
approaches warrant further investigation. The aim of this study was to determine 
whether Kupffer cells (KCs) play any role in suppressing CYP1A2 in the
hepatocytes (HCs) and if so, how to modulate CYP1A2 expression in sepsis. To
study this, primary KCs and HCs were cultured separately or together with or
without transwells. Cells and supernatant samples were collected after various
stimulations. Additionally, polymicrobial sepsis was induced in rats by cecal
ligation and puncture (CLP) with or without curcumin pretreatment. Liver samples 
were harvested 20 h post-CLP. The results show that lipopolysaccharide (LPS) did 
not suppress CYP1A2 in HC or HC/KC coculture with transwells. However, LPS
downregulated CYP1A2, aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR, a nuclear receptor) and AhR
nuclear translocator (Arnt) in coculture without transwells. Anti-TNF-alpha and
anti-IL-1beta antibodies attenuated this downregulation. Moreover, elevated
hepatic levels of TNF-alpha and IL-1beta post-CLP were decreased by curcumin
pre-treatment. This reduction was associated with increased expression of AhR and
CYP1A2. These results indicate that KCs-derived proinflammatory cytokines may
play an important role in downregulating CYP1A2 in sepsis. The reduction of
AhR/Arnt may be the underlying mechanism for such downregulation. Inhibition of
proinflammatory cytokines by curcumin may provide a novel approach to modulate
the hepatic CYP function in sepsis.

PMID: 16820944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Neurosci. 2006 Jun 28;26(26):7116-20.

Adenoviral-mediated modulation of Sim1 expression in the paraventricular nucleus 
affects food intake.

Yang C(1), Gagnon D, Vachon P, Tremblay A, Levy E, Massie B, Michaud JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche, Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1C5.

Haploinsufficency of Sim1, which codes for a basic helix-loop-helix-PAS
(PER-ARNT-SIM) transcription factor, causes hyperphagia in mice and humans,
without decrease in energy expenditure. Sim1 is expressed in several areas of the
brain, including the developing and postnatal paraventricular nucleus (PVN), a
region of the hypothalamus that controls food intake. We have previously found
that the number of PVN cells is decreased in Sim1+/- mice, suggesting that their 
hyperphagia is caused by a developmental mechanism. However, the possibility that
Sim1 functions in the postnatal PVN to control food intake cannot be ruled out.
To explore this hypothesis, we used adenoviral vectors to modulate Sim1
expression in the postnatal PVN of wild-type mice. Unilateral stereotaxic
injection into the PVN of an adenoviral vector producing a short hairpin RNA
directed against Sim1 resulted in a significant increase in food intake, which
peaked to 22% 6 d after the procedure, compared with the injection of a control
virus. In contrast, injection of an adenovirus that expresses Sim1 induced a
decrease in food intake that was maximal on the seventh day after the procedure, 
reaching 20%. The impact of bilateral injections of these vectors into the PVN
was not greater than that of unilateral injections. Together, these results
strongly suggest that Sim1 functions along a physiological pathway to control
food intake.

PMID: 16807340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Eur J Pharmacol. 2006 Aug 7;542(1-3):108-15. Epub 2006 May 20.

Sertindole, in contrast to clozapine and olanzapine, does not disrupt water maze 
performance after acute or chronic treatment.

Didriksen M(1), Kreilgaard M, Arnt J.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Target Research, H. Lundbeck A/S Ottiliavej 9, 2500 Valby,
Denmark. ndi@lundbeck.com

Cognitive deficits in schizophrenia are associated with poor functional outcome, 
and may be further aggravated by treatment with antipsychotics. In the present
study the acute and chronic (3 weeks of treatment) effects of clozapine,
olanzapine, and sertindole on performance in the Morris water maze in rats was
compared, using pharmacologically and/or clinically relevant dose regimens. An
experimental design consisting of three trials/day over 3 days was used.
Performance was expressed as the distance and latency to find a submerged
platform, as well as the percentage of "non-finders", i.e. percentage of trials
where the rat was unable to find the platform within the total trial time of 60
s. Clozapine (40 mg/kg, p.o.) and olanzapine (2.5 mg/kg, s.c.) impaired water
maze performance when given acutely. However, tolerance developed to the deficit 
induced by clozapine, whereas the olanzapine-mediated impairment was enhanced
after chronic treatment. Sertindole (2.5 mg/kg, p.o.) had no disruptive effect on
performance after either acute or chronic treatment. Exposure measurements
confirmed that all three compounds were present in the serum at least at
clinically effective concentrations. Thus, the three antipsychotics tested
differentially affected rodent cognition, whereby sertindole appeared to have a
lower potential than either clozapine or olanzapine to induce cognitive
impairment. The hypothesis that the low potency of sertindole in inducing
dopamine D2 receptor blockade, combined with lack of antimuscarinic and histamine
H1 antagonist activity in vivo is discussed. Clearly further studies are needed
to assess the potential cognition-enhancing effects of sertindole vs. other
antipsychotics in a relevant animal model of schizophrenia.

PMID: 16806167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Aug 11;346(4):1289-96. Epub 2006 Jun 16.

Reconstitution of human hypoxia inducible factor HIF-1 in yeast: a simple in vivo
system to identify and characterize HIF-1alpha effectors.

Braliou GG(1), Venieris E, Kalousi A, Simos G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Thessaly, 41222 
Larissa, Greece.

Hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), the master regulator of hypoxia-activated
genes, is involved in many diseases and is a valid drug target. In order to
develop a simple and genetically tractable in vivo system for HIF-1 analysis, we 
tested the inducible expression of both human HIF-1 subunits (HIF-1alpha and
ARNT) in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and showed the formation of
transcriptionally active HIF-1. The use of this system for the identification and
characterization of HIF-1 effectors was first validated by showing that two
chemical Hsp90 inhibitors, geldanamycin and radicicol, impaired the activity of
HIF-1 in yeast. By applying this system in mutant yeast strains, we then
identified Hsp90 co-chaperones, which were required for HIF-1 activity.
Furthermore, using yeast strains co-expressing truncated forms of HIF-1alpha with
ARNT or both HIF-1alpha and ARNT, we characterized fragments of HIF-1alpha that
acted as dominant negative mutants and suppressed HIF-1 activity.

PMID: 16806077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. FASEB J. 2005 Sep;19(11):1396-406.

Human HIF-3alpha4 is a dominant-negative regulator of HIF-1 and is down-regulated
in renal cell carcinoma.

Maynard MA(1), Evans AJ, Hosomi T, Hara S, Jewett MA, Ohh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

A universal response to changes in cellular oxygen tension is governed by a
family of heterodimeric transcription factors called hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF). Tumor hypoxia, as well as various cancer-causing mutations, has been shown
to elevate the level of HIF-1alpha, signifying a critical role of the HIF pathway
in cancer development. The recently identified third member of the human
HIF-alpha family, HIF-3alpha, produces multiple splice variants that contain
extra DNA binding elements and protein-protein interaction motifs not found in
HIF-1alpha or HIF-2alpha. Here we report the molecular cloning of the
alternatively spliced human HIF-3alpha variant HIF-3alpha4 and show that it
attenuates the ability of HIF-1 to bind hypoxia-responsive elements located
within the enhancer/promoter of HIF target genes. The overexpression of
HIF-3alpha4 suppresses the transcriptional activity of HIF-1 and siRNA-mediated
knockdown of the endogenous HIF-3alpha4 increases transcription by
hypoxia-inducible genes. HIF-3alpha4 itself is oxygen-regulated, suggesting a
novel feedback mechanism of controlling HIF-1 activity. Furthermore, the
expression of HIF-3alpha4 is dramatically down-regulated in the majority of
primary renal carcinomas. These results demonstrate an important
dominant-negative regulation of HIF-1-mediated gene transcription by HIF-3alpha4 
in vivo and underscore its potential significance in renal epithelial
oncogenesis.

PMID: 16126907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Aug 15;11(16):5793-801.

Cytochrome P450 1B1 is overexpressed and regulated by hypomethylation in prostate
cancer.

Tokizane T(1), Shiina H, Igawa M, Enokida H, Urakami S, Kawakami T, Ogishima T,
Okino ST, Li LC, Tanaka Y, Nonomura N, Okuyama A, Dahiya R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center and University of
California, San Francisco, California 94121, USA.

PURPOSE: Cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1), a dioxin inducible member of the CYP
supergene family, is overexpressed in various human malignancies including
prostate cancer. We hypothesized that promoter/enhancer CpG methylation
contributes to the regulation of CYP1B1 expression in human prostate tissue.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Expression and induction of the CYP1B1 gene in clinical
prostate tissues and prostate cancer cell lines were investigated. The
methylation status of the CYP1B1 gene was analyzed in 175 prostate cancer and 96 
benign prostatic hyperplasia samples using methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and
bisulfite-modified DNA sequencing. MSP primers covered dioxin response elements
(DRE) and Sp1 sites that are important for the expression of CYP1B1.
RESULTS: Expressions of CYP1B1 mRNA and protein were increased in prostate
cancer. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)/AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT)
heterodimer complex activates gene transcription by binding to the DREs of
CYP1B1. In prostate cancer cells, CYP1B1 mRNA was induced by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodigenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and/or demethylation agent
(5-aza-2-deoxycytidine). There was no change in the expressions of AhR and ARNT. 
Methylation of promoter/enhancer regions was significantly higher in benign
prostatic hyperplasia compared with prostate cancer. MSP-positive patients had
significantly lower risk for prostate cancer as compared with MSP-negative
patients. There was no correlation between CYP1B1 methylation status and
clinicopathologic features.
CONCLUSIONS: CYP1B1 is overexpressed in prostate cancer and regulated by
hypomethylation of its promoter/enhancer region. This is the first report about
CYP1B1 regulation in human clinical prostate samples showing that hypomethylation
of the CYP1B1 gene may play an important role in prostate cancer.

PMID: 16115918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2005 Jul;141(3):281-91.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) expression in
Baikal seal (Pusa sibirica) and association with 2,3,7,8-TCDD toxic equivalents
and CYP1 expression levels.

Kim EY(1), Iwata H, Suda T, Tanabe S, Amano M, Miyazaki N, Petrov EA.

Author information: 
(1)Ehime Prefectural Institute of Public Health and Environmental Science, 8-234 
Sanban-cho, Matsuyama 790-0003, Japan.

Most toxic effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related
planar halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (PHAHs) are mediated by ligand-activated
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) signaling pathway. To understand the regulation
mechanism of AHR and AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) expression in wild Baikal
seal (Pusa sibirica) population contaminated by PHAHs, the present study
investigated hepatic mRNA expression levels of AHR and its heterodimer, ARNT
genes, in association with biological index (age, gender and body weight), PHAH
accumulation and expression levels of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A and 1B. While
there was no gender difference, the AHR mRNA expression levels were increased
with ages (p = 0.014) and body weights (p = 0.015), indicating that AHR
expression might be affected by these biological factors. The AHR mRNA expression
levels exhibited significant positive correlations with total TEQs and most of
individual congener TEQs derived from polychorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins,
dibenzofurans and non-ortho coplanar polychorinated biphenyls (PCBs), indicating 
the transcriptional up-regulation of AHR expression by these congeners. On the
other hand, there was no significant correlation between individual TEQs from
mono-ortho coplanar PCBs and AHR expression. These results imply the
structure-related transcriptional activity of AHR among PHAHs congeners. AHR mRNA
levels showed positive correlations with both CYP1A protein (p = 0.039) and
CYP1A1 mRNA expression levels (p = 0.046). In contrast to AHR expression, neither
the total nor individual congener TEQs influenced ARNT at the transcriptional
level. ARNT mRNA showed significant negative correlations with CYP1A/1B protein
(p = 0.027 and p = 0.006) and CYP1A1 mRNA expression levels (p = 0.039), implying
the existence of different transcriptional regulation between AHR and ARNT genes 
and negative regulation by CYP1A/1B-mediated signaling pathways. The present
findings may render significant insight on the basic mechanisms underlying
regulation of AHR and ARNT expressions associated with biological factors and
PHAH exposure in wild mammalian populations.

PMID: 16111922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2005 Sep 1;441(1):84-95.

A novel Arnt-interacting protein Ainp2 enhances the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
signalling.

Li Y(1), Luu TC, Chan Wk.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, Thomas J. Long School of 
Pharmacy and Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, CA 95211, USA.

In an effort to better understand the Ah receptor nuclear translocator
(Arnt)-dependent signaling mechanisms, we employed a phage display system to
identify Arnt-interacting peptides. Human liver cDNA library was utilized to
screen for Arnt-interacting peptides using an Arnt construct fused to thioredoxin
(TH-ArntCDelta418). Two clones, namely Ainp1 and Ainp2 (Arnt-interacting
peptide), were identified and subsequently Ainp2 was further characterized. Ainp2
interacts with TH-ArntCDelta418 in the GST pull-down and mammalian two-hybrid
assays. Northern blot results revealed that Ainp2 is predominantly expressed in
human liver. The putative full-length Ainp2 cDNA sequence was subsequently cloned
using RACE PCR. Endogenous expression of Ainp2 was found in Jurkat cells at the
mRNA and protein levels. Results from the transient transfection studies using a 
DRE-driven reporter plasmid and the real-time QPCR experiments examining the
endogenous CYP1A1 expression showed that Ainp2 enhances the
3-methylchloranthrene-induced activity in HepG2 cells, suggesting that Ainp2
plays a role in the Arnt-dependent function

PMID: 16111650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Sci Aging Knowledge Environ. 2005 Aug 17;2005(33):nf65.

Beta testing.

Leslie M.

PMID: 16107658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Biochemistry. 2005 Aug 23;44(33):11148-59.

The transactivation domain of the Ah receptor is a key determinant of cellular
localization and ligand-independent nucleocytoplasmic shuttling properties.

Ramadoss P(1), Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, Department of Veterinary
Science, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, 
USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that regulates transcription of a number of target genes upon binding ligands
such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Large intra- and interspecies
variations exist with respect to sensitivity to TCDD, and this could, at least in
part, be due to a considerable variation in the AhR amino acid sequence between
species. The N-terminal half of the AhR is well-conserved across species, whereas
the C-terminal half exhibits a considerable degree of degeneracy. It has
previously been shown that there are differences between the mouse (mAhR) and
human AhR (hAhR) in terms of cellular localization, nucleocytoplasmic shuttling, 
the effect of chaperone proteins on these properties, and differences in relative
ligand affinity. In this study, two chimeras were generated such that each had
the N-terminal half of one receptor and the C-terminal half of the other
receptor. The C-terminal half of the receptor, containing the transactivation
domain, determines the cellular localization of the transiently transfected
receptor and regulates the ability of hepatitis B virus X-associated protein 2
(XAP2) to inhibit ligand-independent nuclear import of AhR. In addition, the
transactivation domain (TAD) appears to determine the presence of XAP2 in the
nuclear ligand-bound AhR/hsp90 complex prior to association with the AhR nuclear 
translocator protein (ARNT). However, the transactivation domain does not appear 
to play a role in determining relative ligand affinity of the receptor, and mAhR 
and hAhR have similar overall transactivation potential in a cell-based reporter 
system at a saturating dose of ligand. This study demonstrates for the first time
that the transactivation domain of the AhR influences important biochemical
properties of the N-terminal half of the AhR, and the degeneracy in the
transactivation domain between the mAhR and the hAhR results in species-specific 
differences in receptor properties.

PMID: 16101299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2005 Aug 11;125(15):2026-9.

[Skeletal tuberculosis--diagnostic challenges].

[Article in Norwegian]

Winsnes A(1), Refsum D, Kalager T, Iveland H, Solheim DM, Haakonsen M.

Author information: 
(1)Barneavdelingen Sykehuset Buskerud, 3004 Drammen. arnt.winsnes@sb-hf.no

BACKGROUND: Skeletal tuberculosis is rare in Norway. The diagnosis could be
difficult.
MATERIAL: A Somalian mother and three daughters and a Somalian girl in the
neighborhood developed skeletal tuberculosis 4-12 months after arrival in Norway.
RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION: All had pain as their main complaint. Skeletal
scintigraphy and MRI were decisive for demonstration of the infectious locus.
Three patients had spondylitis, two of them with serious abscesses. Other
localisations were the frontal bone, the humerus shaft, the femoral shaft, and
the calcaneus. Despite no signs or symptoms of lung tuberculosis, culture of
expectorate or bronchial lavage fluid yielded growth of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis in four patients. This demonstrates the importance of bronchial
material also in extrapulmonary tuberculosis.

PMID: 16100545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Gene. 2005 Sep 26;358:39-52.

Regulation of an insect cytochrome P450 monooxygenase gene (CYP6B1) by aryl
hydrocarbon and xanthotoxin response cascades.

Brown RP(1), McDonnell CM, Berenbaum MR, Schuler MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, 
IL 61801, USA.

Many organisms respond to toxic compounds in their environment by inducing
regulatory networks controlling the expression and activity of cytochrome P450
monooxygenase (P450s) detoxificative enzymes. In particular, black swallowtail
(Papilio polyxenes) caterpillars respond to xanthotoxin, a toxic phytochemical in
their hostplants, by activating transcription of the CYP6B1 promoter via several 
regions located within 150 nt of the transcription initiation site. One such
element is the xenobiotic response element to xanthotoxin (XRE-Xan) that lies
upstream of consensus XRE-AhR (xenobiotic response element to the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor) and OCT-1 (octamer-1 binding site) element known to be
utilized in mammalian aryl hydrocarbon response cascades. Two-plasmid
transfections conducted in Sf9 cells have indicated that XRE-Xan, XRE-AhR and a
number of other proximal elements, but not OCT-1, are critical for basal as well 
as xanthotoxin- and benzo[alpha]pyrene-induced transcription of the CYP6B1
promoter. Four-plasmid transfections with vectors co-expressing the spineless
(Ss) and tango (Tgo) proteins, the Drosophila melanogaster homologues of
mammalian AhR and ARNT, have indicated that these proteins enhance basal
expression of the CYP6B1 promoter but not the magnitude of its xanthotoxin and
benzo[alpha]pyrene induction. Based on these results, we propose that these
Drosophila transcription factors modulate basal expression of this promoter in a 
ligand-independent manner and attenuate its subsequent responses to planar aryl
hydrocarbons (benzo[alpha]pyrene) and allelochemicals (xanthotoxin).

PMID: 16099607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Cell Metab. 2005 Aug;2(2):78-80.

Diabetic pancreatic beta cells ARNT all they should be.

Levisetti MG(1), Polonsky KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine Washington University School of Medicine St.Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

A complex network of interacting transcription factors plays a critical role in
normal pancreatic beta cell function, with mutations in certain transcription
factor genes known to cause diabetes. In a recent issue of Cell, Gunton et
al.(2005) demonstrate a role for the transcription factor ARNT/HIF1beta
(hydrocarbon nuclear receptor translocator/hypoxia-inducible factor 1 beta) in
normal beta cell function. ARNT expression is reduced in diabetic human islets
and beta cell-specific ARNT knockout mice show the impaired glucose tolerance and
abnormal insulin secretion that are characteristic of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 16098823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Cell. 2005 Aug 12;122(3):337-49.

Loss of ARNT/HIF1beta mediates altered gene expression and pancreatic-islet
dysfunction in human type 2 diabetes.

Gunton JE(1), Kulkarni RN, Yim S, Okada T, Hawthorne WJ, Tseng YH, Roberson RS,
Ricordi C, O'Connell PJ, Gonzalez FJ, Kahn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center and Harvard Medical School, 1 Joslin Place, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

beta cell dysfunction is a central component of the pathogenesis of type 2
diabetes. Using oligonucleotide microarrays and real-time PCR of pancreatic
islets isolated from humans with type 2 diabetes versus normal glucose-tolerant
controls, we identified multiple changes in expression of genes known to be
important in beta cell function, including major decreases in expression of
HNF4alpha, insulin receptor, IRS2, Akt2, and several glucose-metabolic-pathway
genes. There was also a 90% decrease in expression of the transcription factor
ARNT. Reducing ARNT levels in Min6 cells with small interfering RNA (siRNA)
resulted in markedly impaired glucose-stimulated insulin release and changes in
gene expression similar to those in human type 2 islets. Likewise, beta
cell-specific ARNT knockout mice exhibited abnormal glucose tolerance, impaired
insulin secretion, and changes in islet gene expression that mimicked those in
human diabetic islets. Together, these data suggest an important role for
decreased ARNT and altered gene expression in the impaired islet function of
human type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 16096055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Aug 23;102(34):12071-6. Epub 2005 Aug 10.

Brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1), a component of the molecular clock,
regulates adipogenesis.

Shimba S(1), Ishii N, Ohta Y, Ohno T, Watabe Y, Hayashi M, Wada T, Aoyagi T,
Tezuka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Science, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University, 7-7-1
Narashinodai, Funabashi, Chiba 274-8555, Japan. shimba@pha.nihon-u.ac.jp

Brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (BMAL1; also known as MOP3 or Arnt3) is a
transcription factor known to regulate circadian rhythm. Here, we established its
involvement in the control of adipogenesis and lipid metabolism activity in
mature adipocytes. During adipose differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells, the level of
BMAL1 mRNA began to increase 4 days after induction and was highly expressed in
differentiated cells. In white adipose tissues isolated from C57BL/6J mice, BMAL1
was predominantly expressed in a fraction containing adipocytes, as compared with
the stromal-vascular fraction. BMAL1 knockout mice embryonic fibroblast cells
failed to be differentiated into adipocytes. Importantly, adding BMAL1 back by
adenovirus gene transfer restored the ability of BMAL1 knockout mice embryonic
fibroblast cells to differentiate. Knock-down of BMAL1 expression in 3T3-L1 cells
by an RNA interference technique allowed the cells to accumulate only minimum
amounts of lipid droplets in the cells. Adenovirus-mediated expression of BMAL1
in 3T3-L1 adipocytes resulted in induction of several factors involved in
lipogenesis. The promoter activity of these genes was stimulated in a
BMAL1-dependent manner. Interestingly, expression of these factors showed clear
circadian rhythm in mice adipose tissue. Furthermore, overexpression of BMAL1 in 
adipocytes increased lipid synthesis activity. These results indicate that BMAL1,
a master regulator of circadian rhythm, also plays important roles in the
regulation of adipose differentiation and lipogenesis in mature adipocytes.

PMCID: PMC1189312
PMID: 16093318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Scand J Immunol. 2005 Jul;62(1):36-44.

Whole influenza virus vaccine is more immunogenic than split influenza virus
vaccine and induces primarily an IgG2a response in BALB/c mice.

Hovden AO(1), Cox RJ, Haaheim LR.

Author information: 
(1)Influenza Centre, Section for Microbiology and Immunology, The Gade Institute,
University of Bergen, Haukeland University Hospital, Norway.
arnt-ove.hovden@gades.uib.no

The aim of this study was to compare the kinetics and the magnitude of the
humoral immune response to two different influenza vaccine formulations, whole
and split virus vaccines. BALB/c mice were immunized intramuscularly with one or 
two doses (3 weeks apart) of 7.5, 15 or 30 microg of haemagglutinin of monovalent
A/Panama/2007/99 (H3N2) split or whole virus vaccine. The two vaccine
formulations induced similar kinetics of the antibody-secreting cells response;
however, differences in the magnitude were observed in the spleen and bone
marrow. Vaccination with whole virus vaccine generally elicited a quicker and
higher neutralizing antibody response, particularly after the first dose of
vaccine. The two vaccine formulations gave different immunoglobulin G (IgG)
subclass profiles. Split virus vaccine stimulated both IgG1 and IgG2a antibodies 
suggestive of mixed T-helper 1 (Th1) and Th2 response, whereas whole virus
vaccine induced mainly an IgG2a antibody response, which is indicative of a
dominant Th1 response. The increased immunogenicity of whole virus vaccine in a
naïve population could reduce the vaccine concentration needed to provide
protective immunity.

PMID: 16092921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Fertil Steril. 2005 Aug;84(2):454-8.

Analysis of the AhR, ARNT, and AhRR gene polymorphisms: genetic contribution to
endometriosis susceptibility and severity.

Tsuchiya M(1), Katoh T, Motoyama H, Sasaki H, Tsugane S, Ikenoue T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Miyazaki Medical College, University of Miyazaki,
Miyazaki, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To explore whether polymorphisms in AhR, ARNT, and AhRR contribute to 
endometriosis susceptibility and severity.
DESIGN: Case control study.
SETTING: Hospital.
PATIENT(S): One hundred thirty-eight Japanese women with or without
endometriosis, diagnosed endoscopically.
INTERVENTION(S): Endoscopic laparoscopy, with blood samples for genotyping
obtained before the laparoscopic examination for genomic DNA extraction from
peripheral leukocytes.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): AhR, ARNT, and AhRR polymorphisms were genotyped using
real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis. Odds ratios and 95%
confidence intervals were calculated for AhR, ARNT, and AhRR genotypes to
evaluate the risk of endometriosis. Associations between these polymorphisms and 
stage of endometriosis were also examined.
RESULT(S): The C/G + G/G genotypes at codon 185 of AhRR showed a statistically
significant association with risk of endometriosis (adjusted odds ratio, 2.53;
95% confidence interval, 1.16-5.55). Furthermore, a statistically significant
trend associated the C/G + G/G genotypes with the clinical stage of
endometriosis. No statistically significant association was observed between AhR 
codon 554 or ARNT codon 189 polymorphisms and endometriosis.
CONCLUSION(S): AhRR codon 185 polymorphism was associated with susceptibility to 
and severity of endometriosis in Japanese women.

PMID: 16084889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Toxicol Lett. 2005 Dec 30;160(1):22-33. Epub 2005 Jul 28.

Lack of CYP1A1 expression is involved in unresponsiveness of the human hepatoma
cell line SK-HEP-1 to dioxin.

Shiizaki K(1), Ohsako S, Koyama T, Nagata R, Yonemoto J, Tohyama C.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Sciences Division, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, Tsukuba 305-8506, Japan.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) mediates a wide variety of toxic effects due 
to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). The human hepatoma cell line
SK-HEP-1 expresses AhR and ARNT. However, TCDD failed to induce CYP1A1 and
XRE-dependent reporter genes in these cells. Although CYP1A1 was not induced by
TCDD exposure, both CYP1B1 and AhR repressor (AhRR) were constitutively
expressed. The AhR antagonist alpha-naphthoflavone altered the basal level of
XRE-dependent reporter gene expression dose-dependently. As our results suggested
the activation of AhR signals by putative endogenous ligands, we established
SK-HEP-1-derived cell lines that stably expressed CYP1A1. The inducibility of
XRE-dependent reporter genes and CYP1B1 by TCDD was restored in these cells. Our 
findings demonstrated the presence of endogenous ligands in SK-HEP-1 cells due to
the absence of the metabolizing enzyme CYP1A1, but not CYP1B1, which allowed the 
constitutive expression of AhR target genes.

PMID: 16054781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005 Sep 1;207(2 Suppl):62-9.

CYP2S1: a short review.

Saarikoski ST(1), Rivera SP, Hankinson O, Husgafvel-Pursiainen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology, Finnish Institute of
Occupational Health, FI-00250, Finland. sirkku.saarikoski@ktl.fi

A new member of the cytochrome P450 superfamily, CYP2S1, has recently been
identified in human and mouse. In this paper, we review the data currently
available for CYP2S1. The human CYP2S1 gene is located in chromosome 19q13.2
within a cluster including CYP2 family members CYP2A6, CYP2A13, CYP2B6, and
CYP2F1. These genes also show the highest homology to the human CYP2S1. The gene 
has recently been found to harbor genetic polymorphism. CYP2S1 is inducible by
dioxin, the induction being mediated by the Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor (AHR) and
Aryl Hydrocarbon Nuclear Translocator (ARNT) in a manner typical for CYP1 family 
members. In line with this, CYP2S1 has been shown to be inducible by coal tar, an
abundant source of PAHs, and it was recently reported to metabolize naphthalene. 
This points to the involvement of CYP2S1 in the metabolism of toxic and
carcinogenic compounds, similar to other dioxin-inducible CYPs. CYP2S1 is
expressed in epithelial cells of a wide variety of extrahepatic tissues. The
highest expression levels have been observed in the epithelial tissues frequently
exposed to xenobiotics, e.g., the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and urinary
tracts, and in the skin. The observed ubiquitous tissue distribution, as well as 
the expression of CYP2S1 throughout embryogenesis suggest that CYP2S1 is likely
to metabolize important endogenous substrates; thus far, retinoic acid has been
identified. In conclusion, CYP2S1 exhibits many features of interest for human
health and thus warrants further investigation.

PMID: 16054184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Biogerontology. 2005;6(3):165-71.

Age-dependent increase of prolyl-4-hydroxylase domain (PHD) 3 expression in human
and mouse heart.

Rohrbach S(1), Simm A, Pregla R, Franke C, Katschinski DM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathophysiology, Martin-Luther University Halle, Germany.

The hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 is a master transcriptional activator of
oxygen-regulated genes involved in energy metabolism, angiogenesis, and
erythropoiesis. HIF-1 is composed of the two subunits HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta
(also called ARNT). The destruction of HIF-1alpha in the presence of oxygen is
initiated by prolyl-4-hydroxylation. In human cells three closely related prolyl 
hydroxylases (PHDs) have been identified. An age-dependent decrease in HIF-1alpha
expression was reported previously in brain, liver and kidney, which may be
associated with a reduced adaptation to hypoxia as found in aged animals and
humans. We have determined the expression of HIF-1alpha and the PHDs in human
atrial trabeculae under normoxic and hypoxic conditions, in samples of human left
ventricles as well as in heart extracts from female mice of different age (5 up
to 16 months). With increasing age we found a decreased expression of HIF-1alpha,
which correlated to an increased PHD3 expression in mouse and human heart. PHD3
was the most prominent HIF modifying hydroxylase found in human heart samples.
Additionally, we found a strong ischemia/hypoxia-inducibility of PHD3 compared to
PHD1 and PHD2 in atrial trabeculae. These data may explain the previously
reported reduction of HIF-1alpha and HIF-1 target genes such as the vascular
endothelial growth factor in ageing tissue.

PMID: 16041620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Nat Biotechnol. 2005 Aug;23(8):995-1001. Epub 2005 Jul 17.

Design of a genome-wide siRNA library using an artificial neural network.

Huesken D(1), Lange J, Mickanin C, Weiler J, Asselbergs F, Warner J, Meloon B,
Engel S, Rosenberg A, Cohen D, Labow M, Reinhardt M, Natt F, Hall J.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Genome and Proteome Sciences,
CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    Nat Biotechnol. 2005 Oct;23(10):1315.
    Nat Biotechnol. 2006 Aug;24(8):1033.

Comment in
    Nat Biotechnol. 2005 Aug;23(8):946-7.
    Nat Biotechnol. 2005 Aug;23(8):942-4.

The largest gene knock-down experiments performed to date have used multiple
short interfering/short hairpin (si/sh)RNAs per gene. To overcome this burden for
design of a genome-wide siRNA library, we used the Stuttgart Neural Net Simulator
to train algorithms on a data set of 2,182 randomly selected siRNAs targeted to
34 mRNA species, assayed through a high-throughput fluorescent reporter gene
system. The algorithm, (BIOPREDsi), reliably predicted activity of 249 siRNAs of 
an independent test set (Pearson coefficient r = 0.66) and siRNAs targeting
endogenous genes at mRNA and protein levels. Neural networks trained on a
complementary 21-nucleotide (nt) guide sequence were superior to those trained on
a 19-nt sequence. BIOPREDsi was used in the design of a genome-wide siRNA
collection with two potent siRNAs per gene. When this collection of 50,000 siRNAs
was used to identify genes involved in the cellular response to hypoxia, two of
the most potent hits were the key hypoxia transcription factors HIF1A and ARNT.

PMID: 16025102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Biochemistry. 2005 Jul 19;44(28):9598-605.

Investigation of the relationship between protein-protein interaction and
catalytic activity of a heme-regulated phosphodiesterase from Escherichia coli
(Ec DOS) by protein microarray.

Sasakura Y(1), Kanda K, Yoshimura-Suzuki T, Matsui T, Fukuzono S, Shimizu T.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-Medical Center, R&D Division, Nanotechnology Product Business Group,
Hitachi High-Technologies Corporation, Hitachinaka, Ibaraki, 312-8504, Japan.

Ec DOS, a heme-regulated phosphodiesterase from Escherichia coli, is composed of 
an N-terminal heme-bound PAS domain and a C-terminal phosphodiesterase domain.
The heme redox state in the PAS domain regulates Ec DOS phosphodiesterase
activity. Interestingly, the isolated heme-bound PAS fragment enhances
phosphodiesterase activity of full-length Ec DOS. The enhancement is also
regulated by the heme redox state of the isolated PAS domain. In the present
study, we used a newly developed protein microarray system to examine the
relationship between catalytic activity and the interaction of full-length Ec DOS
and the isolated PAS fragment. Adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (cAMP), a
substrate of the Ec DOS phosphodiesterase, was found to be indispensable for the 
interaction between Ec DOS and the PAS fragment, and two phosphodiesterase
inhibitors, 3-isobutyl-methyl-xanthine and etazolate hydrochloride, hindered the 
interaction. In addition, an enzyme with a mutation in the putative cAMP-binding 
sites (H590 and H594) was unable to interact with Ec DOS and lacked enzymatic
activity. These results strongly suggest a close relationship between Ec DOS
phosphodiesterase activity and interaction with the isolated PAS fragment.
Therefore, this study provides insights into the mechanism of how the isolated
PAS domain activates Ec DOS, which has important implications for the general
role of the isolated PAS domain in cells. Moreover, we found that multiple
microscale analyses using the protein microarray system had several advantages
over conventional affinity column methods, including the quantity of protein
needed, the sensitivity, the variability of immobilized protein, and the time
required for the experiment.

PMID: 16008345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2005 Jun;141(2):177-87.

Molecular characterization of the aryl hydrocarbon receptors (AHR1 and AHR2) from
red seabream (Pagrus major).

Yamauchi M(1), Kim EY, Iwata H, Tanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Ehime Prefectural Institute of Public Health and Environmental Science, 8-234 
Sanban-cho, Matsuyama 790-0003, Japan.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) mediates the toxic effects of planar
halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (PHAHs). Bony fishes exposed to PHAHs exhibit a
wide range of developmental defects. However, functional roles of fish AHR are
not yet fully understood, compared with those of mammalian AHRs. To investigate
the potential sensitivity to PHAHs toxic effects, an AHR cDNA was initially
cloned and sequenced from red seabream (Pagrus major), an important fishery
resource in Japan. The present study succeeded in identifying two highly
divergent red seabream AHR cDNA clones, which shared only 32% identity in
full-length amino acid sequence. The phylogenetic analysis revealed that one
belonged to AHR1 clade (rsAHR1) and another to AHR2 clade (rsAHR2). The rsAHR1
encoded a 846-residue protein with a predicted molecular mass of 93.2 kDa, and
990 amino acids and 108.9 kDa encoded rsAHR2. In the N-terminal half, both rsAHR 
genes included bHLH and PAS domains, which participate in ligand binding,
AHR/ARNT dimerization and DNA binding. The C-terminal half, which is responsible 
for transactivation, was poorly conserved between rsAHRs. Quantitative analyses
of both rsAHRs mRNAs revealed that their tissue expression profiles were
isoform-specific; rsAHR1 mRNA expressed primarily in brain, heart, ovary and
spleen, while rsAHR2 mRNA was observed in all tissues examined, indicating
distinct roles of each rsAHR. Furthermore, there appeared to be
species-differences in the tissue expression profiles of AHR isoforms between red
seabream and other fish. These results suggest that there are isoform- and
species-specific functions in piscine AHRs.

PMID: 16006195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Biochem J. 2005 Nov 15;392(Pt 1):103-16.

Phylogenetic analysis of the phytochrome superfamily reveals distinct microbial
subfamilies of photoreceptors.

Karniol B(1), Wagner JR, Walker JM, Vierstra RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, 425-G Henry Mall, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Phys (phytochromes) are a superfamily of photochromic photoreceptors that employ 
a bilin-type chromophore to sense red and far-red light. Although originally
thought to be restricted to plants, accumulating genetic and genomic analyses now
indicate that they are also prevalent among micro-organisms. By a combination of 
phylogenetic and biochemical studies, we have expanded the Phy superfamily and
organized its members into distinct functional clades which include the phys
(plant Phys), BphPs (bacteriophytochromes), Cphs (cyanobacterial Phys), Fphs
(fungal Phys) and a collection of Phy-like sequences. All contain a signature GAF
(cGMP phosphodiesterase/adenylate cyclase/FhlA) domain, which houses the bilin
lyase activity. A PHY domain (uppercase letters are used to denote the PHY domain
specifically), which helps stabilize the Pfr form (far-red-light-absorbing form
of Phy), is downstream of the GAF region in all but the Phy-like sequences. The
phy, Cph, BphP and Fph families also include a PLD [N-terminal PAS
(Per/Arnt/Sim)-like domain] upstream of the GAF domain. Site-directed mutagenesis
of conserved residues within the GAF and PLD motifs supports their importance in 
chromophore binding and/or spectral activity. In agreement with Lamparter,
Carrascal, Michael, Martinez, Rottwinkel and Abian [(2004) Biochemistry 43,
3659-3669], a conserved cysteine within the PLD of several BphPs was found to be 
necessary for binding the chromophore via the C-3 vinyl side chain on the bilin A
ring. Phy-type sequences were also discovered in the actinobacterium Kineococcus 
radiotolerans and collections of microorganisms obtained from marine and
extremely acidic environments, thus expanding further the range of these
photoreceptors. Based on their organization and distribution, the evolution of
the Phy superfamily into distinct photoreceptor types is proposed.

PMCID: PMC1317669
PMID: 16004604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Toxicol Lett. 2005 Jul 28;158(1):50-60. Epub 2005 Apr 1.

Sanguinarine activates polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon associated metabolic
pathways in human oral keratinocytes and tissues.

Karp JM(1), Rodrigo KA, Pei P, Pavlick MD, Andersen JD, McTigue DJ, Fields HW,
Mallery SR.

Author information: 
(1)The Ohio State University College of Dentistry, Department of Pediatric
Dentistry, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Comment in
    Toxicol Lett. 2005 Aug 14;158(2):164-5.

Sanguinarine's use in human clinical applications is currently controversial.
While some studies have demonstrated sanguinarine's anti-inflammatory and
anti-oxidant properties, other investigations reported sanguinarine's
procarcinogenic effects. Like the tobacco-associated carcinogen, benzo(a)pyrene
(B(a)P), sanguinarine is a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH). PAH exposure
activates the aryl hydrocarbon transcription activating factor (AhR), resulting
in nuclear translocation, binding to the aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator
(ARNT), which thereby increases expression of a pool of carcinogen metabolizing
enzymes. The goal of this study was to investigate whether sanguinarine activates
this PAH-associated signaling cascade in human oral cells and tissues. Our
results demonstrate that sanguinarine: (i) results in formation of the AhR-ARNT
complex, (ii) induces AhR-associated gene expression, (iii) inhibits cytochrome
P450 1A1 (CYP 1A1) microsomal oxidative activity and (iv) pretreatment
upregulates CYP 1A1 function. Collectively, these data provide evidence that
sanguinarine activates PAH-associated signaling and metabolic pathways. Notably, 
previous studies have demonstrated that mammalian hepatic microsomes metabolize
sanguinarine to a mutagenic epoxide. Persons who respond to sanguinarine exposure
with induction of primarily Phase I relative to Phase II enzymes are, therefore, 
at risk for sanguinarine bioactivation and its potential mutagenic effects.

PMID: 15993743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 1999 Sep;8(9):1385-96.

Development of selective aryl hydrocarbon receptor modulators for treatment of
breast cancer.

Safe S(1), Qin C, McDougal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843-4466 USA. ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a basic helix-loop-helix DNA-binding
protein that forms a transcriptionally-active heterodimer with the AhR nuclear
translocator (Arnt) protein. The nuclear AhR complex is a ligand-induced
transcription factor and the environmental toxicant
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is a high affinity ligand for the AhR.
TCDD induces a diverse spectrum of tissue-, sex- and species-specific biochemical
and toxic responses in Ah-responsive cells/tissues including the inhibition of
17beta-oestradiol (E2)-induced gene expression in the rodent uterus and mammary
and in human breast cancer cell lines. TCDD also inhibits spontaneous and
carcinogen-induced mammary tumour formation and growth in rodent models. Research
in this laboratory has utilised the AhR as a target for developing anticancer
drugs for treatment of breast cancer and two different structural classes of
selective AhR modulators (SAhRMs) have been developed. Alternate-substituted
(1,3,6,8- and 2,4,6,8-) alkyl polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs) and
substituted diindolylmethanes (DIMs) bind the AhR and induce a pattern of
AhR-oestrogen receptor (ER) inhibitory cross-talk similar to that observed for
TCDD including inhibition of mammary tumour growth at doses < 1.0 mg/kg/day. In
contrast, effective doses of these compounds do not induce hepatic
CYP1A1-dependent activity or other AhR-mediated toxic responses induced by TCDD. 
These results indicate that SAhRMs may be an important new class of drugs for
clinical treatment of breast cancer via AhR-ER inhibitory cross-talk.

PMID: 15992156  [PubMed]


3. Development. 2005 Aug;132(15):3393-403. Epub 2005 Jun 29.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-dependent histone deacetylase activity determines stem
cell fate in the placenta.

Maltepe E(1), Krampitz GW, Okazaki KM, Red-Horse K, Mak W, Simon MC, Fisher SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Molecular Medicine Program, University of
California, Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) is a heterodimeric transcription factor composed
of HIFalpha and the arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT/HIF1beta). Previously, we have reported that ARNT function is required for 
murine placental development. Here, we used cultured trophoblast stem (TS) cells 
to investigate the molecular basis of this requirement. In vitro, wild-type TS
cell differentiation is largely restricted to spongiotrophoblasts and giant
cells. Interestingly, Arnt-null TS cells differentiated into chorionic
trophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts, as demonstrated by their expression of
Tfeb, glial cells missing 1 (Gcm1) and the HIV receptor CXCR4. During this
process, a region of the differentiating Arnt-null TS cells underwent granzyme
B-mediated apoptosis, suggesting a role for this pathway in murine
syncytiotrophoblast turnover. Surprisingly, HIF1alpha and HIF2alpha were induced 
during TS cell differentiation in 20% O2; additionally, pVHL levels were
modulated during the same time period. These results suggest that
oxygen-independent HIF functions are crucial to this differentiation process. As 
histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity has been linked to HIF-dependent gene
expression, we investigated whether ARNT deficiency affects this epigenetic
regulator. Interestingly, Arnt-null TS cells had reduced HDAC activity, increased
global histone acetylation, and altered class II HDAC subcellular localization.
In wild-type TS cells, inhibition of HDAC activity recapitulated the Arnt-null
phenotype, suggesting that crosstalk between the HIFs and the HDACs is required
for normal trophoblast differentiation. Thus, the HIFs play important roles in
modulating the developmental plasticity of stem cells by integrating
physiological, transcriptional and epigenetic inputs.

PMID: 15987772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2006 Feb 1;210(3):212-24. Epub 2005 Jun 27.

2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) induces matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)
expression and invasion in A2058 melanoma cells.

Villano CM(1), Murphy KA, Akintobi A, White LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, 76 Lipman Dr., Rutgers, The State
University of NJ, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.

There has been a 34% increase in melanoma related mortality in the United States 
from 1973 to 1992. Although few successful treatments for malignant melanoma
exist, it is known that genetic susceptibility and environmental factors
contribute to the initiation and progression of melanoma. Excessive UV exposure
is considered the main etiological factor in melanoma initiation, however,
epidemiological and experimental evidence suggests that exposure to environmental
carcinogens contribute to melanoma. We propose that exposure to environmental
chemicals that activate the aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway contribute to
melanoma progression, specifically through stimulation of the expression and
activity of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Therefore, we investigated the 
effect of AhR activation on normal human melanocytes and several melanoma cell
lines. The data presented here demonstrate that normal melanocytes and melanoma
cells express the AhR and Arnt and are responsive to activation by TCDD.
Furthermore, activation of this pathway in transformed melanoma cells (A2058)
results in increased expression and activity of MMP-1, MMP-2 and MMP-9, as well
as increased invasion using in vitro invasion assays. Furthermore, TCDD-induced
expression of the MMP-1 promoter in melanoma cells appears to require different
elements than those required in untransformed cells, indicating that this pathway
may have multiple mechanisms for activation of MMP expression.

PMID: 15982688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Thromb Haemost. 2005 Dec;3(12):2627-32. Epub 2005 Jun 24.

VHL: oxygen sensing and vasculogenesis.

Rathmell WK(1), Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA. rathmell@med.unc.edu

PMID: 15975138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Cell Cycle. 2005 Jul;4(7):881-2. Epub 2005 Jul 11.

Genetic instability: the dark side of the hypoxic response.

To KK(1), Koshiji M, Hammer S, Huang LE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4255, USA.

Under low oxygen tension, the activated transcription factor HIF-1alpha
upregulates an array of hypoxia-inducible genes via heterodimerization with ARNT 
and binding to the hypoxia-responsive element in the promoter. Alternatively,
HIF-1alpha regulates hypoxia-responsive genes by functionally antagonizing the
oncoprotein Myc via protein-protein interactions. This so-called HIF-1alpha-Myc
mechanism apparently not only accounts for the gene upregulation, but also for
the gene downregulation during hypoxia, depending upon the activating and
repressive nature of Myc in gene expression. Indeed, our recent study
demonstrated that both mismatch repair genes, MSH2 and MSH6, are inhibited by
this mechanism in a p53-dependent manner. In particular, the constitutively bound
transcription factor Sp1 serves as a molecular switch by recruiting HIF-1alpha in
hypoxia to displace the transcription activator Myc from the promoter. Therefore,
our findings shed light on the mechanisms underlying hypoxia-induced genetic
instability, an "adverse"effect of the hypoxic response, and yet a germane
process to tumor survival and progression.

PMID: 15970707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2005 Jul 15;439(2):139-53.

Differentiation of pluripotent C3H10T1/2 cells rapidly elevates CYP1B1 through a 
novel process that overcomes a loss of Ah Receptor.

Cho YC(1), Zheng W, Yamamoto M, Liu X, Hanlon PR, Jefcoate CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Center, 
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 53706, USA.

Stimulation of C3H10T1/2 cells by an adipogenic hormonal mixture (IDM) consisting
of insulin (I), dexamethasone (D), and methylisobutylxanthine (M) substantially
induces cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1B1 expression. This stimulation represents up to
40% of the level produced by maximum activation of the arylhydrocarbon receptor
(AhR) with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Dexamethasone and
methylisobutylxanthine in combination produced near maximum elevation of CYP1B1
along with a subsequent decline in AhR that paralleled the rise in peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptorgamma1 (PPARgamma1). Inhibitors of AhR activity,
which block TCDD induction, did not affect this increase of CYP1B1 expression,
which was, therefore, independent of AhR activity. These responses were
unaffected by inhibition of DNA synthesis, which was required for PPARgamma1
induction and terminal differentiation. Induction of CYP1B1 mRNA was paralleled
by increased CYP1B1 promoter-luciferase reporter activity. The initial 0.8kb of
promoter region, which was sufficient for 24h near maximum stimulation, did not
contain either the key AhR-responsive elements that mediate the TCDD response or 
CREB and SF1 elements that mediate cAMP stimulation of rat CYP1B1 in
steroidogenic cells. This reporter response to IDM stimulation, but not to TCDD, 
was maintained in AhR-null fibroblasts. CYP1B1 expression, unlike TCDD induction,
was stimulated by IDM in only about half the cells. CYP1B1 expression partially
overlapped with PPARgamma expression, which was also inversely related in clonal 
sub-lines. CYP1B1 expression may, therefore, represent an early stage of
differentiation that requires factors associated with DNA synthesis to
subsequently generate PPARgamma1.

PMID: 15967407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Sep 10;309(1):220-8.

Transcription factor single-minded 2 (SIM2) is ubiquitinated by the
RING-IBR-RING-type E3 ubiquitin ligases.

Okui M(1), Yamaki A, Takayanagi A, Kudoh J, Shimizu N, Shimizu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Human single-minded 2 (SIM2) is a member of the basic
helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH/PAS) family of transcription factors and is
associated with the etiology of Down syndrome phenotype. Here, we examined a
possibility of the post-translational modification of SIM2 protein by
transfecting various expression constructs followed by the analysis with
immunoprecipitation and Western blotting. In fact, transient expression of SIM2
cDNA in HEK293 cells revealed poly-ubiquitination of SIM2 protein. In the stable 
transfectants, a proteasome inhibitor MG132 protected the poly-ubiquitinated SIM2
protein from degradation. Furthermore, in the cells co-transfected with SIM2 and 
each of four different E3 ubiquitin ligases, SIM2 was immunoprecipitated with the
RING-IBR-RING-type E3 ubiquitin ligases, Parkin and HHARI, but it was not
immunoprecipitated with other E3 ligases, such as one RING-type Siah-1 and the
PHD type AIRE. A series of deletion constructs revealed that Parkin actually
binds to SIM2 with the IBR (294-377)-RING2 (378-465) domains and that the sites
for poly-ubiquitination of SIM2 reside within the PAS1-PAS2 region (aa 141-289). 
We postulated that transcription factor SIM2 and E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin may
interact each other to play an important physiological role in the brain
development which is controlled by ubiquitination.

PMID: 15963499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Med Hypotheses. 2005;65(4):760-5.

Oestrogen-receptors (ER) are likely to be promiscuous: wider role for oestrogens 
and mimics.

Wiseman A(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford
GU2 7XH, UK. alan@tridgway.wanadoo.co.uk

The anti-breast cancer drug tamoxifen that binds to ER is metabolised in human
liver by CYP2D6 isoenzyme, whilst the metabolism of 17beta-oestradiol (by
hydroxylation) is by phase I biotransformation in the liver to
2-hydroxyoestradiol and to 4-hydroxyoestradiol respectively by two isoenzymes of 
this mixed function oxidase CYP cytochromes P450 (EC 1.14.14.1); CYP1A2 and by
CYP1B1. Nevertheless, it appears that the receptor (AhR) itself causes the
expression of oestrogen-regulated target genes (studied by binding of dioxin).
This is the result of an unknown signalling mechanism at the genome that is
triggered directly by this receptor by binding promiscuously to ER (alpha or
beta) sites. This has been observed even in the absence of oestrogens or mimics
therefore in genome-binding investigations of target tissues such as uterus:
oestrogen-receptor (ER) is likely to be promiscuous therefore. Furthermore, AhR
(polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon receptor), when activated by the binding of
aromatic hydrocarbons (Ah) forms a complex with the aryl hydrocarbon
nuclear-translocator chaperone protein (Arnt). It is this binding to xenobiotic
response elements in DNA that initiates expression of the appropriate
oestrogen-regulated target-genes in the uterus and other target tissues
(including mammary, ovaries, and brain). The likely promiscuity of oestrogen
receptors is proposed to be the cause of numerous side effects when oestrogen is 
involved in therapy, these can be manifest in hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
and in the incorporation of synthetic oestrogens in the wide varieties of oral
contraceptives now available.

PMID: 15961252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2005 Jul;32(7):296-300. Epub 2005 Jun 16.

Simple oligomers as antimicrobial peptide mimics.

Rennie J(1), Arnt L, Tang H, Nüsslein K, Tew GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 01003, USA.

New approaches to antibiotic design are desperately needed. The design of simple 
oligomers that capture the shape and biological function of natural antimicrobial
peptides could prove to be versatile and highly successful. We discuss the use of
aromatic backbones to design facially amphiphilic (FA) beta-sheet like structures
which are potently antimicrobial. These oligomers capture the physiochemical
properties of peptides like the Magainins and Defensins, which fold into specific
conformations that are amphiphilic resulting in antimicrobial activity. However, 
natural peptides are expensive to prepare and difficult to produce on large
scale. The design of polymers and oligomers that mimic the complex structures and
remarkable biological properties of proteins is an important endeavor and
provides attractive alternatives to the difficult synthesis of natural peptides. 
We therefore have designed a series of FA oligomers that are easy to prepare from
inexpensive monomers. They adopt structures very reminiscent of amphiphilic
beta-sheets and have significant activity with minimal inhibitory concentrations 
at 6 h in the low microgram per ml range (muM to nM). They are active against a
broad spectrum of bacteria including gram-positive and gram-negative as well as
antibiotic resistant strains.

PMID: 15959729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Annu Rev Biochem. 2005;74:115-28.

Proline hydroxylation and gene expression.

Kaelin WG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
william_kaelin@dfci.harvard.edu

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) is a master transcriptional regulator of
hypoxia-inducible genes and consists of a labile alpha subunit (such as
HIF1alpha) and a stable beta subunit (such as HIF1beta or ARNT). In the presence 
of oxygen, HIFalpha family members are hydroxylated on one of two conserved
prolyl residues by members of the egg-laying-defective nine (EGLN) family. Prolyl
hydroxylation generates a binding site for a ubiquitin ligase complex containing 
the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor protein, which results in HIFalpha
destruction. In addition, the HIFalpha transcriptional activation function is
modulated further by asparagine hydroxylation by FIH (factor-inhibiting HIF),
which affects recruitment of the coactivators p300 and CBP. These findings
provide new mechanistic insights into oxygen sensing by metazoans and are the
first examples of protein hydroxylation being used in intracellular signaling.
The existence of three human EGLN family members, as well as other putative
hydroxylases, raises the possibility that this signal is used in other contexts
by other proteins.

PMID: 15952883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cancer Res. 2005 Jun 1;65(11):4775-81.

Topotecan blocks hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha and vascular endothelial growth 
factor expression induced by insulin-like growth factor-I in neuroblastoma cells.

Beppu K(1), Nakamura K, Linehan WM, Rapisarda A, Thiele CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The extent of angiogenesis and/or vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
expression in neuroblastoma tumors correlates with metastases, N-myc
amplification, and poor clinical outcome. Understanding the mechanisms regulating
VEGF expression in neuroblastoma cells provides additional therapeutic options to
control neuroblastoma tumor growth. VEGF mRNA is controlled by growth factors and
hypoxia via the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1alpha).
HIF-1alpha protein levels are regulated by the von Hippel Lindau tumor suppressor
gene, VHL, which targets HIF-1alpha degradation. To determine whether the levels 
of VEGF in neuroblastomas are due to mutations in VHL, we evaluated genomic DNA
from 15 neuroblastoma cell lines using PCR. We found no mutations in exons 1, 2, 
or 3 of the VHL gene. VEGF mRNA levels in neuroblastoma cells cultured in
serum-free medium increased after 8 to 16 hours in serum, insulin-like growth
factor-I (IGF-I), epidermal growth factor, or platelet-derived growth factor.
Serum/IGF-I induced increases in HIF-1alpha protein that temporally paralleled
increases in VEGF mRNA, whereas HIF-1beta levels were unaffected. VEGF and
HIF-1alpha levels were blocked by inhibitors of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and
mammalian target of rapamycin. Furthermore, we confirmed that HIF-1alpha mediates
approximately 40% of the growth factor activity stimulating VEGF protein
expression. Topotecan blocked the IGF-I-stimulated increase in HIF-1alpha but not
HIF-1beta, and this resulted in a decrease in VEGF in four neuroblastoma cell
lines tested. These data indicate that growth factors in an autocrine or
paracrine manner play a major role in regulating VEGF levels in neuroblastoma
cells and that targeted therapies to phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, mammalian
target of rapamycin, and/or HIF-1alpha have the potential to inhibit VEGF
expression and limit neuroblastoma tumor growth.

PMID: 15930297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Cell. 2005 May 27;18(5):507-18.

Regulation of LuxPQ receptor activity by the quorum-sensing signal autoinducer-2.

Neiditch MB(1), Federle MJ, Miller ST, Bassler BL, Hughson FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
08544, USA.

The extracellular signaling molecule autoinducer-2 (AI-2) mediates quorum-sensing
communication in diverse bacterial species. In marine vibrios, binding of AI-2 to
the periplasmic receptor LuxP modulates the activity of the inner membrane sensor
kinase LuxQ, transducing the AI-2 information into the cytoplasm. Here, we show
that Vibrio harveyi LuxP associates with LuxQ in both the presence and absence of
AI-2. The 1.9 A X-ray crystal structure of apoLuxP, complexed with the
periplasmic domain of LuxQ, reveals that the latter contains two tandem
Per/ARNT/Simple-minded (PAS) folds. Thus, although many prokaryotic PAS folds
themselves bind ligands, the LuxQ periplasmic PAS folds instead bind LuxP,
monitoring its AI-2 occupancy. Mutations that disrupt the apoLuxP:LuxQ interface 
sensitize V. harveyi to AI-2, implying that AI-2 binding causes the replacement
of one set of LuxP:LuxQ contacts with another. These conformational changes
switch LuxQ between two opposing enzymatic activities, each of which conveys
information to the cytoplasm about the cell density of the surrounding
environment.

PMID: 15916958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Sci STKE. 2005 May 17;2005(284):pe23.

A rationally designed small molecule that inhibits the HIF-1alpha-ARNT
heterodimer from binding to DNA in vivo.

Vinson C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Vinsonc@mail.nih.gov

Modern drug development is focused on two steps: the identification of new
molecular targets and the development of drugs that affect these targets. A
molecular target can be an enzymatic activity or a macromolecular interface that 
is important in a disease pathway. Current drugs on the market are biased toward 
targeting cell surface receptors and intracellular enzymatic activities. However,
macromolecular interfaces can also serve as potential molecular targets. A recent
paper from Kaelin and Dervan's groups examined an underused molecular
target-transcription factor DNA binding. To specifically disrupt transcriptional 
activation, they used a rationally designed small molecule that binds
specifically in the minor groove of a DNA sequence that in vivo is bound by a
bHLH heterodimer transcription factor.

PMID: 15900031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Toxicol Sci. 2005 Aug;86(2):342-53. Epub 2005 May 11.

Comparative microarray analysis of basal gene expression in mouse Hepa-1c1c7
wild-type and mutant cell lines.

Fong CJ(1), Burgoon LD, Zacharewski TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Food Safety and
Toxicology Center, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA.

Hepa-1c1c7 wild-type and benzo[a]pyrene-resistant derived mutant cell lines have 
been used to elucidate pathways and mechanisms involving the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR). However, there has been little focus on other biological
processes which may differ between the isolated lines. In this study, mouse cDNA 
microarrays representing 4858 genes were used to examine differences in basal
gene expression between mouse Hepa-1c1c7 wild-type and c1 (truncated Cyp1a1
protein), c4 (AhR nuclear translocator, ARNT, deficient), and c12 (low AhR
levels) mutant cell lines. Surprisingly, c1 mutants exhibited the greatest number
of gene expression changes compared to wild-type cells, followed by c4 and c12
lines, respectively. Differences in basal gene expression were consistent with
cell line specific variations in morphology, mitochondrial activity, and
proliferation rate. MTT and direct cell count assays indicate both c4 and c12
mutants exhibit increased proliferative activity when compared to wild-type
cells, while the c1 mutants exhibited decreased activity. This study further
characterizes Hepa-1c1c7 wild-type and mutant cells and identifies significant
differences in biological processes that should be considered when conducting
comparative mechanistic studies with these lines.

PMID: 15888666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Agric Food Chem. 2005 May 18;53(10):3751-68.

Hypoxia inducible factor pathways as targets for functional foods.

Losso JN(1), Bawadi HA.

Author information: 
(1)Food Protein Biotechnology Laboratory, Department of Food Science, Louisiana
State University Agricultural Center, 111 Food Science Building, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana 70803, USA. jlosso@agctr.lsu.edu

The etiology of most chronic angiogenic diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis,
atherosclerosis, diabetes complications, and cancer includes the presence of
pockets of hypoxic cells growing behind aerobic cells and away from blood
vessels. Hypoxic cells are the result of uncontrolled growth and insufficient
vascularization and have undergone a shift from aerobic to anaerobic metabolism. 
Cells respond to hypoxia by stimulating the expression of hypoxia inducible
factor (HIF), which is critical for survival under hypoxic conditions and in
embryogenesis. HIF is a heterodimer consisting of the O2-regulated subunit,
HIF-1alpha, and the constitutively expressed aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator, HIF-1beta. Under hypoxic conditions, HIF-1alpha is stable,
accumulates, and migrates to the nucleus where it binds to HIF-1beta to form the 
complex (HIF-1alpha + HIF-1beta). Transcription is initiated by the binding of
the complex (HIF-1alpha + HIF-1beta) to hypoxia responsive elements (HREs). The
complex [(HIF-1alpha + HIF-1beta) + HREs] stimulates the expression of genes
involved in angiogenesis, anaerobic metabolism, vascular permeability, and
inflammation. Experimental and clinical evidence show that these hypoxic cells
are the most aggressive and difficult angiogenic disease cells to treat and are a
major reason for antiangiogenic and conventional treatment failure. Hypoxia
occurs in early stages of disease development (before metastasis), activates
angiogenesis, and stimulates vascular remodeling. HIF-1alpha has also been
identified under aerobic conditions in certain types of cancer. This review
summarizes the role of hypoxia in some chronic degenerative angiogenic diseases
and discusses potential functional foods to target the HIF-1alpha pathways under 
hypoxic and normoxic conditions. It is reported that dietary quinones,
semiquinones, phenolics, vitamins, amino acids, isoprenoids, and vasoactive
compounds can down-regulate the HIF-1 pathways and therefore the expression of
several proangiogenic factors. Considering the lack of efficiency or the side
effects of synthetic antiangiogenic drugs at clinical trials, down-regulation of 
hypoxia-induced angiogenesis by use of naturally occurring functional foods may
provide an effective means of prevention.

PMID: 15884793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Reprod Toxicol. 2005 Nov-Dec;20(4):521-30.

Ontogenetic development, sexual differentiation, and effects of Aroclor 1254
exposure on expression of the arylhydrocarbon receptor and of the arylhydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator in the rat hypothalamus.

Pravettoni A(1), Colciago A, Negri-Cesi P, Villa S, Celotti F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, University of Milano, Via Balzaretti, 9, 20133
Milano, Italy.

Interaction of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) with the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR)/nuclear translocator (ARNT) system might interfere with the
mechanisms controlling the sexual differentiation of the developing hypothalamus.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the presence of AhR/ARNT in brain cells and
the developmental profile of their expression in the hypothalamus of male and
female rats during the perinatal period. Brain accumulation of the main PCB
congeners after prenatal exposure to Aroclor 1254 and its influence on
hypothalamic expression of AhR/ARNT was also assessed. The results show that: (a)
AhR and ARNT are expressed both in neurons and in glia; (b) AhR expression
progressively increases in the developing hypothalamus particularly in males,
while ARNT is relatively constant in both sexes; (c) the prenatal administration 
of Aroclor to dams produces a differential accumulation of PCBs, depending on the
chlorine atom number, and stimulates AhR expression only in the male
hypothalamus. In conclusion, the developing male hypothalamus might be more
sensitive to disrupting potential of PCBs.

PMID: 15869859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2005 Sep;289(3):L391-9. Epub 2005 Apr 29.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor is a regulator of cigarette smoke induction of the 
cyclooxygenase and prostaglandin pathways in human lung fibroblasts.

Martey CA(1), Baglole CJ, Gasiewicz TA, Sime PJ, Phipps RP.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Department, Shippensburg University, Pennsylvania, USA.

Cigarette smoking can lead to chronic lung inflammation and lung cancer. Chronic 
inflammation, associated with expression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and
prostaglandins, predisposes to malignancy. We recently demonstrated that human
lung fibroblasts are activated by cigarette smoke to express COX-2 and
prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)). Little is known about the mechanism whereby smoke
activates human lung fibroblasts to produce proinflammatory mediators. Herein, we
report the central role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) in cigarette smoke
extract (CSE)-induced COX-2, microsomal PGE(2) synthase (mPGES), and PGE(2)
production in human lung fibroblasts. Western blot analysis revealed that primary
strains of human lung fibroblasts express AHR and aryl hydrocarbon nuclear
translocator protein, supporting the possibility that smoke activates lung
fibroblasts through this pathway. Experiments were subsequently performed to
determine whether the AHR was activated by CSE. Immunocytochemistry and EMSA
analysis revealed that CSE induced nuclear translocation of the AHR in human lung
fibroblasts. CSE decreased protein levels of the AHR, consistent with AHR
ligand-induced proteosome-mediated degradation. CSE also induced mPGES-1 and
COX-2 protein and increased PGE(2) production. Treatment of human fibroblasts
with AHR antagonists in the presence of CSE inhibited AHR nuclear translocation
as well as COX-2, mPGES-1, and PGE(2) production. These data indicate that the
AHR pathway plays an important role in cigarette smoke-mediated COX-2 and PG
production in human lung fibroblasts and may contribute to tobacco-associated
inflammation and lung disease.

PMID: 15863442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2005 Feb;94(1-3):15-21. Epub 2005 Jan 26.

Cloning and characterization of the 5'-flanking region of the rat estrogen
receptor beta gene.

Fujimoto N(1), Asano K, Usui T, Kitamura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology 
and Medicine, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, 
Japan. nfjm@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

Erratum in
    J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2009 May;115(1-2):75. Honda, Hiroaki [removed].

In the rat, estrogen receptor (ER) beta is preferentially expressed in the ovary 
and the prostate gland where it is transcriptionally regulated by testosterone. A
single 5'-end of rERbeta cDNA was identified in these tissues by the 5'-RACE
analysis in the present study. The transcription starting site was predicted at
-335 from the translation starting signal (ATG), and a 640bp section of the
5'-flanking region of the gene was cloned. Luciferase reporter assays revealed
this region to be responsible for cell-specific promoter activity and successive 
deletion analyses indicated that only 98bp were sufficient for basic promoter
activity as well as for testosterone-dependent transcription. The sequence of the
determined region found to demonstrate high homology with the mouse ERbeta
promoter with more than 80% identity between positions -1 and -550. The rat
region of -30/-110 also showed good homology with 69% identity to corresponding
section of the human promoter. Putative cis-acting elements, USF/Arnt and AML1a, 
were found in common in the promoter regions of three species. The present study 
thus demonstrated the 5'-flanking region of the rERbeta gene to be a functional
promoter.

PMID: 15862946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Biochem Pharmacol. 2005 May 15;69(10):1403-8.

Ah receptor- and TCDD-mediated liver tumor promotion: clonal selection and
expansion of cells evading growth arrest and apoptosis.

Bock KW(1), Köhle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University
of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. bock@uni-tuebingen.de <bock@uni-tuebingen.de>

The Ah receptor (AhR) has been characterized as a ligand-activated transcription 
factor which belongs to the bHLH/PAS (basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim) family
of chemosensors. Transgenic mouse models revealed adaptive and developmental
functions of the AhR in the absence of exogenous ligands. Use of persistent
agonists such as dioxins including 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and
related compounds demonstrated that the AhR mediates a plethora of species- and
tissue-dependent toxicities, including chloracne, wasting, teratogenicity,
immunotoxicity, liver tumor promotion and carcinogenicity. However, molecular
mechanisms underlying most aspects of these toxic responses as well as biological
functions of the AhR are currently unknown. Previous studies of liver tumor
promotion in the two-stage hepatocarcinogenesis model indicated that TCDD
mediates clonal expansion of 'initiated' preneoplastic hepatocytes, identified as
enzyme-altered foci (EAF) by inhibiting apoptosis and bypassing AhR-mediated
growth arrest. In contrast, the Ah receptor has been shown in cell models to
stimulate growth arrest and apoptosis. Possible underlying mechanisms of these
AhR responses are discussed, including enhanced metabolism of retinoic acid which
attenuates TGFbeta-mediated apoptosis and interaction of the Ah receptor with the
hypophosphorylated retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein. The discrepancy
between in vivo findings in EAF and AhR functions may be solved by hypothesizing 
that sustained activation of the Ah receptor generates a strong selective
pressure in liver treated with genotoxic carcinogens leading to selection and
expansion of clones evading growth arrest and apoptosis. Models are discussed
which may facilitate verification of this hypothesis.

PMID: 15857604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol. 2005;26(2):175-80.

Effects of dioxin and nutrition on cellular proliferation and dioxin- and
estrogen-linked genes in ovarian cancer cell lines.

Takahashi S(1), Hirano S, Ito N, Tamaya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Gifu University School of Medicine, 
Gifu, Japan.

This study was undertaken to examine the effects of dioxin (TCDD) and nutrition
on cellular proliferation and dioxin- and estrogen-linked gene expression in
ovarian cancer cell lines. Caov-3 and SK-OV-3 cells were incubated in a medium
supplemented with 0.5-10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Cell proliferation was
assayed with an MTT assay. Dioxin- and estrogen-linked genes (AhR, ERalpha,
ERbeta, CYP1A1 and ARNT) expressed were determined with the RT-PCR method. Caov-3
cells, but not SK-OV-3 cells, were proliferated with TCDD alone with increased
AhR and ERa mRNA expressions when incubated in the low FBS concentration. CYP1A1 
and ARNT mRNA expressions of SK-OV-3, but not that of Caov-3, were suppressed in 
the low FBS (under 1.0%) concentration. In the low FBS concentration medium with 
dioxin, AhR and ERa expression were increased with the proliferation of Caov-3
cells; CYP1A1 and ARNT were stable. Each ovarian cancer cell line may have its
own distinct responsiveness to dioxin depending on the nutritional state.

PMID: 15857025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Jun 3;331(2):464-70.

Bacterially produced human HIF-1alpha is competent for heterodimerization and
specific DNA-binding.

Chachami G(1), Paraskeva E, Georgatsou E, Bonanou S, Simos G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Thessaly,
Papakyriazi 22, 41222 Larissa, Greece.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) is the regulatory subunit of HIF-1, 
the transcriptional activator and key mediator of the cellular response to
hypoxia. Regulation of HIF-1alpha occurs at multiple levels and involves several 
different post-translational modifications. In order to examine the importance of
these modifications for the basic function of HIF-1alpha, we have produced in
bacteria recombinant full-length human HIF-1alpha using different expression
systems. We show that this unmodified form of HIF-1alpha is able to form a stable
heterodimer with the second subunit of HIF-1 (HIF-1beta or ARNT) when both
proteins are co-expressed in Escherichia coli. Furthermore, this bacterially
reconstituted heterodimer exhibits specific DNA-binding activity. These data
indicate that post-translational modification of HIF-1alpha is not essential for 
its interaction with ARNT and DNA, and provide an in vitro system for the
characterization of the molecular properties of HIF-1alpha.

PMID: 15850782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Toxicology. 2005 Jun 1;210(2-3):189-96.

Gene expression of drug metabolizing enzymes in adult and aged mouse liver: a
modulation by immobilization stress.

Mikhailova ON(1), Gulyaeva LF, Filipenko ML.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Mechanisms of Carcinogenesis, Institute of Molecular
Biology and Biophysics, Timakov Str. 2, Novosibirsk 630117, Russia.
pharmacogenomics@ngs.ru

The role of stress in the regulation of enzymatic systems involved in the
biotransformation of xenobiotics, as well as endogenous substrates in the liver
was investigated using single immobilization stress as a model. Adult (3 months
of age) and aged (26 months) C3H/a male mice were used. Cytochrome P450 1A1 and
1A2 (CYP1A1 and CYP1A2), glutathione S-transferase M1 (GSTM1), aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR), aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) and
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) mRNA levels in the mouse liver were measured 
by a semi-quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
method. Excluding CYP1A1, experiments revealed significant differences in the
expression of these genes between adult- and aged-control animals. The influence 
of stress on the expression of genes studied was shown to be higher in adult mice
than in aged ones. Our results clearly demonstrate the lack of response or even
the attenuation of gene expression in aged animals that may play an important
role in age-related pathologies and diseases.

PMID: 15840432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 3;280(22):21607-11. Epub 2005 Apr 18.

ER alpha-AHR-ARNT protein-protein interactions mediate estradiol-dependent
transrepression of dioxin-inducible gene transcription.

Beischlag TV(1), Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Toxicology and Carcinogenesis and Department of
Veterinary Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (ARNT) form a heterodimeric transcription factor upon binding a wide
variety of environmental pollutants, including
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). AHR target gene activation can be
repressed by estrogen and estrogen-like compounds. In this study, we demonstrate 
that a significant component of TCDD-inducible Cyp1a1 transcription is the result
of recruitment of estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha by AHR/ARNT as a transcriptional
co-repressor. Both AHR and ARNT were capable of interacting directly with ER
alpha, as ascertained by glutathione S-transferase pull-down. 17Beta-estradiol
repressed TCDD-activated Cyp1a1 and Cyp1b1 gene transcription in MCF-7 cells in
the presence of cycloheximide, as determined by reverse transcription/real-time
PCR. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays have shown that ER 
alpha is present at the Cyp1a1 enhancer only after co-treatment with E2 and TCDD,
in MCF-7 cells. Sequential two-step ChIP assays were performed which demonstrate 
that AHR and ER alpha are present together at the same time on the Cyp1a1
enhancer during transrepression. Taken together these data support a role for
ER-mediated transrepression of AHR-dependent gene regulation.

PMID: 15837795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biogerontology. 2005;6(1):27-37.

The effect of age and calorie restriction on HIF-1-responsive genes in aged
liver.

Kang MJ(1), Kim HJ, Kim HK, Lee JY, Kim DH, Jung KJ, Kim KW, Baik HS, Yoo MA, Yu 
BP, Chung HY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Aging Tissue Bank, Pusan National University, Busan,
Korea.

Hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) regulates transactivation of several genes in 
response to hypoxia condition. We explore hepatic HIF-1 responsive gene
regulation during aging and the age-related changes of the HIF-1 related gene
activation in young and old rats. Results indicate that the aging process induces
the activation of HIF-1alpha, which is accompanied by increased HIF-1 DNA
binding. This increased binding activity is accompanied by the increase of
HIF-1-dependent genes, heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), erythropoietin (EPO), and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), 
which all showed remarkable up-regulation during aging process. In contrast, the 
increased HIF-1 related gene expression was effectively blunted by the
anti-oxidative action of calorie restriction in aged rat liver. We propose that
age-related HIF-1 binding activity may well be influenced by the increased
pro-oxidative conditions of aged animals, which up-regulate HIF-1-dependent gene 
expression.

PMID: 15834661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cancer Res. 2005 Apr 15;65(8):3257-63.

A hypoxia-independent hypoxia-inducible factor-1 activation pathway induced by
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase/Akt in HER2 overexpressing cells.

Li YM(1), Zhou BP, Deng J, Pan Y, Hay N, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

HER2 overexpression, a known prognostic factor in many human cancers, can
activate phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI-3K)/Akt pathways and plays an
important role in mediating cell survival and tumor development.
Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) promote angiogenesis and energy metabolism and
thereby enhance tumor growth and metastasis. HIFs, composed of alpha and beta
subunits, are activated in most human cancers, including those that overexpress
HER2. Previous reports have suggested that increased PI-3K/Akt or decreased PTEN 
activity may activate the HIF pathway in various tumors, but the detailed
mechanism is still not completely understood. Here we reported an interaction
between the HIF and PI-3K/Akt pathways in HER2-overexpressing cancer cells. Our
results indicate that HER2 overexpression, which results in constitutively active
Akt, turns on HIF-1alpha independently of hypoxia, and this activation is weaker 
than that under hypoxic condition. Further investigation showed that Akt is
required for the hypoxia-independent HIF activity. The PI-3K/Akt pathway did not 
affect the HIF-1alpha binding with its E3 ligase von Hippel-Lindau but enhanced
the binding affinity between the HIF-1 alpha and beta subunits. Furthermore, we
found that Akt interacts with HIF-1beta and regulates HIF activity. Our results
indicated that HER2 can induce HIF activation via the activation of Akt
suggesting that activation of HER2/Akt pathway may promote angiogenesis
independent of hypoxia, which may have important implications for the oncogenic
activity of HER2 and Akt.

PMID: 15833858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Arch Pharm Res. 2005 Mar;28(3):249-68.

Induction of phase I, II and III drug metabolism/transport by xenobiotics.

Xu C(1), Li CY, Kong AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The
State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Drug metabolizing enzymes (DMEs) play central roles in the metabolism,
elimination and detoxification of xenobiotics and drugs introduced into the human
body. Most of the tissues and organs in our body are well equipped with diverse
and various DMEs including phase I, phase II metabolizing enzymes and phase III
transporters, which are present in abundance either at the basal unstimulated
level, and/or are inducible at elevated level after exposure to xenobiotics.
Recently, many important advances have been made in the mechanisms that regulate 
the expression of these drug metabolism genes. Various nuclear receptors
including the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), orphan nuclear receptors, and
nuclear factor-erythoroid 2 p45-related factor 2 (Nrf2) have been shown to be the
key mediators of drug-induced changes in phase I, phase II metabolizing enzymes
as well as phase III transporters involved in efflux mechanisms. For instance,
the expression of CYP1 genes can be induced by AhR, which dimerizes with the AhR 
nuclear translocator (Arnt), in response to many polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon 
(PAHs). Similarly, the steroid family of orphan nuclear receptors, the
constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) and pregnane X receptor (PXR), both
heterodimerize with the retinoid X receptor (RXR), are shown to transcriptionally
activate the promoters of CYP2B and CYP3A gene expression by xenobiotics such as 
phenobarbital-like compounds (CAR) and dexamethasone and rifampin-type of agents 
(PXR). The peroxisome proliferator activated receptor (PPAR), which is one of the
first characterized members of the nuclear hormone receptor, also dimerizes with 
RXR and has been shown to be activated by lipid lowering agent fibrate-type of
compounds leading to transcriptional activation of the promoters on CYP4A gene.
CYP7A was recognized as the first target gene of the liver X receptor (LXR), in
which the elimination of cholesterol depends on CYP7A. Farnesoid X receptor (FXR)
was identified as a bile acid receptor, and its activation results in the
inhibition of hepatic acid biosynthesis and increased transport of bile acids
from intestinal lumen to the liver, and CYP7A is one of its target genes. The
transcriptional activation by these receptors upon binding to the promoters
located at the 5-flanking region of these CYP genes generally leads to the
induction of their mRNA gene expression. The physiological and the
pharmacological implications of common partner of RXR for CAR, PXR, PPAR, LXR and
FXR receptors largely remain unknown and are under intense investigations. For
the phase II DMEs, phase II gene inducers such as the phenolic compounds
butylated hydroxyanisol (BHA), tert-butylhydroquinone (tBHQ), green tea
polyphenol (GTP), (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) and the isothiocyanates
(PEITC, sulforaphane) generally appear to be electrophiles. They generally
possess electrophilic-mediated stress response, resulting in the activation of
bZIP transcription factors Nrf2 which dimerizes with Mafs and binds to the
antioxidant/electrophile response element (ARE/EpRE) promoter, which is located
in many phase II DMEs as well as many cellular defensive enzymes such as heme
oxygenase-1 (HO-1), with the subsequent induction of the expression of these
genes. Phase III transporters, for example, P-glycoprotein (P-gp), multidrug
resistance-associated proteins (MRPs), and organic anion transporting polypeptide
2 (OATP2) are expressed in many tissues such as the liver, intestine, kidney, and
brain, and play crucial roles in drug absorption, distribution, and excretion.
The orphan nuclear receptors PXR and CAR have been shown to be involved in the
regulation of these transporters. Along with phase I and phase II enzyme
induction, pretreatment with several kinds of inducers has been shown to alter
the expression of phase III transporters, and alter the excretion of xenobiotics,
which implies that phase III transporters may also be similarly regulated in a
coordinated fashion, and provides an important mean to protect the body from
xenobiotics insults. It appears that in general, exposure to phase I, phase II
and phase III gene inducers may trigger cellular "stress" response leading to the
increase in their gene expression, which ultimately enhance the elimination and
clearance of these xenobiotics and/or other "cellular stresses" including harmful
reactive intermediates such as reactive oxygen species (ROS), so that the body
will remove the "stress" expeditiously. Consequently, this homeostatic response
of the body plays a central role in the protection of the body against
"environmental" insults such as those elicited by exposure to xenobiotics.

PMID: 15832810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2005 May;12(5):441-8. Epub 2005 Apr 10.

The orphan nuclear receptor RORalpha regulates circadian transcription of the
mammalian core-clock Bmal1.

Akashi M(1), Takumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Osaka Bioscience Institute, 6-2-4 Furuedai, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan.

The PAS (PER-ARNT-SIM) helix-loop-helix transcription factor BMAL1 (also known as
MOP3) is an essential component of the circadian pacemaker in mammals. Here we
show that the retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor RORalpha (NR1F1)
directly activates transcription of Bmal1 through two conserved RORalpha response
elements that are required for cell-autonomous transcriptional oscillation of
Bmal1 mRNA. Positive involvement of RORalpha in generation of the Bmal1 circadian
oscillation was verified by behavioral analyses of RORalpha-deficient staggerer
mice that showed aberrant locomotor activity and unstable rhythmicity. In
cultured cells, loss of endogenous RORalpha protein resulted in a dampened
circadian rhythm of Bmal1 transcription, further indicating that RORalpha is a
functional component of the cell-autonomous core circadian clock. These results
indicate that RORalpha acts to promote Bmal1 transcription, thereby maintaining a
robust circadian rhythm.

PMID: 15821743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2005 Mar;18(3):127-37. Epub 2005 Apr 8.

Conservation and specialization in PAS domain dynamics.

Pandini A(1), Bonati L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze dell'Ambiente e del Territorio, Università degli Studi
di Milano-Bicocca, Piazza della Scienza 1, 20126 Milan, Italy.

The PAS (Per-ARNT-Sim) superfamily is presented as a well-suited study case to
demonstrate how comparison of functional motions among distant homologous
proteins with conserved fold characteristics may give insight into their
functional specialization. Based on the importance of structural flexibility of
the receptive structures in anticipating the signal-induced conformational
changes of these sensory systems, the dynamics of these structures were analysed.
Molecular dynamics was proved to be an effective method to obtain a reliable
picture of the dynamics of the crystal structures of HERG, phy3, PYP and FixL,
provided that an extensive conformational space sampling is performed. Other
reliable sources of dynamic information were the ensembles of NMR structures of
hPASK, HIF-2alpha and PYP. Essential dynamics analysis was successfully employed 
to extract the relevant information from the sampled conformational spaces.
Comparison of motion patterns in the essential subspaces, based on the structural
alignment, allowed identification of the specialized region in each domain. This 
appears to be evolved in the superfamily by following a specific trend, that also
suggests the presence of a limited number of general solutions adopted by the PAS
domains to sense external signals. These findings may give insight into unknown
mechanisms of PAS domains and guide further experimental studies.

PMID: 15820977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Dev Genes Evol. 2005 May;215(5):221-9. Epub 2005 Apr 8.

Analysis of the transcriptional activation domain of the Drosophila tango
bHLH-PAS transcription factor.

Sonnenfeld MJ(1), Delvecchio C, Sun X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ontario, 
Canada K1H 8M5. msonnenf@uottawa.ca

Basic-helix-loop-helix-PAS transcription factors play important roles in diverse 
biological processes including cellular differentiation and specification, oxygen
tension regulation and dioxin metabolism. Drosophila tango is orthologous to
mammalian Arnt and acts as a common dimerization partner for bHLH-PAS proteins
during embryogenesis. A transient transfection assay using Drosophila S2 tissue
culture cells and wild-type and mutant Drosophila tango cDNAs was used to
localize the activation domain of the Tango protein. An activation domain was
identified in the C-terminus of TGO consisting of poly-glutamine and
histidine-proline repeats. Transcriptional activation of the fibroblast growth
factor receptor (breathless) gene required an intact TGO C-terminus, in vitro.
Co-expression assays of trachealess and tgo in the developing eye imaginal disc
showed a requirement for the C-terminal transactivation domain of TGO for a
cellular response. Genetic analysis of tgo(3) shows that the paired repeat is
necessary for tracheal tubule formation in all branches. Lastly, expression of a 
C-terminal truncated tgo transgene specifically in the CNS midline and trachea
resulted in reductions in the number of breathless-expressing cells. These
results together identify TGO's transactivation domain and establish its
importance for proper target gene regulation and cellular specification.

PMID: 15818484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Apr;25(8):3163-72.

Inactivation of the arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt)
suppresses von Hippel-Lindau disease-associated vascular tumors in mice.

Rankin EB(1), Higgins DF, Walisser JA, Johnson RS, Bradfield CA, Haase VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, 700 Clinical Research Bldg., 415 Curie Blvd.,
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6144, USA.

Patients with germ line mutations in the VHL tumor suppressor gene are
predisposed to the development of highly vascularized tumors within multiple
tissues. Loss of pVHL results in constitutive activation of the transcription
factors HIF-1 and HIF-2, whose relative contributions to the pathogenesis of the 
VHL phenotype have yet to be defined. In order to examine the role of HIF in von 
Hippel-Lindau (VHL)-associated vascular tumorigenesis, we utilized
Cre-loxP-mediated recombination to inactivate hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
(Hif-1alpha) and arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) genes in a 
VHL mouse model of cavernous liver hemangiomas and polycythemia. Deletion of
Hif-1alpha did not affect the development of vascular tumors and polycythemia,
nor did it suppress the increased expression of vascular endothelial growth
factor (Vegf) and erythropoietin (Epo). In contrast, phosphoglycerokinase (Pgk)
expression was substantially decreased, providing evidence for target
gene-dependent functional redundancy between different Hif transcription factors.
Inactivation of Arnt completely suppressed the development of hemangiomas,
polycythemia, and Hif-induced gene expression. Here, we demonstrate genetically
that the development of VHL-associated vascular tumors in the liver depends on
functional ARNT. Furthermore, we provide evidence that individual HIF
transcription factors may play distinct roles in the development of specific VHL 
disease manifestations.

PMCID: PMC1069599
PMID: 15798202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Am Coll Nutr. 2005 Apr;24(2):146S-149S.

Soy protein isolate and protection against cancer.

Badger TM(1), Ronis MJ, Simmen RC, Simmen FA.

Author information: 
(1)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center and Department of Physiology/Biophysics, 
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA.
badgerthomasm@uams.edu

OBJECTIVE: Results from epidemiological and animal studies suggest that consuming
soy-containing diets reduces the incidence of certain cancers. The purpose of
this presentation was to evaluate the potential of soy protein to prevent
occurrence of prostate, breast and colon cancer.
METHODS: Meta-analyses of published epidemiologic studies associating cancer risk
with soy intake were performed. The incidence of chemically-induced mammary or
colon tumors was determined for rats fed AIN-93G diets made with either casein or
soy protein isolate (SPI). Western and Northern blot and microarray analyses were
performed on rat mammary and colon tissues to study mechanisms underlying the
effects of soy.
RESULTS: Meta-analyses revealed reductions in the mean overall risk estimate for 
mammary (0.78, p < 0.001), colon (0.70, p < 0.001) and prostate (0.66, p < 0.001)
cancer for soy consumers. The incidence of AOM-induced colon tumors and
DMBA-induced mammary tumors was reduced (p < 0.05) in rats fed SPI-containing
diets. Lower incidence of mammary tumors in SPI-fed rats was associated with: 1) 
reduced terminal end bud numbers (p < 0.05), 2) lower expression of the phase I
enzyme CYP1B1 (p < 0.05) and 3) reduced expression of the Ah Receptor and ARNT (p
< 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: SPI may protect against cancer via multiple mechanisms, including:
1) increased mammary gland differentiation, 2) decreased activation of
procarcinogens to carcinogens and 3) regulation of genes in signal transduction
pathways underlying tumor initiation, promotion and/or progression.

PMID: 15798082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Reproduction. 2005 Apr;129(4):379-89.

Molecular interactions of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and its biological and
toxicological relevance for reproduction.

Pocar P(1), Fischer B, Klonisch T, Hombach-Klonisch S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Martin Luther
University Halle-Wittenberg, Grosse Steinstrasse 52, D-06097, Halle (Saale),
Germany. paola.pocar@medizin.uni-halle.de

The dioxin/aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription
factor responsive to both natural and man-made environmental compounds. AhR and
its nuclear partner ARNT are expressed in the female reproductive tract in a
variety of species and several indications suggest that the AhR might play a
pivotal role in the physiology of reproduction. Furthermore, it appears to be the
mediator of most, if not all, the adverse effects on reproduction of a group of
highly potent environmental pollutants collectively called aryl hydrocarbons
(AHs), including the highly toxic compound 2,3,7,8-tetrachlor-odibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD). Although a large body of recent literature has implicated AhR in multiple
signal transduction pathways, the mechanisms of action resulting in a wide
spectrum of effects on female reproduction are largely unknown. Here we summarize
the major types of molecular cross-talks that have been identified for the AhR
and linked cell signaling pathways and that are relevant for the understanding of
the role of this transcription factor in female reproduction.

PMID: 15798013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Curr Med Chem. 2005;12(5):599-616.

Molecular actions of polyhalogenated arylhydrocarbons (PAHs) in female
reproduction.

Hombach-Klonisch S(1), Pocar P, Kietz S, Klonisch T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Cell Science, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3E 0W3, Canada. klonisch@cc.umanitoba.ca

Polyhalogenated aromatic arylhydrocarbons (PAHs) such as polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs) and dibenzofurans (PCDFs), the polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs) and polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) are persistent
lipophilic pollutants, which affect female fertility resulting in severe
reproductive dysregulation, including anovulation, reduced conception rates,
abortion, menstrual abnormalities and developmental defects of female
reproductive tissues. Many PAHs exert their effects by activating a family of
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, the arylhydrocarbon receptor
(AhR) and the arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), which result 
in the expression of AhR target molecules. Complex interactions between
PAH-mediated AhR activation and ER signalling pathways have been discovered which
may contribute to the developmental malformations, impact on reproductive
dysfunctions and promote carcinogenic dedifferentiation of tissues within the
female reproductive tract. This review will focus on the multifaceted roles of
PAHs in key organs of the female reproductive tract, the ovary, uterus/
endometrium and the mammary gland. The complexity and diversity of actions
unleashed by PAHs in these female reproductive tissues identify these
environmental pollutants as important endocrine disrupting toxicants impacting on
female fertility.

PMID: 15777215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 20;280(20):20094-101. Epub 2005 Mar 14.

Intestinal glucose-dependent expression of glucose-6-phosphatase: involvement of 
the aryl receptor nuclear translocator transcription factor.

Carrière V(1), Le Gall M, Gouyon-Saumande F, Schmoll D, Brot-Laroche E,
Chauffeton V, Chambaz J, Rousset M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR 505, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France.
veronique.carriere-u505@bhdc.jussieu.fr

Glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) catalyzes the release of glucose from glucose
6-phosphate. This enzyme was mainly studied in the liver, but while detected in
the small intestine little is known about the regulation of its intestinal
expression. This study describes the mechanisms of the glucose-dependent
regulation of G6Pase expression in intestinal cells. Results obtained in vivo and
in Caco-2/TC7 enterocytes showed that glucose increases the G6Pase mRNA level. In
Caco-2/TC7 cells, glucose stabilized G6Pase mRNA and activated the transcription 
of the gene, meaning that glucose-dependent G6Pase expression involved both
transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms. Reporter-gene studies showed
that, although the -299/+57 region of the human G6Pase promoter was sufficient to
trigger the glucose response in the hepatoma cell line HepG2, the -1157/-1133
fragment was required for maximal activation of glucose-6-phosphatase gene
transcription in Caco-2/TC7 cells. This fragment binds the aryl receptor nuclear 
translocator (ARNT), cAMP-responsive element-binding protein, and upstream
stimulatory factor transcription factors. The DNA binding activity of these
transcription factors was increased in nuclear extracts of differentiated cells
from the intestinal villus of mice fed sugar-rich diets as compared with mice fed
a no-sugar diet. A direct implication of ARNT in the activation of G6Pase gene
transcription by glucose has been observed in Caco-2/TC7 cells using RNA
interference experiments. These results support a physiological role for G6Pase
in the control of nutrient absorption in the small intestine.

PMID: 15767253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):17526-32. Epub 2005 Feb 24.

Light-independent phosphorylation of WHITE COLLAR-1 regulates its function in the
Neurospora circadian negative feedback loop.

He Q(1), Shu H, Cheng P, Chen S, Wang L, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Phosphorylation is a major regulatory mechanism controlling circadian clocks. In 
the Neurospora circadian clock, the PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) domain-containing
transcription factor, WHITE COLLAR (WC)-1, acts both as the blue light
photoreceptor of the clock and as a positive element in the circadian negative
feedback loop in constant darkness, by activating the transcription of the
frequency (frq) gene. To understand the role of WC-1 phosphorylation, five in
vivo WC-1 phosphorylation sites, located immediately downstream of the WC-1 zinc 
finger DNA binding domain, were identified by tandem mass spectrometry using
biochemically purified endogenous WC-1 protein. Mutations of these
phosphorylation sites suggest that they are major WC-1 phosphorylation sites
under constant conditions but are not responsible for the light-induced
hyperphosphorylation of WC-1. Although phosphorylation of these sites does not
affect the light function of WC-1, strains carrying mutations of these sites show
short period, low amplitude, or arrhythmic conidiation rhythms in constant
darkness. Furthermore, normal or slightly higher levels of frq mRNA and FRQ
proteins were observed in a mutant strain containing mutations of all five sites 
despite its low WC-1 levels. Together, these data suggest that phosphorylation of
these sites negatively regulates the function of WC-1 in the circadian negative
feedback loop and is important for the function of the Neurospora circadian
clock.

PMID: 15731099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Toxicol Sci. 2005 May;85(1):727-34. Epub 2005 Feb 23.

Inhibitory effects of vitamin A on TCDD-induced cytochrome P-450 1A1 enzyme
activity and expression.

Yang YM(1), Huang DY, Liu GF, Zhong JC, Du K, Li YF, Song XH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Center, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou,
Guangdong 515041, People's Republic of China.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is an extremely potent environmental
contaminant that produces a wide range of adverse biological effects, including
the induction of cytochrome P450 1A1(CYP1A1) that may enhance the toxic effects
of TCDD. Several studies indicated that concurrent supplementation of vitamin A
could reduce the toxicity, and potentially inhibit CYP1A1 activity (measured as
ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase [EROD] activity). In the present study, we
investigated the in vivo effects of vitamin A on EROD activities and the
expression of CYP1A1 in the liver of TCDD-treated mice. In Experiment I, the mice
were given a single oral dose of 40 mug TCDD/kg body weight with or without the
continuous administration of 2500 IU vitamin A/kg body weight/day, and were
killed on day 1, 3, 7, 14, or 28. In Experiment II, the mice were given daily an 
oral dose of 0.1 mug TCDD/kg body weight with or without supplement of 2000 IU
vitamin A/kg body weight, and were killed on day 14, 28, or 42. In both
experiments, TCDD caused liver damage and increase in relative liver weights,
augmented the EROD activities and CYP1A1 expression, and increased the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) mRNA expression, but did not alter the AhR nuclear
translocator (ARNT) mRNA expression. CYP1A1 mRNA expression and AhR mRNA
expression showed a similar time course. The liver damage in TCDD + vitamin
A-treated mice was less severe than that in TCDD-treated mice. EROD activities,
CYP1A1 expression, and AhR mRNA expression in vitamin A + TCDD-treated mice were 
lower than those in TCDD-treated mice, indicating that supplementation of vitamin
A might attenuate the liver damage caused by TCDD.

PMID: 15728703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Immunol. 2005 Mar 1;174(5):2770-7.

Constitutively active aryl hydrocarbon receptor expressed specifically in
T-lineage cells causes thymus involution and suppresses the immunization-induced 
increase in splenocytes.

Nohara K(1), Pan X, Tsukumo S, Hida A, Ito T, Nagai H, Inouye K, Motohashi H,
Yamamoto M, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Tohyama C.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Sciences Division, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan. keikon@nies.go.jp

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a transcription factor belonging to the
basic helix-loop-helix-PER-ARNT-SIM superfamily. Xenobiotics, such as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, bind the receptor and trigger diverse
biological reactions. Thymocyte development and T cell-dependent immune reactions
are sensitive targets of AhR-dependent 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
toxicity. However, the exact role of the AhR in T cells in animals exposed to
exogenous ligands has not been clarified because indirect effects of activated
AhR in other cell types cannot be excluded. In this study, we generated
transgenic (Tg) mice expressing a constitutively active mutant of AhR under the
regulation of a T cell-specific CD2 promoter to examine AhR function in T cells. 
The mRNAs of the constitutively active mutant of AhR and an AhR-induced gene,
CYP1A1, were expressed in the thymus and spleen of the Tg mice. The transgene
expression was clearly detected in the thymocytes, CD4, and CD8 T cells, but not 
in the B cells or thymus stromal cells. These Tg mice had a decreased number of
thymocytes and an increased percentage of CD8 single-positive thymocytes, but
their splenocytes were much less affected. By contrast, the increase in number of
T cells and B cells taking place in the spleen after immunization was
significantly suppressed in the Tg mice. These results clearly show that AhR
activation in the T-lineage cells is directly involved in thymocyte loss and
skewed differentiation. They also indicate that AhR activation in T cells and not
in B cells suppresses the immunization-induced increase in both T cells and B
cells.

PMID: 15728486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. NeuroRx. 2004 Jan;1(1):26-35.

Hypoxic preconditioning protects against ischemic brain injury.

Sharp FR(1), Ran R, Lu A, Tang Y, Strauss KI, Glass T, Ardizzone T, Bernaudin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Cincinnati, Ohio 45267, USA.
frank.sharp@uc.edu

Animals exposed to brief periods of moderate hypoxia (8% to 10% oxygen for 3
hours) are protected against cerebral and cardiac ischemia between 1 and 2 days
later. This hypoxia preconditioning requires new RNA and protein synthesis. The
mechanism of this hypoxia-induced tolerance correlates with the induction of the 
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), a transcription factor heterodimeric complex
composed of inducible HIF-1alpha and constitutive HIF-1beta proteins that bind to
the hypoxia response elements in a number of HIF target genes. Our recent studies
show that HIF-1alpha correlates with hypoxia induced tolerance in neonatal rat
brain. HIF target genes, also induced following hypoxia-induced tolerance,
include vascular endothelial growth factor, erythropoietin, glucose transporters,
glycolytic enzymes, and many other genes. Some or all of these genes may
contribute to hypoxia-induced protection against ischemia. HIF induction of the
glycolytic enzymes accounts in part for the Pasteur effect in brain and other
tissues. Hypoxia-induced tolerance is not likely to be equivalent to treatment
with a single HIF target gene protein since other transcription factors including
Egr-1 (NGFI-A) have been implicated in hypoxia regulation of gene expression.
Understanding the mechanisms and genes involved in hypoxic tolerance may provide 
new therapeutic targets to treat ischemic injury and enhance recovery.

PMCID: PMC534910
PMID: 15717005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Circulation. 2005 Mar 1;111(8):961-8. Epub 2005 Feb 7.

Novel mutation in the Per-Arnt-Sim domain of KCNH2 causes a malignant form of
long-QT syndrome.

Rossenbacker T(1), Mubagwa K, Jongbloed RJ, Vereecke J, Devriendt K, Gewillig M, 
Carmeliet E, Collen D, Heidbüchel H, Carmeliet P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Transgene Technology and Gene Therapy, Flanders Interuniversitary
Institute for Biotechnology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: It has been proposed that the highest risk for cardiac events in
patients with long-QT syndrome subtype 2 (LQT2) is related to mutations in the
pore region of the KCNH2 channel. It has also been suggested that a subpopulation
of LQT2 patients may benefit from pharmacological therapy with modified KCNH2
channel-blocking drugs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In a large LQT2 family (n=33), we have identified a novel
nonpore missense mutation (K28E) in the Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain of the KCNH2
channel associated with a malignant phenotype: One third of the suspected gene
carriers experienced a major cardiac event. Wild-type and K28E-KCNH2 channels
were transiently transfected in HEK293 cells. For the mutant channel, whole-cell 
patch-clamp analysis showed a reduced current density, a negative shift of
voltage-dependent channel availability, and an increased rate of deactivation.
Western blot analysis and confocal imaging revealed a trafficking deficiency for 
the mutant channel that could be rescued by the K+ channel blocker E-4031. In
cells containing both wild-type and mutant channels, deactivation kinetics were
normal. In these cells, reduced current density was restored with E-4031.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that besides pore mutations, mutations in the PAS
domain may also exhibit a malignant outcome. Pharmacological restoration of
current density is promising as a mutation-specific therapy for patients carrying
this trafficking-defective mutant.

PMID: 15699249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Apr;16(4):1901-12. Epub 2005 Feb 2.

Hypoxia-inducible factor regulates alphavbeta3 integrin cell surface expression.

Cowden Dahl KD(1), Robertson SE, Weaver VM, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-deficient placentas exhibit a number of defects,
including changes in cell fate adoption, lack of fetal angiogenesis,
hypocellularity, and poor invasion into maternal tissue. HIF is a heterodimeric
transcription factor consisting of alpha and beta aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator or ARNT) subunits. We used undifferentiated trophoblast stem
(TS) cells to characterize HIF-dependent adhesion, migration, and invasion.
Arnt(-/-) and Hifalpha(-/-) TS cells exhibit reduced adhesion and migration
toward vitronectin compared with wild-type cells. Furthermore, this defect is
associated with decreased cell surface expression of integrin alphavbeta3 and
significantly decreased expression of this integrin in focal adhesions. Because
of the importance of adhesion and migration in tumor progression (in addition to 
placental development), we examined the affect of culturing B16F0 melanoma cells 
in 1.5% oxygen (O(2)). Culturing B16F0 melanoma cells at 1.5% O(2) resulted in
increased alphavbeta3 integrin surface expression and increased adhesion to and
migration toward vitronectin. Together, these data suggest that HIF and O(2)
tension influence placental invasion and tumor migration by increasing cell
surface expression of alphavbeta3 integrin.

PMCID: PMC1073670
PMID: 15689487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2004 Sep;138(3):233-6.

Transcriptional activation of cytochrome P450 1A1 with alpha-tocopherol.

Sidorova YA(1), Grishanova AY, Lyakhovich VV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Biochemistry of Foreign Compounds, Institute of Molecular
Biology and Biophysics, Siberian Division of the Russian Academy of Medical
Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia.

Peroral administration of alpha-tocopherol in a daily dose of 150 mg/kg for 1, 4,
8, and 12 days leads to induction of cytochromes P450 1A in male rats. Activity
of CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 increased most significantly one day after alpha-tocopherol 
administration (by 2.6 and 2.7 times, respectively). CYP1A1 was
immunohistochemically detected in rat liver microsomes during this period. The
content of CYP1A1 mRNA significantly increased in the liver. The amount of CYP1A2
mRNA and regulatory proteins for signal activation of CYP1A1 (AhR and Arnt)
remained unchanged after treatment with alpha-tocopherol.

PMID: 15665910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Toxicology. 2005 Mar 1;208(1):1-11.

Effect of TCDD on mRNA expression of genes encoding bHLH/PAS proteins in rat
hypothalamus.

Korkalainen M(1), Lindén J, Tuomisto J, Pohjanvirta R.

Author information: 
(1)National Public Health Institute, Department of Environmental Health, P.O. Box
95, FIN-70701 Kuopio, Finland. merja.korkalainen@ktl.fi

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) brings about a wide variety of toxic
and biochemical effects via an AH receptor (AHR)-mediated signalling pathway.
Wasting syndrome and acute lethality are TCDD-induced endpoints showing a
striking sensitivity difference between two rat strains, TCDD-sensitive
Long-Evans (Turku/AB) (L-E) and TCDD-resistant Han/Wistar (Kuopio) (H/W). These
rat strains were used to study hypothalamic effects of TCDD on expression of
genes encoding AHR-regulated bHLH/PAS proteins potentially involved in molecular 
pathogenesis of the wasting syndrome. In addition, two well-established target
genes of TCDD, CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 were also examined. Quantitative RT-PCR was used
to measure mRNA levels in hypothalamus, which is a major center of food intake
and body weight regulation. At both 6 and 96 h after a single dose of 50
microg/kg TCDD, significant elevations were found in mRNA levels of AHR repressor
(AHRR), CYP1A1 and CYP1A2, but not those of AHR, ARNT or ARNT2. Likewise, TCDD
(100 microg/kg) did not alter the expression of SIM1, implicated in the
suppressive impact of TCDD on food intake, nor that of PER2, involved in
regulation of circadian rhythms. Differences between H/W and L-E rats appeared in
constitutive levels of AHR and ARNT and in TCDD-induced levels of CYP1A2, AHRR,
AHR and ARNT, which all were about two- to four-fold lower in H/W rats. Thus,
although the changes found do not account for the wasting syndrome, expression of
all principal genes of the AHR-signalling pathway in rat hypothalamus make it a
candidate target for TCDD.

PMID: 15664428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Toxicology. 2005 Feb 28;207(3):401-9.

Identification of aldehyde oxidase 1 and aldehyde oxidase homologue 1 as
dioxin-inducible genes.

Rivera SP(1), Choi HH, Chapman B, Whitekus MJ, Terao M, Garattini E, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of California, 650 Charles E. Young Dr., Factor Bldg. 13-230, 
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1732, USA.

Aldehyde oxidases are a family of highly related molybdo-flavoenzymes acting upon
a variety of compounds of industrial and medical importance. We have identified
aldehyde oxidase 1 (AOX1) as a 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (dioxin)
inducible gene in the mouse hepatoma cell line Hepa-1. AOX1 mRNA levels were not 
increased by dioxin in mutant derivatives of the Hepa-1 cell line lacking either 
functional aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) or aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (ARNT) proteins, thus demonstrating that transcriptional induction
of AOX1 in response to dioxin occurs through the AHR pathway. Dioxin induction of
AOX1 mRNA was also observed in mouse liver. In addition, levels of AOX1 protein
as well as those of aldehyde oxidase homologue 1 (AOH1), a recently identified
homolog of AOX1, were elevated in mouse liver in response to dioxin. Employing an
aldehyde oxidase specific substrate, AOX1/AOH1 activity was shown to be induced
by dioxin in mouse liver. This activity was inhibited by a known inhibitor of
aldehyde oxidases, and eliminated by including tungstate in the mouse diet, which
is known to lead to inactivation of molybdoflavoenzymes, thus confirming that the
enzymatic activity was attributable to AOX1/AOH1. Our observations thus identify 
two additional xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes induced by dioxin.

PMID: 15664268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Apr;67(4):1325-33. Epub 2005 Jan 18.

Regulation of the Cyp2a5 gene involves an aryl hydrocarbon receptor-dependent
pathway.

Arpiainen S(1), Raffalli-Mathieu F, Lang MA, Pelkonen O, Hakkola J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, P.O. Box 5000, University of Oulu, 
FIN-90014 Oulun yliopisto, Finland.

We have investigated the role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) in the
regulation of the Cyp2a5 gene. The C57BL/6 and DBA/2 mouse strains with a
genetically determined difference in AHR function were used to study the CYP2A5
induction by typical AHR ligands, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and 
3-methylcholanthrene. The CYP2A5 mRNA up-regulation in these mouse strains showed
a difference in response, typical for AHR-regulated genes, both by TCDD in
cultured primary hepatocytes and by 3-methylcholanthrene in vivo. In primary
hepatocytes, TCDD caused a 3-fold elevation of the CYP2A5 protein level and a
similar induction of the CYP2A5-catalyzed coumarin 7-hydroxylation activity. In
reporter gene assays, the Cyp2a5 promoter region -3033 to +10 mediated a 2- to
5-fold induction of luciferase activity by TCDD treatment in primary hepatocytes 
and in Hepa-1 hepatoma cells with an intact AHR/AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT)
complex. In Hepa-1 variant cell lines with deficiencies in the AHR/ARNT complex, 
the absence of ARNT abolished the induction. A putative AHR response element
(XRE) was identified in the Cyp2a5 promoter at the position -2514 to -2492 and
found to interact with the AHR/ARNT heterodimer. Transfection experiments
combined with mutation of the XRE site indicated that the site partly mediates
the TCDD induction of Cyp2a5. An additional AHR-dependent mechanism also
regulates the proximal promoter of the Cyp2a5 gene. In conclusion, our studies
showed that AHR ligands up-regulate Cyp2a5 transcriptionally by an
AHR/ARNT-dependent mechanism and established Cyp2a5 as a novel AHR-regulated
gene.

PMID: 15657367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Neurosci Res. 2005 Feb 15;79(4):451-8.

Novel function of neuronal PAS domain protein 1 in erythropoietin expression in
neuronal cells.

Ohsawa S(1), Hamada S, Kakinuma Y, Yagi T, Miura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The basic helix loop helix-PAS (bHLH-PAS) transcription factors have diverse
roles in physiologic responses to the environment and in early development. One
bHLH-PAS protein, neuronal PAS domain protein 1 (NPAS1), is reported to be
expressed only in the central nervous system beginning at the late embryonic
stage, but its function is unknown. Using an anti-NPAS1 antibody, we have shown
that NPAS1 expression in cerebral cortex was observed first around embryonic Day 
16.5 (E16.5) and was then dispersed throughout the region as cortical development
progressed. From the similarity with hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
(HIF-1alpha), we investigated whether NPAS1 regulates transcription of
erythropoietin (EPO), which is the target of HIF-1alpha and is expressed in the
brain during the early developmental stage. In the present study, we have shown
that NPAS1 binds to the enhancer region of Epo in vivo. A luciferase reporter
assay revealed a repressive effect of NPAS1 on hypoxia-responsive
element-regulated gene expression. These results raise the possibility that NPAS1
plays a role in late central nervous system development by modulating EPO
expression in response to cellular oxygen level.

Copyright (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15635607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Protein Sci. 2005 Feb;14(2):558-65. Epub 2005 Jan 4.

Crystal structures of RsbQ, a stress-response regulator in Bacillus subtilis.

Kaneko T(1), Tanaka N, Kumasaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, 
Japan.

Growth-limiting stresses in bacteria induce the general stress response to
protect the cells against future stresses. Energy stress caused by starvation
conditions in Bacillus subtilis is transmitted to the sigma(B) transcription
factor by stress-response regulators. RsbP, a positive regulator, is a
phosphatase containing a PAS (Per-ARNT-Sim) domain and requires catalytic
function of a putative alpha/beta hydrolase, RsbQ, to be activated. These two
proteins have been found to interact with each other. We determined the crystal
structures of RsbQ in native and inhibitor-bound forms to investigate why RsbP
requires RsbQ. These structures confirm that RsbQ belongs to the alpha/beta
hydrolase superfamily. Since the catalytic triad is buried inside the molecule
due to the closed conformation, the active site is constructed as a hydrophobic
cavity that is nearly isolated from the solvent. This suggests that RsbQ has
specificity for a hydrophobic small compound rather than a macromolecule such as 
RsbP. Moreover, structural comparison with other alpha/beta hydrolases
demonstrates that a unique loop region of RsbQ is a likely candidate for the
interaction site with RsbP, and the interaction might be responsible for product 
release by operating the hydrophobic gate equipped between the cavity and the
solvent. Our results support the possibility that RsbQ provides a cofactor
molecule for the mature functionality of RsbP.

PMCID: PMC2253412
PMID: 15632289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cell. 2005 Jan 7;17(1):69-82.

Crystal structure and interactions of the PAS repeat region of the Drosophila
clock protein PERIOD.

Yildiz O(1), Doi M, Yujnovsky I, Cardone L, Berndt A, Hennig S, Schulze S,
Urbanke C, Sassone-Corsi P, Wolf E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular
Physiology, Otto-Hahn-Strasse 11, 44227 Dortmund, Germany.

PERIOD proteins are central components of the Drosophila and mammalian circadian 
clock. Their function is controlled by daily changes in synthesis, cellular
localization, phosphorylation, degradation, as well as specific interactions with
other clock components. Here we present the crystal structure of a Drosophila
PERIOD (dPER) fragment comprising two tandemly organized PAS (PER-ARNT-SIM)
domains (PAS-A and PAS-B) and two additional C-terminal alpha helices (alphaE and
alphaF). Our analysis reveals a noncrystallographic dPER dimer mediated by
intermolecular interactions of PAS-A with PAS-B and helix alphaF. We show that
alphaF is essential for dPER homodimerization and that the PAS-A-alphaF
interaction plays a crucial role in dPER clock function, as it is affected by the
29 hr long-period perL mutation.

PMID: 15629718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Pharm Sci. 2005 Mar;94(3):493-506.

Down-regulation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-regulated genes by tumor necrosis
factor-alpha and lipopolysaccharide in murine hepatoma Hepa 1c1c7 cells.

Gharavi N(1), El-Kadi AO.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 3118 Dentistry/Pharmacy
Centre, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada T6G 2N8.

Although much is known concerning the effects of inflammation and oxidative
stress on the cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1), little is known about the modulation 
of other aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)-regulated genes such as
glutathione-S-transferase Ya (GST Ya) and NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase (QOR) by
inflammation. In the present study, the effect of tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha and lipopolysaccharides (LPS) on the constitutive and inducible
expression of the AHR-regulated genes cyp1a1, GST Ya, and QOR was determined in
murine hepatoma Hepa 1c1c7 (WT), AHR-deficient (C12), and AHR nuclear
translocator protein (ARNT)-deficient (C4) cells. We found that both TNF-alpha
and LPS strongly repressed the constitutive expression and the
beta-naphthoflavone-mediated induction of cyp1a1, GST Ya, and QOR in WT but not
in C12 and C4 cells. The induction of GST Ya and QOR activities and mRNA levels
by phenolic antioxidant, tert-butylhydroquinone, through the antioxidant response
element was not significantly affected by TNF-alpha or LPS. In addition, a
significant increase in reactive oxygen species was observed in WT, C12, and C4
cells treated with TNF-alpha or LPS which was completely prevented by
tert-butylhydroquinone. These results show that the down-regulation of
AHR-regulated genes by TNF-alpha and LPS is dependent on the presence of both
heterodimeric transcription factors, AHR and ARNT. Furthermore, reactive oxygen
species may be involved in the down-regulation of AHR-regulated genes.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc. and the American Pharmacists Association.

PMID: 15627257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Cell Sci. 2005 Jan 15;118(Pt 2):301-11. Epub 2004 Dec 22.

Role of CBP in regulating HIF-1-mediated activation of transcription.

Ruas JL(1), Poellinger L, Pereira T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institute, 171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.

The hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a key regulator of oxygen homeostasis
in the cell. We have previously shown that HIF-1alpha and the transcriptional
coactivator CBP colocalize in accumulation foci within the nucleus of hypoxic
cells. In our further exploration of the hypoxia-dependent regulation of
HIF-1alpha function by transcriptional coactivators we observed that coexpression
of SRC-1 (another important coactivator of the hypoxia response) and HIF-1alpha
did not change the individual characteristic nuclear distribution patterns.
Colocalization of both these proteins proved to be mediated by CBP. Biochemical
assays showed that depletion of CBP from cell extracts abrogated interaction
between SRC-1 and HIF-1alpha. Thus, in contrast to the current model for the
assembly of complexes between nuclear hormone receptors and coactivators, the
present data suggest that it is CBP that recruits SRC-1 to HIF-1alpha in hypoxic 
cells. We also observed that CBP, HIF-1alpha/Arnt and HIF-1alpha/CBP accumulation
foci partially overlap with the hyperphosphorylated form of RNA polymerase II,
and that CBP had a stabilizing effect on the formation of the complex between
HIF-1alpha and its DNA-binding partner, Arnt. In conclusion, CBP plays an
important role as a mediator of HIF-1alpha/Arnt/CBP/SRC-1 complex formation,
coordinating the temporally and hierarchically regulated intranuclear traffic of 
HIF-1alpha and associated cofactors in signal transduction in hypoxic cells.

PMID: 15615775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Toxicol Lett. 2005 Feb 15;155(2):253-8.

Rat hepatic CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 induction by menadione.

Sidorova YA(1), Grishanova AY, Lyakhovich VV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Siberian Division of Russian
Academy of Medical Sciences, Timakova str. 2, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.
ysidorova@soramn.ru

The effects of menadione on activities and expression of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A
subfamily (CYP1A) isozymes in rat hepatic tissue were examined. When rats were
treated orally with 15 mg/kg menadione for 4 days, the elevation of hepatic
CYP1A1/1A2 specific activities in microsomal preparations was detected with
approximately 5.4- and 2.5-fold increase over control values for
ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD, CYP1A1) and methoxyresorufin-O-demethylase
(MROD, CYP1A2) activities, respectively. CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 mRNA levels in the
liver of menadione-treated rats were approximately 11.8- and 1.8-fold higher than
in controls, respectively, whereas the expression of the CYP1A regulatory
proteins aryl hydrocarbon-receptor (AhR) and AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt) was 
not changed at the mRNA level. The result of this study demonstrates that
menadione induces CYP1A1/1A2 expression in vivo through either transcriptional
activation and/or mRNA stabilization.

PMID: 15603920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Dec 21;101(51):17634-9. Epub 2004 Dec 13.

Per-Arnt-Sim domain-dependent association of cAMP-phosphodiesterase 8A1 with
IkappaB proteins.

Wu P(1), Wang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inflammation and Infection, Schering-Plough Research Institute, 
Kenilworth, NJ 07033, USA.

Phosphodiesterase (PDE) 8A1 is a cAMP-specific PDE isozyme characterized by the
presence of a Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain. However, the function(s) of the PAS
domain has remained unknown. In this study, using a lysate of HEK293 cells
overexpressing recombinant human PDE8A1, we detected a physical association
between PDE8A1 and endogenous IkappaBbeta by an antibody array technique. The
association was specific for PDE8A1 and depended on the presence of the PAS
domain. Subsequent coimmunoprecipitation experiments revealed that, in addition
to IkappaBbeta, other IkappaB family members examined (p105, p100, and
IkappaBalpha) also associated with PDE8A1. Furthermore, it was found that PDE8A1 
competed with the p65/p50 NF-kappaB for IkappaBbeta binding. Taken together,
these data indicate that PDE8A1, through its PAS domain, may bind with IkappaB
proteins in a region containing their ankyrin repeats. Functionally, in vitro and
in vivo experiments demonstrated that the association with IkappaB greatly
enhanced the enzyme activity of PDE8A1. However, the PDE8A1-IkappaB association
did not affect NF-kappaB activation. The biological role of the PDE8A1-IkappaB
association remains to be elucidated.

PMCID: PMC539753
PMID: 15596729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Free Radic Biol Med. 2005 Jan 1;38(1):117-24.

Deferoxamine induces prolonged cardiac preconditioning via accumulation of oxygen
radicals.

Dendorfer A(1), Heidbreder M, Hellwig-Bürgel T, Jöhren O, Qadri F, Dominiak P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University
of Luebeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, D-23538 Luebeck, Germany.
dendorfe@medinf.mu-luebeck.de

Iron chelation by deferoxamine (DFO) blocks the Fenton reaction, but also
inhibits prolyl hydroxylases and thereby activates certain hypoxia-inducible
transcription factors (HIFs) that trigger cellular adaptation to hypoxia. Because
both mechanisms may alleviate tissue damage in ischemia and reperfusion, we tried
to differentiate their contribution to DFO-induced cardioprotection. Myocardial
ischemia and reperfusion were induced in anesthetized Wistar rats. Infarct size
was related to the ischemic area. Myocardial mRNA expression was determined by
real-time PCR. Radical reactivity was probed in myocardial tissue slices with the
redox-sensitive dye CM-H(2)DCFDA. Single ip applications of DFO (200 mg/kg)
administered 2 h to 3 days before infarction reduced infarct size from 55 +/- 7% 
to 22-26%. Protection was abolished by the radical scavenger
N-(2-mercaptopropionyl)glycine and the protein kinase C inhibitor chelerythrine
when either was given 30 min before DFO, whereas subsequent application was
ineffective. DFO did not alter the expression of various HIF target genes,
whereas mRNAs of HIF-independent genes, aldose reductase and glucose
transporter-4, were increased in infarcted myocardium 2 days after DFO treatment.
Enhancement of superoxide activity by DFO could be demonstrated in vitro. Acute
and prolonged myocardial preconditioning is triggered by DFO in response to
accumulation of oxygen radicals and activation of protein kinase C.

PMID: 15589380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Toxicol Environ Health B Crit Rev. 2004 Nov-Dec;7(6):465-80.

Immune systems, geographic information systems (GIS), environment and health
impacts.

Blanco GA(1), Cooper EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, IDEHU-National Research Council (CONICET), School of
Pharmacy and Biochemistry, University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
gblanco@ffyb.uba.ar

Exposure to dioxins, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) has been related to alterations in cellular and humoral
immune responses in both adaptive and innate immune systems of most animal
species. These compounds share a common signaling mechanism to exert their
effects on cells of the immune system, which includes the aryl-hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) and the AhR nuclear translocator (ARN). Recently, the interference
of AhR-ARNT with the nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB signaling pathway has been
proposed as a critical event in the adverse effects on the immune system. Studies
on the effects of these AhR-ARNT-related toxicants on the immune system of higher
and lower phylum animals and knowledge of intracellular mechanisms of toxicity
may contribute to development of biomarkers of ecotoxicant exposure and effects. 
Biomarkers of this kind allow sampling over extended geographic areas, in several
sentinel species, including wildlife animals, and facilitate the building of risk
models and risk maps of environmentally induced diseases. On the basis of
location, biomarker sampled data obtained through evaluation of ecotoxicant
exposure and effects on the immune system in sentinel species can be further
integrated and analyzed together with other sources of environmental geographic
information, or human population health data, by means of geographic information 
systems (GIS). The spatial analysis capability of GIS can help to evaluate the
complex relationships of overlaid information and to identify areas with high
risk indices or "hot spots." This integrative approach can be useful in studies
contributing to support environmental and health-related policies and
regulations.

PMID: 15586880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Int J Oncol. 2005 Jan;26(1):211-6.

Hypoxia-responsive element-mediated soluble Tie2 vector exhibits an
anti-angiogenic activity in vitro under hypoxic condition.

Jeong CH(1), Lee YM, Choi KS, Seong YR, Kim YJ, Im DS, Kim KW.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Seoul
National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is one of the key mammalian transcription
factors and shows increased levels in both protein stability and intrinsic
transcriptional activity during low oxygen tension. Hypoxia-activated functional 
HIF-1 protein binds to hypoxia-responsive elements (HRE) in the enhancers of
several genes including VEGF, the major player in angiogenesis, and initiates
their mRNA expression. The molecular mechanisms regulating the gene expression
under hypoxic conditions could increase the therapeutic window of tumor-specific 
delivery systems. In this study, to examine hypoxia-specific production of
anti-angiogenic therapeutic gene, we constructed 5 copies of HRE (5xHRE) of human
VEGF linked to soluble Tie2 (sTie2) driven by minimal SV40 promoter
(5xHRE/SV40/sTie2). Our data showed that under hypoxia the secreted sTie2
selectively inhibited tube formation and migration capacities of endothelial
cells in vitro. Hence, we propose that the vector system, 5xHRE/SV40/sTie2, might
be a useful tool for down-regulating tumor angiogenesis under hypoxic condition.

PMID: 15586242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Toxicol Lett. 2005 Jan 15;155(1):151-9.

Hypoxic inhibition of 3-methylcholanthrene-induced CYP1A1 expression is
independent of HIF-1alpha.

Allen JW(1), Johnson RS, Bhatia SN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Department of Bioengineering, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) 
both require dimerization with AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT) to initiate
transcription of their respective target genes. It has been proposed that
competition for ARNT results in decreased targeting of AhR to cytochrome P450 1A1
(CYP1A1) under hypoxia. We established primary cultures of HIF-1alpha null
hepatocytes to examine the interaction between HIF-1alpha and AhR signaling. Gene
expression of known HIF targets phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK), vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and glucose transporter-1 (GLUT-1) increased
under hypoxia, but was reduced in the HIF null cultures. Concomitant treatment of
cultures with hypoxia (1% O2) and 3-methylcholanthrene (an AhR ligand) did not
significantly alter HIF target gene expression. Furthermore, enzymatic activity
and transcription of CYP1A1 was inhibited by hypoxia in HIF-1alpha null cultures,
indicating that HIF-1alpha is not directly involved in negative regulation of AhR
signaling.

PMID: 15585370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 18;280(7):5740-9. Epub 2004 Nov 23.

NDPK2 as a signal transducer in the phytochrome-mediated light signaling.

Shen Y(1), Kim JI, Song PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 68588-0304, USA.

Nucleoside-diphosphate kinase (NDPK) 2 in Arabidopsis has been identified as a
phytochrome-interacting protein by using the C-terminal domain of phytochrome A
(PhyA) as the bait in yeast two-hybrid screening. The far-red light-absorbing
form of phytochrome (Pfr) A stimulates NDPK2 gamma-phosphate exchange activity in
vitro. To better understand the multiple functions of NDPK and its role in
phytochrome-mediated signaling, we characterized the interaction between
phytochrome and NDPK2. Domain studies revealed that PER-ARNT-SIM domain A in the 
C-terminal domain of phytochrome is the binding site for NDPK2. Additionally,
phytochrome recognizes both the NDPK2 C-terminal fragment and the NDPK2 hexameric
structure to fulfill its binding. To illustrate the mechanism of how the Pfr form
of phytochrome stimulates NDPK2, His-197-surrounding residue mutants were made
and tested. Results suggested that the H-bonding with His-197 inside the
nucleotide-binding pocket is critical for NDPK2 functioning. The pH dependence
profiles of NDPK2 indicated that mutants with different activities from the wild 
type have different pK(a) values of His-197 and that NDPK2 hyperactive mutants
possess lower pK(a) values. Because a lower pK(a) value of His-197 accelerates
NDPK2 autophosphorylation and the phospho-transfer between the phosphorylated
NDPK2 and its kinase substrate, we concluded that the Pfr form of phytochrome
stimulates NDPK2 by lowering the pK(a) value of His-197.

PMID: 15561724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2004 Oct;139(1-3):23-9.

Prior PCB exposure suppresses hypoxia-induced up-regulation of glycolytic enzymes
in Fundulus heteroclitus.

Kraemer LD(1), Schulte PM.

Author information: 
(1)INRS-ETE, Université du Québec, C.P. 7500, Sainte Foy, QC, Canada.

Increased activity of the glycolytic enzymes is a conserved feature of the
cellular response to hypoxia, and may represent a protective mechanism by which
cells can survive short-term hypoxic exposure. Gene induction by hypoxia involves
a dimer of the hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)-1 alpha and the nuclear cofactor
HIF-1 beta, also called the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT), which is also involved in induction of genes in response to aryl
hydrocarbon exposure. To assess the possibility of interaction between these
pathways, we examined changes in the activity of the glycolytic enzymes in
response to hypoxia and polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) exposure in the liver of a
teleost fish, Fundulus heteroclitus. After 3 days of hypoxic exposure (dissolved 
oxygen levels between 1.5 and 2.0 mg/L), there were significant increases in the 
activity of six glycolytic enzymes (PGI, ALD, TPI, PGK, PGM and LDH). In
contrast, intraperitoneal injection of 1 microg/g body weight of PCB #77
(3,3',4,4'-tetrachlorobiphenyl) caused significant decreases in glycolytic enzyme
activity after 7 days of exposure. When fish were injected with PCB #77 and then 
(4 days later) exposed to hypoxia for 3 days as before, we observed no induction 
of the glycolytic enzymes. This suggests that there is an antagonistic
interaction between exposure to PCBs and hypoxia in F. heteroclitus. Prior PCB
exposure could make these fish less tolerant of environmental hypoxia.

PMID: 15556062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Nov 23;101(47):16677-82. Epub 2004 Nov 15.

Gestational exposure of Ahr and Arnt hypomorphs to dioxin rescues vascular
development.

Walisser JA(1), Bunger MK, Glover E, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is commonly known for its role in the
adaptive metabolism of xenobiotics and in the toxic events that follow exposure
to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (dioxin). Previously, we have demonstrated
that the AHR and its heterodimeric partner, the AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT), 
play a role in the developmental closure of a hepatic vascular shunt known as the
ductus venosus (DV). To investigate the mechanism of DV closure, we generated
hypomorphic alleles of the Ahr and Arnt loci. Using these models, we then asked
whether this vascular defect could be rescued by receptor activation during late 
development. By manipulating gestational exposure, the patent DV in AHR or ARNT
hypomorphs could be efficiently closed by dioxin exposure as early as embryonic
day 12.5 and as late as embryonic day 18.5. These findings define the temporal
regulation of receptor activation during normal ontogeny and provide evidence to 
support the idea that receptor activation and AHR-ARNT heterodimerization are
essential for normal vascular development. Taken in the broader context, these
data demonstrate that similar AHR signaling steps govern all major aspects of AHR
biology.

PMCID: PMC534507
PMID: 15545609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Toxicol Sci. 2005 Feb;83(2):340-8. Epub 2004 Nov 10.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor expression and activity in cerebellar granule
neuroblasts: implications for development and dioxin neurotoxicity.

Williamson MA(1), Gasiewicz TA, Opanashuk LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is a potent teratogen that produces
neurobehavioral abnormalities associated with both cognitive and locomotor
systems, yet the precise regional and cellular targets of developmental
neurotoxicity remain largely unknown. Most, if not all, TCDD-induced pathology is
mediated via binding to the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a ligand-activated
transcription factor that belongs to the basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim
(bHLH/PAS) superfamily. Upon ligand binding, AhR translocates to the nucleus,
dimerizes with the AhR nuclear translocator protein (Arnt), and regulates
transcription by interaction with dioxin-response elements (DREs) in target
genes, most notably specific cytochrome P450 (CYP) family members. To assess
whether developing cerebellar granule neuroblasts are potential direct targets
for TCDD toxicity, AhR expression and transcriptional activity were examined. AhR
and Arnt proteins were present in mouse cerebellum from birth throughout
postnatal development. AhR protein levels peaked between postnatal day (PND)
3-10, a critical period for granule neuroblast growth and maturation.
Transcriptionally active AhR was detected in immature cerebellar granule cells in
a transgenic dioxin-responsive lacZ mouse model after acute TCDD exposure. AhR
and Arnt were also expressed in cerebellar granule neuroblast cultures. AhR
localized to the nucleus in granule cells 15 min after TCDD treatment. TCCD
elicited time-dependent and concentration-dependent increases in CYP1A1 and 1B1
mRNA and protein levels. Moreover, TCDD treatment reduced both thymidine
incorporation and granule neuroblast survival in a concentration-dependent
manner. These data suggest that (1) granule neuroblasts are direct targets for
developmental AhR-mediated TCDD neurotoxicity and (2) TCDD exposure may disrupt
granule cell neurogenesis.

PMID: 15537747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. FEBS Lett. 2004 Nov 5;577(1-2):121-6.

The carboxy-terminus of the hepatitis B virus X protein is necessary and
sufficient for the activation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha.

Yoo YG(1), Cho S, Park S, Lee MO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Sejong University, Seoul 140-747, 
Republic of Korea.

Hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) of the hepatitis B virus is strongly implicated
in angiogenesis and metastasis during hepatocarcinogenesis. Previously, we
reported that HBx enhances activity of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
(HIF-1alpha), a potent transactivator that induces angiogenic factors. Here, we
delineate the structural region of HBx that potentiates HIF-1alpha. The
carboxy-terminus of HBx increased the stability of HIF-1alpha protein, probably
through inhibiting interaction with von Hippel-Lindau protein. Further, the
carboxy-terminus of HBx enhanced the transactivation function of HIF-1alpha by
enhancing its association with CREB binding protein (CBP). Finally, we
demonstrated the physical association of HBx with the basic
helix-loop-helix/PER-ARNT-SIM domain, the inhibitory domain, and the
carboxy-terminal transactivation domain of HIF-1alpha in vivo.

PMID: 15527772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2004 Jul;25(4):155-8.

[Modification and application of recombinant yeast bioassay for measuring the AhR
ligand activity].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang W(1), Hu JY, Gu WM, Liu YH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Environmental Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

A recombinant yeast bioassay, a yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, in which the
human AhR and ARNT complex are coexpressed, is one of the methods to screen the
active AhR agonist. In this study, the original agonist test was modified. The
exposure time was reduced from 18 to 8 hours when experiment was under the
following conditions: (1) the yeast was cultured in 0.2% glucose medium for 24
hours; (2) chemical exposure was carried in 2% galactose medium in glass tube.
Finally, the AhR acitivity of hexachlorobenzene and pentachlorobenzene were
assessed, and their toxicity equivalent factors were found to be 0.018629 and
0.000294, respectively.

PMID: 15515957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Chem Biol Interact. 2004 Oct 15;149(2-3):151-64.

Metabolic fate of the Ah receptor ligand 6-formylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole.

Bergander L(1), Wincent E, Rannug A, Foroozesh M, Alworth W, Rannug U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Toxicology, Stockholm University,
S-10691 Stockholm, Sweden.

The physiological role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a member of the
basic helix-loop-helix PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) transcription factor family is not
known. We have suggested that the AhR is involved in light signaling through
binding of photoproducts with high AhR affinity. This suggestion is based on (i) 
the high AhR affinity of the tryptophan photoproduct formylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole
(FICZ), (ii) the induction of rapid and transient expression of AhR-regulated
genes by FICZ and by extracts of UV-irradiated tryptophan as well as (iii) the
fact that light induces the AhR-regulated cytochrome P450s CYP1A1, CYP1B1 and
CYP2S1. The transient mRNA expression caused by light and tryptophan
photoproducts suggests that the biotransformation enzymes induced by AhR
activation take part in a metabolic degradation of the natural AhR ligand. This
study aimed at identifying the involvement of phase I and phase II enzymes in the
metabolic degradation of FICZ. A cytochrome P450-dependent metabolism of FICZ
giving rise to preferentially mono- and di-hydroxylated derivatives has earlier
been reported. In the present study, rat and human hepatic S9 mixes were employed
together with specific enzyme inhibitors and cofactors. Compared to the
Aroclor-induced rat liver S9, the non-induced rat liver S9 and the human liver S9
caused a more complex metabolite profile of FICZ. The CYP1A1 enzyme was confirmed
to be the most important enzyme for the first step in the metabolism. CYP1A2 was 
found to have overlapping specificity with CYP1A1 being able to form the same
major metabolites although with different kinetics. CYP1B1 turned out to be
preferentially involved in the further metabolism of dihydroxylated metabolites. 
Microsomal epoxide hydrolase, and as yet not identified forms of
sulphotransferases and glucuronosyltransferases were also found to take part in
the metabolic degradation of FICZ. Thus, tryptophan photoproducts fit into a
model in which the ligand-activated AhR signaling is autoregulated by the induced
metabolic enzymes.

PMID: 15501436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Biochem J. 2005 Mar 15;386(Pt 3):575-81.

CLOCK is involved in the circadian transactivation of
peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha) in mice.

Oishi K(1), Shirai H, Ishida N.

Author information: 
(1)Clock Cell Biology Research Group, Institute for Biological Resources and
Functions, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology,
Central 6, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan.

PPARalpha (peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor alpha) is a member of the
nuclear receptor superfamily of ligand-activated transcription factors that
regulate the expression of genes associated with lipid metabolism. In the present
study, we show that circadian expression of mouse PPARalpha mRNA requires the
basic helix-loop-helix PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) protein CLOCK, a core component of the 
negative-feedback loop that drives circadian oscillators in mammals. The
circadian expression of PPARalpha mRNA was abolished in the liver of homozygous
Clock mutant mice. Using wild-type and Clock-deficient fibroblasts derived from
homozygous Clock mutant mice, we showed that the circadian expression of
PPARalpha mRNA is regulated by the peripheral oscillators in a CLOCK-dependent
manner. Transient transfection and EMSAs (electrophoretic mobility-shift assays) 
revealed that the CLOCK-BMAL1 (brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1) heterodimer 
transactivates the PPARalpha gene via an E-box-rich region located in the second 
intron. This region contained two perfect E-boxes and four E-box-like motifs
within 90 bases. ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) also showed that CLOCK
associates with this E-box-rich region in vivo. Circadian expression of PPARalpha
mRNA was intact in the liver of insulin-dependent diabetic and of
adrenalectomized mice, suggesting that endogenous insulin and glucocorticoids are
not essential for the rhythmic expression of the PPARalpha gene. These results
suggested that CLOCK plays an important role in lipid homoeostasis by regulating 
the transcription of a key protein, PPARalpha.

PMCID: PMC1134877
PMID: 15500444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Jan;67(1):88-96. Epub 2004 Oct 18.

Multiple mechanisms are involved in Ah receptor-mediated cell cycle arrest.

Huang G(1), Elferink CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
301 University Boulevard, Galveston, TX, USA.

The liver is the only solid organ that can respond to major tissue loss or damage
by regeneration to restore liver biomass. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
agonist 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) can disrupt the regenerative
process, as evidenced by suppression of DNA synthesis in rat primary hepatocytes 
in culture and in vivo liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy. Independent 
observations demonstrated that AhR-mediated G(1) phase cell cycle arrest depends 
on an interaction with the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (pRb), but
differences exist regarding proposed mechanisms of action. Two distinct models
have been proposed, one supporting the AhR-pRb interaction functioning in
corepression of E2F activity and the other favoring an AhR-pRb interaction
participating in transcriptional coactivation of genes encoding G(1) phase
regulatory proteins. In the present study, experiments in rat hepatoma cells
using dominant-negative DNA-binding-defective AhR and Ah receptor nuclear
translocator (Arnt) mutants provided evidence that TCDD-induced AhR-mediated G(1)
arrest is only partially regulated by direct AhR transcriptional activity,
suggesting that both coactivation and corepression are involved. Studies using a 
small interfering RNA to down-regulate Arnt protein expression revealed that
TCDD-induced G(1) arrest is absolutely dependent on the Arnt protein.

PMID: 15492120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Clin Invest. 2004 Oct;114(8):1146-57.

Epigenetic regulation of 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 expression.

Alikhani-Koopaei R(1), Fouladkou F, Frey FJ, Frey BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, University Hospital of Berne, Berne
UNK 3010, Switzerland.

The enzyme 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (11 beta HSD2) is
selectively expressed in aldosterone target tissues, where it confers aldosterone
selectivity for the mineralocorticoid receptor by inactivating 11
beta-hydroxyglucocorticoids. Variable activity of 11 beta HSD2 is relevant for
blood pressure control and hypertension. The present investigation aimed to
elucidate whether an epigenetic mechanism, DNA methylation, accounts for the
rigorous control of expression of the gene encoding 11 beta HSD2, HSD11B2. CpG
islands covering the promoter and exon 1 of HSD11B2 were found to be densely
methylated in tissues and cell lines with low expression but not those with high 
expression of HSD11B2. Demethylation induced by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and
procainamide enhanced the transcription and activity of the 11 beta HSD2 enzyme
in human cells in vitro and in rats in vivo. Methylation of HSD11B2
promoter-luciferase constructs decreased transcriptional activity. Methylation of
recognition sequences of transcription factors, including those for Sp1/Sp3,
Arnt, and nuclear factor 1 (NF1) diminished their DNA-binding activity. Herein
NF1 was identified as a strong HSD11B2 stimulatory factor. The effect of NF1 was 
dependent on the position of CpGs and the combination of CpGs methylated. A
methylated-CpG-binding protein complex 1 transcriptional repression interacted
directly with the methylated HSD11B2 promoter. These results indicate a role for 
DNA methylation in HSD11B2 gene repression and suggest an epigenetic mechanism
affecting this gene causally linked with hypertension.

PMCID: PMC522246
PMID: 15489962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 24;279(52):54620-8. Epub 2004 Oct 13.

Recruitment of thyroid hormone receptor/retinoblastoma-interacting protein 230 by
the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator is required for the
transcriptional response to both dioxin and hypoxia.

Beischlag TV(1), Taylor RT, Rose DW, Yoon D, Chen Y, Lee WH, Rosenfeld MG,
Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Molecular Biology Institute, 
Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, University 
of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator/hypoxia-inducible factor
(ARNT/HIF-1 beta) mediates an organism's response to various environmental cues, 
including those to chemical carcinogens, such as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-rho-dioxin (TCDD or dioxin), via its formation of a
functional transcription factor with the ligand activated aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR). Similarly, tissue responses to hypoxia are largely mediated
through the HIF-1 heterodimeric transcription factor, comprising
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1 alpha) and ARNT. The latter response is
essential for a metabolic switch from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolytic
anaerobic metabolism as well as for angiogenesis and has been implicated as
necessary for growth in many solid tumors. In this report, we demonstrate that
the thyroid hormone receptor/retinoblastoma-interacting protein 230 (TRIP230)
interacts directly with ARNT and is essential for both hypoxic and TCDD-mediated 
transcriptional responses. We initially identified TRIP230 as an ARNT-interacting
protein in a yeast two-hybrid assay screen. This interaction was confirmed in
mammalian cell systems using co-immunoprecipitation and in mammalian two-hybrid
assays. Furthermore, TRIP230 could be recorded at sites of activated
transcription of either TCDD- or hypoxia-inducible genes in a stimulus-dependent 
fashion by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis. Finally, using single-cell
microinjection and RNA interference assays, we demonstrate that TRIP230 is
indispensable for TCDD- and hypoxia-dependent gene transcription.

PMID: 15485806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Oct 12;32(18):5499-511. Print 2004.

Non-hypoxic transcriptional activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator in concert with a novel hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha isoform.

Lee KH(1), Park JW, Chun YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 28 
Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu, Seoul 110-799, Korea.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) belongs to the basic
helix-loop-helix Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH PAS) protein which dimerizes with other PAS
proteins. Although it has a transactivation domain (TAD), ARNT functions as an
assistant partner of main factors, such as aryl hydrocarbon receptor and
hypoxia-inducible factors, rather than acting as a straightforward transcription 
factor. However, ARNT may function as an active transcription factor using its
TAD either in association with itself, single-minded protein 1, or trachealess
protein. In the present study, we identified a novel ARNT partner, a HIF-1alpha
variant, which is ubiquitously expressed in human tissues and cancer cell lines. 
The HIF-1alpha variant, designated HIF-1alpha417, bound to ARNT and, moreover,
stimulated the transcription of the erythropoietin enhancer reporter gene. This
stimulation was markedly augmented by ARNT but not by the ARNT603 mutant lacking 
the TAD. Thus, augmentation by ARNT suggests that ARNT determined the
transcriptional activity. HIF-1alpha417 was found to be associated with ARNT and 
to bind to the hypoxia response element containing the E-box core. Moreover,
HIF-1alpha417 promoted the nuclear translocation of ARNT, and conversely ARNT
stabilized HIF-1alpha417. Taken together, our results suggest that HIF-1alpha417 
is a novel partner that is required for transcription activity of ARNT.

PMCID: PMC524291
PMID: 15479785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biophys J. 2005 Jan;88(1):566-78. Epub 2004 Oct 8.

HERG channel (dys)function revealed by dynamic action potential clamp technique.

Berecki G(1), Zegers JG, Verkerk AO, Bhuiyan ZA, de Jonge B, Veldkamp MW, Wilders
R, van Ginneken AC.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Molecular Cardiology Group and the Department of Physiology, 
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
g.berecki@amc.uva.nl

The human ether-a-go-go-related gene (HERG) encodes the rapid component of the
cardiac delayed rectifier potassium current (I(Kr)). Per-Arnt-Sim domain
mutations of the HERG channel are linked to type 2 long-QT syndrome. We studied
wild-type and/or type 2 long-QT syndrome-associated mutant (R56Q) HERG current
(I(HERG)) in HEK-293 cells, at both 23 and 36 degrees C. Conventional
voltage-clamp analysis revealed mutation-induced changes in channel kinetics. To 
assess functional implication(s) of the mutation, we introduce the dynamic action
potential clamp technique. In this study, we effectively replace the native I(Kr)
of a ventricular cell (either a human model cell or an isolated rabbit myocyte)
with I(HERG) generated in a HEK-293 cell that is voltage-clamped by the
free-running action potential of the ventricular cell. Action potential
characteristics of the ventricular cells were effectively reproduced with
wild-type I(HERG), whereas the R56Q mutation caused a frequency-dependent
increase of the action potential duration in accordance with the clinical
phenotype. The dynamic action potential clamp approach also revealed a
frequency-dependent transient wild-type I(HERG) component, which is absent with
R56Q channels. This novel electrophysiological technique allows rapid and
unambiguous determination of the effects of an ion channel mutation on the
ventricular action potential and can serve as a new tool for investigating
cardiac channelopathies.

PMCID: PMC1305034
PMID: 15475579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004 Oct;15(10):2569-78.

Divergent expression patterns for hypoxia-inducible factor-1beta and aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear transporter-2 in developing kidney.

Freeburg PB(1), Abrahamson DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City 66160, USA.

The hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF) are alpha/beta heterodimeric transcription
factors of the basic helix-loop-helix-Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS) superfamily and are
chiefly responsible for cellular adaptation to oxygen deprivation. HIF function
relies on the stabilization of the alpha subunit. When oxygen tension falls,
HIF-alpha subunits translocate to the nucleus and, upon dimerization with
HIF-beta, activate transcription of target genes, including vascular endothelial 
growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1 and -2, and WT-1,
which are vital for kidney development. HIF-beta subunits are stable regardless
of oxygen concentration and constitutively translocate to the nucleus. It was
shown previously that HIF-1beta protein expression is nearly ubiquitous in
newborn kidney and that HIF-1beta dimerizes with either HIF-1alpha or -2alpha.
Here it is shown that aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear transporter-2
(ARNT2/HIF-2beta) also heterodimerized with HIF-1alpha and -2alpha.
ARNT2/HIF-2beta protein was highly expressed in newborn kidney but decreased
significantly with age, whereas HIF-1beta levels remained relatively constant. By
immunohistochemical analysis, widespread expression of HIF-1beta was observed in 
developing and mature kidneys. ARNT2/HIF-2beta protein distribution was
restricted to distal segments of developing nephrons and in mature kidney was
confined specifically to thick ascending limb of Henle's loop. The data presented
here suggest that ARNT2/HIF-2beta is required at high levels during nephrogenesis
in distal tubules and later exclusively in thick ascending limb. Furthermore,
Hypoxyprobe-1 and lotus lectin co-localization studies showed that developing
proximal convoluted tubules were the most severely hypoxic nephron segment in
immature kidney. Because HIF-2beta protein was not abundantly expressed in this
segment, it may not be engaged in mediating responses to severe hypoxia. The
differential distribution patterns for HIF-1beta and -2beta suggest divergent
roles during kidney development for these highly related bHLH-PAS proteins.

PMID: 15466261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mutat Res. 2004 Oct 4;554(1-2):267-77.

Identification of genetic polymorphisms of CYP2S1 in a Finnish Caucasian
population.

Saarikoski ST(1), Suitiala T, Holmila R, Impivaara O, Järvisalo J, Hirvonen A,
Husgafvel-Pursiainen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology, Finnish Institute of
Occupational Health, Helsinki FI-00250. sirkku.saarikoski@ktl.fi

CYP2S1 is a recently discovered member of the cytochrome P450 (CYP) gene
superfamily. Interestingly, even though the DNA sequence identifies it as the
sole member of the new CYP2S family, CYP2S1 exhibits many features typical to
CYP1 family members, e.g. dioxin-inducibility mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR) and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT). In 
addition, CYP2S1 metabolises some aromatic hydrocarbons as well as cellular
substances. These characteristics, together with a wide extrahepatic tissue
distribution, suggest that CYP2S1 may have an important role in both exogenous
and endogenous metabolism. This is the first study characterising CYP2S1 alleles 
and naming them with the recommended CYP allele nomenclature. We used denaturing 
gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) and direct sequencing to investigate genetic 
variation of CYP2S1 in 100 male Finnish Caucasians. Those exons in which
variation was found were examined in subsequent 100 subjects. The coding region
of all of the nine exons, as well as a 449 bp fragment of the proximal promoter
region, was analysed. This systematic investigation revealed eight single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which comprise nine different variant alleles
(haplotypes), in addition to the wild-type allele. Seven of the SNPs occurred in 
the protein-coding areas and one in the proximal 3' untranslated region (3'UTR). 
Two of these sequence variations (10347C > T and 13106C > T) result in
non-conservative amino acid substitutions, i.e. Arg380Cys and Pro466Leu,
respectively. The respective allelic variants, CYP2S1*2 ([10347C > T]) and
CYP2S1*3 (13106C > T; 13255A > G]), occurred in our study population at
frequencies of 0.50 and 3.75%, respectively. The most common of the variant
alleles was CYP2S1*1H (23.8%), harbouring a 13255A > G substitution located in
the 3'UTR.

PMID: 15450424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Acta Biochim Pol. 2004;51(3):563-85.

HIF-1: the knowns and unknowns of hypoxia sensing.

Zagórska A(1), Dulak J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biochemistry, Faculty of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian
University, Kraków, Poland. azagorska@op.pl

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a transcriptional activator that functions 
as a master regulator of cellular and systemic oxygen homeostasis. It consists of
two constitutively produced subunits: HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta. Under normoxic
conditions HIF-1alpha undergoes hydroxylation at specific prolyl residues which
leads to an immediate ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation of
the alpha subunit. Additionally, hydroxylation of an asparaginyl residue blocks
the transcriptional activity of HIF-1 due to inhibition of its interaction with
co-activators. In contrast, under hypoxic conditions, abolition of prolyl
hydroxylation results in HIF-1alpha stabilization, whereas the lack of
asparaginyl hydroxylation allows the transcriptional activity. Additionally, the 
transcriptional activity may be modulated by phosphorylation or redox
modification of HIF-1. Despite its name, HIF-1 is induced not only in response to
reduced oxygen availability but also by other stimulants, such as nitric oxide,
various growth factors, or direct inhibitors of prolyl and asparaginyl
hydroxylases. Therefore, it seems to be a crucial transcription factor elicited
by a wide range of stresses such as impaired oxygenation, inflammation, energy
deprivation, or intensive proliferation. However, the mechanisms of normoxic
activation, as well as of oxygen sensing, are not yet fully known. Further
understanding of the processes that control HIF-1 activity will be crucial for
the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 15448722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 26;279(48):49842-8. Epub 2004 Sep 20.

Role of the coiled-coil coactivator (CoCoA) in aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated
transcription.

Kim JH(1), Stallcup MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) are DNA
binding transcription factors with basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS)
domains. These two proteins form a heterodimer that mediates the toxic and
biological effects of the environmental contaminant and AHR ligand
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. The coiled-coil protein coiled-coil
coactivator (Co-CoA) is a secondary coactivator for nuclear receptors and
enhances nuclear receptor function by interacting with the bHLH-PAS domain of
p160 coactivators. We report here that CoCoA also binds the bHLH-PAS domains of
AHR and ARNT and functions as a potent primary coactivator for them; i.e. CoCoA
does not require p160 coactivators for binding to and serving as a coactivator
for AHR and ARNT. Endogenous CoCoA was recruited to a natural AHR target gene
promoter in a 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin -dependent manner. Moreover,
reduction of CoCoA mRNA levels by small interfering RNA inhibited the
transcriptional activation by AHR and ARNT. Our data support a physiological role
for CoCoA as a transcriptional coactivator in AHR/ARNT-mediated transcription.

PMID: 15383530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Sep 15;130A(1):40-4.

Significant association between nonsyndromic oral clefts and arylhydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT).

Kayano S(1), Suzuki Y, Kanno K, Aoki Y, Kure S, Yamada A, Matsubara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, 
Japan.

The etiology of nonsyndromic oral clefts (cleft lip, cleft palate, or cleft lip
and palate) is still controversial, but is considered to involve both genetic and
environmental factors. One of suspected environmental factors is
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) found in tobacco, herbicides,
contaminated soil, and food. TCDD administered during organogenesis in mice
causes a high incidence of CP in fetuses. There is ample evidence that aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT), and cytochrome P450 
1A1 (CYP1A1) are involved in TCDD metabolism. We assessed whether there is any
association in the Japanese population of nonsyndromic oral clefts with single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the AHR, ARNT, and CYP1A1 genes using
transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) and case-control study. We identified and 
investigated three SNPs in ARNT; 567G/C (V189V), IVS12-19T/G, and 2117C/T
(P706L). Two amino acid substitutions, R554L in AHR and I462V in CYP1A1, were
also investigated. In the TDT, the C allele of ARNT 567G/C was preferentially
transmitted to patients (P = 0.033). When a haplotype consisting of 567G/C and
IVS12-19T/G in ARNT was considered, the preferential transmission of the CT
(567C-IVS12-19T) haplotype was observed (P = 0.0012). In a case-control study, a 
significant association of IVS12-19T/G in ARNT was observed (P = 0.021). The SNPs
studied in AHR and CYP1A1 were not associated with the disease. Our results
suggest that ARNT is involved in the development of nonsyndromic oral clefts in
the Japanese population.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15368494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004 Sep 15;199(3):220-38.

Disruption of cell-cell contact maximally but transiently activates AhR-mediated 
transcription in 10T1/2 fibroblasts.

Cho YC(1), Zheng W, Jefcoate CR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Program, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison 53706, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is activated by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), but activation without an exogenous
ligand also occurs when normal cell-cell contact is prevented. Suspension of
several C3H10T1/2 fibroblast clonal sub-lines that contain an integrated
AhR-responsive reporter produced a time course and level of reporter activation
and CYP1B1 induction that paralleled TCDD stimulation in confluent monolayer
culture. Suspension activation was, however, more transient. Loss of cell-cell
contact at low density also activated these reporters independent of cell cycle
changes to levels comparable to TCDD stimulation of confluent cells. Loss of
cell-cell contact may, therefore, activate AhR. Suspension and TCDD activations
exhibited comparable nuclear translocation of AhR and then AhR/ARNT complex
formation. Each AhR activation process was equally attenuated by inhibition of,
respectively, HSP90 ATPase, the 26S proteosome, and by depletion of intracellular
Ca2+. By contrast, the AhR antagonist alpha-naphthoflavone (alphaNF) blocked
ligand-stimulated AhR activity, but not activation through loss of cell-cell
contact. Suspension-induced reporter activation was selectively enhanced by LiCl,
which prevented GSK-3beta effects on the simultaneously released beta-catenin.
The effects of suspension and LiCl on reporters were reversed by Ro-31-8220,
which did not affect beta-catenin, TCDD-activation processes, or AhR turnover.
Neither LiCl nor Ro-31-8220 altered suspension-induced AhR/ARNT complex
formation. Loss of cell-cell contact permits nuclear translocation and AhR
activation that is largely replicated after TCDD binding, but with activity
differences due to contact-sensitive factors functioning after AhR/ARNT complex
formation.

PMID: 15364539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2004 Sep 28;128(2):141-9.

LE-PAS, a novel Arnt-dependent HLH-PAS protein, is expressed in limbic tissues
and transactivates the CNS midline enhancer element.

Moser M(1), Knoth R, Bode C, Patterson C.

Author information: 
(1)Carolina Cardiovascular Biology Center, 103 Mason Farm Road, Glaxo Building
Room 156, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-7126, USA.

A growing family of helix-loop-helix PAS (HLH-PAS) transcription factors has
emerged recently. These proteins form heterodimers and are involved in adaptation
to environmental or physiologic stresses as well as in embryonic development. We 
describe the cloning and characterization of a novel HLH-PAS protein termed
LE-PAS (limbic-enriched PAS) in mouse. LE-PAS consists of 802 amino acids and has
a predicted molecular mass of 87.4 kDa. In adult mice, it is expressed
exclusively in brain. Northern blot and in situ hybridization analysis indicate
that LE-PAS is expressed in the limbic system and olfactory bulb. By in vitro
overexpression in COS-7, cells we found that LE-PAS is a nuclear protein.
Reporter gene analysis indicated that LE-PAS transactivates the CNS midline
enhancer (CME) motif but not the xenobiotic response element in an Arnt-dependent
fashion and without prior activation of LE-PAS protein. Our observation suggests 
that LE-PAS shares a similar mode of function with HLH-PAS proteins such as
single minded or trachealess indicating that LE-PAS also has constitutive or
developmental functions which may be critical for regulating the transcriptional 
control of limbic patterning and function.

PMID: 15363889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Aug 27;321(3):707-15.

Dioxin-responsive AHRE-II gene battery: identification by phylogenetic
footprinting.

Boutros PC(1), Moffat ID, Franc MA, Tijet N, Tuomisto J, Pohjanvirta R, Okey AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont., Canada M5S
1A8.

We identified a set of genes that respond to dioxins through the recently
discovered AHRE-II ("XRE-II") enhancer element. A total of 36 genes containing
AHRE-II motifs conserved across human, mouse, and rat gene orthologs were
identified by genome-wide transcription-factor binding-site searches and
phylogenetic footprinting. Microarray experiments on liver from rats treated with
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin revealed statistically significant changes in
mRNA levels for 13 of these 36 genes after three hours and 15 genes after 19h.
The set of responsive genes was functionally characterized by ontological
analysis and found to be enriched in ion-channels and transporters. Our
identification of 36 putatively AHRE-II-regulated genes highlights the regulatory
versatility of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and the ability of the AHR and
its dimerization partner, ARNT, to act both as a ligand-activated
transcription-factor (on AHRE-I) and as a ligand-activated coactivator (on
AHRE-II). Collectively, these results demonstrate that the AHRE-II induction
mechanism is employed by multiple genes and provide the first categorization of
the gene battery of a ligand-activated coactivator.

PMID: 15358164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Development. 2004 Sep;131(18):4623-34.

Hypoxia affects mesoderm and enhances hemangioblast specification during early
development.

Ramírez-Bergeron DL(1), Runge A, Dahl KD, Fehling HJ, Keller G, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Hypoxia Inducible Factor (HIF), consisting of HIF1alpha and ARNT (HIF1beta)
subunits, activates multiple genes in response to oxygen (O(2)) deprivation.
Arnt(-/-) mice exhibit substantial defects in blood cell and vessel development. 
We demonstrate that hypoxia accelerates the expression of Brachyury (a
mesoderm-specific transcription factor), BMP4 (a mesoderm-promoting growth
factor) and FLK1 (a marker of hemangioblasts, the bipotential progenitor of
endothelial and hematopoietic cells) in differentiating ES cell cultures.
Significantly, proliferation of embryonic hemangioblasts (BL-CFCs) is regulated
by hypoxia, as Arnt(+/+) ES cells generate increased numbers of FLK1(+) cells,
and BL-CFCs with accelerated kinetics in response to low O(2). This response is
HIF-dependent as Arnt(-/-) ES cells produce fewer FLK1(+) cells and BL-CFCs,
under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Interestingly, this defect is rescued
when Arnt(-/-) ES cells are co-cultured with Arnt(+/+) ES cells. Vegf(+/-)or
Vegf(-/-) ES cells generate proper numbers of FLK1(+) cells but fewer BL-CFCs,
suggesting that additional factors regulated by HIF (other than VEGF) are
involved in these early events. Thus, hypoxic responses are important for the
establishment of various progenitor cells, including early mesoderm and its
differentiation into hemangioblasts. Together these data suggest that ineffective
responses to hypoxia in Arnt(-/-) embryos abrogate proper cardiovascular
development during early embryogenesis, including the pathways controlling
hemangioblast differentiation.

PMID: 15342485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Pharmacol. 2004 Sep;66(3):512-21.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin activation of the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor/aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator pathway causes
developmental toxicity through a CYP1A-independent mechanism in zebrafish.

Carney SA(1), Peterson RE, Heideman W.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Center, University of Wisconsin, 777
Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that dimerizes with ARNT to mediate responses to compounds such as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). TCDD and other AHR agonists cause
toxic responses in early life stages of fish, including the zebrafish, Danio
rerio. The most well characterized target gene for the AHR/aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) dimer is a cytochrome P450, CYP1A. Induction
of CYP1A by TCDD has been correlated with certain toxic responses in developing
zebrafish and has been postulated to mediate these responses. To determine
whether CYP1A is the important downstream effector enzyme for the AHR/ARNT
pathway, we used morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs) to block induction of CYP1A in
response to TCDD in zebrafish embryos. Although the zfcyp1a-MO effectively
prevented CYP1A up-regulation, it did not prevent the signs of developmental
toxicity, including pericardial edema, slowed blood flow, craniofacial
malformation, and defects in erythropoiesis. We conclude that the important
target for the AHR/ARNT pathway in developing zebrafish exposed to TCDD is not
zfcyp1a. This suggests an alternative model in which TCDD-activated AHR/ARNT
disrupts the normal process of growth and development by altering programs of
gene expression or function.

PMID: 15322242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2004;14(4-6):351-60.

Interaction of the PAS B domain with HSP90 accelerates hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha stabilization.

Katschinski DM(1), Le L, Schindler SG, Thomas T, Voss AK, Wenger RH.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Physiology Group, Medical Faculty, Martin-Luther-University Halle,
Germany. doerthe.katschinski@medizin.uni-halle.de

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) alpha subunits are induced under hypoxic
conditions, when limited oxygen supply prevents prolyl hydroxylation-dependent
binding of the ubiquitin ligase pVHL and subsequent proteasomal degradation. A
short normoxic half-life of HIF-alpha and a very rapid hypoxic protein
stabilization are crucial to the cellular adaptation to changing oxygen supply.
However, the molecular requirements for the unusually rapid mechanisms of protein
synthesis, folding and nuclear translocation are not well understood. We and
others previously found that the chaperone heat-shock protein 90 (HSP90) can
interact with HIF-1alpha in vitro. Here we show that HSP90 also interacts with
HIF-2alpha and HIF-3alpha, suggesting a general involvement of HSP90 in HIF-alpha
stabilization. The PAS B domain, common to all three alpha subunits, was required
for HSP90 interaction. ARNT competed with HSP90 for binding to the PAS B domain
since an excess of either component inhibited the activity of the other. HSP90 as
well as the heterocomplex members HSP70 and p23, but not HSP40, were detected in 
immunoprecipitations of endogenous cellular HIF-1alpha. While HSP90 and HSP70
bound to HIF-1alpha predominantly under normoxic conditions, ARNT bound to
HIF-1alpha primarily under hypoxic conditions, suggesting that ARNT displaced
HSP90 from HIF-1alpha following nuclear translocation. Hypoxic accumulation of
HIF-1alpha was delayed in a novel cell model deficient for HSP90beta as well as
after treatment of wild-type cells with the HSP90 inhibitor geldanamycin,
suggesting that HSP90 activity is involved in the rapid HIF-1alpha protein
induction.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 15319539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Gene. 2004 Sep 1;338(2):235-41.

A BMAL1 mutant with arginine 91 substituted with alanine acts as a dominant
negative inhibitor.

Hosoda H(1), Motohashi J, Kato H, Masushige S, Kida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Faculty of Applied Bioscience, Tokyo
University of Agriculture, 1-1-1 Sakuragaoka, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-8502, Japan.

Basic-Helix-Loop-Helix-Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS) transcription factor,
Brain-Muscle-Arnt-Like-protein 1 (BMAL1), forms a heterodimer with the CLOCK
protein. The BMAL1/CLOCK complex binds to a specific DNA sequence and plays an
essential role in the generation of the circadian rhythm. The basic region of
BMAL1 contains an E-R-X-R motif that is highly conserved among
basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors that bind to the E-box
transcription element, and is thus thought to constitute a structure required for
recognition of this DNA sequence. To understand the role of arginine 91 (E-K-R-R)
within the basic region of BMAL1, we examined the effect of mutation of this
residue on BMAL1 function. Co-immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays (EMSA) showed that a BMAL1 R91A mutant forms a heterodimer with
CLOCK, but is unable to support DNA binding in vitro. Consistent with these
observations, plasmids encoding the R91A and R91H mutants of BMAL1 were unable to
stimulate transcription from an E-box containing reporter construct in transient 
co-transfection analyses in NIH 3T3 cells. More importantly, these mutants
suppressed the activation of transcription from the reporter construct mediated
by wild-type BMAL1, indicating that they possess dominant negative activity in
this assay. These results document further the importance of the basic region of 
BMAL1 in binding to DNA and suggest that this new mutant might be a useful tool
for further analysis of BMAL1 function.

PMID: 15315827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Sep 10;322(1):9-16.

Inhibition of the MEK-1/p42 MAP kinase reduces aryl hydrocarbon receptor-DNA
interactions.

Yim S(1), Oh M, Choi SM, Park H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, University of Seoul, 90 Cheonnong-dong,
Tongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-743, Republic of Korea.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) induces expression of the cytochrome
P450 1A1 gene, cyp1a1, by binding to its receptor, aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR). TCDD-bound AhR translocates to the nucleus and forms a heterodimer with
its partner protein, AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt). The AhR/Arnt heterodimer
then binds to the dioxin-response elements (DREs) in the cyp1a1 enhancer and
stimulates transcription of cyp1a1. We tested whether kinase pathways are
involved in this process by treating Hepa1c1c7 cells with kinase inhibitors. The 
MEK-1 inhibitor PD98059 reduced TCDD-induced transcription of cyp1a1. TCDD
treatment results in phosphorylation of p44/p42 mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK), a substrate of MEK-1. Overexpression of dominant negative form of p42
MAPK suppressed TCDD-dependent transcription of a reporter gene controlled by
dioxin-response elements (DREs), and pretreatment with PD98059 also blocked this 
transcription. PD98059 pretreatment also inhibited TCDD-induced DRE binding of
the AhR/Arnt heterodimer. Together these results indicate that TCDD activates the
MEK-1/p44/p42 MAPK pathway, which in turn activates AhR and so facilitates
binding of AhR to the cyp1a1 DRE.

PMID: 15313166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Toxicol Sci. 2004 Nov;82(1):46-61. Epub 2004 Aug 5.

Linked expression of Ah receptor, ARNT, CYP1A1, and CYP1B1 in rat mammary
epithelia, in vitro, is each substantially elevated by specific extracellular
matrix interactions that precede branching morphogenesis.

Larsen MC(1), Brake PB, Pollenz RS, Jefcoate CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and the Environmental Toxicology Center, University
of Wisconsin Medical School, 1300 University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Cytochrome P4501B1 (CYP1B1), the major constitutively expressed CYP in the rat
mammary gland, is induced by Ah-receptor (AhR) ligands, while CYP1A1 is
predominantly expressed only after induction. These CYPs contribute to
carcinogenic activation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). AhR, ARNT,
and CYP1B1 were only weakly expressed, even after
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin induction, when rat mammary epithelial cells 
(RMEC) were cultured on plastic. RMEC cultured on the extracellular matrix (ECM),
Matrigel, or on a floating gel of collagen I demonstrated branching morphogenesis
and substantially increased basal CYP1B1 and induced CYP1A1 expression, in
parallel with large increases in AhR and ARNT expression. Branching was more
pronounced in the Wistar Kyoto than in the Wistar Furth rat strain. Although EGF 
enhanced branching, neither strain nor growth factor treatment substantially
impacted CYP expression. Increased AhR and ARNT expression is observed within 24 
h of dispersal on Matrigel, substantially prior to branch formation. Culture on
thin layers of collagen I, collagen IV, and laminin, respectively, failed to
reproduce the branching morphogenesis or increases in AhR, ARNT, or CYP
expression. However, adherent, gelled collagen I recapitulated the increased
protein expression, without supporting branching. This increased protein
expression was closely paralleled by enhanced expression of beta-catenin and
E-cadherin, components of cell-cell adhesion complexes. A synthetic peptide that 
selectively antagonizes integrin-ECM interactions reduced branch formation,
without diminishing AhR, ARNT, and CYP expression. These data demonstrate that
early ECM surface adhesion interactions mediate AhR and ARNT expression, which
enhances CYP expression, independent of branching morphogenesis.

PMID: 15297627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2004 Sep 1;429(1):42-9.

CyP40, but not Hsp70, in rabbit reticulocyte lysate causes the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor-DNA complex formation.

Shetty PV(1), Wang X, Chan WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, Thomas J. Long School of 
Pharmacy and Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, CA 95211, USA.

Upon ligand binding, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) translocates into the
nucleus and dimerizes with its partner aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (Arnt). The AhR-Arnt heterodimer binds to the dioxin response
element (DRE) to regulate target gene expression. Using baculovirus expressed
human AhR and Arnt, we showed that the formation of the ligand-dependent
AhR-Arnt-DRE complex requires protein factors in vitro. Recently, we provided
evidence that p23, an Hsp90-associated protein, is involved in the complex
formation. The aim of this study was to determine whether two other
Hsp90-associated proteins present in rabbit reticulocyte lysate (RRL), namely
CyP40 and Hsp70, play any role in forming the AhR-Arnt-DRE complex. Fractionation
and immunodepletion experiments revealed that Hsp70 is not necessary for the
formation of this complex. In contrast, CyP40 is involved in forming the complex 
since (1) immunodepletion of CyP40 from a RRL fraction reduces the intensity of
the AhR-Arnt-DRE complex by 48% and (2) recombinant human CyP40 alone causes the 
formation of this complex. In addition, CyP40-interacting proteins appear to be
essential for the full CyP40 effect on the AhR gel shift complex.

PMID: 15288808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cell Cycle. 2004 Aug;3(8):1027-9. Epub 2004 Aug 7.

Oxygen sensing by H+: implications for HIF and hypoxic cell memory.

Mekhail K(1), Khacho M, Gunaratnam L, Lee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Hypoxia and acidosis are common features of several physiological and
pathological situations, including cancer and stroke. The HIF (hypoxia-inducible 
factor) transcription factor plays a seminal role in orchestrating cellular
responses to alterations in oxygen availability. HIF is degraded in normal oxygen
tension by the VHL (von Hippel-Lindau) tumor suppressor protein but stabilized by
hypoxia to activate an array of genes implicated in oxygen homeostasis including 
vascular endothelial growth factor. Cells respond to a comparatively mild decline
in oxygen tension by converting to an anaerobic state of respiration and
secreting lactic acid. We recently reported that a decrease in environmental pH
triggers sequestration of VHL into the nucleolus neutralizing its ability to
degrade HIF. This implies that cells have evolved a parallel mechanism of HIF
activation that responds to changes in oxygen levels by sensing extracellular
[H+]. Here we discuss the implications of this new VHL regulatory mechanism on
oxygen homeostasis and hypoxic cell memory.

PMID: 15280664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Toxicol Sci. 2004 Nov;82(1):80-7. Epub 2004 Jul 22.

A critical role for MAP kinases in the control of Ah receptor complex activity.

Tan Z(1), Huang M, Puga A, Xia Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Genetics and Department of Environmental Health,
University of Cincinnati Medical Center, 123 E. Shields Street, Cincinnati, OH
45267-0056, USA.

The heterodimeric complex of aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and Ah receptor 
nuclear translocator (ARNT) plays a pivotal role in controlling the expression of
drug metabolism genes, such as the cytochromes p450 (Cyp) 1a1 and 1b1, believed
to be responsible for most toxic effects of the environmental contaminant
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). In this study, we show that
activation of Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) modulates ARNT transcription activity and potentiates the
transcriptional activity of AHR/ARNT complexes. Inhibition of ERK by chemical
compounds and ablation of JNK caused significant decreases in CYP1A1 induction by
TCDD. Compared to wild type, JNK2 ablation significantly reduced TCDD-stimulated 
CYP1A1 expression in mouse thymus and testis, but not in liver. In contrast,
CYP1B1 expression was unaffected in all three tissues of the knockout mice. These
data suggest that JNK and ERK modulate ARNT activity and AHR/ARNT-dependent gene 
expression, contributing to the gene-specific and tissue-specific toxicity of
environmental contaminants.

PMID: 15272135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cancer Cell. 2004 Jul;6(1):33-43.

Small molecule blockade of transcriptional coactivation of the hypoxia-inducible 
factor pathway.

Kung AL(1), Zabludoff SD, France DS, Freedman SJ, Tanner EA, Vieira A,
Cornell-Kennon S, Lee J, Wang B, Wang J, Memmert K, Naegeli HU, Petersen F, Eck
MJ, Bair KW, Wood AW, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA. andrew_kung@dfci.harvard.edu

Homeostasis under hypoxic conditions is maintained through a coordinated
transcriptional response mediated by the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) pathway
and requires coactivation by the CBP and p300 transcriptional coactivators.
Through a target-based high-throughput screen, we identified chetomin as a
disrupter of HIF binding to p300. At a molecular level, chetomin disrupts the
structure of the CH1 domain of p300 and precludes its interaction with HIF,
thereby attenuating hypoxia-inducible transcription. Systemic administration of
chetomin inhibited hypoxia-inducible transcription within tumors and inhibited
tumor growth. These results demonstrate a therapeutic window for pharmacological 
attenuation of HIF activity and further establish the feasibility of disrupting a
signal transduction pathway by targeting the function of a transcriptional
coactivator with a small molecule.

PMID: 15261140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Genomics. 2004 Aug;84(2):361-73.

Genomic structure, promoter activity, and developmental expression of the mouse
homologue of the Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) gene.

Costa MC(1), Gomes-da-Silva J, Miranda CJ, Sequeiros J, Santos MM, Maciel P.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobehavior Unit, Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, University of
Porto, 4150-180 Porto, Portugal.

Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) is a neurodegenerative disorder, caused by the
expansion of the (CAG)n tract in the MJD gene. This encodes the protein ataxin-3,
of unknown function. The mouse Mjd gene has a structure similar to that of its
human counterpart and it also contains a TATA-less promoter. Its 5' flanking
region contains conserved putative binding regions for transcription factors Sp1,
USF, Arnt, Max, E47, and MyoD. Upon differentiation of P19 cells, the Mjd gene
promoter is preferentially activated in endodermal and mesodermal derivatives,
including cardiac and skeletal myocytes; and less so in neuronal precursors.
Mouse ataxin-3 is ubiquitously expressed during embryonic development and in the 
adult, with strong expression in regions of the CNS affected in MJD. It is
particularly abundant in all types of muscle and in ciliated epithelial cells,
suggesting that it may be associated with the cytoskeleton and may have an
important function in cell structure and/or motility.

PMCID: PMC2894082
PMID: 15233999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biochemistry. 2004 Jul 6;43(26):8373-9.

Role of Gln1029 in the photoactivation processes of the LOV2 domain in adiantum
phytochrome3.

Nozaki D(1), Iwata T, Ishikawa T, Todo T, Tokutomi S, Kandori H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Material Science and Engineering, Nagoya Institute of
Technology, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8555, Japan.

Phototropin (phot) is a blue-light receptor in plants. The molecule has two FMN
(flavin mononucleotide)-binding domains named the LOV (light-oxygen-voltage)
domain, that is a subset of a PAS (per-arnt-sim) superfamily. Illumination of
phot-LOV domains produces a covalent C(4a) flavin-cysteinyl adduct, which is
called the S390 intermediate state. According to the crystal structures of the
LOV2 domain of Adiantum phytochrome3 (phy3), a fusion protein of phot containing 
the phytochrome chromophoric domain, in the unphotolyzed and S390 states, and the
side chain of Gln1029 switches hydrogen bonds with the FMN chromophore. Gln1029
is the hydrogen-bonding donor of the C(4)=O group of FMN in the unphotolyzed
state, whereas Gln1029 is the hydrogen-bonding acceptor of the N(5)-H group of
FMN in S390. In this paper, we measured the light-induced structural changes in
the Q1029L mutant protein of phy3-LOV2 by means of low-temperature FTIR
spectroscopy, and the obtained spectra are compared with those of the wild type. 
Low-temperature UV-visible spectroscopy of Q1029L detected only one intermediate 
state, S390, at 77-295 K, as well as the wild type. The C(4)=O stretch of FMN at 
1710 cm(-1) is shifted to 1723 cm(-1) in Q1029L, presumably because of the lack
of hydrogen bonds between Gln1029 and FMN. Upon formation of S390, the C(4)=O
group hydrogen bond is weakened in both wild type and Q1029L. These observations 
are fully consistent with the X-ray crystal structures of the unphotolyzed and
S390 states. On the other hand, the C(4)=O stretch of FMN and amide-I vibrations 
are temperature-independent in Q1029L, in contrast to wild type, in which highly 
temperature-dependent FTIR spectra are detected. Amide-I vibrations of Q1029L at 
room temperature are similar to those of the wild type at 77-150 K but not at
room temperature. These facts imply that the Q1029L mutant protein lacks
progressive protein structural changes following flavin-cysteinyl adduct
formation in the wild type, which eventually alter structures of beta sheet and
alpha helix in the protein moiety. Hydrogen-bonding interaction of Gln1029 with
the FMN chromophore likely plays an important role in the protein structural
changes of phy3-LOV2.

PMID: 15222749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Pharmacol. 2004 Jul;66(1):178-86.

9-beta-D-arabinofuranosyl-2-fluoroadenine inhibits expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor through hypoxia-inducible factor-1 in human ovarian
cancer cells.

Fang J(1), Cao Z, Chen YC, Reed E, Jiang BH.

Author information: 
(1)Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology, Immunology and
Cell Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506-9300, USA.

Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death from gynecological malignancy and
has the worst prognosis of all gynecological cancers. Vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) plays an important role in ovarian cancer development.
9-beta-D-Arabinofuranosyl-2-fluoroadenine (Fara-A), a nucleotide analog, is
frequently used in treating certain types of cancer. However, the effectiveness
of Fara-A on ovarian cancer cells is unknown. In this study, we found that Fara-A
inhibited VEGF expression in human ovarian cancer cells. Fara-A inhibited VEGF
transcriptional activation through hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1). HIF-1 is
composed of HIF-1alpha and -1beta subunits. Fara-A inhibited expression of
HIF-1alpha but not HIF-1beta. Overexpression of HIF-1alpha reversed
Fara-A-inhibited VEGF transcriptional activation. Our results demonstrated that
Fara-A inhibited VEGF transcriptional activation through HIF-1alpha expression.
Fara-A partly inhibited HIF-1alpha mRNA levels. Fara-A blocked the activation of 
AKT but not of ERK1/2. Overexpression of AKT reversed the Fara-A-inhibited VEGF
transcriptional activation, suggesting that Fara-A inhibits VEGF expression via
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT signaling. These results demonstrate a new
function of Fara-A in inhibiting VEGF and HIF-1alpha expression and identify a
potential molecular mechanism of the regulation.

PMID: 15213310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2004 Jun 16;96(12):946-56.

Role of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha in gastric cancer cell growth,
angiogenesis, and vessel maturation.

Stoeltzing O(1), McCarty MF, Wey JS, Fan F, Liu W, Belcheva A, Bucana CD, Semenza
GL, Ellis LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030-4009, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), a heterodimer comprising the
oxygen-regulated subunit, HIF-1alpha, and HIF-1beta, mediates transcription of
the gene for vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Overexpression of
HIF-1alpha is associated with tumor angiogenesis and tumor cell proliferation and
invasion. We examined the effects of inhibiting HIF-1alpha activity on
angiogenesis and human gastric cancer growth in vivo.
METHODS: Human gastric cancer TMK-1 cells were stably transfected with
pHIF-1alphaDN, an expression plasmid encoding a dominant-negative form of
HIF-1alpha that dimerizes with endogenous HIF-1beta to produce HIF-1 complexes
that cannot activate transcription, or with the empty expression vector (pCEP4). 
Two clones of pHIF-1alphaDN-transfected cells, DN2 and DN3, were tested in all
experiments. We used an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to measure VEGF
secretion by transfected cells cultured in hypoxic (1% O2) or nonhypoxic (20% O2)
conditions. We used subcutaneous and orthotopic mouse tumor models to examine the
growth of tumors derived from injected pHIF-1alphaDN-or pCEP4-transfected cells. 
Tumor cell proliferation, vessel area (a measure of functional vascular volume), 
and tumor endothelial cell association with pericyte-like cells (a measure of
vessel maturation) were analyzed by immunohistochemical or immunofluorescent
staining. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: DN2 cells and DN3 cells secreted less VEGF than pCEP4-transfected TMK-1 
cells when cultured in nonhypoxic or hypoxic conditions (e.g., DN2 versus pCEP4
in nonhypoxic conditions: 645 pg of VEGF/10(6) cells versus 1591 pg of VEGF/10(6)
cells, difference = 946 pg of VEGF/10(6) cells [95% confidence interval [CI] =
640 to 1251 pg of VEGF/10(6) cells; P =.006]; DN2 versus pCEP4 in hypoxic
conditions: 785 pg of VEGF/10(6) cells versus 2807 pg of VEGF/10(6) cells,
difference = 2022 pg of VEGF/10(6) cells [95% CI = 1871 to 2152 pg of VEGF/10(6) 
cells; P<.001]). In the subcutaneous tumor model, tumors derived from DN2 or DN3 
cells had lower final volumes, weights, and vessel areas, less tumor endothelial 
cell association with desmin-positive cells, and fewer proliferating tumor cells 
than tumors derived from pCEP4-transfected cells. In the orthotopic tumor model, 
tumors derived from DN2 cells had smaller volumes and less vessel area and
maturation than tumors derived from pCEP4-transfected cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of HIF-1alpha activity impairs gastric tumor growth,
angiogenesis, and vessel maturation.

PMID: 15199114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Circ Res. 2004 Jul 23;95(2):146-53. Epub 2004 Jun 10.

Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 gene promotes angiogenesis through the
transactivation of both vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptor,
Flt-1.

Takeda N(1), Maemura K, Imai Y, Harada T, Kawanami D, Nojiri T, Manabe I, Nagai
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Japan.

Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1) is a basic-helix-loop-helix/PAS domain
transcription factor that is expressed preferentially in vascular endothelial
cells. EPAS1 shares high homology with hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
(HIF-1alpha) and is reported to transactivate vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF), fetal liver kinase-1 (Flk-1), and Tie2 promoters. In this study, we
analyzed the role of EPAS1 in the process of angiogenesis. Using microarray
technology, we looked for target genes regulated by EPAS1 in vascular endothelial
cells. A total of 130 genes were upregulated by EPAS1, including fms-like
tyrosine kinase-1 (Flt-1). Reporter analysis using human Flt-1 promoter and gel
mobility shift assays showed that the heterodimer of EPAS1 and aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator binds directly to HIF-1-binding site upstream of
Flt-1 promoter and transactivates it. Small interfering RNA targeted to EPAS1 but
not HIF-1alpha attenuated desferrioxamine-induced Flt-1 mRNA expression, thus
EPAS1 is thought to play an essential role in hypoxic induction of Flt-1 gene.
Furthermore, using mouse wound healing models, we demonstrated that
adenovirus-mediated delivery of EPAS1 gene significantly induced the expression
of VEGF, Flt-1, Flk-1, and Tie2 mRNA at the wound site and promoted mature
angiogenesis. The proportion of the number of mural cells in newly formed vessels
was significantly higher in EPAS1-treated wound area than VEGF-treated area. In
conclusion, EPAS1 promotes Flt-1 gene expression and induces mRNA expression of
VEGF, Flk-1, and Tie2, leading to enhancement of mature angiogenesis in vivo.
Thus, EPAS1 may contribute to the construction of mature vessels by modulating
the coordinated expressions of VEGF, Flt-1, Flk-1, and Tie2.

PMID: 15192019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jun 9;32(10):3169-79. Print 2004.

Altered DNA binding specificity of Arnt by selection of partner bHLH-PAS
proteins.

Kinoshita K(1), Kikuchi Y, Sasakura Y, Suzuki M, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Sogawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku 
University, Sendai, 980-8578, Japan.

The Ah receptor (AhR) and HLF are transcription factors involved in xenobiotic
metabolism and hypoxic response, respectively. AhR and HLF heterodimerize with
Arnt as the common partner, and bind to asymmetric E-boxes termed XRE and HRE,
respectively. In order to investigate nucleotide preference of the heterodimers, 
reporter plasmids with oligonucleotides for XREs or HREs with systematic
mutations were constructed and their activity was determined. Comparison of the
activity revealed that DNA length and nucleotide preference recognized by Arnt
subunit in the two heterodimers were largely different between XRE and HRE. We
expressed AhR-Arnt and HLF-Arnt in Escherichia coli and used them for DNA
binding. The dissociation constant of HLF-Arnt-HRE was 10.4 +/- 1.6 nM.
Competition activity of mutated XREs or HREs with wild type was consistent with
their transcription activity. Bending of XRE and HRE induced by binding of the
relevant heterodimers was observed with stronger bending of XRE than of HRE. By
deletional and mutational analyses, an alanine and three arginine (Ala 8, Arg 9, 
Arg 11 and Arg 12) residues in the basic sequence of HLF were found to be
indispensable for the transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC434443
PMID: 15190133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 6;279(32):33799-805. Epub 2004 Jun 7.

Identification of a novel family of ankyrin repeats containing cofactors for p160
nuclear receptor coactivators.

Zhang A(1), Yeung PL, Li CW, Tsai SC, Dinh GK, Wu X, Li H, Chen JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854-5635,
USA.

Members of the p160 nuclear receptor coactivators interact with liganded nuclear 
receptors to enhance transcription of target genes. Here we identify a novel
family of ankyrin repeats containing cofactors (ANCOs) that interact with the
p160 coactivators. ANCO-1 binds to the conserved Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) region of the
p160 coactivators. It encodes a large nuclear protein with five ankyrin repeats, 
and parts of its sequences have been reported as nasopharyngeal carcinoma
susceptibility protein and medulloblastoma antigen. Immunofluorescence staining
reveals discrete nuclear foci of ANCO-1 that are distinct from known nuclear
structures. Intriguingly, ANCO-1 also colocalizes and interacts with histone
deacetylases. Transient reporter gene assay shows that ANCO-1 expression inhibits
ligand-dependent transactivation by both steroid and nonsteroid nuclear
receptors. Taken together, we have identified a novel family of ankyrin repeats
containing cofactors that may recruit histone deacetylases to the p160
coactivators/nuclear receptor complex to inhibit ligand-dependent
transactivation.

PMID: 15184363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biochem Pharmacol. 2004 Jul 1;68(1):63-71.

Phenylthiourea as a weak activator of aryl hydrocarbon receptor inhibiting
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-induced CYP1A1 transcription in zebrafish
embryo.

Wang WD(1), Wang Y, Wen HJ, Buhler DR, Hu CH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University,
Keelung 202-24, Taiwan, ROC.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor
that can be activated by a diverse synthetic and naturally-occurring chemicals,
such as the halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (HAHs) and the non-halogenated
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). The liganded AHR modulates the genetic
activity of a variety of xenobiotic-responsive genes, including cytochrome
P4501A1 (CYP1A1). The tyrosinase inhibitor 1-phenyl-2-thiourea (PTU) is widely
used in zebrafish research to suppress pigmentation in developing embryos/fry.
Here we showed that 0.2 mM PTU induced a basal level of CYP1A1 transcription in
zebrafish embryonic integument as early as 24 h postfertilization (hpf) stage.
Subsequently, PTU induced CYP1A1 transcription in blood vessels at 36 hpf. During
larval stage, the liver and all pharyngeal arch vessels of PTU-treated embryos
exhibited CYP1A1 transcription as well. Comparing to TCDD, PTU induces CYP1A1
transcription with much lower efficacy in zebrafish embryos. Coincubating the
embryos with PTU and TCDD led to repressing TCDD-induced CYP1A1 transcription.
Mechanistic studies indicated that both of PTU- and TCDD-mediated CYP1A1
transcriptions are modulated by the same AHR-ARNT signaling pathway.

PMID: 15183118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. FEBS Lett. 2004 Jun 4;567(2-3):311-5.

Hypoxia-dependent regulation of PHD1: cloning and characterization of the human
PHD1/EGLN2 gene promoter.

Erez N(1), Stambolsky P, Shats I, Milyavsky M, Kachko T, Rotter V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, The Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel.

The recent identification of hypoxia-inducible-factor (HIF) prolyl hydroxylases
(PHD1, 2, and 3), which modify HIF-1 alpha in an oxygen-dependent manner,
provided an important link between oxygen availability and hypoxia-induced gene
expression. However, little is known about the regulation of the PHDs. To
investigate the transcriptional regulation of PHD1, we cloned the PHD1 gene
promoter. Here, we report that the expression of PHD1 is reduced under hypoxic
conditions. Furthermore, we identified binding sites for aryl hydrocarbon nuclear
translocator (ARNT/HIF-1 beta) within the PHD1 promoter, and showed that ARNT is 
associated in vivo with the PHD1 promoter following hypoxia, which implies a role
for ARNT in the hypoxia-dependent regulation of PHD1. Taken together, our
findings suggest a hypoxia-induced regulatory loop of PHD1 expression, mediated
by ARNT.

PMID: 15178343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mar Environ Res. 2004 Aug-Dec;58(2-5):119-24.

Cloning and analysis of the CYP1A promoter from the atlantic killifish (Fundulus 
heteroclitus).

Powell WH(1), Morrison HG, Weil EJ, Karchner SI, Sogin ML, Stegeman JJ, Hahn ME.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA, USA. powellw@kenyon.edu

Enzymes in the cytochrome P450 gene family 1 (CYP1) catalyze the metabolic
activation of numerous hydrocarbon carcinogens and various natural compounds.
CYP1 family members have been identified in several vertebrates, including fish, 
amphibians, birds, and mammals, and are inducible by aromatic hydrocarbons acting
through the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR). Together with its heterodimeric
partner ARNT, the ligand-bound AHR binds conserved xenobiotic response elements
(XREs) near the promoter of CYP1A and other genes. However, some populations of
the Atlantic killifish Fundulus heteroclitus inhabiting highly contaminated sites
are refractory to CYP1A induction by aromatic hydrocarbons. To better understand 
the mechanisms underlying this phenomenon, we are characterizing the AHR-CYP1A
signaling pathway in this species. We report here the characterization of a
genomic clone containing the 5(') end of the wild-type F. heteroclitus CYP1A
gene. The 5(') coding sequence matches that of the F. heteroclitus CYP1A cDNA
reported earlier [Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 121C (1998) 231]. Consistent with its
inducibility by AHR agonists, the CYP1A gene contains three consensus XREs
(5(')CACGC3(')) within 1.6 kb of the putative transcriptional start site. When
oligonucleotides containing each of these sites were analyzed in an
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, one of these showed a strong,
TCDD-inducible mobility shift in the presence of in vitro expressed mouse AHR
protein. These sequence data and initial functional characterization provide a
valuable tool for the study of genetic variations in CYP1A expression and
activity in sensitive and resistant populations. These studies may ultimately
shed light on the importance of P4501A activity in xenobiotic toxicity.

PMID: 15178023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Aquat Toxicol. 2004 Jul 14;68(4):301-13.

Baltic salmon (Salmo salar) yolk-sac fry mortality is associated with
disturbances in the function of hypoxia-inducible transcription factor
(HIF-1alpha) and consecutive gene expression.

Vuori KA(1), Soitamo A, Vuorinen PJ, Nikinmaa M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Physiology, Department of Biology, University of Turku,
FI-20014 Turku, Finland.

Baltic salmon (Salmo salar) suffer from abnormally high yolk-sac fry mortality
designated as M74-syndrome. In 1990s, 25-80% of salmon females, which ascended
rivers to spawn, produced yolk-sac fry suffering from the syndrome. Symptoms of
M74-affected fry include neurological disturbances, impaired vascular development
and abnormal haemorrhages. The latter symptoms are observed in mammalian embryos 
if the function of hypoxia inducible transcription factor (HIF-1alpha), its
dimerization partner aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT) or target gene 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is disturbed. To study the possible
involvement of HIF-1alpha and its target gene VEGF in the development of the
syndrome, we collected healthy and M74-affected wild Baltic salmon yolk-sac fry
and analyzed HIF-1alpha mRNA and protein expression, HIF-1alpha DNA-binding,
target gene VEGF protein expression, and blood vessel density in both groups at
different stages of yolk-sac fry development. In addition, since Baltic salmon
females contain organochlorine contaminants, which have been suggested to be the 
cause of M74 syndrome via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-dependent gene
expression pathway, we studied AhR protein expression, AhR DNA-binding and target
gene CYP1A protein expression. Since the parents of both healthy and M74-affected
wild fry will have experienced the organochlorine load from the Baltic Sea,
hatchery-reared fry were included in the studies as an additional control. The
results show that the vascular defects observed in fry suffering from M74 are
associated with reduced DNA-binding activity of HIF-1alpha and subsequent
downregulation of its target gene vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). In
addition, also AhR function is decreased in diseased fry making it unlikely that 
symptoms of M74-affected fry would be caused by an upregulation of xenobiotically
induced AhR-dependent gene expression pathway.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 15177948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Aquat Toxicol. 2004 Jun 24;68(3):219-32.

Unprecedented genomic diversity of AhR1 and AhR2 genes in Atlantic salmon (Salmo 
salar L.).

Hansson MC(1), Wittzell H, Persson K, von Schantz T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Ecology, Lund University, Ecology Building, SE-22362
Lund, Sweden. maria.hansson@zooekol.lu.se

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) genes encode proteins involved in mediating the
toxic responses induced by several environmental pollutants. Here, we describe
the identification of the first two AhR1 (alpha and beta) genes and two
additional AhR2 (alpha and beta) genes in the tetraploid species Atlantic salmon 
(Salmo salar L.) from a cosmid library screening. Cosmid clones containing
genomic salmon AhR sequences were isolated using a cDNA clone containing the
coding region of the Atlantic salmon AhR2gamma as a probe. Screening revealed 14 
positive clones, from which four were chosen for further analyses. One of the
cosmids contained genomic AhR sequences that were highly similar to the rainbow
trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) AhR2alpha and beta genes. SMART RACE amplified two
complete, highly similar but not identical AhR type 2 sequences from salmon cDNA,
which from phylogenetic analyses were determined as the rainbow trout AhR2alpha
and beta orthologs. The salmon AhR2alpha and beta encode proteins of 1071 and
1058 residues, respectively, and encompass characteristic AhR sequence elements
like a basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and two PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) domains. Both
genes are transcribed in liver, spleen and muscle tissues of adult salmon. A
second cosmid contained partial sequences, which were identical to the previously
characterized AhR2gamma gene. The last two cosmids contained partial genomic AhR 
sequences, which were more similar to other AhR type 1 fish genes than the four
characterized salmon AhR2 genes. However, attempts to amplify the corresponding
complete cDNA sequences of the inserts proved very difficult, suggesting that
these genes are non-functional or very weakly transcribed in the examined
tissues. Phylogenetic analyses of the conserved regions did, however, clearly
indicate that these two AhRs belong to the AhR type 1 clade and have been
assigned as the Atlantic salmon AhR1alpha and AhR1beta genes. Taken together,
these findings demonstrate that multiple AhR genes are present in Atlantic salmon
genome, which likely is a consequence of previous genome duplications in the
evolutionary past of salmonids. Plausible explanations for the high incidence of 
AhR genes in fish and more specifically in salmonids, like rapid divergences in
specialized functions, are discussed.

PMID: 15159049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jun 1;101(22):8319-24. Epub 2004 May 17.

Involvement of Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) kinase in the stimulation of preproinsulin and 
pancreatic duodenum homeobox 1 gene expression by glucose.

da Silva Xavier G(1), Rutter J, Rutter GA.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Signalling Laboratories and Department of Biochemistry,
University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 ITD, United Kingdom.

Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain-containing kinases are common in prokaryotes, but a
mammalian counterpart has only recently been described. Although the PAS domain
of the mammalian PAS kinase (PASK) is closely related to the bacterial oxygen
sensor FixL, it is unclear whether PASK activity is changed in mammalian cells in
response to nutrients and might therefore contribute to signal transduction by
these or other stimuli. Here, we show that elevated glucose concentrations
rapidly increase PASK activity in pancreatic islet beta cells, an event followed 
by the accumulation of both PASK mRNA and protein. Demonstrating a physiological 
role for PASK activation, comicroinjection into clonal beta cells of cDNA
encoding wild-type PASK, or PASK protein itself, mimics the induction of
preproinsulin promoter activity by high glucose concentrations. Conversely,
anti-PASK antibodies block promoter activation by the sugar, and the silencing of
PASK expression by RNA interference suppresses the up-regulation by glucose of
preproinsulin and pancreatic duodenum homeobox 1 gene expression, without
affecting glucose-induced changes in the levels of mRNAs encoding glucokinase or 
uncoupling protein 2. We conclude that PASK is an important metabolic sensor in
nutrient-sensitive mammalian cells and plays an unexpected role in the regulation
of key genes involved in maintaining the differentiated phenotype of pancreatic
beta cells.

PMCID: PMC420392
PMID: 15148392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jun 4;318(3):746-55.

A novel induction mechanism of the rat CYP1A2 gene mediated by Ah receptor-Arnt
heterodimer.

Sogawa K(1), Numayama-Tsuruta K, Takahashi T, Matsushita N, Miura C, Nikawa J,
Gotoh O, Kikuchi Y, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Science, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku
University, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan. sogawa@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

We have identified an enhancer responsible for induction by 3-methylcholanthrene 
in the upstream region of the CYP1A2 gene. The enhancer does not contain the
invariant core sequence of XREs that are binding sites for the Ah receptor (AhR) 
and Arnt heterodimer. The enhancer did not show any inducible expression in
Hepa-1-derived cell lines, C4 and C12, deficient of Arnt and AhR, respectively.
On the other hand, bacterially expressed AhR-Arnt heterodimer could not bind to
the enhancer. Mutational analysis of the enhancer revealed that a repeated
sequence separated by six nucleotides is important for expression. A factor
binding specifically to the enhancer was found by using gel shift assays.
Bacterially expressed AhR-Arnt heterodimer interacted with the factor. A dominant
negative mutant of the AhR to XRE activated the enhancer. Collectively, these
results demonstrate that a novel induction mechanism is present in which the
AhR-Arnt heterodimer functions as a coactivator.

PMID: 15144902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2004 Oct;29(10):1782-9.

Inactivation of 5-HT(2C) receptors potentiates consequences of serotonin reuptake
blockade.

Cremers TI(1), Giorgetti M, Bosker FJ, Hogg S, Arnt J, Mørk A, Honig G, Bøgesø
KP, Westerink BH, den Boer H, Wikstrom HV, Tecott LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Pharmacy, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands.

The enhancement of central serotonin system function underlies the therapeutic
effects of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which have become the
most commonly used class of antidepressant agents. However, many individuals
experience depressive episodes that are resistant to SSRI treatment. Homeostatic 
mechanisms that limit the extent to which SSRIs enhance serotonergic
neurotransmission have been implicated in this phenomenon. Here, we report a
novel strategy for enhancing the efficacy of SSRIs. Using in vivo microdialysis
methods in rats, the nonselective 5-HT2 receptor antagonist ketanserin was
observed to produce a robust augmentation of citalopram-, fluoxetine-, and
sertraline-induced elevations of hippocampal extracellular serotonin levels.
Similar effects were also observed in cortex. The potentiation of SSRI-induced
increases in hippocampal serotonin levels was reproduced by the 5-HT(2C)
receptor-selective antagonists SB 242084 and RS 102221, but not by the 5-HT(2A)
receptor-selective antagonist MDL 100 907. Although 5-HT(2C) receptor antagonists
augmented the actions of SSRIs, they had no effect on extracellular serotonin
levels or tail suspension responses when administered alone. These results were
in strong accord with independent findings using a line of 5-HT(2C) receptor-null
mutant mice. Although this mutation did not affect baseline extracellular
serotonin levels or tail suspension test (TST) behavior, it enhanced fluoxetine
effects on serotonin levels and immobility in the TST. These findings reveal an
unanticipated pharmacological action of 5-HT(2C) receptors that warrants
consideration in the development of novel strategies for the treatment of
depression.

PMID: 15138437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Biol Chem. 2004 Mar-Apr;385(3-4):291-4.

Simultaneous exposure of rats to dioxin and carbon monoxide reduces the
xenobiotic but not the hypoxic response.

Hofer T(1), Pohjanvirta R, Spielmann P, Viluksela M, Buchmann DP, Wenger RH,
Gassmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Physiology, University of Zürich, CH-8057 Zürich,
Switzerland.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) 
are conditionally regulated transcription factor subunits that form heterodimeric
complexes with their common partner, AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT/HIF-1beta).
Whereas the environmentally toxic compound 2,3,7,8-tetra-chlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) initiates the trans-activation activity of AhR:ARNT/HIF-1beta, hypoxic
exposure stabilizes HIF-1alpha and functionally activates the
HIF-1alpha:ARNT/HIF-1beta complex. To analyze a possible crosstalk between these 
two pathways in vivo, rats were given dioxin orally and/or were exposed to carbon
monoxide (CO), causing functional anemia. We found that exposure to CO inhibited 
the xenobiotic response while dioxin application had no significant negative
impact on hypoxia-mediated gene transcription.

PMID: 15134343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Arch Toxicol. 2004 Sep;78(9):496-507. Epub 2004 May 1.

PPARalpha-dependent modulation of hepatic CYP1A by clofibric acid in rats.

Shaban Z(1), El-Shazly S, Ishizuka M, Kimura K, Kazusaka A, Fujita S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology, Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido
University, N18, W9, Kita-ku, 060-0818 Sapporo, Japan.

Fibrates, hypolipidemic drugs, have been reported to suppress the metabolic
activities of cytochrome P450 1A1 and 1A2 in rats but the mechanism has not been 
elucidated. In the present study we tested the hypothesis that the inhibitory
effect of fibrates on arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) function may be due to their
stimulatory effects on PPARalpha. Sudan III (S.III) treatment induced CYP 1A1 and
CYP 1A2 protein expression, mRNA and their metabolic activities,
methoxyresorufin-O-demethylase (MROD) and ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD), in
Wistar rats higher than those in the control. Co-treatment of rats with S.III and
clofibric acid (CA) caused a 40-50% decrease in the induced levels of CYP1A1 and 
CYP1A2 protein, mRNA expression and their metabolic activities and reduced AhR
protein expression. When we treated HepG2 cells with S.III and/or CA, no
suppressive effect on S.III-induced CYP1A1 protein expression due to CA was
found. HepG2 cells were transiently transfected with increasing concentrations of
PPARalpha mammalian expression vector and exposed to the same treatment. CA
co-treatment with S.III decreased AhR protein and S.III-induced CYP1A1 protein
expression with increasing dose of PPARalpha transfected into HepG2 cells. Our
results demonstrate that the suppressive effect of fibrates on CYP1A is
PPARalpha-dependent and suggest that PPARalpha has an inhibitory effect on AhR
function.

PMID: 15127182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Med Sci Monit. 2004 May;10(5):BR135-8. Epub 2004 Apr 28.

Expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT) mRNA expression in human spermatozoa.

Khorram O(1), Garthwaite M, Jones J, Golos T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Wisconsin, and
Wisconsin Regional Primate Research Center, Madison, WI, USA.
okhorram@obgyn.humc.edu

BACKGROUND: The objective of this study was to determine if human spermatozoa
express AHR (dioxin receptor) and ARNT and if mRNA levels for these transcription
factors correlate with sperm concentration, motility or morphology.
MATERIAL/METHODS: This was a case-controlled cohort study in which AHR and ARNT
mRNA levels in subjects with normal and abnormal semen analysis were compared.
Semen analysis was performed by CASA. AHR/ARNT mRNA levels were determined by
multiplex RT-PCR using Glyceryl aldehyde 3-phospho dehydrogenase (G3PDH) as an
internal control.
RESULTS: Human sperm expresses abundant amounts of AHR and ARNT mRNA. There were 
no differences in AHR and ARNT mRNA levels in subjects with normal and abnormal
semen analysis. AHR and ARNT levels did not correlate with sperm concentration,
morphology or motility. There was a trend (p=0.07) for lower AHR mRNA expression 
in sperm of men with severe oligospermia. There was a significant negative
correlation (r=-0.42, p<0.05) between sperm AHR and ARNT mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of AHR in sperm provides a mechanism by which
environmental dioxins, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and polyhalogenated
biphenyls could directly influence sperm function.

PMID: 15114261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 25;279(26):27187-93. Epub 2004 Apr 24.

Dioxin-induced immortalization of normal human keratinocytes and silencing of p53
and p16INK4a.

Ray SS(1), Swanson HI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Biomedical Pharmacology, University of Kentucky
Medical Center, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

Dioxin, a potent tumor promoter, activates the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), a
ligand-activated transcription factor belonging to the basic helix-loop-helix-PAS
family, to enhance tumorigenesis via unknown mechanisms. We undertook this study 
to determine the mechanisms underlying the impact of dioxin on cell fate, in
particular senescence that occurs in normal human cells and is considered to play
important tumor suppressive function. We have previously shown that in primary
human keratinocytes, dioxin attenuates senescence while retaining the
proliferative capacity and represses expression of the tumor suppressors,
p16(INK4a) and p53. Here, we show that repression of p16(INK4a) and p53
transcriptional activity by dioxin absolutely requires the AHR and is accompanied
by promoter methylation. Furthermore, dioxin alone is sufficient to immortalize
normal human keratinocytes. Our data introduce a previously unrecognized
regulatory pathway, that of the AHR, that impacts senescence. More importantly,
this is the first report of a tumor promoter capable of inhibiting senescence in 
a receptor mediated manner and introduces a novel mechanism by which this
carcinogen may contribute to human malignancies.

PMID: 15111621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004 May;77(5):1751-5.

Upregulated hypoxia-inducible factor-1 DNA binding activity to the vascular
endothelial growth factor-A promoter mediates increased vascular permeability in 
donor lung grafts.

Abraham D(1), Krenn K, Seebacher G, Paulus P, Klepetko W, Aharinejad S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cardiovascular Research, Department of Anatomy, University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Transplantation-induced hypoxia results in enhanced vascular
permeability and tissue vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and
endothelin-1 (ET-1) overexpression in donor lung grafts. Promoter studies have
uncovered a hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 binding site (HBS) in 5'-flanking
region of VEGF gene that regulates the hypoxia-induced expression of VEGF; and
ET-1 potently stimulates VEGF-A production. We hypothesized that HIF-1 regulates 
VEGF-mediated vascular permeability in lung grafts.
METHODS: We studied the mRNA and protein expression of HIF-1 and its
protein-binding capacity to the HBS of the VEGF gene in biopsies of preserved
donor and control lungs, using real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction, Western blotting, and electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Wet-to-dry 
lung weight ratio was measured in donor and control lungs.
RESULTS: While HIF-1 alpha mRNA expression was unchanged, HIF-1 beta was
downregulated (p < 0.05) in donor versus control lungs. Protein expression of
both, HIF-1 alpha and -beta was significantly upregulated in donor lung grafts.
HIF-1 binding to the HBS of the VEGF promoter as well as tissue fluid content
were increased in donor lung biopsies versus controls (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that upregulated HIF-1 DNA binding activity to
the HBS of VEGF-A most likely contributes to elevated VEGF levels in preserved
lung grafts. Unchanged HIF-1 alpha mRNA expression did not affect HIF-1 alpha
protein levels. Endothelin-1 increases HIF-1 alpha accumulation and activates
HIF-1 transcription complex in vitro. Therefore, ET-1-mediated increased HIF-1
alpha protein stability most likely leads to transcriptional activation of VEGF
during lung graft preservation. Targeting HIF might be of benefit to counteract
edema formation in preserved lung grafts.

PMID: 15111179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Dev Biol. 2004 May 15;269(2):360-80.

Differences between human and mouse embryonic stem cells.

Ginis I(1), Luo Y, Miura T, Thies S, Brandenberger R, Gerecht-Nir S, Amit M, Hoke
A, Carpenter MK, Itskovitz-Eldor J, Rao MS.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Section, Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging,
NIH, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

We compared gene expression profiles of mouse and human ES cells by
immunocytochemistry, RT-PCR, and membrane-based focused cDNA array analysis.
Several markers that in concert could distinguish undifferentiated ES cells from 
their differentiated progeny were identified. These included known markers such
as SSEA antigens, OCT3/4, SOX-2, REX-1 and TERT, as well as additional markers
such as UTF-1, TRF1, TRF2, connexin43, and connexin45, FGFR-4, ABCG-2, and
Glut-1. A set of negative markers that confirm the absence of differentiation was
also developed. These include genes characteristic of trophoectoderm, markers of 
germ layers, and of more specialized progenitor cells. While the expression of
many of the markers was similar in mouse and human cells, significant differences
were found in the expression of vimentin, beta-III tubulin, alpha-fetoprotein,
eomesodermin, HEB, ARNT, and FoxD3 as well as in the expression of the LIF
receptor complex LIFR/IL6ST (gp130). Profound differences in cell cycle
regulation, control of apoptosis, and cytokine expression were uncovered using
focused microarrays. The profile of gene expression observed in H1 cells was
similar to that of two other human ES cell lines tested (line I-6 and clonal
line-H9.2) and to feeder-free subclones of H1, H7, and H9, indicating that the
observed differences between human and mouse ES cells were species-specific
rather than arising from differences in culture conditions.

PMID: 15110706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Mol Biol Cell. 2004 Jul;15(7):3042-52. Epub 2004 Apr 23.

Properties of switch-like bioregulatory networks studied by simulation of the
hypoxia response control system.

Kohn KW(1), Riss J, Aprelikova O, Weinstein JN, Pommier Y, Barrett JC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

A complex bioregulatory network could be more easily comprehended if its
essential function could be described by a small "core" subsystem, and if its
response characteristics were switch-like. We tested this proposition by
simulation studies of the hypoxia response control network. We hypothesized that 
a small subsystem governs the basics of the cellular response to hypoxia and that
this response has a sharp oxygen-dependent transition. A molecular interaction
map of the network was prepared, and an evolutionarily conserved core subsystem
was extracted that could control the activity of hypoxia response promoter
elements on the basis of oxygen concentration. The core subsystem included the
hypoxia-inducible transcription factor (HIFalpha:ARNT heterodimer), proline
hydroxylase, and the von Hippel-Lindau protein. Simulation studies showed that
the same core subsystem can exhibit switch-like responses both to oxygen level
and to HIFalpha synthesis rate, thus suggesting a mechanism for hypoxia response 
promoter element-dependent responses common to both hypoxia and growth factor
signaling. The studies disclosed the mechanism responsible for the sharp
transitions. We show how parameter sets giving switch-like behavior can be found 
and how this type of behavior provides a foundation for quantitative studies in
cells.

PMCID: PMC452562
PMID: 15107465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Toxicol Lett. 2004 Apr 1;149(1-3):287-93.

Aryl-hydrocarbon receptor-dependent pathway and toxic effects of TCDD in humans: 
a population-based study in Seveso, Italy.

Baccarelli A(1), Pesatori AC, Masten SA, Patterson DG Jr, Needham LL, Mocarelli
P, Caporaso NE, Consonni D, Grassman JA, Bertazzi PA, Landi MT.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Epidemiology Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics,
National Cancer Institute, NIH, DHHS, Bethesda, MD 20892-7236, USA.
baccarea@mail.nih.gov

Approximately 20 years after the Seveso, Italy accident, we conducted a
population-based study to evaluate the impact of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) exposure upon immune and
mechanistically based biomarkers of dioxin response in humans. TCDD toxic effects
are known to be mediated by the aryl-hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). We randomly
selected 62 study subjects from the highest exposed zones and 59 from the
surrounding non-contaminated area. Current lipid-adjusted plasma TCDD
concentrations in these subjects ranged from 3.5 to 90 ng/kg (or ppt) and were
negatively associated with plasma IgG concentrations (r=-0.35; P = 0.0002). The
expression of genes in the AhR-dependent pathway, including AhR, aryl-hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), CYP1A1, and CYP1B1 transcripts, and the
CYP1A1-associated 7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) activity was measured in 
lymphocytes. AhR mRNA levels in uncultured lymphocytes were negatively associated
with plasma TCDD (P=0.03). When mitogen-induced lymphocytes were cultured with
10nM TCDD, all AhR-dependent genes were induced 1.2- to 13-fold. In these cells, 
plasma TCDD was associated with decreased EROD activity. Markers within the AhR
pathway were correlated with one another. Our findings suggest the presence of
long-term effects in the subjects exposed to TCDD after the Seveso accident.

PMID: 15093275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Cell Sci. 2004 Apr 1;117(Pt 9):1785-94. Epub 2004 Mar 16.

Oxygen-regulated expression of the RNA-binding proteins RBM3 and CIRP by a
HIF-1-independent mechanism.

Wellmann S(1), Bührer C, Moderegger E, Zelmer A, Kirschner R, Koehne P, Fujita J,
Seeger K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Charité Campus Virchow-Klinikum, 
Medical University of Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany.

The transcriptional regulation of several dozen genes in response to low oxygen
tension is mediated by hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), a heterodimeric
protein composed of two subunits, HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta. In the
HIF-1alpha-deficient human leukemic cell line, Z-33, exposed to mild (8% O(2)) or
severe (1% O(2)) hypoxia, we found significant upregulation of two related
heterogenous nuclear ribonucleoproteins, RNA-binding motif protein 3 (RBM3) and
cold inducible RNA-binding protein (CIRP), which are highly conserved cold stress
proteins with RNA-binding properties. Hypoxia also induced upregulation of RBM3
and CIRP in the murine HIF-1beta-deficient cell line, Hepa-1 c4. In various HIF-1
competent cells, RBM3 and CIRP were induced by moderate hypothermia (32 degrees
C) but hypothermia was ineffective in increasing HIF-1alpha or vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a known HIF-1 target. In contrast, iron
chelators induced VEGF but not RBM3 or CIRP. The RBM3 and CIRP mRNA increase
after hypoxia was inhibited by actinomycin-D, and in vitro nuclear run-on assays 
demonstrated specific increases in RBM3 and CIRP mRNA after hypoxia, which
suggests that regulation takes place at the level of gene transcription.
Hypoxia-induced RBM3 or CIRP transcription was inhibited by the respiratory chain
inhibitors NaN(3) and cyanide in a dose-dependent fashion. However, cells
depleted of mitochondria were still able to upregulate RBM3 and CIRP in response 
to hypoxia. Thus, RBM3 and CIRP are adaptatively expressed in response to hypoxia
by a mechanism that involves neither HIF-1 nor mitochondria.

PMID: 15075239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2004 Mar;69(3):306-10.

Cytochrome P-450 family 1 in rat embryo cell culture immortalized by Rausher
leukemia virus.

Vaiman AV(1), Shcherbak NP, Kobliakov VA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Carcinogenesis, Cancer Research Center, Russian Academy of
Medical Sciences, Moscow 115478, Russia. vakob@crc.umos.ru

We studied comparative expression and activity of cytochrome P450 family 1 (CYP1)
isoforms in rat embryo cells, both primary and immortalized by Rausher leukemia
virus (RLV). In RLV-infected embryonal cells compared with the initial ones the
expression levels of CYP1A1 and 1B1 mRNAs and benzo[a]pyrene (BP) hydroxylase
activity were higher, regardless of their treatment with the CYP1 inducer
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. The sensitivity to BP and
7,12-dimethylbenzo[a]anthracene was higher in the cells immortalized with RLV.
The expression level of mRNAs of induction-mediating proteins aryl hydrocarbon
receptor and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator was the same in both 
cell cultures tested. Higher sensitivity of cells immortalized with RLV compared 
with the initial embryo cells to transforming effect of BP, which was described
previously, is possibly associated with elevated expression of CYP1 isoforms.

PMID: 15061698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Apr 23;317(1):84-91.

Subcellular localization and regulation of hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha in
vascular endothelial cells.

Takahashi R(1), Kobayashi C, Kondo Y, Nakatani Y, Kudo I, Kunimoto M, Imura N,
Hara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Molecular Toxicology, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kitasato University, Tokyo, Japan.

The hypoxia-inducible factors 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and 2alpha (HIF-2alpha) have
extensive structural homology and have been identified as transcription factors
that mediate hypoxia-inducible gene expression through hypoxia-responsive element
(HRE). They play critical roles not only in normal development, but also in tumor
progression. Endothelial cells (EC) express both HIF-1alpha and -2alpha. In this 
study, we examined the subcellular localization of HIF-1alpha and -2alpha in
bovine arterial EC (BAEC) by immunoblotting and immunocytostaining analysis and
found that even under normoxic conditions, as with its heterodimeric partner
ARNT, HIF-2alpha was stable, and was localized in the nucleus of BAEC differently
than HIF-1alpha. HIF-2alpha might be regulated by a different mechanism than
HIF-1alpha and might mediate the expression of some EC-specific genes under
normoxic conditions. We further found that cardiovascular helix-loop-helix factor
(CHF) 2, which had been identified as an ARNT-interacting protein, was expressed 
in BAEC and suppressed HRE-dependent gene expression both under normoxia and
hypoxia. CHF2 might be one of the key regulators of HIF-2alpha-mediated gene
expression in normoxic EC.

PMID: 15047151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Curr Pharm Des. 2004;10(8):821-33.

Modulating the hypoxia-inducible factor signaling pathway: applications from
cardiovascular disease to cancer.

Hewitson KS(1), McNeill LA, Schofield CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Molecular Sciences and the Department of Chemistry,
Chemistry Research Laboratory, Mansfield Road, Oxford, OX1 JTA, UK.
kirsty.hewitson@chem.ox.ac.uk

Humans, like other complex aerobic organisms, possess highly evolved systems for 
the delivery of dioxygen to all the cells of the body. These systems are
regulated since excessive levels of dioxygen are toxic. In animals hypoxia causes
an increase in the transcription levels of specific genes, including those
encoding for vascular endothelial growth factor and erythropoietin. At the
transcriptional level, the hypoxic response is mediated by hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF), an alpha,beta-heterodimeric protein. HIF-beta is constitutively
present, but HIF-alpha levels are regulated by dioxygen. Under hypoxic
conditions, levels of HIF-alpha rise, allowing its dimerization with HIF-beta and
enabling transcriptional activation. Under normoxic conditions both the level of 
HIF-alpha and its ability to enable transcription are directly controlled by its 
post-translational oxidation by oxygenases. Hydroxylation of HIF-alpha at either 
of two conserved prolyl residues enables its recognition by the von Hippel-Lindau
tumour suppressor protein which targets it for proteasomal degradation.
Hydroxylation of an asparaginyl residue in the C-terminal transactivation domain 
of HIF-alpha directly prevents its interaction with the coactivator p300 from the
transcription complex. Hydroxylation of HIF-alpha is catalysed by members of the 
iron (II) and 2-oxoglutarate dependent oxygenase family. In humans, three
prolyl-hydroxylase isozymes (PHD1-3, for prolyl hydroxylase domain enzymes) and
an asparaginyl hydroxylase (FIH, for factor inhibiting HIF) have been identified.
Recent studies have identified additional post-translational modifications of
HIF-alpha including acetylation and phosphorylation. Modulation of the HIF
mediated hypoxic response is of potential use in a wide range of disease states
including cardiovascular disease and cancer. Here we review current knowledge of 
the HIF pathway focusing on its regulation by dioxygen and discussion of
potential targets and challenges in attempts to modulate the pathway for
medicinal application.

PMID: 15032687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Int J Cancer. 2004 May 10;109(6):810-6.

Inhibition of MUC1 expression by indole-3-carbinol.

Lee IJ(1), Han F, Baek J, Hisatsune A, Kim KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Maryland School of
Pharmacy, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

MUC1 is a large transmembrane glycoprotein overexpressed by a majority of
carcinomas. High expression of MUC1 is associated with aggressive tumors, and
MUC1 antigen is used as a marker to monitor disease progression in breast cancer 
patients. Several lines of evidence strongly suggest that the overexpression of
MUC1 contributes to cancer progression and metastasis. In this report, we
demonstrate that the naturally occurring cancer preventative, indole-3-carbinol
(I3C), inhibits the expression of MUC1 in breast cancer cells. I3C inhibited both
MUC1 mRNA and protein levels in a dose- and time-dependent manner. This
inhibition was seen in the estrogen responsive MCF-7 cells as well as
unresponsive MDA-MB-468 cells, indicating that the inhibitory pathway is
independent of estrogen receptor. Gene expression studies using the human MUC1
gene promoter connected to a luciferase reporter demonstrated that I3C inhibits
the transcription of the MUC1 gene. Promoter deletion studies indicate that the
region containing up to 600 bp upstream (-600) of the initiation site is
sufficient for inhibition by I3C. Furthermore, I3C represses the activation of
transcription mediated by the region between -600 and -450 bp. A putative
xenobiotic response element was located within this region but the binding of
AhR/Arnt heterodimer to this site was undetectable by electrophoretic mobility
shift assays. Our results may point to the existence of a novel pathway of
transcriptional inhibition by I3C in cancer cells as well as a new mechanism of
MUC1 gene inhibition. Our findings might have implications in the use of I3C as a
preventative as well as a therapeutic agent for breast cancer.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15027113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. PLoS Biol. 2004 Mar;2(3):E65. Epub 2004 Mar 16.

Interaction networks in yeast define and enumerate the signaling steps of the
vertebrate aryl hydrocarbon receptor.

Yao G(1), Craven M, Drinkwater N, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a vertebrate protein that mediates the
toxic and adaptive responses to dioxins and related environmental pollutants. In 
an effort to better understand the details of this signal transduction pathway,
we employed the yeast S. cerevisiae as a model system. Through the use of arrayed
yeast strains harboring ordered deletions of open reading frames, we determined
that 54 out of the 4,507 yeast genes examined significantly influence AHR signal 
transduction. In an effort to describe the relationship between these modifying
genes, we constructed a network map based upon their known protein and genetic
interactions. Monte Carlo simulations demonstrated that this network represented 
a description of AHR signaling that was distinct from those generated by random
chance. The network map was then explored with a number of computational and
experimental annotations. These analyses revealed that the AHR signaling pathway 
is defined by at least five distinct signaling steps that are regulated by
functional modules of interacting modifiers. These modules can be described as
mediating receptor folding, nuclear translocation, transcriptional activation,
receptor level, and a previously undescribed nuclear step related to the
receptor's Per-Arnt-Sim domain.

PMCID: PMC368161
PMID: 15024417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Feb 27;315(1):123-31.

Primary structure and inducibility by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) 
of aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor in a TCDD-sensitive and a TCDD-resistant
rat strain.

Korkalainen M(1), Tuomisto J, Pohjanvirta R.

Author information: 
(1)National Public Health Institute, Department of Environmental Health, P.O. Box
95, FIN-70701 Kuopio, Finland. Merja.Korkalainen@ktl.fi

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AHRR) is a negative regulator of AH
receptor (AHR), which mediates most of the toxic and biochemical effects of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). AHR has been shown to be the major
reason for the exceptionally wide (ca. 1000-fold) sensitivity difference in acute
toxicity of TCDD between two rat strains, sensitive Long-Evans (Turku/AB) (L-E)
and resistant Han/Wistar (Kuopio) (H/W), but there is another, currently unknown 
contributing factor involved. In the present study, we examined AHRR structure
and expression in these rat strains to find out whether AHRR could be this
auxiliary factor. Molecular cloning of AHRR coding region showed that consistent 
with AHRR proteins in other species, the N-terminal end of rat AHRR is highly
conserved, but PAS B and Q-rich domains are severely truncated or lacking.
Identical structures were recorded in both strains. Next, the time-, dose-, and
tissue-dependent expression of AHRR was determined using quantitative real-time
RT-PCR. In liver, AHRR expression was very low in untreated rats, but it
increased rapidly after TCDD exposure (100microg/kg). Testis exhibited the
highest constitutive expression of AHRR, whereas kidney, spleen, and heart showed
the highest induction of AHRR in response to TCDD treatment. Again, no marked
differences were found between H/W and L-E rats, implying that AHRR is not the
auxiliary contributing factor to the strain difference in TCDD sensitivity.
However, simultaneous measurement of CYP1A1 mRNA reinforced the view that AHRR is
an important determinant of tissue-specific responsiveness to TCDD.

PMID: 15013435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2004 Mar;60(Pt 3):550-2. Epub 2004 Feb 25.

Crystallization and preliminary crystallographic studies of the NCoA-1/SRC-1
PAS-B domain bound to the LXXLL motif of the STAT6 transactivation domain.

Razeto A(1), Pfitzner E, Becker S.

Author information: 
(1)Department for NMR-Based Structural Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Goettingen, Germany.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) regulates
transcriptional activation in response to interleukin-4 (IL-4) by direct
interaction with coactivators. Among them, NCoA-1, a member of the p160/steroid
receptor coactivator (SRC) family, has been found to bind to STAT6 with the
region B of its putative Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain. STAT6 interacts specifically 
with NCoA-1 via an LXXLL motif in its transactivation domain. Crystals of the
NCoA-1(257-385) domain in complex with the STAT6(794-814) LXXLL motif were
obtained in two hexagonal space groups. The crystals in space group P6(1), with
unit-cell parameters a = 61.7, b = 61.7, c = 146.5 A, alpha = beta = 90, gamma = 
120 degrees, diffract to 2.8 A at a home source. Crystals belonging to space
group P6(2), with unit-cell parameters a = 62.0, b = 62.0, c = 73.6 A, alpha =
beta = 90, gamma = 120 degrees, diffract to 1.8 A at a synchrotron source.

PMID: 14993689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Interv. 2002 Jul;2(4):229-43.

Regulation of gene expression by the hypoxia-inducible factors.

Fedele AO(1), Whitelaw ML, Peet DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences (Biochemistry) and the Centre for the
Molecular Genetics of Development, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South
Australia 5005 Australia.

Many molecular and physiological responses to hypoxia in mammals are controlled
by the transcription factors Hypoxia-Inducible Factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and
HIF-2alpha. Their ability to promote the transcription of hypoxia-inducible genes
is mediated by protein stability and regulation of a C-terminal transactivation
domain. Oxygen-dependent hydroxylation of conserved proline and asparagine
residues in HIF-alpha are required for targeting HIF-alpha to proteasomes for
destruction, and for inhibiting its capacity for CBP/p300-dependent
transactivation, respectively. In hypoxia, the O2 required for prolyl and
asparaginyl hydroxylation is limiting, and HIF-alpha is thus stabilized and
competent for transcription. Because these proteins participate in angiogenesis, 
glycolysis, programmed cell death, cancer, and ischemia, HIF-alpha and its
mediators are attractive therapeutic targets.

PMID: 14993394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 30;279(18):19209-16. Epub 2004 Feb 25.

Cell density regulates intracellular localization of aryl hydrocarbon receptor.

Ikuta T(1), Kobayashi Y, Kawajiri K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute and Department of Pathology, Saitama Cancer Center,
Saitama, 362-0806, Japan.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that plays a role as an intracellular mediator of the xenobiotic signaling
pathway. AhR contains signals for both nuclear localization and nuclear export
(NES). The objective of this study was to demonstrate how AhR intracellular
distribution was regulated physiologically in cells. We found that cell density, 
but not the cell cycle, influenced the subcellular distribution of AhR in a
keratinocyte cell line, HaCaT: AhR was predominantly nuclear at sparse cell
densities, both nuclear and cytoplasmic at subconfluence, and predominantly
cytoplasmic at confluence. Stable transfectants of HaCaT carrying a reporter gene
fused with xenobiotic responsive element showed an association between xenobiotic
responsive element-mediated transcription and AhR relocalization. Leptomycin B
promoted nuclear accumulation of AhR irrespective of cell density, suggesting
that this alteration may be because of a change of the regulation of the nuclear 
export of AhR. We found that Ser-68 in the NES of AhR was phosphorylated after
nuclear accumulation of activated AhR and the nuclear export of a chimeric
GST-AhR-GFP fusion protein was suppressed by substitution of a serine residue
(Ser-68) to aspartic acid, which mimics the negative charge of phosphorylation.
This novel cell density-dependent AhR relocalization was affected by exposure to 
SB203580, okadaic acid, and low Ca(2+) concentrations. These findings strongly
suggest that cell density regulates the intracellular localization and function
of AhR, because of modulation of nuclear export activity. The p38 MAPK-mediated
phosphorylation of the NES and its dephosphorylation, regulated by cell-cell
contact signals, may have pivotal roles in the novel AhR relocalization.

PMID: 14985336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2003 Dec 15;300(1):48-57.

ARNT gene multiplicity in amphibians: characterization of ARNT2 from the frog
Xenopus laevis.

Rowatt AJ(1), DePowell JJ, Powell WH.

Author information: 
(1)Kenyon College, Gambier, Ohio 43022, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is a member of the
Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) protein superfamily, transcription factors that mediate the
cellular responses to various developmental signals and environmental conditions.
A beta-class ("partner") PAS protein, ARNT exhibits the capacity to form
transcriptionally active heterodimers with several alpha-class ("sensor")
proteins, including the aryl hydrocarbon receptors (AHRs), the hypoxia-inducible 
factors (HIFs), and the Single minded (Sim) proteins. Two genes encode different 
forms of ARNT in mammals: ARNT1, which is widely expressed, and ARNT2, which is
limited to the brain and kidneys of adults and specific neural and branchial
tissues of embryos. In contrast, fish apparently express only a single ARNT gene,
although in different species, this may be either ARNT1 or ARNT2. In efforts to
understand the evolution of ARNT proteins throughout the vertebrate lineage, we
isolated an ARNT cDNA from early life stages of the amphibian Xenopus laevis. The
encoded protein binds cognate DNA sequences in concert with mouse AHR.
Phylogenetic analysis reveals that this sequence is orthologous to mammalian
ARNT2 and paralogous to the recently reported X. laevis ARNT1. ARNT2 mRNA
expression begins later than ARNT1 (stage 22 vs. stage 8), suggesting the two
proteins play distinct roles during development. Hence, in the expression of two 
well-conserved ARNT paralogs with distinct expression patterns, X. laevis
resembles mammals rather than fish. Diversity in the number and function of PAS
proteins, including ARNT, may underlie significant species differences in
developmental programming and biochemical response to environmental conditions.
The identification of multiple amphibian ARNT paralogs represents an important
step in the understanding of evolution and functional variation of ARNT in
vertebrates.

PMID: 14984034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 14;279(20):20582-93. Epub 2004 Feb 20.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) tyrosine 9, a residue that is essential for
AhR DNA binding activity, is not a phosphoresidue but augments AhR
phosphorylation.

Minsavage GD(1), Park SK, Gasiewicz TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
Rochester, 575 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

We delineate a mechanism by which dioxin (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin or 
TCDD)-mediated formation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) DNA binding
complex is disrupted by a single mutation at the conserved AhR tyrosine 9.
Replacement of tyrosine 9 with the structurally conservative phenylalanine
(AhRY9F) abolished binding to dioxin response element (DRE) D, E, and A and
abrogated DRE-driven gene induction mediated by the AhR with no effect on TCDD
binding, TCDD-induced nuclear localization, or ARNT heterodimerization. The
speculated role for phosphorylation at tyrosine 9 was also examined.
Anti-phosphotyrosine immunoblotting could not detect a major difference between
the AhRY9F mutant and wild-type AhR, but a basic isoelectric point shift was
detected by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis of AhRY9F. However, an antibody
raised to recognize only phosphorylated tyrosine 9 (anti-AhRpY9) confirmed that
AhR tyrosine 9 is not a phosphorylated residue required for DRE binding. Kinase
assays using synthetic peptides corresponding to the wild-type and mutant AhR
residues 1-23 demonstrated that a tyrosine at position 9 is important for
substrate recognition at serine(s)/threonine(s) within this sequence by purified 
protein kinase C (PKC). Also, compared with AhRY9F, immunopurified full-length
wild-type receptor was more rapidly phosphorylated by PKC. Furthermore,
co-treatment of AhR-deficient cells that expressed AhRY9F and a DRE-driven
luciferase construct with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate and TCDD resulted in a 
30% increase in luciferase activity compared with AhRY9F treated with TCDD alone.
Overall, AhR tyrosine 9, which is not a phosphorylated residue itself but is
required for DNA binding, appears to play a crucial role in AhR activity by
permitting proper phosphorylation of the AhR.

PMID: 14978034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2000 Jul;5(3):295-306.

Mechanisms of inhibitory aryl hydrocarbon receptor-estrogen receptor crosstalk in
human breast cancer cells.

Safe S(1), Wormke M, Samudio I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station 77843-4466, USA. ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that forms a functional heterodimeric complex with the AhR nuclear translocator
(Arnt) protein. The environmental toxin, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD), is a high affinity ligand for the AhR and has been extensively used to
investigate AhR-mediated biochemical and toxic responses. TCDD modulates several 
endocrine pathways including inhibition of 17beta-estradiol-induced responses in 
the immature and ovariectomized rodent uterus and mammary gland and in human
breast cancer cell lines. TCDD inhibits formation and growth of mammary tumors in
carcinogen-induced rodent models and relatively nontoxic selective AhR modulators
(SAhRMs) are being developed for treatment of breast cancer. The mechanisms of
inhibitory AhR-estrogen receptor (ER) crosstalk have been investigated in MCF-7
breast cancer cells by analysis of promoter regions of genes induced by E2 and
inhibited by TCDD. AhR-mediated inhibition of E2-induced cathepsin D, pS2, c-fos,
and heat shock protein 27 gene expression involves direct interaction of the AhR 
complex with inhibitory pentanucleotide (GCGTG) dioxin responsive elements
(iDREs) resulting in disruption of interactions between proteins binding DNA
elements required for ER action and the basal transcription machinery. Mechanisms
of inhibitory AhR-ER crosstalk indicate that functional iDREs are required for
inhibition of some genes; however, results indicate that other interaction
pathways are important including AhR-mediated proteasome-dependent degradation of
the ER.

PMID: 14973392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Cell Biochem. 2004 Jan;255(1-2):33-45.

Arsenite induces HIF-1alpha and VEGF through PI3K, Akt and reactive oxygen
species in DU145 human prostate carcinoma cells.

Gao N(1), Shen L, Zhang Z, Leonard SS, He H, Zhang XG, Shi X, Jiang BH.

Author information: 
(1)Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology, Immunology and
Cell Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA.

Arsenite is widely distributed environmental toxicant in water, food and air. It 
is a known human carcinogen, which is strongly associated with human cancers
originated from liver, nasal cavity, lung, skin, bladder, kidney, and prostate.
In this study, we investigated whether arsenite induces expression of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1). HIF-1 is a heterodimeric basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor, composed of HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta/ARNT 
subunits; and is involved in tumor growth and angiogenesis. Here we demonstrate
that arsenite induces the expression of HIF-1alpha but not HIF-1beta subunit in
DU145 human prostate carcinoma cells. Arsenite also increases the expression of
VEGF through the induction of HIF-1. We also found that arsenite activates PI3K
and Akt that are required for arsenite-induced expression of HIF-1alpha and VEGF.
The induction of HIF-1 and VEGF by arsenite can not be inhibited by MAP kinase
inhibitors. Arsenite causes production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). The
major species of ROS required for the induction of HIF-1 and VEGF is H2O2. These 
data indicate that the arsenite-induced activation of PI3K/Akt signaling and the 
expression of HIF-1 and VEGF through the generation of ROS could be an important 
mechanism in the arsenite-induced carcinogenesis.

PMID: 14971644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Cell Biochem. 2004 Jan;255(1-2):19-23.

Arsenite induces p70S6K1 activation and HIF-1alpha expression in prostate cancer 
cells.

Skinner HD(1), Zhong XS, Gao N, Shi X, Jiang BH.

Author information: 
(1)Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology, Immunology and
Cell Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26505-9300, USA.

Arsenite is ubiquitous in the environment, particularly in the form of
contaminated water. Although this metal is a known human carcinogen, its exact
mechanism of action remains unclear. P70S6K1 phosphorylates the ribosomal 40S
protein leading to increased protein translation, and is an important regulator
of cell growth and proliferation. Hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor composed of two subunits, HIF-1alpha and
HIF-1beta. HIF-1 activates the transcription of a number of genes that mediate
angiogenesis and tumor formation. In this study we demonstrated that arsenite
treatment increased levels of p70S6K1 phosphorylation and p70S6K1 activity in a
PI3K and mTOR sensitive manner. We have also shown that arsenite specifically
induces HIF-1alpha, but not HIF-1beta, protein levels in prostate cancer cells in
a mTOR-dependent manner.

PMID: 14971642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mar Biotechnol (NY). 2001 Sep;3(5):416-27.

Expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) isoforms in
juvenile and adult rainbow trout tissues.

Sojka KM(1), Pollenz RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Whether and where rainbow trout aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(rtARNT) isoforms are expressed in juvenile and adult tissues of rainbow trout is
unknown. Using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR),
expression of the rtARNT(b) isoform messenger RNA was identified in day 19 and 23
embryos, in day 27, 35, 39, and 42 sac fry, and in all adult tissues
investigated. The rtARNT(a) isoform mRNA was expressed in all juvenile trout
except day 42 sac fry and in all adult tissues except skeletal muscle. Western
blot analysis and immunohistochemistry demonstrated that the rtARNT(b) protein
was present in all juvenile trout and adult tissues investigated, except skeletal
muscle, and was primarily localized to the nucleus. In contrast, rtARNT(a)
protein was not detected at any developmental stage but was expressed in the
adult gill. These results imply that rtARNT(b) is involved in signaling events at
many developmental stages, while the functionality of the dominant negative
rtARNT(a) is restricted.

PMID: 14961334  [PubMed]


127. J Urol. 2004 Mar;171(3):1080-4.

Prognostic significance of endothelial Per-Arnt-sim domain protein
1/hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha expression in a subset of tumor associated
macrophages in invasive bladder cancer.

Koga F(1), Kageyama Y, Kawakami S, Fujii Y, Hyochi N, Ando N, Takizawa T, Saito
K, Iwai A, Masuda H, Kihara K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Reproductive Medicine, Graduate School, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

PURPOSE: Endothelial Per-Arnt-Sim domain protein 1 (EPAS1) is induced under
hypoxia and it transactivates a series of genes involved in angiogenesis and
energy metabolism. Recent studies showed that EPAS1 is expressed in tumor
associated macrophages (TAMs), which have multifaceted roles in tumor
progression. We hypothesized that EPAS1 expressed in TAMs may contribute to
bladder cancer progression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Clinicopathological and followup data on 69 patients
undergoing radical cystectomy for T1-4N0-2M0 high grade bladder urothelial
carcinoma were reviewed. Quantitative immunohistochemical analysis of TAMs and
EPAS1 was performed separately in invasive front and in other superficial parts
of carcinoma tissues. TAM counts and EPAS1 positive cell counts were compared
with pathological variables and cancer specific survival (CSS).
RESULTS: The 5-year CSS rate in the 69 patients was 69% at a median followup of
58 months (range 2 to 196). EPAS1 expression was restricted to a small subset of 
TAMs. Although TAM counts were not associated with T stage or lymph node
metastasis, EPAS1 expressing TAM counts were significantly associated with higher
T stage. On univariate and multivariate analyses higher EPAS1 expressing TAM
counts in invasive front along with higher T stage and positive lymph node
metastasis were significantly associated with shorter CSS, while total TAM counts
or EPAS1 expressing TAM counts in other superficial parts did not.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite limited prognostic effects of total TAMs EPAS1 expressing
TAMs were associated with a poor prognosis of invasive bladder cancer, suggesting
that EPAS1 expressed in a subset of TAMs mediates bladder cancer progression.

PMID: 14767275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Physiol. 2004 May 1;556(Pt 3):983-1000. Epub 2004 Feb 6.

Leukocytes, cytokines, growth factors and hormones in human skeletal muscle and
blood after uphill or downhill running.

Malm C(1), Sjödin TL, Sjöberg B, Lenkei R, Renström P, Lundberg IE, Ekblom B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. Christer.malm@anatomy.umu.se

Muscular adaptation to physical exercise has previously been described as a
repair process following tissue damage. Recently, evidence has been published to 
question this hypothesis. The purpose of this study was to investigate
inflammatory processes in human skeletal muscle and epimysium after acute
physical exercise with large eccentric components. Three groups of subjects (n=
19) performed 45 min treadmill running at either 4 deg (n= 5) or 8 deg (n= 9)
downhill or 4 deg uphill (n= 5) and one group served as control (n= 9). One
biopsy was taken from each subject 48 h post exercise. Blood samples were taken
up to 7 days post exercise. Compared to the control group, none of the markers of
inflammation in muscle and epimysium samples was different in any exercised
group. Only subjects in the Downhill groups experienced delayed onset of muscle
soreness (DOMS) and increased serum creatine kinase activity (CK). The detected
levels of immunohistochemical markers for T cells (CD3), granulocytes (CD11b),
leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and hypoxia-inducible factor 1beta (HIF-1beta) 
were greater in epimysium from exercised subjects with DOMS ratings >3 (0-10
scale) compared to exercised subjects without DOMS but not higher than controls. 
Eccentric physical exercise (downhill running) did not result in skeletal muscle 
inflammation 48 h post exercise, despite DOMS and increased CK. It is suggested
that exercise can induce DOMS by activating inflammatory factors present in the
epimysium before exercise. Repeated physical training may alter the content of
inflammatory factors in the epimysium and thus reduce DOMS.

PMCID: PMC1664987
PMID: 14766942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 16;279(16):16128-35. Epub 2004 Feb 5.

Aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT) promotes oxygen-independent
stabilization of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha by modulating an Hsp90-dependent
regulatory pathway.

Isaacs JS(1), Jung YJ, Neckers L.

Author information: 
(1)Urologic Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, National Institutes
of Health, Rockville, Maryland 20850, USA. isaacsj@mail.nih.gov

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a potent cellular survival factor
contributing to tumorigenesis in a broad range of cancers. The functional
transcription factor exists as a heterodimeric complex consisting of HIF-1alpha
and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT). Association of
HIF-1 with ARNT is required for its activity; however, no other role has been
ascribed to this interaction. We demonstrated previously that pharmacologic
inhibition of Hsp90 by geldanamycin (GA) impairs HIF transcription and promotes
VHL (Von Hippel-Lindau)-independent degradation of the protein, thus implicating 
Hsp90 as an essential interacting partner for HIF. In this study, we further
explore the physiological role for Hsp90 in HIF function. We establish that the
PAS (Per-ARNT-Sim) domain of HIF is required both to promote association with
Hsp90 and confer sensitivity to GA. Coincidentally, this domain also associates
with ARNT. Overexpression of ARNT in a VHL-deficient background resulted in
substantially increased HIF-1 protein concomitant with increased protein
stability. Conversely, down-regulation of endogenous ARNT protein by RNA
interference decreased the steady-state HIF protein. ARNT-mediated stabilization 
of HIF is specific for the Hsp90-dependent pathway, as ARNT was unable to protect
HIF from VHL-mediated degradation. We establish that the ability of ARNT to
up-regulate HIF and diminish HIF sensitivity to GA is due to its ability to
compete for the Hsp90 binding site on HIF. These data elucidate novel functions
for ARNT and Hsp90 in regulating HIF function and further illustrate that
cofactor association may significantly impact upon the sensitivity of Hsp90
clients to chaperone inhibitors.

PMID: 14764593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 16;279(16):16326-31. Epub 2004 Feb 5.

Patent ductus venosus and dioxin resistance in mice harboring a hypomorphic Arnt 
allele.

Walisser JA(1), Bunger MK, Glover E, Harstad EB, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is the dimeric partner of
hypoxia-inducible factors and thus plays a pivotal role in cellular adaptation to
low oxygen environments. ARNT is also a dimeric partner for the Ah receptor
(AHR), and this complex is essential in regulating the adaptive metabolic
response to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Because of the essential role of
ARNT in hypoxia-driven developmental events, it has been difficult to study the
physiological significance of AHR.ARNT heterodimers in vivo. To address this
issue, we developed a hypomorphic Arnt allele that displayed normal development
and allowed the examination of the role of ARNT in AHR biology. In this regard,
the AHR is also known to mediate two additional biological processes: the
toxicological response to compounds such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(dioxin) and the developmental closure of a fetal vascular structure known as the
ductus venosus. Although the mechanism of the adaptive pathway has been well
described, the mechanism of AHR-mediated signal transduction in the toxic and
developmental pathways is not well understood. Liver perfusion studies
demonstrated that ARNT hypomorphs have a patent ductus venosus, identical to that
observed in the Ahr null mice. Parallel dioxin toxicity studies demonstrated that
the ARNT hypomorphs exhibited resistance to the end points of dioxin exposure.
Moreover, we observed that toxicity could be segregated from the classical
adaptive responses such as P4501A induction. Taken in sum, these experiments
demonstrate that ARNT is an essential component of AHR developmental signaling
and shed light on the mechanism of dioxin toxicity.

PMID: 14764592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Pflugers Arch. 2004 May;448(2):175-80. Epub 2004 Feb 5.

Hypoxia up-regulates triosephosphate isomerase expression via a HIF-dependent
pathway.

Gess B(1), Hofbauer KH, Deutzmann R, Kurtz A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologie der Universität Regensburg, 93040, Regensburg,
Germany.

The glycolytic enzyme triosephosphate isomerase (TPI) catalyses the reversible
conversion of dihydroxyacetone phosphate into glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. We
report here that the expression of TPI at both the mRNA and protein levels is
increased by hypoxia in vivo and in vitro. The temporal pattern of hypoxic TPI
induction is very similar to that of genes triggered by the hypoxia-inducible
transcription factor (HIF) and is mimicked characteristically by cobalt and by
deferoxamine, but is absent in cells with a defective aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT, here HIF-1beta) and in cells lacking HIF-1alpha
protein. We conclude from these findings that the expression of TPI is regulated 
via the HIF pathway and thus belongs to the family of classic oxygen-regulated
genes. The physiological meaning of an increased expression of TPI in
hypoxygenated tissues is probably to increase the flow of triosephosphates
through the glycolytic cascade thus leading to an increase of anaerobic energy
generation.

PMID: 14762718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004 Feb 1;194(3):239-47.

Protective effects of ursodeoxycholic acid against
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-induced testicular damage in mice.

Kwon YI(1), Yeon JD, Oh SM, Chung KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Science, Shinheung College, Uijeongbu,
Kyunggido 480-701, South Korea.

The protective effect of ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), a biliary component found
in bears, on 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-induced testicular damage
in mice was investigated. Fifty C57BL/6J mice were equally divided into five
groups. The mice in the control group received the vehicle and standard chow. The
single TCDD treatment group received 27.5 microg/kg of TCDD subcutaneously. The
UDCA-included treatment group received pulverized chow containing 0.125%, 0.25%
and 0.5% UDCA, respectively, for 70 days starting 10 days before TCDD injections.
The body and testicular weights were shown to be decreased in the single TCDD
treatment group, while the decrease was prevented by UDCA added to the chow. In
addition, the decrease in the serum-luteinizing hormone (LH) or the follicle
stimulating hormone (FSH) secondary to a TCDD injection was not observed in the
UDCA-included treatment group. Contrary to the single TCDD treatment group, the
germinal epithelium and intercellular space were relatively well preserved in the
UDCA-included treatment group. Adding UDCA also normalized TCDD-induced irregular
ultrastructural changes such as development of phagolysosomes, inflated smooth
endoplasmic reticulum (SER), dilated and altered mitochondria, necrosis and
completely damaged seminiferous tubules. Moreover, in the experiment for Arnt
expression, UDCA added to the chow suppressed the TCDD-induced relocation of Arnt
from the cytoplasm to the nuclei. In conclusion, TCDD-induced testicular toxicity
was effectively protected by UDCA. There was almost complete recovery of the
testes in the UDCA-included treatment group. Thus, UDCA may be useful for the
prevention and treatment of TCDD-induced testicular damage.

PMID: 14761680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Development. 2004 Feb;131(4):819-28.

The AHR-1 aryl hydrocarbon receptor and its co-factor the AHA-1 aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor nuclear translocator specify GABAergic neuron cell fate in C. elegans.

Huang X(1), Powell-Coffman JA, Jin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptors (AHR) are bHLH-PAS domain containing transcription
factors. In mammals, they mediate responses to environmental toxins such as 2, 3,
7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Such functions of AHRs require a
cofactor, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), and the
cytoplasmic chaperonins HSP90 and XAP2. AHR homologs have been identified
throughout the animal kingdom. We report here that the C. elegans orthologs of
AHR and ARNT, ahr-1 and aha-1, regulate GABAergic motor neuron fate
specification. Four C. elegans neurons known as RMED, RMEV, RMEL and RMER express
the neurotransmitter GABA and control head muscle movements. ahr-1 is expressed
in RMEL and RMER neurons. Loss of function in ahr-1 causes RMEL and RMER neurons 
to adopt a RMED/RMEV-like fate, whereas the ectopic expression of ahr-1 in RMED
and RMEV neurons can transform them into RMEL/RMER-like neurons. This function of
ahr-1 requires aha-1, but not daf-21/hsp90. Our results demonstrate that C.
elegans ahr-1 functions as a cell-type specific determinant. This study further
supports the notion that the ancestral role of the AHR proteins is in regulating 
cellular differentiation in animal development.

PMID: 14757639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Thorax. 2004 Feb;59(2):90-2.

New insights into oxygen sensing at a cellular level.

Walmsley SR, Sheares KK, Sobolewski A, Morrell NW, Chilvers ER.

PMCID: PMC1746932
PMID: 14760141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 2;279(14):14391-7. Epub 2004 Jan 20.

Substrate requirements of the oxygen-sensing asparaginyl hydroxylase
factor-inhibiting hypoxia-inducible factor.

Linke S(1), Stojkoski C, Kewley RJ, Booker GW, Whitelaw ML, Peet DJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, 
South Australia.

The hypoxia-inducible factor alpha subunits 1 and 2 (HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha)
are subjected to oxygen-dependent asparaginyl hydroxylation, a modification that 
represses the carboxyl-terminal transactivation domain (CAD) at normoxia by
preventing recruitment of the p300/cAMP-response element-binding protein
coactivators. This hydroxylation is performed by the novel asparaginyl
hydroxylase, factor-inhibiting HIF-1' (FIH-1), of which HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha
are the only reported substrates. Here we investigated the substrate requirements
of FIH-1 by characterizing its subcellular localization and by examining amino
acids within the HIF-1alpha substrate for their importance in recognition and
catalysis by FIH-1. Using immunohistochemistry, we showed that both endogenous
and transfected FIH-1 are primarily confined to the cytoplasm and remain there
under normoxia and following treatment with the hypoxia mimetic, dipyridyl.
Individual alanine mutations of seven conserved amino acids flanking the
hydroxylated asparagine in HIF-1alpha revealed the importance of the valine
(Val-802) adjacent to the targeted asparagine. The HIF-1alpha CAD V802A mutant
exhibited a 4-fold lower V(max) in enzyme assays, whereas all other mutants were 
hydroxylated as efficiently as the wild type HIF-1alpha CAD. Furthermore, in
cell-based assays the transcriptional activity of V802A was constitutive,
suggesting negligible normoxic hydroxylation in HEK293T cells, whereas the wild
type and other mutants were repressed under normoxia. Molecular modeling of the
HIF-1alpha CAD V802A in complex with FIH-1 predicted an alteration in asparagine 
positioning compared with the wild type HIF-1alpha CAD, providing an explanation 
for the impaired catalysis observed and confirming the importance of Val-802 in
asparaginyl hydroxylation by FIH-1.

PMID: 14734545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2004 Feb;96(2):774-83.

Signal transduction by heme-containing PAS-domain proteins.

Gilles-Gonzalez MA(1), Gonzalez G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9038, USA. magg@biochem.swmed.edu

The most common physiological strategy for detecting the gases oxygen, carbon
monoxide, and nitric oxide is signal transduction by heme-based sensors, a broad 
class of modular proteins in which a heme-binding domain governs the activity of 
a neighboring transmitter domain. Different structures are possible for the
heme-binding domains in these sensors, but, so far, the Per-ARNT-Sim motif, or
PAS domain, is the one most commonly encountered. Heme-binding PAS (heme-PAS)
domains can accomplish ligand-dependent switching of a variety of partner
domains, including histidine kinase, phosphodiesterase, and basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) DNA-binding modules. Proteins with heme-PAS domains occur
in all kingdoms of life and are quite diverse in their physiological roles.
Examples include the neuronal bHLH-PAS carbon monoxide sensor NPAS2 that is
implicated in the mammalian circadian clock, the acetobacterial oxygen sensor
AxPDEA1 that directs cellulose production, and the rhizobial oxygen sensor FixL, 
which governs nitrogen fixation. What factors determine the range of detection of
these sensors? How do they transduce their signal? This review examines the
recent advances in answering these questions.

PMID: 14715687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2003;543:89-115.

Hypoxia and high altitude. The molecular response.

Höpfl G(1), Ogunshola O, Gassmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Physiology, University of Zürich, Switzerland.

Increased erythropoietin plasma levels and the consequent augmented production of
red blood cells is the best known systemic adaptation to reduced oxygen partial
pressure (pO2). Intensive research during the last years revealed that the
molecular mechanism behind the regulation of erythropoietin is ubiquitous and has
far more implications than first thought. Erythropoietin regulation results from 
the activation of the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) pathway under hypoxic
conditions. HIF-1 is a heterodimer consisting of an oxygen sensitive--HIF-1--and 
an oxygen-independent subunit--HIF-1beta (also known as the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator--ARNT). In addition to erythropoietin, more than 30
genes are now known to be up-regulated by HIF-1. Recently, the critical
involvement of HIF-1alpha post-translational modifications in the cellular oxygen
sensing mechanism was discovered. In this review we will focus on the regulation 
of the HIF-1 pathway and the cellular oxygen sensor and discuss their
implications in high altitude hypoxia.

PMID: 14713116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Cell Cycle. 2004 Feb;3(2):168-71.

An unexpected role for hypoxic response: oxygenation and inflammation.

Peyssonaux C(1), Johnson RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, San
Diego, California 92093-0366, USA.

The eradication of invading microorganisms depends initially on innate immunity
mechanisms that preexist in all individuals and act within minutes of infection. 
Pathogen spread is often countered by an inflammatory response that recruits more
effector molecules and cells of the innate immune system from local blood
vessels, while inducing clotting farther downstream so that pathogens cannot
spread throughout the blood. If a microorganism crosses an epithelial barrier and
begins to replicate in the tissues of the host, it is, in some cases, immediately
recognized by the mononuclear phagocytes, or macrophages, that reside in tissues.
Macrophages mature continuously from circulating monocytes that leave the
circulation to migrate into tissues throughout the body. The second major family 
of phagocytes, the neutrophils or polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) are
short-lived cells that are abundant cells in the blood but are not present in
healthy tissues. Both phagocytic cell types play a key role in innate immunity
because they can recognize, ingest and destroy many pathogens without the aid of 
an adaptive immune response. This infiltration of neutrophils and later
macrophages to the site of bacterial infection is tightly linked with the need of
these immune defense cells to respond to the tissue microenvironment.

PMID: 14712083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Cell Cycle. 2004 Feb;3(2):160-3.

Dead cells don't form tumors: HIF-dependent cytotoxins.

Sutphin PD(1), Chan DA, Giaccia AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cancer Biology, Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford
University, Stanford, California 94305-5787, USA.

Elimination or reduction of tumor burden is the primary goal of cancer therapy.
Strategies to achieve this goal with the fewest adverse effects to the patient
are an area of intense investigation. Elevated protein levels of
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) are commonly found in solid tumors, while rarely
found in healthy tissue. Numerous studies have suggested that HIF activity is
essential for the development of solid tumors. Thus, inhibition of HIF represents
an attractive therapeutic target for eradicating tumors. The search for small
molecules that target and inhibit HIF activity is currently underway. We propose 
an alternate approach: to directly target and kill HIF-activated tumor cells.
This approach is advantageous in that cells with activated HIF will be eliminated
directly. Specific elimination of HIF-activated cells represents a potential
mechanism for inhibiting tumor growth, with the potential advantage of sparing
the patient of the normal tissue toxicity associated with current treatment
options.

PMID: 14712081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(2):608-16.

Identification of a novel basic helix-loop-helix-PAS factor, NXF, reveals a Sim2 
competitive, positive regulatory role in dendritic-cytoskeleton modulator drebrin
gene expression.

Ooe N(1), Saito K, Mikami N, Nakatuka I, Kaneko H.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Science Laboratory, Sumitomo Chemical Co. Ltd.,
Konohana-ku, Osaka 554-8558, Japan. ooe@sc.sumitomo-chem.co.jp

Sim2, a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS transcriptional repressor, is thought
to be involved in some symptoms of Down's syndrome. In the course of searching
for hypothetical Sim2 relatives, we isolated another bHLH-PAS factor, NXF. NXF
was a novel gene and was selectively expressed in neuronal tissues. While no
striking homolog of NXF was found in vertebrates, a Caenorhabditis elegans
putative transcription factor, C15C8.2, showed similarity in the bHLH-PAS domain.
NXF had an activation domain as a transcription activator, and Arnt-type bHLH-PAS
subfamily members were identified as the heterodimer partners of NXF. The
NXF/Arnt heterodimer was capable of binding and activating a subset of Sim2/Arnt 
target DNA variants, and Sim2 could compete with the NXF activity on the
elements. We showed that Drebrin had several such NXF/Arnt binding elements on
the promoter, which could be direct or indirect cross talking points between NXF 
(activation) and Sim2 (repression) action. Drebrin has been reported to be
engaged in dendritic-cytoskeleton modulation at synapses, and such a novel NXF
signaling system on neural gene promoter may be a molecular target of the adverse
effects of Sim2 in the mental retardation of Down's syndrome.

PMCID: PMC343817
PMID: 14701734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Toxicol Sci. 2004 Mar;78(1):68-77. Epub 2003 Dec 22.

Interactions between 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and hypoxia
signaling pathways in zebrafish: hypoxia decreases responses to TCDD in zebrafish
embryos.

Prasch AL(1), Andreasen EA, Peterson RE, Heideman W.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Center and dagger School of Pharmacy,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) interacts with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
nuclear translocator (ARNT) to form a heterodimer that binds to promoters in
target genes to alter transcription in response to xenobiotics such as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). The ARNT protein also forms
heterodimers with other proteins such as HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha to alter gene 
expression in response to low oxygen conditions. Because ARNT is shared between
multiple signaling pathways it is possible that activation of one ARNT-requiring 
pathway could inhibit the activation of other pathways that depend on ARNT. One
hypothesis to explain TCDD toxicity in early life stage fish is that TCDD
activation of zfAHR2 sequesters zfARNT2 away from the hypoxia signaling pathway. 
To test this hypothesis we measured the ability of TCDD to prevent induction of
heme oxygenase by hypoxia (40% saturation), as well as the ability of hypoxia to 
increase the sensitivity of zebrafish to the effects of TCDD during the first
week of life. As a further test of the model we examined mutant zebrafish that
lack zfARNT2 for phenotypes that resemble the effects of TCDD exposure. Our
results demonstrate that sequestration of zfARNT2 is not causing TCDD toxicity.
TCDD did not inhibit hypoxia induction of heme oxygenase, hypoxia and TCDD
exposures were not additive in causing developmental toxicity, and mutant embryos
that lack zfARNT2 do not develop defects mimicking TCDD toxicity. However, our
results demonstrate some level of cross talk between the two pathways in the
zebrafish embryo. Hypoxia decreased TCDD induction of zfCYP1A mRNA, and decreased
the potency of TCDD in causing edema. It is not clear whether this is mediated
through competition for zfARNT2, or through other mechanisms.

PMID: 14691204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mol Cell. 2003 Dec;12(6):1537-49.

CoCoA, a nuclear receptor coactivator which acts through an N-terminal activation
domain of p160 coactivators.

Kim JH(1), Li H, Stallcup MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
90089, USA.

The p160 coactivators bind to and potentiate transcriptional activation by
nuclear receptors by recruiting secondary coactivators such as the histone
acetyltransferases p300 and CBP and the protein methyltransferase CARM1. The
function of the highly conserved N-terminal basic-helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim
(bHLH-PAS) domain of p160 coactivators is unknown. This region is required for
coactivator synergy among p160, p300, and CARM1 coactivators. We identified a
coactivator, coiled-coil coactivator (CoCoA), which binds to this domain and
thereby enhances transcriptional activation by the estrogen receptor and other
nuclear receptors. Endogenous CoCoA was found simultaneously with p160
coactivators on the promoter of an endogenous estrogen-responsive gene. Reduction
of endogenous cellular CoCoA levels inhibited the estrogen-stimulated expression 
of transiently transfected and endogenous genes. Moreover, CoCoA cooperated
synergistically with GRIP1, CARM1, and p300 to enhance ER-mediated transcription.
Thus, the N-terminal region of p160 coactivators contains an additional
activation domain which contributes to coactivator function by recruitment of
CoCoA.

PMID: 14690606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2003 Dec 15;193(3):370-82.

Zebrafish embryos express an orthologue of HERG and are sensitive toward a range 
of QT-prolonging drugs inducing severe arrhythmia.

Langheinrich U(1), Vacun G, Wagner T.

Author information: 
(1)Exelixis Deutschland GmbH, Spemannstrasse 35, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.
U.Langeheinrich@exelixis-de.com

A wide range of drugs has been shown to prolong the QT interval of the
electrocardiogram by blocking the pore-forming subunit of the rapidly activating 
delayed rectifier K+ channel, HERG (ether-à-go-go-related gene), sometimes
leading to life-threatening arrhythmia. In this paper we describe cloning,
sequence, and expression of the zebrafish orthologue of HERG, Zerg. Further, we
studied effects of Zerg inhibition in zebrafish embryos caused by drugs or by an 
antisense approach. Zerg is expressed specifically in both heart chambers of
zebrafish embryos, is composed of six transmembrane domains, and shows an
especially high degree of amino acid conservation in the S6 and pore domain (99% 
identity). Several QT-prolonging drugs added to the bathing medium elicited
bradycardia and arrhythmia in zebrafish embryos. The arrhythmia induced ranged
from an atrioventricular 2:1 block, the ventricle beating half as often as the
atrium, to more severe irregular arrhythmia with higher concentrations of the
drugs. These effects were highly specific, reproducible, and rapid, e.g., 10
microM astemizole caused a 2:1 heartbeat within a minute after addition of the
compound in all the embryos studied. Morpholino antisense oligonucleotides
targeting Zerg were injected into zebrafish embryos and elicited similar
dose-sensitive and specific arrhythmia as the QT-prolonging drugs, suggesting an 
evolutionarily conserved role for Erg in regulating heartbeat rate and rhythm.
Further, we identified a mutation in the Per-Arnt-Sim domain of the Zerg channel 
in the breakdance mutant, also characterized by a 2:1 atrioventricular block. In 
conclusion, the zebrafish could be a tractable model organism for the study of
Erg function and modulation but might also have a value in the field of
cardiovascular pharmacology, e.g., as an early preclinical model for testing
drugs under development for potential QT prolongation.

PMID: 14678746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Life Sci. 2004 Jan 9;74(8):1039-49.

Characteristic expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor gene in human
tissues: organ-specific distribution and variable induction patterns in
mononuclear cells.

Yamamoto J(1), Ihara K, Nakayama H, Hikino S, Satoh K, Kubo N, Iida T, Fujii Y,
Hara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
jyamamoto@dr.hosp.kyushu-u.ac.jp

To investigate the expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AhRR) and
related molecules in various tissues and the effects of aromatic hydrocarbons
(AHs) on their expression, we developed a reliable technique of quantification of
human AhRR as well as aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), AhR nuclear translocator
(ARNT) and cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1) mRNA by real-time TaqMan PCR method.
First, we examined the expression of these genes in human adult or fetal tissues.
The levels of AhRR expression were extremely high in testis, very high in lung,
ovary, spleen and pancreas from adults, whereas those were low in those from
fetuses. On the other hand, CYP1A1 expression was extremely high in lung, and AhR
and ARNT were ubiquitously expressed in almost all tissues. Second, we compared
the expression levels of these genes in mononuclear cells (MNCs) from various
sources. Comparison of the basal expression levels of these genes in MNCs
demonstrated that MNCs from umbilical cord blood showed higher AhRR or CYP1A1
expression than those from adults. The induction of AhRR or CYP1A1 expression by 
3-methylcholanthrene (3-MC) was observed in MNCs from adults but not from
umbilical cord blood. Consequently, there existed characteristic differences in
the basal levels of AhRR and CYP1A1 expression in MNCs, as well as in their
inducibility by 3-MC among MNCs from various types of human bloods. These results
will provide basic information for a possible application of AhRR and CYP1A1
measurements to evaluate AH exposure in vivo.

PMID: 14672759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Dec 23;100(26):15504-9. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Structural basis for PAS domain heterodimerization in the basic
helix--loop--helix-PAS transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor.

Erbel PJ(1), Card PB, Karakuzu O, Bruick RK, Gardner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Biological responses to oxygen availability play important roles in development, 
physiological homeostasis, and many disease processes. In mammalian cells, this
adaptation is mediated in part by a conserved pathway centered on the
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF). HIF is a heterodimeric protein complex composed
of two members of the basic helix-loop-helix Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) (ARNT, aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator) domain family of transcriptional
activators, HIFalpha and ARNT. Although this complex involves protein-protein
interactions mediated by basic helix-loop-helix and PAS domains in both proteins,
the role played by the PAS domains is poorly understood. To address this issue,
we have studied the structure and interactions of the C-terminal PAS domain of
human HIF-2alpha by NMR spectroscopy. We demonstrate that HIF-2alpha PAS-B binds 
the analogous ARNT domain in vitro, showing that residues involved in this
interaction are located on the solvent-exposed side of the HIF-2alpha central
beta-sheet. Mutating residues at this surface not only disrupts the interaction
between isolated PAS domains in vitro but also interferes with the ability of
full-length HIF to respond to hypoxia in living cells. Extending our findings to 
other PAS domains, we find that this beta-sheet interface is widely used for both
intra- and intermolecular interactions, suggesting a basis of specificity and
regulation of many types of PAS-containing signaling proteins.

PMCID: PMC307597
PMID: 14668441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Biol Reprod. 2004 Apr;70(4):1121-30. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Expression and localization of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 subunits in the adult
rat epididymis.

Palladino MA(1), Powell JD, Korah N, Hermo L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Monmouth University, West Long Branch, New Jersey
07764, USA. mpalladi@monmouth.edu

The epididymal epithelium contributes to formation of a luminal fluid that is
essential for the protection of spermatozoa from a variety of insults including
changes in oxygen tension. A key regulator of the response to oxygen debt in many
cells is hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). A transcription factor composed of
alpha and beta subunits, HIF-1 activates genes that mediate oxygen homeostasis
and cell survival pathways or trigger cell death responses. Previously we have
shown that HIF-1alpha mRNA is expressed in the adult rat epididymis. Goals of
this study were to determine whether HIF-1alpha protein is activated by ischemia 
in the rat epididymis, to determine whether epididymal HIF-1alpha mRNA expression
is androgen dependent, and to identify epididymal cell types expressing
HIF-1alpha and beta. Immunoblot analysis revealed that HIF-1alpha protein is
primarily present in corpus and cauda of the normoxic epididymis and unaffected
by ischemia, whereas HIF-1beta was detected equally in all regions and also
unaffected by ischemia. HIF-1alpha mRNA expression in all regions was not
affected by 15 days bilateral orchiectomy. Principal cells stained positive for
HIF-1alpha by immunocytochemistry, with the epithelium of initial segment and
caput epididymidis staining less intensely than corpus and cauda. HIF-1beta
immunoreactivity was equally present in principal cells in all regions. Clear,
narrow, and basal cells were unreactive for HIF-1alpha and beta. The presence of 
HIF-1 in normoxic epididymis and the regional distribution of HIF-1alpha suggests
fundamental differences in how proximal and distal regions of the epididymis
maintain oxygen homeostasis to protect the epithelium and spermatozoa from
hypoxia.

PMID: 14668208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 5;279(10):9306-12. Epub 2003 Dec 1.

Regulatory interaction between arylhydrocarbon receptor and SIM1, two basic
helix-loop-helix PAS proteins involved in the control of food intake.

Yang C(1), Boucher F, Tremblay A, Michaud JL.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center, Hôpital Sainte-Justine, 3175 Côte Sainte-Catherine, Montréal,
Québec H3T 1C5, Canada.

The basic helix-loop-helix PAS (bHLH-PAS) transcription factors SIM1 and
arylhydrocarbon receptor (AHR) are involved in the control of feeding behavior.
Sim1 haploinsufficiency causes hyperphagia in mice and humans, most likely by
perturbing the hypothalamus function. The administration of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), a ligand of AHR, causes severe
anorexia, which also appears to be of central origin. Both SIM1 and AHR require
heterodimerization either with ARNT or ARNT2 to function. Here, we characterize
the promoter for Sim1 and show that a consensus AHR-ARNT/2 binding site
positively regulates its activity in the context of transfection experiments in
Neuro-2A cells. A gel shift assay indicated that AHR-ARNT/2 can bind its putative
site in the Sim1 promoter. Overexpression of Arnt, Arnt2, or Ahr increased the
activity of a reporter construct containing the Sim1 promoter by 1.8-, 1.5-, and 
2.2-fold, respectively, but failed to do so when the AHR-ARNT/2 binding site was 
mutated. Similarly, TCDD increased the activity of the reporter construct by
1.8-fold but not that of its mutated version. Finally, we found that TCDD
increased Sim1 expression in Neuro-2A cells and in mouse kidney and hypothalamus 
by 4-, 3-, and 2-fold, respectively. We conclude that Sim1 expression is
regulated by AHR-ARNT/2. This result raises the possibility that Sim1 mediates
the effect of TCDD on feeding and points to a complex network of regulatory
interactions between bHLH-PAS proteins.

PMID: 14660629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Toxicol Sci. 2004 Jan;77(1):109-16. Epub 2003 Dec 3.

Role of aryl hydrocarbon receptor in mesencephalic circulation failure and
apoptosis in zebrafish embryos exposed to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Dong W(1), Teraoka H, Tsujimoto Y, Stegeman JJ, Hiraga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno Gakuen
University, Ebetsu, Japan.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is a persistent and potent
developmental toxicant in various animals, with developing fish being the most
sensitive organisms. Although the expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)
as well as the partner molecule, AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) in the brain has
been reported, the effect of TCDD on the brain remains to be clarified in detail.
Previously, we reported local circulation failure and apoptosis in dorsal
midbrain caused by TCDD in developing zebrafish. In the present experiments, we
investigated the effects of morpholino antisense oligos against aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor 2 (zfAHR2) (AHR2-MO) on toxicological endpoints caused by TCDD in
developing zebrafish. AHR2-MO but not its negative homologue (4mis-AHR2-MO)
improved TCDD-evoked circulation failure in mesencephalic vein and reduced the
occurrence of apoptosis in dorsal midbrain, with concomitant inhibition of CYP1A 
induction in vascular endothelium. Injection of bovine serum albumin (BSA) into
the general circulation, followed by immunohistochemistry with anti-BSA, showed
that TCDD raised vascular permeability to albumin in dorsal midbrain, which was
blocked by AHR2-MO and N-acetlycystein. In the absence of TCDD, development of
embryos injected with AHR2-MO appeared normal at least until 60 h after
fertilization. It is concluded that AHR2 activation in the vascular endothelium
of the zebrafish embryo midbrain is involved in the mesencephalic circulation
failure and apoptosis elicited by TCDD. This is the further evidence that
vascular endothelium is the target of TCDD in relation to local circulation
failure and apoptosis in dorsal midbrain.

PMID: 14657521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Exp Mol Med. 2003 Oct 31;35(5):393-402.

Genomic organization and expression of parkin in Drosophila melanogaster.

Bae YJ(1), Park KS, Kang SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, College of Natural Science, Ewha Womans
University, Seoul 120-750, Korea.

We report here the isolation, characterization on genomic structure and
expression of the D. melanogaster homolog of human parkin. The 2,122 bp parkin
gene sequence contains six exons that form a 1,449 bp transcript encoding a
protein of 482 amino acids. 151 bp of 5' and 112 bp of 3' untranslated regions
were identified by a combination of 5'-RACE/primer extension and 3'-RACE,
respectively. The 5' UTR contains three transcription initiation sites. Neither a
classical TATA nor a CAAT box was found in the putative promoter sequence.
However, binding sites for AhR-Arnt, AP4, NF1 and GATA transcription factors were
identified. Transient transfection analysis of the 5' UTR confirmed its promoter 
activity in HEK 293 cells and SH-SY5Y neuronal cells using a dual luciferase
reporting system. The amino acid sequence of D. melanogaster Parkin exhibits 42%,
43% and 43% identity to that of human, mouse and rat, respectively, representing 
a 54 kDa protein band via western blot analysis. It shows a high degree of
conservation in the Ubiquitin-like domain at the N-terminus (34%), the In-Between
RING finger domains (IBR, 65-69%), and the RING finger domains at the C-terminus 
(56-57%). The expression pattern of D. melanogaster parkin varies during the
developmental stages, with the highest expression in the adult stage as measured 
by competitive RT-PCR. From immunostainings of the embryo, D. melanogaster parkin
was expressed slightly higher in the central nervous system (brain and nerve
cord) during the late embryonic stage.

PMID: 14646593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Dec;64(6):1434-43.

Heterogeneous role of caspase-8 in fenretinide-induced apoptosis in epithelial
ovarian carcinoma cell lines.

Kalli KR(1), Devine KE, Cabot MC, Arnt CR, Heldebrant MP, Svingen PA, Erlichman
C, Hartmann LC, Conover CA, Kaufmann SH.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Joseph 5-194, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, 200 First
Street S.W., Rochester, MN 55905, USA. kalli.kimberly@mayo.edu

The mechanism of action of fenretinide, a synthetic retinoid currently undergoing
testing as a chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic agent, is incompletely
understood. In the present study, fenretinide caused apoptotic changes, including
DNA fragmentation and cleavage of caspase substrates, in six low-passage ovarian 
cancer cell lines. However, the caspase activation pathway used by this agent
varied. Transient transfection of cDNA-encoding cytokine response modifier A
(CrmA), a caspase-8 inhibitor, diminished fenretinide-induced death in OV177
cells. Likewise, IETD(OMe)-fluoromethylketone (fmk) inhibited fenretinide-induced
apoptosis by >80% in OV177 or OV266 cells and by approximately 50% in OV17,
OV167, or OV207 cells. Further analysis demonstrated that inhibition of Fas
ligand, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, or TRAIL signaling with blocking reagents
did not affect fenretinide-induced apoptosis, raising the possibility that
fenretinide activates caspase-8 in a death receptor-independent manner. In
contrast, CrmA transfection or IETD(OMe)-fmk treatment did not inhibit
fenretinide-induced apoptosis in OV202 cells. These divergent behaviors did not
correlate with increased levels of procaspase-10, which is relatively resistant
to CrmA and IETD(OMe)-fmk, nor with the expression of procaspase-8 and -9,
apoptotic protease activating factor-1, or cellular FLICE-like inhibitory
protein. Similarly, fenretinide treatment increased ceramide levels equally in
cells that do (OV177) and do not (OV202) rely on caspase-8 to initiate apoptosis.
These results indicate that synthetic retinoids can use caspase-8 as an
initiating caspase, but they also indicate unexpected heterogeneity in caspase
activation pathways among closely related cell lines.

PMID: 14645674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;36(2):189-204.

The mammalian basic helix-loop-helix/PAS family of transcriptional regulators.

Kewley RJ(1), Whitelaw ML, Chapman-Smith A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science (Biochemistry), University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/PAS proteins are critical regulators of gene
expression networks underlying many essential physiological and developmental
processes. These include transcriptional responses to environmental pollutants
and low oxygen tension, mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon (Dioxin) receptor and
hypoxia inducible factors (HIF), respectively, and controlling aspects of neural 
development, mediated by the single minded (SIM) proteins. bHLH proteins must
dimerise to form functional DNA binding complexes and bHLH/PAS proteins are
distinguished from other members of the broader bHLH superfamily by the
dimerisation specificity conferred by their PAS homology domains. bHLH/PAS
proteins tend to be ubiquitous, latent signal-regulated transcription factors
that often recognise variant forms of the classic E-box enhancer sequence bound
by other bHLH proteins. Two closely related forms of each of the hypoxia
inducible factors alpha and single minded proteins and the general partner
protein, aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), are present in
many cell types. Despite high sequence conservation within their DNA binding and 
dimerisation domains, and having very similar DNA recognition specificities, the 
homologues are functionally non-redundant and biologically essential. While the
mechanisms controlling partner choice and target gene activation that determine
this functional specificity are poorly understood, interactions mediated by the
PAS domains are essential. Information on structures and protein/protein
interactions for members of the steroid hormone/nuclear receptor superfamily has 
contributed to our understanding of the way these receptors function and assisted
the development of highly specific agonists and antagonists. Similarly, it is
anticipated that developing a detailed mechanistic and structural understanding
of bHLH/PAS proteins will ultimately facilitate drug design.

PMID: 14643885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Z Rheumatol. 2003;62(Suppl 2):II43-5.

[Hypoxia and angiogenesis in rheumatic diseases].

[Article in German]

Distler K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Experimentelle Rheumatologie, Universitätsspital Zürich,
Gloriastr. 25, 8091 Zürich, Switzerland. Oliver.Distler@usz.ch

The important role of angiogenesis for the pathogenesis of most tumors has gained
much interest into the mechanisms of new vessel formation during recent years.
Hypoxia induces angiogenesis via stabilization of the transcription factor
HIF-1alpha. After dimerization of HIF-1alpha with HIF-1beta/ARNT, HIF-1 binds to 
the hypoxia-responsive elements in the regulatory regions of proangiogenic
molecules such as VEGF. Hypoxia-mediated angiogenesis also plays a part in the
pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. For instance, intraarticular application of
the angiostatic molecule angiostatin reduces the severity of collagen-induced
arthritis in mice. Moreover, recent data indicate that the expression of
HIF-1alpha in myeloid cells is important for the initiation of the inflammatory
infiltrate in rheumatoid arthritis. In contrast to rheumatoid arthritis, the
therapeutic goal in systemic sclerosis (SSc) is the formation of new vessels
rather than the inhibition of angiogenesis. Surprisingly, several proangiogenic
factors such as VEGF or MCP-1 (CCL-2) are overexpressed in the skin of patients
with SSc despite the reduction in the capillary density. The role of these
findings for the defective angiogenesis in SSc is currently investigated in our
laboratory.

PMID: 14648091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 13;279(7):5353-62. Epub 2003 Nov 24.

Contribution of the Per/Arnt/Sim (PAS) domains to DNA binding by the basic
helix-loop-helix PAS transcriptional regulators.

Chapman-Smith A(1), Lutwyche JK, Whitelaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science (Biochemistry), University of
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. anne.chapmansmith@adelaide.edu.au

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) PAS transcriptional regulators control critical
developmental and metabolic processes, including transcriptional responses to
stimuli such as hypoxia and environmental pollutants, mediated respectively by
hypoxia inducible factors (HIF-alpha) and the dioxin (aryl hydrocarbon) receptor 
(DR). The bHLH proteins contain a basic DNA binding sequence adjacent to a
helix-loop-helix dimerization domain. Dimerization among bHLH.PAS proteins is
additionally regulated by the PAS region, which controls the specificity of
partner choice such that HIF-alpha and DR must dimerize with the aryl hydrocarbon
nuclear translocator (Arnt) to form functional DNA binding complexes. Here, we
have analyzed purified bacterially expressed proteins encompassing the N-terminal
bHLH and bHLH.PAS regions of Arnt, DR, and HIF-1alpha and evaluated the
contribution of the PAS domains to DNA binding in vitro. Recovery of functional
DNA binding proteins from bacteria was dramatically enhanced by coexpression of
the bHLH.PAS regions of DR or HIF-1alpha with the corresponding region of Arnt.
Formation of stable protein-DNA complexes by DR/Arnt and HIF-1alpha/Arnt
heterodimers with their cognate DNA sequences required the PAS A domains and
exhibited KD values of 0.4 nM and approximately 50 nM, respectively. In contrast,
the presence of the PAS domains of Arnt had little effect on DNA binding by Arnt 
homodimers, and these bound DNA with a KD of 45 nM. In the case of the DR, both
high affinity DNA binding and dimer stability were specific to its native PAS
domain, since a chimera in which the PAS A domain was substituted with the
equivalent domain of Arnt generated a destabilized protein that bound DNA poorly.

PMID: 14638687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2003 Oct;60(10):2131-8.

Photoreception in Neurospora: a tale of two White Collar proteins.

Liu Y(1), He Q, Cheng P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Texas, Southwestern Medical Center,
5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, Texas 75390-9040, USA. yi.liu@UTsouthwestern.edu

Neurospora crassa is the best-understood fungal organism in terms of the
mechanism of light responses. All known Neurospora photoresponses are mediated by
blue light. Two Per-Arnt-Simdomain containing transcription factors, WHITE
COLLAR-1 (WC-1) and WC-2, are essential components for almost all light
responses. Recently, WC-1was shown to be a blue-light photoreceptor. How light
affects the DNA binding of the WC proteins to the promoter of the circadian clock
gene frequency was also demonstrated. These studies established a mechanism that 
explains the light responses mediated by activation of transcription. The purpose
of this review is to summarize the findings of recent studies on the molecular
mechanism of photoreception in Neurospora.

PMID: 14618260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Cancer Res. 2003 Nov 1;63(21):7277-83.

A molecular mechanism regulating circadian expression of vascular endothelial
growth factor in tumor cells.

Koyanagi S(1), Kuramoto Y, Nakagawa H, Aramaki H, Ohdo S, Soeda S, Shimeno H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Fukuoka
University, 8-19-1 Nanakuma Jonan-ku, Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan.

Because angiogenesis is essential for tumor growth and metastasis, inhibition of 
angiogenesis has emerged as a new therapy to treat cancers. Hypoxia-induced
expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) plays a central role in
tumor-induced angiogenesis. In this study, we found that expression of VEGF in
hypoxic tumor cells was affected by the circadian organization of molecular
clockwork. The core circadian oscillator is composed of an autoregulatory
transcription-translation feedback loop in which CLOCK and BMAL1 are positive
regulators, and Period and Cryptochrome genes act as negative ones. The levels of
VEGF mRNA in tumor cells implanted in mice rose substantially in response to
hypoxia, but the levels fluctuated rhythmically in a circadian fashion.
Luciferase reporter gene analysis revealed that Period2 and Cryptochrome1, whose 
expression in the implanted tumor cells showed a circadian oscillation, inhibited
the hypoxia-induced VEGF promoter activity. These results suggest that the
negative limbs of the molecular loop periodically inhibit the hypoxic induction
of VEGF transcription, resulting in the circadian fluctuation of its mRNA
expression. We also showed that the antitumor efficacy of antiangiogenic agents
could be enhanced by administering the drugs at the time when VEGF production
increased. These findings support the notion that monitoring of the circadian
rhythm in VEGF production is useful for choosing the most appropriate time of day
for administration of antiangiogenic agents.

PMID: 14612524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2004 Mar;286(3):F564-71. Epub 2003 Nov 11.

Sodium-dependent methotrexate carrier-1 is expressed in rat kidney: cloning and
functional characterization.

Kneuer C(1), Honscha KU, Honscha W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Pharmacy and Toxicology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Leipzig, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.

Previous Northern blot studies suggested strong expression of a homolog to the
sodium-dependent hepatocellular methotrexate transporter in the kidneys. Here, we
report on the cloning of the cDNA for the renal methotrexate carrier isoform-1
(RK-MTX-1) and its functional characterization. Sequencing revealed 97% homology 
to the rat liver methotrexate carrier with an identical open reading frame.
Differences were located in the 5'-untranslated region and resulted in the
absence of putative regulatory elements (Barbie box, Ah/ARNT receptor) identified
in the cDNA for the hepatocellular carrier. For functional characterization,
MTX-1 cDNA was stably expressed in Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells. A
sodium-dependent transport of methotrexate with a K(m) of 41 microM and a V(max) 
of 337 pmol.mg protein(-1).min(-1) was observed. This uptake was blocked by the
reduced folates dihydro- and tetrahydrofolate as well as by methotrexate itself. 
Folate was inhibiting only weakly, whereas 5-methyltetrahydrofolate was a strong 
inhibitor. Further inhibitors of the methotrexate transport included the bile
acids cholate and taurocholate and xenobiotics like bumetanide and BSP. PAH,
ouabain, bumetanide, cholate, taurocholate, and acetyl salicylic acid were tested
as potential substrates. However, none of these substances was transported by
MTX-1. Furthermore, expression of RK-MTX-1 in MDCK cells enhanced methotrexate
toxicity in these cells fivefold. Analysis of a fusion protein of RK-MTX-1 and
the influenza virus hemagglutinin epitope by immunoblotting revealed a major band
at 72 kDa within the cell membrane but not in the soluble fraction of transfected
MDCK. Indirect immunofluorescence staining revealed an exclusive localization of 
the carrier in the plasma membrane, and by confocal laser-scanning microscopy we 
were able to demonstrate that the protein is expressed in the serosal region of
MDCK tubules grown in a morphogenic collagen gel model.

PMID: 14612385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Histochem Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;120(5):343-52. Epub 2003 Nov 5.

Effects of hypoxia and intracellular iron chelation on hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha and -1beta in the rat carotid body and glomus cells.

Baby SM(1), Roy A, Mokashi AM, Lahiri S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, B-400 Richards Building, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, 3700 Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6085, USA.

The present investigation provides for the first time, unambiguous information on
the occurrence of hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta proteins)
in normoxia (Nx) and their interaction with hypoxia (Hx) and intracellular Fe(2+)
chelation in the rat carotid body (CB) glomus cells. HIF-1alpha bound to
HIF-1beta translocated into the nucleus is identified on the basis of
immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence. In Nx, a weak expression of
HIF-1alpha was observed in CB glomus cells. However, exposure of CB and glomus
cells to Hx (Po(2) approximately 7 Torr) and Nx with ciclopirox olamine (CPX, 5
microM) for 1 h showed a significant ( P<0.001) increase in HIF-1alpha protein.
The CBs and glomus cells exposed to Nx, Hx, and Nx with CPX showed a constant
level of HIF-1beta protein expression. HIF-1alpha subunit is continuously
synthesized and degraded under normoxic conditions, while it accumulates rapidly 
following exposure to low oxygen tensions. Hydroxylation of HIF-1alpha by prolyl 
hydroxylase for proteasomal degradation was dependent on iron, 2-oxoglutarate,
and oxygen concentration. The intracellular iron that acts as a cofactor for
prolyl hydroxylase activity belongs to the labile iron pool and can be easily
chelated. Thus, chelation of intracellular labile iron by CPX in Nx significantly
increased HIF-1alpha in CB glomus cells. Thus, the results are consistent with
the hypothesis that HIF-1alpha which is present in the glomus cells translocates 
to the nucleus during exposure to Hx and to CPX in Nx.

PMID: 14600837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Clin Invest. 2003 Nov;112(9):1372-82.

Alteration of the 4-sphingenine scaffolds of ceramides in keratinocyte-specific
Arnt-deficient mice affects skin barrier function.

Takagi S(1), Tojo H, Tomita S, Sano S, Itami S, Hara M, Inoue S, Horie K, Kondoh 
G, Hosokawa K, Gonzalez FJ, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social and Environmental Medicine H3, Osaka University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. takeda@mr-envi.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), a transcription factor of 
the Per/AHR/ARNT/Sim family, regulates gene expression in response to
environmental stimuli including xenobiotics and hypoxia. To examine its role in
the epidermis, the Cre-loxP system was used to disrupt the Arnt gene in a
keratinocyte-specific manner. Gene-targeted, newborn mice with almost normal
appearance died neonatally of severe dehydration caused by water loss. Histology 
showed small changes in the architecture of cornified layers, with apparently
preserved intercorneocyte lamellar structures responsible for the skin barrier
function. In contrast, HPLC/ion-trap mass spectrometry revealed significant
alterations in the compositions of ceramides, the major components of the
lamellae. The murine epidermal ceramides normally contain 4-sphingenine and
4-hydroxysphinganine. In Arnt-null epidermis, 4-sphingenine was largely replaced 
by sphinganine and the amounts of ceramides with 4-hydroxysphinganine were
greatly decreased, suggesting deficiency of dihydroceramide desaturases that
catalyze the formation of both 4-sphingenyl and 4-hydroxysphinganyl moieties. A
desaturase isoenzyme, DES-1, prefers desaturation, but DES-2 catalyzes both
reactions to a similar extent. Transcript levels of Des-2, but not Des-1, were
considerably decreased in cultured keratinocytes from Arnt-null epidermis. These 
results indicate that proper ceramide compositions through 4-desaturation
regulated by ARNT are crucial for maintaining the epidermal barrier function.

PMCID: PMC228437
PMID: 14597763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Nov 1;290(2):391-401.

Hepatocyte growth factor signaling regulates transactivation of genes belonging
to the plasminogen activation system via hypoxia inducible factor-1.

Tacchini L(1), Matteucci E, De Ponti C, Desiderio MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Pathology, University of Milano, via L. Mangiagalli, 31, 
20133 Milano, Italy.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) plays an important role in tumor growth and
progression also by regulating invasive/metastatic phenotype and angiogenesis.
Here we report that a molecular mechanism possibly contributing to these
functions of HGF may be hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1)-dependent expression
of genes of the plasminogen activation system. The following findings support
this conclusion: (1) HGF enhanced the activity of a luciferase reporter construct
under the control of multiple HIF-1 responsive elements (HRE) in HepG2 cells, and
the cotransfection of the dominant negative for the beta-subunit (ARNT) prevented
this increase; (2) HGF activated uPA and PAI-1 promoters through HIF-1 activity
regulated by PI3K/JNK1 transducers, as demonstrated by cotransfection with the
reporter gene promoters and the dominant negative for ARNT, p85 subunit of PI3K
or JNK1; (3) hypoxia was additive to HGF in increasing reporter vector
activities, but probably through different transduction pathways; (4) JNK1
wild-type expression vector increased HIF-1alpha protein expression probably in a
phosphorylated state and, thus, functional for transactivating activity; and (5) 
c-Jun did not seem to be involved in the activation of the luciferase construct
containing multiple HREs because it was not prevented by expression of TAM-67,
which is the dominant negative mutant form for c-Jun.

PMID: 14567996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Oncogene. 2003 Oct 2;22(43):6717-24.

Constitutive upregulation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha mRNA occurring in
highly metastatic lung carcinoma cells leads to vascular endothelial growth
factor overexpression upon hypoxic exposure.

Koshikawa N(1), Iyozumi A, Gassmann M, Takenaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Chiba Cancer Center Research Institute, 666-2 Nitona,
Chuoh-ku, Chiba 260-8717, Japan.

Neoangiogenesis is crucial for tumor growth and metastasis and is regulated by
various angiogenic factors including vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
However, little is known whether highly metastatic cells express higher level of 
VEGF in response to various stimuli, thereby increasing neoangiogenesis compared 
to low-metastatic cells. Here we report that hypoxia markedly induced the
expression of VEGF mRNA in the cell lines with high-metastatic potential (A11 and
D6 cells) compared to the cell lines with low-metastatic potential (P29 and P34
cells) established from Lewis lung carcinoma. A11 cells exhibited higher VEGF
gene-promoter activity, produced a larger amount of VEGF and showed higher
activity to induce neoangiogenesis than P29 cells. Although the degradation rate 
of VEGF mRNA under hypoxic conditions was similar in both cell lines,
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) mRNA, but not HIF-1beta mRNA, was
found to be constitutively upregulated in A11 cells compared to P29 cells.
Accordingly, the level of HIF-1alpha protein in response to hypoxia was higher in
A11 cells than in P29 cells. Upregulation of HIF-1alpha mRNA was also observed in
D6 cells but not in P34 cells. Thus, the high-metastatic cells produced a larger 
amount of VEGF under hypoxic conditions through constitutive HIF-1alpha mRNA
upregulation compared to the low-metastatic cells, thereby leading to extensive
neoangiogenesis.

PMID: 14555985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2003 Oct;22(10):2337-43.

Expression and inducibility of aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway genes in
wild-caught killifish (Fundulus heteroclitus) with different contaminant-exposure
histories.

Meyer JN(1), Wassenberg DM, Karchner SI, Hahn ME, Di Giulio RT.

Author information: 
(1)Nicholas School of the Environment and Earth Sciences and Integrated
Toxicology Program, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708-0328, USA.

Wildcaught killifish from a contaminated site on the Elizabeth River (VA, USA)
are refractory to induction of cytochrome P4501A (CYP1A, measured as catalytic
activity and immunodetectable CYP1A protein) after exposure to typical aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) agonists, as has been reported for fish from other
sites highly contaminated with these compounds. In an attempt to understand the
molecular basis for the lack of inducibility of CYP1A protein expression and
activity in Elizabeth River killifish, we analyzed the expression of CYP1A and
four other members of the AHR signal transduction pathway: AHR1, AHR2, AHR
repressor (AHRR), and AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT). Gene expression was
measured by cycle-optimized reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) analysis of messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) extracted from livers of
killifish from the Elizabeth River and King's Creek (VA, USA) (reference site),
36 h after injection with beta-naphthoflavone (BNF, an AHR agonist) or corn oil
(carrier control). Hepatic CYP1A mRNA was inducible in King's Creek killifish.
However, in Elizabeth River killifish, no induction of CYP1A mRNA was observed,
confirming and extending previous results showing no induction of CYP1A protein
or catalytic activity in this population. Similarly, AHRR and AHR2 mRNA levels
were induced by BNF in King's Creek but not Elizabeth River killifish. No
population or treatment-related differences were observed in expression of AHR1
or ARNT mRNAs. The results reveal in Elizabeth River killifish a consistent lack 
of inducibility of genes that are normally inducible by AHR agonists (CYP1A,
AHRR, AHR2). However, the expression of AHR1, AHR2, and AHRR in vehicle-treated
fish did not differ between Elizabeth River and King's Creek killifish,
suggesting that altered constitutive expression of AHRs or AHRR does not underlie
the refractory CYP1A phenotype in Elizabeth River killifish.

PMID: 14551997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2003 Oct 15;192(2):174-90.

Ah receptor regulation of mouse Cyp1B1 is additionally modulated by a second
novel complex that forms at two AhR response elements.

Zhang L(1), Zheng W, Jefcoate CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical Science Center, University of Wisconsin,
1300 University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Cyp1B1 is expressed constitutively in many extrahepatic cells and is induced by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). An enhancer region (AhER-810 to -1075
of the mouse Cyp1B1 promoter), which mediates aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
regulation of transcription, contains three consensus XRE sequences (designated
XRE1, XRE4, and XRE5) and a central Ebox. XRE5 is essential for both basal and
induced activity in C3H10T1/2 cells. AhR/ARNT binding to XRE1, XRE4, and the Ebox
complex function in combination to support the AhR/ARNT complex at XRE5. The
identical 12 base cores of XRE1 and XRE4 differ from the core of XRE5 by two
bases outside of the consensus XRE. These sites bind a constitutive complex
slightly smaller than AhR/ARNT (anomalous complex; anC), which is not formed at
XRE5 or six Cyp1A1 XREs. Exchange of these bases (m3 mutations) restores
selective AhR/ARNT binding at XRE1/XRE4 and introduces anC binding at XRE5. The
activities of multimeric XRE1 and XRE5 luciferase reporters responded in parallel
to the extent of AhR/ARNT binding. The consensus anC binding sequence
((C/T)GCG(C/T)GCGC(C/A)GC) overlaps the XRE1/XRE4 AhR/ARNT element. Gel mobility 
analyses show that anC binds to XRE1/XRE4 under basal conditions, while AhR/ARNT 
partially displaces anC following TCDD induction. Selective depletion of anC with
biotin-oligonucleotides increases AhR/ARNT binding. M3-mutations at,
respectively, XRE1 and XRE4 of the AhER sequence, had opposite effects on
luciferase reporters. Activities increased for the XRE1 mutation and decreased
for the XRE4 mutation, but also depended on the level of AhR transfected into AhR
-/- fibroblasts. AnC compete with AhR at XRE1 while playing an activating role at
XRE4. This positive effect of constitutive anC binding at XRE4 may contribute to 
the characteristic basal Cyp1B1 expression in embryo fibroblasts, which is
mediated by low constitutive activities of AhR.

PMID: 14550751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Immunol. 2003 Oct 15;171(8):4113-20.

T cell-specific disruption of arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(Arnt) gene causes resistance to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-induced
thymic involution.

Tomita S(1), Jiang HB, Ueno T, Takagi S, Tohi K, Maekawa S, Miyatake A, Furukawa 
A, Gonzalez FJ, Takeda J, Ichikawa Y, Takahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kagawa Medical University, Kagawa, Japan.
tomita@genome.tokushima-u.ac.jp

The arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is a member of the basic
helix-loop-helix, PER-ARNT-SIM family of heterodimeric transcription factors, and
serves as a dimerization partner for arylhydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha. To assess the function of ARNT in T cells, we
disrupted the Arnt gene specifically in T cells of mice by conditional gene
targeting using T cell-specific p56(lck)-Cre (Lck-Cre) transgenic Arnt-floxed
mice. Thus generated, T cell-specific Arnt-disrupted mice
(Lck-Cre;Arnt(flox/Delta) transgenic mice) exhibited complete loss of the
expression of ARNT protein only in T cells, and were viable and appeared normal. 
The Arnt-disrupted T cells in the thymus were phenotypically and histologically
normal. The Arnt-deficient T cells in the spleen were capable of responding to
TCR stimulation in vitro. However, unlike normal mice in which exposure to the
environmental pollutant 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), an AHR
ligand, resulted in thymic involution, the thymus of Lck-Cre;Arnt(flox/Delta)
mice were resistant to TCDD treatment in vivo. In contrast, benzo(a)pyrene,
another AHR ligand, still caused thymic involution in Lck-Cre;Arnt(flox/Delta)
mice. Finally, fetal thymus organ culture using Lck-Cre;Arnt(flox/Delta) and
K5-Cre;Arnt(flox/Delta) (epithelial cell-specific Arnt-disrupted mice) showed
that thymocytes rather than thymic epithelial cells are predominantly responsible
for TCDD-induced thymic atrophy. Our results indicate that ARNT in T lineage
cells is essential for TCDD-mediated thymic involution.

PMID: 14530333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Mol Biol. 2003 Oct 17;333(2):249-60.

Proteasome inhibition induces nuclear translocation of the dioxin receptor
through an Sp1 and protein kinase C-dependent pathway.

Santiago-Josefat B(1), Fernandez-Salguero PM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias,
Universidad de Extremadura, Avenida de Elvas s/n, 06071 Badajoz, Spain.

The dioxin receptor (AhR), in addition to its role in xenobiotic-induced
carcinogenesis, appears to participate in cell proliferation, differentiation and
organ homeostasis. Understanding potential mechanisms of activation of this
receptor in the absence of exogenous ligands is therefore important to study its 
contribution to endogenous cellular functions. Using mouse embryo primary
fibroblasts, we have previously shown that proteasome inhibition increased AhR
transcriptional activity in the absence of xenobiotics. We suggested that
proteasome inhibition-dependent AhR activation could involve an increase in the
expression of the partner protein dioxin receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT).
Since ARNT over-expression induced nuclear translocation of the AhR, and
ARNT-deficient cells were unable to translocate this receptor to the nucleus upon
proteasome inhibition, we have analyzed the effect of proteasome inhibition on
the expression of regulatory proteins controlling ARNT levels. Treatment with the
proteasome inhibitor MG132 increased endogenous Sp1 phosphorylation and its
DNA-binding activity to the ARNT promoter. Sp1 phosphorylation and binding to the
ARNT promoter, ARNT over-expression and AhR nuclear translocation were inhibited 
by GF109203X, a protein kinase C-specific inhibitor. In addition, MG132
stimulated protein kinase C activity in MEF cells with a pattern similar to that 
observed for ARNT expression. These data suggest that cellular control of protein
kinase C activity, through Sp1 and ARNT, could regulate AhR transcriptional
activity in the absence of xenobiotics.

PMID: 14529614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Cell Biochem. 2003 Oct 15;90(3):548-60.

Cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1) is upregulated by hypoxia via an ARNT
dependent pathway.

Wang G(1), Reisdorph R, Clark RE Jr, Miskimins R, Lindahl R, Miskimins WK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, University of South
Dakota, Vermillion, South Dakota 57069, USA.

Expression of cyclin dependent kinase (Cdk) inhibitor p27(Kip1), which blocks
cell cycle progression from G(1) to S phase, can be regulated via multiple
mechanisms including transcription, protein degradation, and translation.
Recently, it was shown that p27(Kip1) plays an important role in the cellular
response to hypoxia. However, the mechanisms involved in the hypoxia-induced
regulation of p27(Kip1) expression are still not clear. In this study, we compare
the expression of p27(Kip1) in two related murine hepatoma cell lines, Hepa-1 and
c4. Hepa-1 produces functional aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT). c4 cells are derived from Hepa-1, but are ARNT deficient. Interestingly, 
we observed cell line-dependent effects of hypoxia on the expression of
p27(Kip1). The level of p27(Kip1) protein in Hepa-1 cells is enhanced by hypoxia,
but is reduced by hypoxia in c4 cells. Further investigation demonstrated that
hypoxia-induced, ARNT-mediated, transactivation of the p27(Kip1) gene in Hepa-1
cells is responsible for the increase in p27(Kip1) protein. Once c4 cells were
stably transfected with the wild type ARNT gene, a hypoxia-induced increase in
p27(Kip1) mRNA was observed and reduction of p27(Kip1) protein caused by hypoxia 
was blocked. Hence, our data indicate that ARNT is involved in transcriptional
upregulation of the p27(Kip1) gene under hypoxic conditions.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14523989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Biochem J. 2004 Jan 1;377(Pt 1):205-13.

Induction of murine NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin requires the CNC (cap 'n' collar) basic
leucine zipper transcription factor Nrf2 (nuclear factor erythroid 2-related
factor 2): cross-interaction between AhR (aryl hydrocarbon receptor) and Nrf2
signal transduction.

Ma Q(1), Kinneer K, Bi Y, Chan JY, Kan YW.

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Biology Laboratory, Toxicology and Molecular Biology Branch, Health
Effects Laboratory Division, National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Morgantown, WV 26505, USA.
qam1@cdc.gov

TCDD (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo- p -dixoin) induces phase II drug-metabolizing
enzyme NQO1 [NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase; EC 1.6.99.2; DT-diaphorase] in a
wide range of mammalian tissues and cells. Here, we analysed the molecular
pathway mediating NQO1 induction by TCDD in mouse hepatoma cells. Inhibition of
protein synthesis with CHX (cycloheximide) completely blocks induction of NQO1 by
TCDD as well as the basal expression and induction by phenolic antioxidant tBHQ
(2-t-butylbenzene-1,4-diol), implicating a labile factor in NQO1 mRNA expression.
The inhibition is both time- and concentration-dependent, requires inhibition of 
protein synthesis, and occurs at a transcriptional level. Inhibition of NQO1
transcription by CHX correlates with a rapid reduction of the CNC bZip (cap 'n'
collar basic leucine zipper) transcription factor Nrf2 (nuclear factor erythroid 
2-related factor 2) through the 26 S proteasome pathway. Moreover, blocking Nrf2 
degradation with proteasome inhibitor MG132 increases the amount of Nrf2 and
superinduces NQO1 in the presence of TCDD or tBHQ. Finally, genetic experiments
using AhR (aryl hydrocarbon receptor)-, Arnt (aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator)- or Nrf2-deficient cells reveal that, while induction of NQO1 by
TCDD depends on the presence of AhR and Arnt, the basal and inducible expression 
of NQO1 by either TCDD or tBHQ requires functional Nrf2. The findings demonstrate
a novel role of Nrf2 in the induction of NQO1 by TCDD and provide new insights
into the mechanism by which Nrf2 regulates the induction of phase II enzymes by
both phenolic antioxidants and AhR ligands.

PMCID: PMC1223846
PMID: 14510636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Cell Death Differ. 2003 Oct;10(10):1118-20.

The saintly side of Smac/DIABLO: giving anticancer drug-induced apoptosis a
boost.

Arnt CR, Kaufmann SH.

PMID: 14502234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Oct;23(19):6780-9.

Targeted disruption of the mouse PAS domain serine/threonine kinase PASKIN.

Katschinski DM(1), Marti HH, Wagner KF, Shibata J, Eckhardt K, Martin F, Depping 
R, Paasch U, Gassmann M, Ledermann B, Desbaillets I, Wenger RH.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Physiology Group, Medical Faculty, Martin Luther University Halle,
D-06112 Halle, Germany.

PASKIN is a novel mammalian serine/threonine kinase containing two PAS
(Per-Arnt-Sim) domains. PASKIN is related to the Rhizobium oxygen sensor protein 
FixL and to AMP-regulated kinases. Like FixL, the sensory PAS domain of PASKIN
controls the kinase activity by autophosphorylation in a (unknown)
ligand-dependent manner. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the two PASKIN orthologues 
PSK1 and PSK2 phosphorylate three translation factors and two enzymes involved in
glycogen synthesis, thereby coordinately regulating protein synthesis and
glycolytic flux. To elucidate the function of mammalian PASKIN, we inactivated
the mouse Paskin gene by homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells.
Paskin(-/-) mice showed normal development, growth, and reproduction. The
targeted integration of a lacZ reporter gene allowed the identification of the
cell types expressing mouse PASKIN. Surprisingly, PASKIN expression is strongly
upregulated in postmeiotic germ cells during spermatogenesis. However, fertility 
and sperm production and motility were not affected by the PASKIN knockout. The
Ppp1r7 gene encoding Sds22, a regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 1, shares
the promoter region with the Paskin gene, pointing towards a common
transcriptional regulation. Indeed, Sds22 colocalized with the cell types
expressing PASKIN in vivo, suggesting a functional role of protein phosphatase-1 
in the regulation of PASKIN autophosphorylation.

PMCID: PMC193927
PMID: 12972598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Mutat Res. 2003 Sep 9;540(1):99-105.

Construction of reporter yeasts for mouse aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligand
activity.

Kawanishi M(1), Sakamoto M, Ito A, Kishi K, Yagi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiobiology and Environmental Science, Research Institute for
Advanced Science and Technology, Osaka Prefecture University, 1-2 Gakuen-cho,
Sakai 599-8570, Japan.

Aryl hydrocarbons such as dioxins, polychlorinated biphenyls and polyaromatic
hydrocarbons bind to the cellular aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) in the initial 
step of their metabolism. The activation of intracellular signaling subsequent to
the AhR binding is highly correlated with the toxicity and carcinogenicity of
these chemicals. We produced Saccharomyces cerevisiae coexpressing mouse AhR and 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) protein in accordance with 
Miller III's method for constructing yeasts with human Ahr and Arnt [Toxicol.
Appl. Pharmacol. 160 (1998) 297]. Ligand treatment induced a dose-dependent
increase in beta-galactosidase activity from a reporter plasmid in the yeast.
Then, we compared activities of several ligands in yeast having the mouse
Ahr/Arnt genes with those in yeast having the human genes, both of which have the
same genetic background. There was no significant difference in the EC50 values
of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), benzo[a]pyrene,
3-methylcholanthrene and beta-naphthoflavone between the mouse and human genes.
However, indirubin, which was recently found in human urine as a potent AhR
ligand [J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 31475], had a 35-140 times higher EC50 value in
the yeast with human genes than mouse genes. This difference might reflect
species-specificity between mouse and human AhR/Arnt.

PMID: 12972062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Science. 2003 Sep 12;301(5639):1541-4.

Structural basis of a phototropin light switch.

Harper SM(1), Neil LC, Gardner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-9038, USA.

Phototropins are light-activated kinases important for plant responses to blue
light. Light initiates signaling in these proteins by generating a covalent
protein-flavin mononucleotide (FMN) adduct within sensory Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS)
domains. We characterized the light-dependent changes of a phototropin PAS domain
by solution nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and found that an alpha helix
located outside the canonical domain plays a key role in this activation process.
Although this helix associates with the PAS core in the dark, photoinduced
changes in the domain structure disrupt this interaction. We propose that this
mechanism couples light-dependent bond formation to kinase activation and
identifies a signaling pathway conserved among PAS domains.

PMID: 12970567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Biochem Pharmacol. 2003 Sep 1;66(5):841-7.

Contribution of the Ah receptor to the phenolic antioxidant-mediated expression
of human and rat UDP-glucuronosyltransferase UGT1A6 in Caco-2 and rat hepatoma 5L
cells.

Münzel PA(1), Schmohl S, Buckler F, Jaehrling J, Raschko FT, Köhle C, Bock KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University
of Tübingen, Tübingen D-72074, Germany.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) represent major phase II enzymes of drug
metabolism which are regulated in a tissue-specific manner by endogenous and
environmental factors. Among the latter, aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) agonists
such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and phenolic antioxidants such
as tert-butylhydroquinone (tBHQ) are known to induce the expression of human
UGT1A6 in Caco-2 cells. While binding of the TCDD-activated AhR to one xenobiotic
response element (XRE) in the 5'-flanking regulatory region of UGT1A6 was
characterised previously, the mechanism responsible for tBHQ induction is
unknown. Therefore, it was investigated whether antioxidant response elements
(AREs) are involved in tBHQ induction of UGT1A6. Transfectants of 3 kb of its
regulatory region and its deletion mutants were treated with tBHQ. These studies 
suggested a region with approximately 2-fold induction, including an ARE-like
motif, 15 bp downstream of the previously characterised XRE. Transfectants of the
point-mutated ARE-like motif showed marginally reduced response to tBHQ, but
surprisingly, loss of response to TCDD, suggesting interference of flanking
proteins with the AhR/Arnt complex. Coordinate responses of UGT activity after
treatment with TCDD or tBHQ were also observed in rat hepatoma 5L cells, mutants 
without the AhR and with recomplemented AhR. The results suggest a contribution
of the AhR pathway and of proteins binding to the XRE flanking region to the
induction of human UGT1A6 by both AhR agonists and phenolic antioxidants.

PMID: 12948865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Transplant Proc. 2003 May;35(3):1177-8.

Ethics and safety of living kidney donation.

Jakobsen A(1), Holdaas H, Leivestad T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Rikshospitalet, 0027 Oslo, Norway.
arnt.jakobsen@rikshospitalet.no

PMID: 12947899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 7;278(45):44857-67. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

Identification of the downstream targets of SIM1 and ARNT2, a pair of
transcription factors essential for neuroendocrine cell differentiation.

Liu C(1), Goshu E, Wells A, Fan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Baltimore,
Maryland 21210, USA.

SIM1 and ARNT2 are two basic helix-loop-helix/PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) transcription
factors that control the differentiation of neuroendocrine lineages in the mouse 
hypothalamus. Heterozygous Sim1 mice also develop early onset obesity, possibly
due to hypodevelopment of the hypothalamus. Although SIM1 and ARNT2 form
heterodimers to direct the same molecular pathway, knowledge of this pathway is
limited. To facilitate the identification of their downstream genes, we combined 
an inducible gene expression system in a neuronal cell line with microarray
analysis to screen for their transcriptional targets. This method identified 268 
potential target genes of SIM1/ARNT2 that displayed >1.7-fold induced expression.
15 of these genes were subjected to Northern analysis, and a high percentage of
them were confirmed to be up-regulated. In vivo, several of these genes showed
neuroendocrine hypothalamic expression correlating with that of Sim1.
Furthermore, we found that expression of two of these potential targets, the Jak2
and thyroid hormone receptor beta2 genes, was lost in the neuroendocrine
hypothalamus of the Sim1 mutant. The expression and predicted functions of many
of these genes provide new insight into both the Sim1/Arnt2 action in
neuroendocrine hypothalamus development and the molecular basis for the Sim1
haplo-insufficient obesity phenotype.

PMID: 12947113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biochem. 2003 Jul;134(1):83-90.

Heterodimers of bHLH-PAS protein fragments derived from AhR, AhRR, and Arnt
prepared by co-expression in Escherichia coli: characterization of their DNA
binding activity and preparation of a DNA complex.

Kikuchi Y(1), Ohsawa S, Mimura J, Ema M, Takasaki C, Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Graduate School of Life Science, Tohoku
University, Sendai 980-8578. ykikuchi@mail.cc.tohoku.ac.jp

AhR (aryl hydrocarbon receptor), AhRR (AhR repressor), and Arnt (AhR nuclear
translocator) are members of the bHLH (basic-helix-loop-helix)-PAS
(Per-AhR/Arnt-Sim homology sequence) transcription factor superfamily. They
associate with each other to form heterodimers, AhR/Arnt or AhRR/Arnt, and bind
the XRE (xenobiotic responsive element) sequences in the promoter regions of the 
target genes to regulate their expression. Their basic regions and HLH motifs
mediate DNA binding activity and protein dimerization, respectively. The PAS
domain includes two incomplete repeats, PAS-A and PAS-B, and is considered to
determine the specificity on protein dimerization. However, the three-dimensional
structures of PAS folds reported so far are all monomeric, therefore, little is
known about the structural basis of protein interaction through PAS domains. In
the present study, we prepared heterodimeric bHLH-PAS domains derived from AhR
and Arnt, and AhRR and Arnt by co-expressing each pair in E. coli, and showed
that the heterodimers formed exhibited full DNA-binding activity, which was not
apparently affected by deletion of the highly basic amino acid cluster most
N-terminal as to the HLH region of AhR or AhRR. Methylation of the two CpG sites 
in the XRE core sequence reduced the binding affinity to heterodimeric proteins, 
with 5-methylcytosine in the AhR recognition site exhibiting a greater inhibitory
effect than that in the Arnt recognition site.

PMID: 12944374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2003 Jul;60(7):1376-93.

The hypoxia-inducible factors: key transcriptional regulators of hypoxic
responses.

Bracken CP(1), Whitelaw ML, Peet DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Bioscience, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South
Australia 5005, Australia.

Oxygen depravation in mammals leads to the transcriptional induction of a host of
target genes to metabolically adapt to this deficiency, including erythropoietin 
and vascular endothelial growth factor. This response is primarily mediated by
the hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) which are members of the
basic-helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-Sim (bHLH/PAS) transcription factor family. The
HIFs are primarily regulated via a two-step mechanism of HIF post-translational
modification, increasing both protein stability and transactivation capacity.
This review aims to summarise our current understanding of these processes, and
discuss the important role of the HIFs in the pathophysiology of many human
diseases.

PMID: 12943226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 3;278(40):39185-8. Epub 2003 Aug 7.

The NMR structure of the sensory domain of the membranous two-component fumarate 
sensor (histidine protein kinase) DcuS of Escherichia coli.

Pappalardo L(1), Janausch IG, Vijayan V, Zientz E, Junker J, Peti W, Zweckstetter
M, Unden G, Griesinger C.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institut für Biophysikalische Chemie, Am Fassberg 11, D-37077
Göttingen, Germany.

The structure of the water-soluble, periplasmic domain of the fumarate sensor
DcuS (DcuS-pd) has been determined by NMR spectroscopy in solution. DcuS is a
prototype for a sensory histidine kinase with transmembrane signal transfer. DcuS
belongs to the CitA family of sensors that are specific for sensing di- and
tricarboxylates. The periplasmic domain is folded autonomously and shows helices 
at the N and the C terminus, suggesting direct linking or connection to helices
in the two transmembrane regions. The structure constitutes a novel fold. The
nearest structural neighbor is the Per-Arnt-Sim domain of the photoactive yellow 
protein that binds small molecules covalently. Residues Arg107, His110, and
Arg147 are essential for fumarate sensing and are found clustered together. The
structure constitutes the first periplasmic domain of a two component sensory
system and is distinctly different from the aspartate sensory domain of the Tar
chemotaxis sensor.

PMID: 12907689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Circulation. 2003 Aug 19;108(7):849-56. Epub 2003 Aug 4.

Mechanism of complement activation and its role in the inflammatory response
after thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair.

Fiane AE(1), Videm V, Lingaas PS, Heggelund L, Nielsen EW, Geiran OR, Fung M,
Mollnes TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Rikshospitalet University
Hospital, N-0027 Oslo, Norway. arnt.fiane@rikshospitalet.no

BACKGROUND: Complement activation contributes to ischemia-reperfusion injury.
Patients undergoing thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm (TAAA) repair suffer
extensive ischemia-reperfusion and considerable systemic inflammation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The degree and mechanism of complement activation and its
role in inflammation were investigated in 19 patients undergoing TAAA repair.
Patients undergoing open infrarenal aortic surgery (n=5) or endovascular
descending aortic aneurysm repair (n=6) served as control subjects. Substantial
complement activation was seen in TAAA patients but not in controls.
C1rs-C1-inhibitor complexes increased moderately, whereas C4bc, C3bBbP, C3bc, and
the terminal SC5b-9 complex (TCC) increased markedly after reperfusion, reaching 
a maximum 8 hours after reperfusion. Interleukin (IL)-1beta, tumor necrosis
factor alpha (TNF-alpha), and IL-8 increased significantly in TAAA patients but
not in controls, peaking at 24 hours postoperatively and correlating closely with
the degree of complement activation. IL-6 and IL-10 increased to a maximum 8
hours after reperfusion in the TAAA patients, were not correlated with complement
activation, and increased moderately in the control subjects. Myeloperoxidase and
lactoferrin increased markedly before reperfusion in all groups, whereas sICAM-1,
sP-selectin, and sE-selectin were unchanged. No increase was observed in
complement activation products, IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, or IL-8 in a mannose-binding
lectin (MBL)-deficient TAAA patient, whereas IL-6, IL-10, myeloperoxidase, and
lactoferrin increased as in the controls. Two other MBL-deficient TAAA patients
receiving plasma attained significant MBL levels and showed complement and
cytokine patterns identical to the MBL-sufficient TAAA patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The data suggest that complement activation during TAAA repair is
MBL mediated, amplified through the alternative pathway, and responsible in part 
for the inflammatory response.

PMID: 12900342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Aug 1;307(3):595-9.

Molecular cloning and expression analysis of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor of
Xenopus laevis.

Ohi H(1), Fujita Y, Miyao M, Saguchi K, Murayama N, Higuchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biopharmaceutics, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Showa
University, 1-5-8 Hatanodai, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 142-8555, Japan.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a member of the basic
helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH/PAS) family of transcription factors.
Although this receptor has been known to mediate the toxic effects of
environmental pollutants, its physiological functions remain elusive. Here, we
describe the isolation and expression pattern of the Xenopus AHR gene. The
predicted amino acid sequence contained regions characteristic of other
vertebrate AHRs. However, in line with previously described fish AHR genes, no
distinct Q-rich domain was found. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that Xenopus
AHR was clustered within the AHR1 clade. As in the case of mammalian AHR genes,
the Xenopus AHR gene was expressed in all the adult tissues tested. Xenopus AHR
was also expressed during early development, in parallel with expression of the
CYP1A7 gene, which is thought to be regulated by AHR. These results suggest that 
while frogs are relatively tolerant to TCDD toxicity, the AHR of frogs has
characteristics similar to those of other vertebrate AHRs.

PMID: 12893265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 3;278(40):38260-8. Epub 2003 Jul 21.

Insulin and hypoxia share common target genes but not the hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha.

Yim S(1), Choi SM, Choi Y, Lee N, Chung J, Park H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, University of Seoul, Seoul 130-743, Korea.

Both hypoxia and insulin induce common target genes, including vascular
endothelial growth factors and several glycolytic enzymes. However, these two
signals eventually trigger quite different metabolic pathways. Hypoxia induces
glycolysis, resulting in anaerobic ATP production, while insulin increases
glycolysis for energy storage. Hypoxia-induced gene expression is mediated by the
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) that consists of HIF-1alpha and the aromatic
hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (Arnt). Hypoxia-induced gene expression is
initiated by the stabilization of the HIF-1alpha subunit. Here we investigated
whether insulin-induced gene expression also requires stabilization of
HIF-1alpha. Our results indicate that hypoxia but not insulin stabilizes
HIF-1alpha protein levels, whereas both insulin- and hypoxia-induced gene
expression require the presence of the Arnt protein. Insulin treatment fails to
inactivate proline hydroxylation of HIF-1alpha, which triggers recruitment of the
von Hippel-Lindau protein and oxygen-dependent degradation of HIF-1alpha.
Insulin-induced gene expression is inhibited by the presence of the
phosphoinositide (PI) 3-kinase inhibitor LY294002 and the dominant negative
mutant of the p85 subunit of PI 3-kinase, whereas hypoxia-induced gene expression
is not. Pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate, a scavenger of H2O2, reduces insulin-induced
gene expression but not hypoxia-induced gene expression. Although both hypoxia
and insulin induce the expression of common target genes through a
hypoxia-responsive element- and Arnt-dependent mechanism, insulin cannot
stabilize the HIF-1alpha protein. We believe that insulin activates other
putative partner proteins for Arnt in PI 3-kinase- and H2O2-dependent pathways.

PMID: 12876287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Chem Res Toxicol. 2003 Jul;16(7):807-16.

Inhibitory aryl hydrocarbon receptor-estrogen receptor alpha cross-talk and
mechanisms of action.

Safe S(1), Wormke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USA. ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu

PMID: 12870882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 3;278(40):38149-58. Epub 2003 Jul 17.

Constructing a feedback loop with circadian clock molecules from the silkmoth,
Antheraea pernyi.

Chang DC(1), McWatters HG, Williams JA, Gotter AL, Levine JD, Reppert SM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Chronobiology, MassGeneral Hospital for Children, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Circadian clocks are important regulators of behavior and physiology. The
circadian clock of Drosophila depends on an autoinhibitory feedback loop
involving dCLOCK, CYCLE (also called dBMAL, for Drosophila brain and muscle
ARNT-like protein), dPERIOD, and dTIMELESS. Recent studies suggest that the clock
mechanism in other insect species may differ strikingly from that of Drosophila. 
We cloned Clock, Bmal, and Timeless homologs (apClock, apBmal, and apTimeless)
from the silkmoth Antheraea pernyi, from which a Period homolog (apPeriod) has
already been cloned. In Schneider 2 (S2) cell culture assays, apCLOCK:apBMAL
activates transcription through an E-box enhancer element found in the 5' region 
of the apPeriod gene. Furthermore, apPERIOD can robustly inhibit apCLOCK:
apBMAL-mediated transactivation, and apTIMELESS can augment this inhibition.
Thus, a complete feedback loop, resembling that found in Drosophila, can be
constructed from silkmoth CLOCK, BMAL, PERIOD, and TIMELESS. Our results suggest 
that the circadian autoinhibitory feedback loop discovered in Drosophila is
likely to be widespread among insects. However, whereas the transactivation
domain in Drosophila lies in the C terminus of dCLOCK, in A. pernyi, it lies in
the C terminus of apBMAL, which is highly conserved with the C termini of BMALs
in other insects (except Drosophila) and in vertebrates. Our analysis sheds light
on the molecular function and evolution of clock genes in the animal kingdom.

PMID: 12869551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2003 Aug 1;416(1):53-67.

Cell selective cAMP induction of rat CYP1B1 in adrenal and testis cells.
Identification of a novel cAMP-responsive far upstream enhancer and a second Ah
receptor-dependent mechanism.

Zheng W(1), Brake PB, Bhattacharyya KK, Zhang L, Zhao D, Jefcoate CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical Science Center, University of Wisconsin,
1300, University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

CYP1B1 is unique among P450 cytochromes in exhibiting inductive responses
mediated by both the Ah receptor (AhR) and cAMP. cAMP induction was mediated
either by a 189bp far upstream enhancer region (FUER, -5110 to -5298) or by a
230bp AhR-responsive enhancer region (AhER) (-797 to -1026). CYP1B1 luciferase
reporters respond selectively to cAMP and TCDD in adrenal Y-1 cells (only cAMP), 
testis MA10 cells (cAMP>TCDD), and C3H10T1/2 mouse embryo fibroblasts (only
TCDD). In Y-1 cells, which lack AhR, cAMP induction is totally dependent on the
FUER, including absolute requirements for upstream and downstream halves of this 
region, and for CREB activity at a CRE sequence located at the 3(')-end. cAMP
stimulation of the FUER was remarkably high (27-fold) and equally effective when 
linked to an HSV-TK promoter, indicating direct cAMP activation of the FUER.
Binding of CREB to the essential CRE was demonstrated along with dominant
negative effects of functionally impaired mutants. cAMP induction in MA10 cells
was partially mediated by the FUER mechanism but was regulated additionally by
AhER through AhR activity. MA10 cells also exhibit cAMP-dependent AhR
down-regulation and AhR/Arnt complex formation. Mutations in AhER including XRE5 
were similarly inhibitory to cAMP stimulation in MA10 cells and to TCDD
stimulation in C3H10T1/2 cells. Transfection of AhR into the AhR-deficient Y-1
cells did not introduce this second mechanism, which indicated a need for
additional components that are present in MA10 cells.

PMID: 12859982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jul 25;307(2):248-53.

Estrogen increases messenger RNA and immunoreactivity of aryl-hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator 2 in the rat mediobasal hypothalamus.

Mitsushima D(1), Funabashi T, Kimura F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroendocrinology, Yokohama City University, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan.

We examined the effect of estrogen on the expression of aryl-hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR) and two types of AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt1 and Arnt2) mRNAs in the
hypothalamus of ovariectomized rats. Northern blotting demonstrated that, in the 
mediobasal hypothalamus, a subcutaneous injection of 20 microg estradiol benzoate
(E(2)) significantly increased the expression of Arnt2 mRNA, but induced no
significant changes in the expression of AhR and Arnt1 mRNAs. The expression of
Arnt2 mRNA was significantly increased at 4, 24, and 72h after the injection.
Immunocytochemical study revealed that the number of Arnt2 immunoreactive cells
was also significantly increased at 72h after the injection. Conversely, in the
preoptic area, injection of E(2) did not cause significant changes in the
expression of any of the three mRNAs. These observations suggest that estrogen
regulates Arnt2 expression in the mediobasal hypothalamus and modulates the toxic
action of dioxins in rats.

PMID: 12859947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Plant Foods Hum Nutr. 2003 Winter;58(1):27-40.

Temporal aspects of onion-induced antiplatelet activity.

Osmont KS(1), Arnt CR, Goldman IL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Horticulture, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1575 Linden
Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Organosulfur compounds in onion extracts are formed following the lysis of the
S-alk(en)yl-L-cysteine sulfoxides by alliinase. These compounds inhibit the
aggregation of human blood platelets and offer the potential for positive
cardiovascular health benefits. An experiment was designed to examine temporal
and temperature effects on onion-induced antiplatelet activity. Platelet
aggregation is induced by various agonists, including ADP, collagen, and
thrombin. Unexpectedly, all freshly-juiced onion extracts (ca. 5 minutes
post-juicing) appeared to exhibit both an agonist-free aggregation peak (AFP) and
a platelet inhibitory peak (PIP) characteristic of inhibition of platelet
aggregation. The AFP was minimal by 30 minutes and dissipated in all treatments
by 120 minutes, while the PIP increased as onion extracts aged and did not change
after 30 minutes at 25 degrees C. This finding confirms the observation that the 
in vitro platelet inhibitory activity of onion organosulfur compounds is time
dependent. Freshly-prepared onion extracts were incubated with the ADP scavenger 
enzyme apyrase (E.C. 3.6.1.5). AFPs were abolished in apyrase-treated extracts,
suggesting that this response may have been due to free ADP in onion extracts,
although an amount of ADP required to generate such a response would be
unexpected in onion extracts. In addition, platelet aggregates were not observed 
in the AFP, suggesting this response may be associated with changes in light
transmission through platelet rich plasma that are not associated with platelet
aggregation. Artifacts of analysis are, therefore, possible when assessing
onion-induced antiplatelet activity with freshly-juiced extracts. Temporal
formation of platelet-inhibiting organosulfur compounds should be taken into
account during both in vitro and in vivo assessment of onion-induced antiplatelet
activity.

PMID: 12859011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Biochemistry. 2003 Jul 15;42(27):8183-91.

Light-induced structural changes in the LOV2 domain of Adiantum phytochrome3
studied by low-temperature FTIR and UV-visible spectroscopy.

Iwata T(1), Nozaki D, Tokutomi S, Kagawa T, Wada M, Kandori H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Osaka
Prefecture, Sakai, Osaka 599-8570, Japan.

Phototropin (Phot) is a blue-light receptor in plants. The molecule has two FMN
(flavin mononucleotide) binding domains named LOV (light-, oxygen-, and
voltage-sensing), which is a subset of the PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) superfamily.
Illumination of the phot-LOV domains in the dark state (D447) produces a covalent
C(4a) flavin-cysteinyl adduct (S390) via a triplet excited state (L660), which
reverts to D447 in the dark. In this work, we studied the light-induced
structural changes in the LOV2 domain of Adiantum phytochrome3 (phy3), which is a
fusion protein of phot containing the phytochrome chromophoric domain, by
low-temperature UV-visible and FTIR spectroscopy. UV-visible spectroscopy
detected only one intermediate state, S390, in the temperature range from 77 to
295 K, indicating that the adduct is produced even at temperatures as low as 77
K, although a portion of D447 cannot be converted to S390 at low temperatures
possibly because of motional freezing. In the whole temperature range, FTIR
spectra in the S-H stretching frequency region showed that Cys966 of phy3-LOV2 is
protonated in D447 and unprotonated on illumination, supporting adduct formation.
The pK(a) of the S-H group in D447 is estimated to be >10. FTIR spectra also
showed the light-induced appearance of a positive peak around 3621 cm(-1) in the 
whole temperature range, indicating that adduct formation accompanies
rearrangement of a hydrogen bond of a water molecule(s), which can be either
water25, water45, or both, near the chromophore. In contrast to the weak
temperature dependence of the spectral changes in the UV-visible absorption and
the FTIR of both S-H and O-H stretching bands, light-induced changes in the amide
I vibration that probes protein backbone structure vary significantly with the
increase in temperature. The spectral changes suggest that light excitation of
FMN loosens the local structure around it, particularly in turns, in the early
stages and that another change subsequently takes place to tighten it, mainly in 
beta-structure, but some occur in the alpha-helical structure of the protein
moiety as well. Interestingly, these changes proceed without altering the shape
of UV-visible spectra, suggesting the presence of multiple conformation states in
S390.

PMID: 12846567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 19;278(38):35878-88. Epub 2003 Jul 1.

Defining the role for XAP2 in stabilization of the dioxin receptor.

Lees MJ(1), Peet DJ, Whitelaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Sciences (Biochemistry) and the Centre for 
the Molecular Genetics of Development, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South
Australia 5005, Australia.

The dioxin receptor (DR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor that is
activated upon binding of dioxins or structurally related forms of xenobiotics.
Upon binding ligand the DR translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus where
it complexes with the partner protein Arnt to form a DNA binding heterodimer,
which activates transcription of target genes involved in xenobiotic metabolism. 
Latency of the DR signaling pathway is maintained by association of the DR with a
number of molecular chaperones including the 90-kDa heat shock protein (hsp90),
the hepatitis B virus X-associated protein (XAP2), and the 23-kDa heat shock
protein (p23). Here we investigated the role of XAP2 in DR signaling and
demonstrated that reduced levels of XAP2 labilize the DR, arguing for a function 
of XAP2 beyond its reported role as a cytoplasmic retention factor. In addition, 
we showed that a constitutively nuclear DR is degraded in the nucleus and does
not require nuclear export for efficient degradation. We also provided evidence
implicating the ubiquitin ligase protein C-terminal hsp70-interacting protein
(CHIP) in the degradation of the DR, and we demonstrated that this degradation
can be overcome by overexpression of XAP2. XAP2 protection of CHIP-mediated
degradation is dependent on the tetratricopeptide repeat domain of XAP2 and
suggests a mechanism whereby competition for the C-terminal tetratricopeptide
repeat acceptor site of hsp90 guides the protein triage decision, the point of
determination for either maturation of DR folding or DR degradation.

PMID: 12837759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Jul 15;287(2):237-48.

Xenopus single-minded (xSim) is a nuclear factor allowing nuclear translocation
of its cytoplasmic partner xArnt.

Coumailleau P(1), Bollérot K, Lecomte C, Angelier N.

Author information: 
(1)Université Pierre et Marie Curie, UMR7622-CNRS Biologie Moléculaire et
Cellulaire du Développement, 9 quai St Bernard, 75252 Paris Cedex 05, France.
pascal.coumailleau@snv.jussieu.fr

Transcription factors belonging to the basic helix-loop-helix Per-Arnt-Sim
(bHLH/PAS) family control a wide variety of biological processes in mammalian
and/or Drosophila. We have previously isolated bHLH/PAS Xenopus amphibian
homologs of Single-minded (xSim) and aryl receptor nuclear translocator (xArnt)
and characterized their expression pattern during embryogenesis. We show in this 
paper that xSim protein is a functional homolog of Drosophila or mammalian
Sim(s). Biochemical analysis indicates that xSim forms a heterodimer with xArnt. 
Subcellular localization analysis of bHLH/PAS chimeric fluorescent versions in
Xenopus or mammalian cell lines shows that xSim is constitutively localized in
the nuclear compartment. On the opposite, xArnt appears to be predominantly
expressed in the cytoplasm. In addition, we demonstrate that xArnt nuclear
localization depends on the presence of xSim. Thus xSim appears to be an
essential factor in the nuclear translocation of the xSim/xArnt complex. In
perfect agreement, we show that the C-terminal half of xSim contains the
information for this nuclear localization.

PMID: 12837280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Biochem. 2003 May;133(5):583-92.

Critical enhancer region to which AhR/ARNT and Sp1 bind in the human CYP1B1 gene.

Tsuchiya Y(1), Nakajima M, Yokoi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Drug Metabolism, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kanazawa
University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa 920-0934, Japan.

Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1B1 is known to be induced by polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons including 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). The
constitutive and TCDD-inducible transcriptional expression of human CYP1B1 is
known to be cell-specific. In order to identify the cis-elements that
cell-specifically regulate the constitutive and TCDD-inducible transcription of
CYP1B1, we constructed luciferase reporter plasmids containing a series of
deletions of the XRE core sequence in the 5'-flanking region of the human CYP1B1 
gene. Luciferase assays were performed with MCF-7 (breast carcinoma), HepG2
(hepatocellular carcinoma), LS-180 (colon carcinoma), and OMC-3 (ovarian
carcinoma) cells. Although there were large differences in the relative
luciferase activity and inducibility between these four cell lines, the
contribution of each reporter construct was similar. Constitutive expression
increased with the regulatory elements that are present at -910 to -852 and -1652
to -1243. Potential enhancer elements for TCDD-induction were located from -1022 
to -852 including three XREs, XRE3 at -853, XRE4 at -940, and XRE5 at -989. Gel
shift analyses revealed binding of the AhR/ARNT heterodimer to XRE2 at -834, XRE3
at -853, XRE6 at -1024, and XRE7 at -1490. In addition, the binding of a nuclear 
transcriptional factor, Sp1, near XRE2 and XRE8 was observed. It was suggested
that mutual interaction of XRE2 and XRE3 is important for transcriptional
regulation, and that the Sp1 binding to the Sp1-like motif (-824) enhances both
the constitutive and inducible transcriptional activities of the human CYP1B1
gene.

PMID: 12801909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Anat Embryol (Berl). 2003 Jul;207(1):9-18. Epub 2003 Jun 3.

Epithelial cells in the oviduct and vagina and steroid-synthesizing cells in the 
rabbit ovary express AhR and ARNT.

Hasan A(1), Fischer B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Martin Luther University Faculty of
Medicine, Grosse Steinstrasse 52, 06097 Halle (Saale), Germany.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor.
Beside exogenous ligands, an increasing list of endogenous ligands has recently
been described. The AhR and its dimerization partner AhR nuclear translocator
(ARNT) were found in embryos, fetuses and in genital tract tissue. Its role in
reproduction and fertility is not known. In the current study, AhR and ARNT
expression and co-localization were studied immunohistochemicaly during the
pre-implantation period in various genital tract organs (ovary, oviduct, vagina) 
of the rabbit. In the ovary, the AhR was expressed in the steroid-secreting
interstitial cells, in follicular and granulosa cells, and in lutein cells. The
receptor was localized in the cytoplasm. A cytoplasmic localization was also
found in the oviduct epithelium with a diffuse cytoplasmic staining in the
ampulla and a localized cytoplasmic localization in the isthmus. In the vagina,
AhR localization changed from cytoplasmic in the non-pregnant animal to nuclear
staining in the basal layer of the vaginal epithelium on day 6 of pregnancy. The 
ARNT protein was found in all AhR expressing cells except for oocytes within
primordial follicles. Its localization was in the cytoplasm and/or nuclei.
Therefore, the full complement for AhR/ARNT transcriptional activity was found in
the studied organs. AhR expression showed stage-specific changes in both the
uterus (Hasan and Fischer 2001) and the vagina during the pre-implantation
period, while the ARNT protein exhibited no change in expression during this
period. In summary, these findings indicate a functional AhR/ARNT complex in the 
rabbit genital tract epithelia. Its precise role and activation mechanism in
reproductive tissue is not clear. It is supposed, however, that this complex may 
be involved in both hormone production and hormone-induced cellular changes
during early pregnancy of the rabbit.

PMID: 12783319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Pharmacogenetics. 2003 Jun;13(6):339-47.

Structure and polymorphisms of human aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AhRR)
gene in a French population: relationship with CYP1A1 inducibility and lung
cancer.

Cauchi S(1), Stücker I, Cénée S, Kremers P, Beaune P, Massaad-Massade L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Toxicologie Moléculaire, U-490 INSERM, 45 rue des Saints-Pères,
75270 Paris Cedex, France.

OBJECTIVE: The aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AhRR) protein may dimerize
with the AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT) and may compete with the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) to bind the xenobiotic responsive elements. The result
is a negative feedback mechanism that involves a down regulation of all genes
regulated by the AhR transcription factor which positively regulates the
expression of the Cytochrome P-4501A1 gene (CYP1A1).
METHODS: The structure of the AhRR gene was reconstituted, then the genetic
polymorphisms of this gene including the promoter were investigated and the link 
between these polymorphisms, CYP1A1 inducibility and lung cancer incidence in a
French population was examined. Four polymorphisms were found, two in the coding 
region (609G>C and 1977G>C) and two in the 5'-untranslated region (-96G>A and
-869A>T). Among the four polymorphisms, only one, the 609G>C has been previously 
described. The 609G>C and 1977G>C are localized respectively in exon 6 and 12 and
lead to Pro554Ala and Asp641His substitutions, respectively. To evaluate the
frequency of these allelic variants, a DNA library of a case-control study of
lung cancer (164 controls and 171 patients) was screened. These polymorphisms
were detected at the same allele frequency (0.40 for 609C, 0.05 for 1977C, 0.24
for -96A and 0.17 for -869T) in both controls and patients. Statistical analysis 
did not show any relationship between all the mutations found and CYP1A1
inducibility and lung cancer incidence.
CONCLUSION: None of the polymorphisms were found to play a key role in CYP1A1
inducibility or in the susceptibility to develop lung cancer.

PMID: 12777964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Nature. 2003 May 29;423(6939):545-50.

Modulation of oestrogen receptor signalling by association with the activated
dioxin receptor.

Ohtake F(1), Takeyama K, Matsumoto T, Kitagawa H, Yamamoto Y, Nohara K, Tohyama
C, Krust A, Mimura J, Chambon P, Yanagisawa J, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Kato S.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo,
1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0032, Japan.

Comment in
    Nature. 2003 May 29;423(6939):487-8.

Environmental contaminants affect a wide variety of biological events in many
species. Dioxins are typical environmental contaminants that exert adverse
oestrogen-related effects. Although their anti-oestrogenic actions are well
described, dioxins can also induce endometriosis and oestrogen-dependent tumours,
implying possible oestrogenic effects. However, the molecular mechanism
underlying oestrogen-related actions of dioxins remains largely unknown. A
heterodimer of the dioxin receptor (AhR) and Arnt, which are basic
helix-loop-helix/PAS-family transcription factors, mediates most of the toxic
effects of dioxins. Here we show that the agonist-activated AhR/Arnt heterodimer 
directly associates with oestrogen receptors ER-alpha and ER-beta. This
association results in the recruitment of unliganded ER and the co-activator p300
to oestrogen-responsive gene promoters, leading to activation of transcription
and oestrogenic effects. The function of liganded ER is attenuated. Oestrogenic
actions of AhR agonists were detected in wild-type ovariectomized mouse uteri,
but were absent in AhR-/- or ER-alpha-/- ovariectomized mice. Our findings
suggest a novel mechanism by which ER-mediated oestrogen signalling is modulated 
by a co-regulatory-like function of activated AhR/Arnt, giving rise to adverse
oestrogen-related actions of dioxin-type environmental contaminants.

PMID: 12774124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Biochem Soc Trans. 2003 Jun;31(Pt 3):510-5.

The role of iron and 2-oxoglutarate oxygenases in signalling.

Hewitson KS(1), McNeill LA, Elkins JM, Schofield CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Molecular Sciences and the Department of Chemistry, Dyson
Perrins Laboratory, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QY, UK.
kirsty.hewitson@chem.ox.ac.uk

Sensing of ambient dioxygen levels and appropriate feedback mechanisms are
essential processes for all multicellular organisms. In animals, moderate hypoxia
causes an increase in the transcription levels of specific genes, including those
encoding vascular endothelial growth factor and erythropoietin. The hypoxic
response is mediated by hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), an alphabeta
heterodimeric transcription factor in which both the HIF subunits are members of 
the basic helix-loop-helix PAS (PER-ARNT-SIM) domain family. Under hypoxic
conditions, levels of HIFalpha rise, allowing dimerization with HIFbeta and
initiating transcriptional activation. Two types of dioxygen-dependent
modification to HIFalpha have been identified, both of which inhibit the
transcriptional response. Firstly, HIFalpha undergoes trans -4-hydroxylation at
two conserved proline residues that enable its recognition by the von
Hippel-Lindau tumour-suppressor protein. Subsequent ubiquitinylation, mediated by
an ubiquitin ligase complex, targets HIFalpha for degradation. Secondly,
hydroxylation of an asparagine residue in the C-terminal transactivation domain
of HIFalpha directly prevents its interaction with the co-activator p300.
Hydroxylation of HIFalpha is catalysed by enzymes of the iron(II)- and
2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase family. In humans, three prolyl hydroxylase 
isoenzymes (PHD1-3) and an asparagine hydroxylase [factor inhibiting HIF (FIH)]
have been identified. The role of 2-oxoglutarate oxygenases in the hypoxic and
other signalling pathways is discussed.

PMID: 12773146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Jun;63(6):1373-81.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor gene silencing with small inhibitory RNA differentially
modulates Ah-responsiveness in MCF-7 and HepG2 cancer cells.

Abdelrahim M(1), Smith R 3rd, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, Veterinary Research Building 409, College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA.

Sequence-specific small interfering RNA (siRNA) duplexes can be used for gene
silencing in mammalian cells and as mechanistic probes for determining gene
function. Transfection of siRNAs for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and AhR 
nuclear translocator (ARNT) mRNAs in MCF-7 breast cancer cells resulted in a 60
to 80% decrease in levels of AhR and ARNT proteins in whole-cell extracts and
decreased binding of nuclear extracts to 32P-labeled dioxin-responsive element.
siRNA for the AhR also decreased 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD)-induced CYP1A1 protein, CYP1A1-dependent activity, and luciferase activity
in cells transfected with an Ah-responsive construct. 17beta-estradiol (E2)
induces proliferation of MCF-7 cells through enhanced G0/G1 --> S phase
progression, and this response is inhibited in cells cotreated with E2 plus TCDD.
The effects of TCDD on E2-induced cell-cycle progress were partially blocked in
MCF-7 cells transfected with siRNA for AhR. The results also indicated that
siRNA-dependent decreases in AhR protein in MCF-7 cells were accompanied by
increased G0/G1 --> S phase progression, suggesting a growth-inhibitory role for 
the "endogenous" AhR. Surprisingly, TCDD alone induced G0/G1 --> S phase
progression and exhibited estrogenic activity in MCF-7 cells transfected with
siRNA for the AhR. In contrast, degradation of the AhR in HepG2 liver cancer
cells resulted in decreased G0/G1 --> S phase progression, and this was
accompanied by decreased expression of cyclin D1, cyclin E, cyclin-dependent
kinase 2 (cdk2), and cdk4. In the absence of ligand, the AhR exhibits
growth-inhibitory (MCF-7) and growth-promoting (HepG2) activity that is cell
context-dependent.

PMID: 12761348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 May 27;100(11):6517-22. Epub 2003 May 16.

The basic helix-loop-helix-PAS protein ARNT functions as a potent coactivator of 
estrogen receptor-dependent transcription.

Brunnberg S(1), Pettersson K, Rydin E, Matthews J, Hanberg A, Pongratz I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, S-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.

The biological effects of estrogens are mediated by the estrogen receptors
ERalpha and ERbeta. These receptors regulate gene expression through binding to
DNA enhancer elements and subsequently recruiting factors such as coactivators
that modulate their transcriptional activity. Here we show that ARNT (aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator), the obligatory heterodimerization
partner for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and hypoxia inducible factor 1alpha,
functions as a potent coactivator of ERalpha- and ERbeta- dependent
transcription. The coactivating effect of ARNT depends on physical interaction
with the ERs and involves the C-terminal domain of ARNT and not the structurally 
conserved basic helix-loop-helix and PAS (Per-ARNT-Sim) motifs. Moreover, we show
that ARNT/ER interaction requires the E2-activated ligand binding domain of
ERalpha or ERbeta. These observations, together with the previous role of ARNT as
an obligatory partner protein for conditionally regulated basic
helix-loop-helix-PAS proteins like the aryl hydrocarbon receptor or hypoxia
inducible factor 1alpha, expand the cellular functions of ARNT to include
regulation of ERalpha and ERbeta transcriptional activity. ARNT was furthermore
recruited to a natural ER target gene promoter in a estrogen-dependent manner,
supporting a physiological role for ARNT as an ER coactivator.

PMCID: PMC164478
PMID: 12754377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Biochem Pharmacol. 2003 May 15;65(10):1663-74.

Quantitative analysis of the Ah receptor/cytochrome P450 CYP1B1/CYP1A1 signalling
pathway.

McFadyen MC(1), Rooney PH, Melvin WT, Murray GI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK.
m.mcfadyen@abdn.ac.uk

Cytochrome P450 (CYP) drug metabolising enzymes CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 are regulated
through the ligand-activated aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor. Differential
expression of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 mRNA and protein has previously been reported in 
human tissues with the presence of the message often extrapolated to indicate the
presence of protein. The aim of this study was to clarify these potentially
misleading findings, by analysing components of the Ah receptor pathway (CYP1B1, 
CYP1A1, Ah receptor and ARNT) using a combination of quantitative real-time
RT-PCR and immunoblotting. Three human cell lines (MOG-G-CCM, MCF7 and HEPG2)
known to differentially express CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 mRNA and protein were exposed
to the Ah receptor agonist 3-MC, and basal and inducible levels of CYP1A1,
CYP1B1, Ah receptor and ARNT were determined. The key finding of this study was
the demonstration of equivalent levels of CYP1B1 mRNA in both the treated and
untreated MOG-G-CCM cell lines, with expression of the corresponding CYP1B1
protein only after exposure to an Ah receptor agonist. This finding suggests that
a post-transcriptional mechanism is involved in the regulation of CYP1B1. In
addition, the expression pattern of CYP1B1 mRNA and protein in the MOG-G-CCM
cells highlights this cell line as a potential model for studying CYP1B1
expression in human tissue.

PMID: 12754102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Eur J Biochem. 2003 May;270(10):2228-35.

The cellular oxygen tension regulates expression of the endoplasmic
oxidoreductase ERO1-Lalpha.

Gess B(1), Hofbauer KH, Wenger RH, Lohaus C, Meyer HE, Kurtz A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologie der Universität Regensburg, Germany.

The formation of disulfide bonds in the endoplasmic reticulum requires protein
disulfide isomerase (PDI) and endoplasmic reticulum oxidoreductin 1 (ERO1) that
reoxidizes PDI. We report here that the expression of the rat, mouse and human
homologues of ERO1-Like protein alpha but not of the isoform ERO1-Lbeta are
stimulated by hypoxia in rats vivo and in rat, mouse and human cell cultures. The
temporal pattern of hypoxic ERO1-Lalpha induction is very similar to that of
genes triggered by the hypoxia inducible transcription factor (HIF-1) and is
characteristically mimicked by cobalt and by deferoxamine, but is absent in cells
with a defective aryl hydrocarbon receptor translocator (ARNT, HIF-1beta). We
speculate from these findings that the expression of ERO1-Lalpha is probably
regulated via the HIF-pathway and thus belongs to the family of classic oxygen
regulated genes. Activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) by
tunicamycin, on the other hand, strongly induced ERO1-Lbeta and more moderately
ERO1-Lalpha expression. The expression of the two ERO1-L isoforms therefore
appears to be differently regulated, in the way that ERO1-Lalpha expression is
mainly controlled by the cellular oxygen tension, whilst ERO1-Lbeta is triggered 
mainly by UPR. The physiological meaning of the oxygen regulation of ERO1-Lalpha 
expression likely is to maintain the transfer rate of oxidizing equivalents to
PDI in situations of an altered cellular redox state induced by changes of the
cellular oxygen tension.

PMID: 12752442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Chemosphere. 2003 Jul;52(4):655-62.

Functional activation of arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) in primary T cells by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Doi H(1), Baba T, Tohyama C, Nohara K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Environmental Studies, 305-8506, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,
Japan.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) exerts diverse adverse health effects 
by activating the transcription factor arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR). The
activated AhR induces the expression of various genes having xenobiotic
responsive elements (XREs) in their enhancer regions, such as the gene for
cytochrome P-450 1A1 (CYP1A1). The immune system is sensitively affected by TCDD,
while the precise mechanism of how TCDD acts in each immune cell type remains to 
be determined. The results of previous studies on AhR activation in B cell lines,
T cell clones, and thymocytes, which mainly consist of immature T cells,
suggested that AhR in mature T cells is inactive, whereas that in B cells and
immature T cells act functionally. In the present study, we investigated whether 
or not TCDD induces the CYP1A1 gene by functionally activating AhR in primary
mature T cells in mice. When the splenocytes that contain mature T and B
lymphocytes as their predominant cell types or the thymocytes were cultured in
the presence of TCDD, each of them showed a similar magnitude of CYP1A1 induction
with a peak induction at 4 h. Both mature T cells and B cells that had been
separated from total splenocytes also showed CYP1A1 induction at the same
magnitude with a peak induction at 4 h. Gene expression of CYP1A1 was observed at
0.1 nM or greater concentrations of TCDD in splenocytes and separated T cells.
The induction of CYP1A1 in T cells was confirmed in mice exposed to TCDD. These
results indicate that TCDD induces the functional activation of AhR in primary
mature T cells in mice.

PMID: 12738279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Carcinogenesis. 2003 Apr;24(4):673-80.

TCDD-mediated alterations in the AhR-dependent pathway in Seveso, Italy, 20 years
after the accident.

Landi MT(1), Bertazzi PA, Baccarelli A, Consonni D, Masten S, Lucier G, Mocarelli
P, Needham L, Caporaso N, Grassman J.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Epidemiology Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics,
National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-7236, USA. landim@mail.nih.gov

Approximately 20 years after the Seveso, Italy, accident we conducted a
population-based study to evaluate the impact of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) exposure on cancer using
mechanistically based biomarkers of dioxin response in humans. TCDD toxic effects
are mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). We studied the AhR-dependent
pathway in lymphocytes from 62 subjects randomly sampled from the highest exposed
zones and 59 subjects from the surrounding non-contaminated area, frequency
matched for age, gender and smoking. To our knowledge, this is the most
comprehensive investigation to date designed to evaluate the key genes in the
pathway, including AhR, aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator, CYP1A1
and CYP1B1 transcripts and CYP1A1-associated 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase
(EROD) activity in a population heavily exposed to dioxin. Current lipid-adjusted
plasma TCDD concentrations in these subjects ranged from 3.5 to 90 ng/kg (or
p.p.t.) and were negatively associated with AhR mRNA in unstimulated peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (P = 0.03). When mitogen-induced lymphocytes were
cultured with 10 nM TCDD, all AhR-dependent genes were induced 1.2- to 13-fold.
In these cells, plasma TCDD was associated with decreased EROD activity. In
addition, there was a strong positive correlation between AhR and CYP1A1
expression (P = 0.001) and between AhR and CYP1B1 expression (P = 0.006). CYP1A1 
expression was also strongly correlated with EROD activity (P = 0.001). The
analysis of the expression of dioxin-inducible genes involved in carcinogenesis
may help in determining dose-response relationships for human exposure to dioxin 
in vivo and in assessing the variability of human response, which may indicate
the presence of subjects more susceptible to disease as a result of such
exposures.

PMID: 12727795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Apr 18;303(4):1095-100.

Identification of novel splice variants of ARNT and ARNT2 in the rat.

Korkalainen M(1), Tuomisto J, Pohjanvirta R.

Author information: 
(1)National Public Health Institute, Laboratory of Toxicology, Department of
Environmental Health, P.O. Box 95, Neulaniementie 4, FIN-70701 Kuopio, Finland.
Merja.Korkalainen@ktl.fi

Most of the biochemical and toxic effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin 
(TCDD) are mediated by the bHLH/PAS protein AH receptor (AHR). For regulation of 
gene activities, AHR dimerizes with another member of the bHLH/PAS protein
family, AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT). A substrain of Wistar rats, Han/Wistar
(Kuopio) (H/W), is about 1000-fold more resistant to the acute lethality of TCDD 
than other strains, exemplified by Long-Evans (Turku/AB) (L-E); the LD50 values
for these two strains are >9600 and 10-20 microg/kg, respectively. Previous
studies have demonstrated that the major reason for the exceptional TCDD
resistance of H/W rats lies in their AHR, which is remodeled at its C-terminal
transactivation domain, but there appears to be another contributing gene
product. The present study set out to compare the primary structure of ARNT and
the closely related ARNT2 proteins in H/W and L-E rats by cDNA cloning. To our
surprise, we found several isoforms of these proteins only one of which has
previously been reported in rats. All of the isoforms appeared to arise from
alternative splicing. For ARNT, isoforms with deletions at exon 5, 3(') end of
exon 6 or 5(') end of exon 11, or with an insertion at 5(') end of exon 20 were
discovered. There was also interindividual variation in the number of
glutamine-encoding codons at 5(') end of exon 16. The most exciting new variant
was revealed for ARNT2, because the insertion found at 5(') end of exon 19
disrupts the functionally critical transactivation domain in the protein,
implying a dominant negative role for this isoform. The relative expression
levels of the variants did not differ in the two rat strains, nor did TCDD modify
the ratios, suggesting that the variants do not contribute to TCDD resistance.
However, the regulation of ARNT and ARNT2 activities may be more intricate than
previously assumed.

PMID: 12684048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Curr Med Chem. 2003 May;10(10):845-55.

The role of nitric oxide (NO) in stability regulation of hypoxia inducible
factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha).

Brüne B(1), Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Biology, University of Kaiserslautern, 
Kaiserslautern, Germany. BRUENE@rhrk.uni-kl.de

Hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a master regulator under conditions of
decreased oxygen availability. As a hypoxia inducible transcription factor HIF-1 
is a heterodimer composed of the helix-loop-helix-Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS)
proteins HIF-1alpha and the aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT) also
known as HIF-1beta. The HIF-1 transcriptional system senses decreased oxygen
availability and transmits this signal into patho-physiological responses such as
angiogenesis, erythropoiesis, vasomotor control, an altered energy metabolism, as
well as cell survival decisions. Among recent advances are the discoveries that
reactive nitrogen species (RNS), oxygen species (ROS), cytokines, and growth
factors participate in stability regulation of HIF-1alpha and HIF-1
transactivation during normoxia. Here we summarize current knowledge and existing
concepts that help to understand how NO affects protein accumulation of
HIF-1alpha. Considering the fundamental role of radicals, especially NO, as
signaling molecules makes HIF-1alpha an attractive target under conditions of NO 
formation that may be attributed to both, physiology and pathology. Although
initial observations showed that NO inhibits hypoxia-induced HIF-1alpha
stabilization and HIF-1 transcriptional activation, later studies indicated that 
exposure of various cells to chemically diverse NO donors or conditions of
endogenous NO formation under normoxic conditions induced HIF-1alpha
accumulation, HIF-1-DNA binding, and activation of downstream target gene
expression. These contrasting situations evoked by NO provide insights into basic
chemical reactions, biochemical signal transduction pathways with broad
implications for medicine.

PMID: 12678687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Urology. 2003 Apr;61(4):851-7.

Correlation study showing no concordance between EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha mRNA and
protein expression in transitional cellcancer of the bladder.

Ji P(1), Xuan JW, Onita T, Sakai H, Kanetake H, Gabril MY, Sun Y, Moussa M, Chin 
JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: Endothelial Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domain protein-1
(EPAS-1)/hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-2alpha is a recently identified,
endothelial-specific, hypoxia-induced transcription factor and is reputed to have
an important role in tumor angiogenesis and tumor progression. Only a few studies
have reported on the clinical correlation with grade, stage, necrosis, and
microvessel density in transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. In vitro
studies have reported no concordance of EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha mRNA and protein
expression. We sought to elucidate these two issues.
METHODS: Surgical specimens from 110 patients with transitional cell carcinoma
comprised the study, including 51 from radical cystectomy and 59 from
transurethral resection of bladder tumor. Immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization were performed with antibodies against EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha, CD31, and
a human EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha cDNA subclone probe.
RESULTS: EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha protein expression was found almost exclusively in
high-grade and high-stage tumors (P <0.0001). EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha mRNA expression
was detectable only in high-grade (grade 3) and high-stage (pT3a or greater)
cases with positive EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha protein expression (P = 0.0017). The
presence of necrosis correlated with EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha expression, tumor grade,
and tumor stage (P <0.0001). Microvessel density was much lower in invasive,
larger tumor nodules in EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha-positive cases than in the negative
cases (P <0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha protein and mRNA levels correlate with higher
grade and advanced bladder transitional cell carcinoma. In lower stage cases, no 
concordance was found between transcription and translation of EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha 
gene expression. Because EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha mRNA is only detectable in highly
invasive cancer cases, it may serve as a therapeutic target (eg, by an antisense 
mRNA approach) for bladder cancer.

PMID: 12670588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2002;2(4):263-74.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor null mice develop cardiac hypertrophy and increased
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha in the absence of cardiac hypoxia.

Thackaberry EA(1), Gabaldon DM, Walker MK, Smith SM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Center, Department of Nutritional
Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53706, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a member of the basic helix loop helix PAS
(Per-ARNT-SIM) transcription family, which also includes hypoxiainducible
factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and its common dimerization partner AhR nuclear
translocator (ARNT). Following ligand activation or hypoxia, AhR or HIF-1alpha,
respectively, translocate into the nucleus, dimerize with ARNT, and regulate gene
expression. Mice lacking the AhR have been shown previously to develop cardiac
enlargement. In cardiac hypertrophy, it has been suggested that the myocardium
becomes hypoxic, increasing HIF-1alpha stabilization and inducing coronary
neovascularization, however, this mechanism has not been demonstrated in vivo.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the cardiac enlargement reported in 
AhR(-/-) mice and to determine if it was associated with myocardial hypoxia and
subsequent activation of the HIF-1alpha pathway. We found that AhR(-/-) mice
develop significant cardiac hypertrophy at 5 mo. However, this cardiac
hypertrophy was not associated with myocardial hypoxia. Despite this finding,
cardiac hypertrophy in AhR(-/-) mice was associated with increased cardiac
HIF-1alpha protein expression and increased mRNA expression of the
neovascularization factor vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). These data
demonstrate that the development of cardiac hypertrophy in AhR(-/-) mice not
associated with myocardial hypoxia, but is correlated with increased cardiac
HIF-1alpha protein and VEGF mRNA expression.

PMID: 12665660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2003 Apr 1;412(1):95-105.

Mutational analysis of the mouse aryl hydrocarbon receptor tyrosine residues
necessary for recognition of dioxin response elements.

Minsavage GD(1), Vorojeikina DP, Gasiewicz TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Tyrosine phosphorylation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a member of the 
basic helix-loop-helix/PER-ARNT-SIM transcription factor family, has been shown
to regulate its dioxin response elements (DRE) binding ability, although no
specific residues have been directly demonstrated to be phosphorylated. Of the 23
tyrosines in the mouse AhR, 19 are conserved across all mammalian species
sequenced thus far. The studies presented here were conducted to examine tyrosine
residue(s) that are both likely candidates of phosphorylation and necessary for
DNA binding and/or transcriptional activity of the AhR. Two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis of phosphatase-treated AhR indicated that the receptor is
phosphorylated on serine/threonine and tyrosine residues. Computational analysis 
predicted several highly conserved tyrosine residues to be phosphorylated. Both
the N terminus (amino acids 1-399) and the C terminus (amino acids 399-805) of
the mouse receptor synthesized in vitro using a rabbit reticulocyte lysate system
are tyrosine phosphorylated as detected by antiphosphotyrosine antibodies.
Furthermore, the N-terminal AhR bound DRE in a ligand-dependent manner similar to
that by the full-length receptor, suggesting that phosphorylated tyrosines
involved in DNA binding are likely located in the region between residues 1 and
399. Mouse AhR tyrosine (Y) residues were evaluated by phenylalanine (F)
mutational analysis for both DNA binding (electrophoretic mobility shift assays; 
EMSAs) and ability to induce a DRE-driven reporter gene in transiently
transfected AhR-deficient cells. Of the 12 tyrosine residues in the N-terminal
AhR, only a tyrosine 9 mutant (AhRY9F) significantly decreased DRE binding as
determined by EMSA. Similarly, only the AhRY9F mutant decreased the DRE-driven
luciferase expression in AhR-deficient cells. Overall, these data strongly
suggest that the putative posttranslational modification at, or mediated by,
tyrosine 9, and not any other individual mouse AhR tyrosine residue, is necessary
for AhR DRE binding and transcriptional activity.

PMID: 12646272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Apr;63(4):915-24.

Species-specific transcriptional activity of synthetic flavonoids in guinea pig
and mouse cells as a result of differential activation of the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor to interact with dioxin-responsive elements.

Zhou JG(1), Henry EC, Palermo CM, Dertinger SD, Gasiewicz TA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Toxicology and Environmental Medicine Program, School of Medicine
and Dentistry, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

To investigate possible species-specificity of aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR)-mediated signal transduction pathways, activities of
2,3,7,8-tetrochlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and six synthetic flavonoids were
evaluated in mouse hepatoma and guinea pig adenocarcinoma cells transfected with 
an AhR-responsive luciferase reporter. Rank order potency in these two cell lines
was similar for the ability of these flavonoids to antagonize TCDD-induced
reporter gene expression. However, in the presence of flavone alone, a
species-specific difference in agonist activity was observed. In guinea pig
cells, several flavonoids demonstrated agonist activity up to 50% of the maximum 
TCDD response. In mouse cells, however, no significant agonist activity was
observed at the same concentrations based on luciferase enzyme activity, protein 
expression, and mRNA analysis. Moreover, competitive ligand-binding assays, using
[(3)H]TCDD in cytosolic fractions, demonstrated that 3'-methoxy-4'-nitroflavone
had a similar IC(50) in both recombinant cell lines, suggesting that the flavone 
has similar binding affinity to receptors from both species. However,
electrophoretic mobility shift assay using the cytosolic fractions demonstrated
that this flavone elicited binding to the DRE by guinea pig but not mouse AhR
complex. The dependence of the AhR in this differential interaction was further
demonstrated using in vitro synthesized guinea pig and mouse Ah receptors and
mouse Arnt. Together, these data suggest that the differential agonist/antagonist
activity of these flavone derivatives is caused by the efficacy of these
flavonoids in eliciting an AhR conformation that recognizes regulatory response
elements in a species-specific manner.

PMID: 12644593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Histochem Cytochem. 2003 Apr;51(4):455-69.

Aint/Tacc3 is highly expressed in proliferating mouse tissues during development,
spermatogenesis, and oogenesis.

Aitola M(1), Sadek CM, Gustafsson JA, Pelto-Huikko M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Tampere University Medical School,
Tampere, Finland.

Aint was originally identified on the basis of its interaction in vitro with the 
aryl hydrocarbon nuclear receptor translocator (Arnt). Arnt is a common
heterodimerization partner in the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PER-ARNT-SIM
(PAS) protein family and is involved in diverse biological functions. These
include xenobiotic metabolism, hypoxic response, and circadian rhythm. In
addition, Arnt has a crucial role during development. Aint is a member of a
growing family of transforming acidic coiled-coil (TACC) proteins and is the
murine homologue of human TACC3. Here we report the spatiotemporal expression of 
Tacc3 mRNA and protein in embryonic, postnatally developing, and adult mouse
tissues using in situ hybridization and immunocytochemistry. Tacc3 mRNA was
highly expressed in proliferating cells of several organs during murine
development. However, the only adult tissues expressing high levels were testis
and ovary. Immunocytochemistry revealed that Tacc3 is a nuclear protein. Our
results suggest that Tacc3 has an important role in murine development,
spermatogenesis, and oogenesis.

PMID: 12642624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 16;278(20):18434-9. Epub 2003 Mar 14.

PAS domains. Common structure and common flexibility.

Vreede J(1), van der Horst MA, Hellingwerf KJ, Crielaard W, van Aalten DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University
of Amsterdam, 1018WV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

PAS (PER-ARNT-SIM) domains are a family of sensor protein domains involved in
signal transduction in a wide range of organisms. Recent structural studies have 
revealed that these domains contain a structurally conserved alpha/beta-fold,
whereas almost no conservation is observed at the amino acid sequence level. The 
photoactive yellow protein, a bacterial light sensor, has been proposed as the
PAS structural prototype yet contains an N-terminal helix-turn-helix motif not
found in other PAS domains. Here we describe the atomic resolution structure of a
photoactive yellow protein deletion mutant lacking this motif, revealing that the
PAS domain is indeed able to fold independently and is not affected by the
removal of these residues. Computer simulations of currently known PAS domain
structures reveal that these domains are not only structurally conserved but are 
also similar in their conformational flexibilities. The observed motions point to
a possible common mechanism for communicating ligand binding/activation to
downstream transducer proteins.

PMID: 12639952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 23;278(21):19526-33. Epub 2003 Mar 12.

The role of the Ah receptor and p38 in benzo[a]pyrene-7,8-dihydrodiol and
benzo[a]pyrene-7,8-dihydrodiol-9,10-epoxide-induced apoptosis.

Chen S(1), Nguyen N, Tamura K, Karin M, Tukey RH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Toxicology, Department of Pharmacology, University
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0636, USA.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are ubiquitous contaminants in the
environment. Benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P), a prototypical member of this class of
chemicals, affects cellular signal transduction pathways and induces apoptosis.
In this study, the proximate carcinogen of B[a]P metabolism,
trans-7,8-dihydroxy-7,8-dihydrobenzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P-7,8-dihydrodiol) and the
ultimate carcinogen, B[a]P-r-7,t-8-dihydrodiol-t-9,10-epoxide(+/-) (BPDE-2) were 
found to induce apoptosis in human HepG2 cells. Apoptosis initiated by
B[a]P-7,8-dihydrodiol was linked to activation of the Ah receptor and induction
of CYP1A1, an event that can lead to the formation of BPDE-2. With both
B[a]P-7,8-dihydrodiol and BPDE-2 treatment, changes in anti- and pro-apoptotic
events in the Bcl-2 family of proteins correlated with the release of
mitochondrial cytochrome c and caspase activation. The onset of apoptosis as
monitored by caspase activation was linked to mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinases. Utilizing mouse hepa1c1c7 cells and the Arnt-deficient BPRc1 cells,
activation of MAP kinase p38 by B[a]P-7,8-dihydrodiol was shown to be Ah
receptor-dependent, indicating that metabolic activation by CYP1A1 was required. 
This was in contrast to p38 activation by BPDE-2, an event that was independent
of Ah receptor function. Confirmation that MAP kinases play a critical role in
BPDE-2-induced apoptosis was shown by inhibiting caspase activation of
poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase 1 (PARP-1) by chemical inhibitors of p38 and ERK1/2.
Furthermore, mouse embryo p38-/- fibroblasts were shown to be resistant to the
actions of BPDE-2-induced apoptosis as determined by annexin V analysis,
cytochrome c release, and cleavage of PARP-1. These results confirm that the Ah
receptor plays a critical role in B[a]P-7,8-dihydrodiol-induced apoptosis while
p38 MAP kinase links the actions of an electrophilic metabolite like BPDE-2 to
the regulation of programmed cell death.

PMID: 12637498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Mar 21;1646(1-2):67-76.

Actin binding of a minispectrin.

Raae AJ(1), Bañuelos S, Ylänne J, Olausson T, Goldie KN, Wendt T, Hoenger A,
Saraste M.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Meyerhofstrasse 1, Postfach 102209,
D-69012 Heidelberg, Germany. arnt.raae@mbi.uib.no

A "minispectrin" has been constructed from the tail end of the alpha/beta
heterodimer, and its actin-binding properties have been characterised. It is a
complex of the N-terminal fragment of the beta-subunit consisting of the
actin-binding domain plus the two first triple-helical repeats beta 1 and beta 2,
and the C-terminal fragment of the alpha-subunit containing the repeats alpha 19 
and alpha 20 plus the calmodulin-like domain. This minispectrin exists in a
dimeric form that contains one copy of each polypeptide and binds to actin in a
cooperative manner with an apparent K(d) of 2.5 microM. Calcium seems not to have
any effect on its binding to actin. Electron microscopic analysis shows that the 
minispectrin decorates actin filaments as clusters, and induces formation of
actin bundles. This study shows that the actin-binding region of the spectrin
alpha/beta heterodimer retains its functional properties in a truncated form and 
establishes basis for further research on spectrin's structure and function.

PMID: 12637013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Biochem Pharmacol. 2003 Mar 15;65(6):941-8.

P23 enhances the formation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-DNA complex.

Shetty PV(1), Bhagwat BY, Chan WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, Thomas J. Long School of 
Pharmacy and Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, CA 95211, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor
that requires heterodimerization with its partner, the Ah receptor nuclear
translocator (Arnt), for activation of transcription. The heterodimer
specifically recognizes the dioxin response element (DRE), which contains a core 
sequence (5'-TNGCGTG-3'). This AhR/Arnt/DRE complex has been well characterized
and can be observed readily by the gel shift assay. Human AhR and Arnt with a
C-terminal histidine tag have been expressed functionally using a baculovirus
expression system. However, after purification of these proteins using the metal 
resin, they are not able to bind the response element in a ligand-dependent
manner unless crude extracts, such as the rabbit reticulocyte lysate (RRL), are
reconstituted with these proteins. Proteins in the RRL are responsible for this
restoration of the gel shift complex because the activity is sensitive to both
heat and proteolytic treatments. We have examined whether hsp90 and p23 are among
the protein factors in the RRL that are responsible for this activity. By
performing fractionation studies using filtration devices and immunodepletion
studies, we have selectively fractionated these proteins. Among all the
fractions, the centricon-10 retentate, which contains 100% of p23 but no hsp90,
possessed the most enriched activity. Purified bacterial-expressed p23 restored
the gel shift complex; the mechanism was mediated at the heterodimerization step 
and was hsp90-dependent.

PMID: 12623125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Mar;63(3):597-606.

Functional analysis of murine aryl hydrocarbon (AH) receptors defective in
nuclear import: impact on AH receptor degradation and gene regulation.

Song Z(1), Pollenz RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that is also a substrate for the 26S proteasome. However, the subcellular
location of the degradation events or the requirement for nuclear transport has
not been resolved. To gain insight into both ligand-dependent and independent
degradation of the AHR, studies were designed to evaluate the relationship
between AHR localization, stability, and gene regulation in a defined cell
culture model system. The strategy of these studies was to generate stable cell
lines expressing murine AHR proteins that were defective in nuclear import and
then to assess the location of the AHR, the time course of AHR degradation, and
the level of induction of endogenous CYP1A1 protein after exposure to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibezo-p-dioxin (TCDD), geldanamycin (GA), or the protease
inhibitor carbobenzoxy-L-leucyl-L-leucyl-leucinal (MG-132). Mutation within the
putative nuclear localization sequence (NLS) resulted in AHR mutants that were
severely defective in nuclear import as evaluated by immunocytochemical staining 
after exposure to TCDD, GA, or MG-132. Importantly, the NLS mutants exhibited
identical levels of degradation along a similar time course as wild-type AHR
after exposure to TCDD or GA when stably expressed in either murine hepatoma
cells (Hepa-1) or hamster lung cells (E36). In contrast, the NLS mutants were
severely defective in ligand-mediated induction of CYP1A1 expression. These
findings imply that the proteolytic machinery present in the cytoplasmic
compartment is sufficient to degrade the AHR and that nuclear translocation,
binding with ARNT, or DNA binding are not necessary for efficient degradation of 
the AHR.

PMID: 12606767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Toxicol Sci. 2003 Mar;72(1):84-91.

TCDD treatment eliminates the long-term reconstitution activity of hematopoietic 
stem cells.

Sakai R(1), Kajiume T, Inoue H, Kanno R, Miyazaki M, Ninomiya Y, Kanno M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Biomedical Science, Hiroshima
University, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), an endocrine disrupting chemical
(EDC), can cause carcinogenesis, immunosuppression, and teratogenesis, through a 
ligand-activated transcription factor, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR).
Despite remarkable recent advances in stem cell biology, the influence of TCDD on
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), which possess the ability to reconstitute
long-term multilineage hematopoiesis, has not been well investigated. In this
study we examined the influence of TCDD on HSCs enriched for CD34(-), c-kit(+),
Sca-1(+), lineage negative (CD34-KSL) cells. The number of the CD34-KSL cells was
found to be increased about four-fold upon a single oral administration of TCDD
(40 micro g/kg body weight). Surprisingly, we found that these TCDD-treated cells
almost lost long-term reconstitution activity. This defect was not present in
AhR(-/-) mice. These findings suggest that modulation of AhR/ARNT system activity
may have an effect on HSC function or survival.

PMID: 12604837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Endocrinology. 2003 Mar;144(3):767-76.

Expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator messenger ribonucleic acids and proteins in rat and human testis.

Schultz R(1), Suominen J, Värre T, Hakovirta H, Parvinen M, Toppari J,
Pelto-Huikko M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Tampere University, FIN-33014 Tampere,
Finland.

Dioxins, e.g. 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), use the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)/aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) 
receptor complex to mediate their toxic actions. In addition to interaction with 
environmental pollutants, several transcription factors, steroid receptors, and
growth factors are capable interacting with the AHR/ARNT complex, which suggests 
a constitutive role for the receptor complex. The testis has been reported to be 
among the most sensitive organs to TCDD exposure. Our experiments revealed a
complex distribution of AHR and ARNT mRNAs and proteins in rat and human testis. 
AHR and ARNT immunoreactivities could be detected in the nuclei of interstitial
and tubular cells. The incubation of seminiferous tubules in a serum-free culture
medium resulted in up-regulation of AHR mRNA, which could be depressed by adding 
FSH to the culture medium. Furthermore, the incubation of tubular segments with a
solution of 1 or 100 nM TCDD resulted in a 2- to 3-fold increase in apoptotic
cells. Thus, up-regulation of AHR in cultured tubular segments and consecutive
depression by FSH suggest a role for AHR in controlled cell death during
spermatogenesis. We suggest that AHR and ARNT mediate effects by direct action on
testicular cells in the rat and human testis.

PMID: 12586752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2003;510:337-41.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha accumulation in the rat brain in response to
hypoxia and ischemia is attenuated during aging.

Chavez JC(1), LaManna JC.

Author information: 
(1)Case Western Reserve University, Department of Anatomy, Cleveland, OH
44106-4938, USA.

PMID: 12580450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Feb 17;1619(3):263-8.

Functional role of AhR in the expression of toxic effects by TCDD.

Mimura J(1), Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Science, Graduate School of Life Science, Tohoku
University, Aoba-ku, 980-8578, Sendai, Japan.

Cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1) is one of the xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes
(XMEs), which is induced by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). The most
potent inducer of CYP1A1 is 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). In
addition, TCDD induces a broad spectrum of biochemical and toxic effects, such as
teratogenesis, immunosuppression and tumor promotion. Most, if not all, of the
effects caused by TCDD and other PAHs are known to be mediated by AhR (aryl
hydrocarbon receptor or dioxin receptor) which has a high binding affinity to
TCDD. The liganded AhR translocates from cytoplasm to nuclei where it switches
its partner molecule from Hsp90 to Arnt. Thus formed AhR/Arnt heterodimer binds a
specific DNA sequence designated XRE in the promoter region of the target genes
including CYP1A1, UDP-glucuronosyl transferase and others to enhance their
expression. Although it remains to be studied how AhR is involved in the other
TCDD-induced biological effects such as teratogenesis and immunosuppression than 
induction of XMEs, it is believed that these adverse TCDD effects are caused by
untimely activation of gene expression by ligand-activated AhR in the biological 
process. We summarize the present knowledge about functional role of AhR in
TCDD-induced biological effects.

PMID: 12573486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 25;278(17):15001-6. Epub 2003 Feb 3.

Involvement of the xenobiotic response element (XRE) in Ah receptor-mediated
induction of human UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1.

Yueh MF(1), Huang YH, Hiller A, Chen S, Nguyen N, Tukey RH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology, Chemistry & Biochemistry, Laboratory of
Environmental Toxicology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California 92093-0636, USA.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) plays an important physiological role by
contributing to the metabolism of endogenous substances such as bilirubin in
addition to xenobiotics and drugs. The UGT1A1 gene has been shown to be inducible
by nuclear receptors steroid xenobiotic receptor (SXR) and the constitutive
active receptor, CAR. In this report, we show that in human hepatoma HepG2 cells 
the UGT1A1 gene is also inducible with aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Ah receptor)
ligands such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), beta-naphthoflavone,
and benzo[a]pyrene metabolites. Induction was monitored by increases in protein
and catalytic activity as well as UGT1A1 mRNA. To examine the molecular
interactions that control UGT1A1 expression, the gene was characterized and
induction by Ah receptor ligands was regionalized to bases -3338 to -3287.
Nucleotide sequence analysis of this UGT1A1 enhancer region revealed a xenobiotic
response element (XRE) at -3381/-3299. The dependence of the XRE on
UGT1A1-luciferase activity was demonstrated by a loss of Ah receptor ligand
inducibility when the XRE core region (CACGCA) was deleted or mutated. Gel
mobility shift analysis confirmed that TCDD induction of nuclear proteins
specifically bound to the UGT1A1-XRE, and competition experiments with Ah
receptor and Arnt antibodies demonstrated that the nuclear protein was the Ah
receptor. These observations reveal that the Ah receptor is involved in human
UGT1A1 induction.

PMID: 12566446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Feb 18;100(4):1649-54. Epub 2003 Jan 31.

Crystal structure of a photoactive yellow protein from a sensor histidine kinase:
conformational variability and signal transduction.

Rajagopal S(1), Moffat K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Chicago, 920
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Photoactive yellow protein (E-PYP) is a blue light photoreceptor, implicated in a
negative phototactic response in Ectothiorhodospira halophila, that also serves
as a model for the Per-Arnt-Sim superfamily of signaling molecules. Because no
biological signaling partner for E-PYP has been identified, it has not been
possible to correlate any of its photocycle intermediates with a relevant
signaling state. However, the PYP domain (Ppr-PYP) from the sensor histidine
kinase Ppr in Rhodospirillum centenum, which regulates the catalytic activity of 
Ppr by blue light absorption, may allow such issues to be addressed. Here we
report the crystal structure of Ppr-PYP at 2 A resolution. This domain has the
same absorption spectrum and similar photocycle kinetics as full length Ppr, but 
a blue-shifted absorbance and considerably slower photocycle than E-PYP. Although
the overall fold of Ppr-PYP resembles that of E-PYP, a novel conformation of the 
beta 4-beta 5 loop results in inaccessibility of Met-100, thought to catalyze
chromophore reisomerization, to the chromophore. This conformation also exposes a
highly conserved molecular surface that could interact with downstream signaling 
partners. Other structural differences in the alpha 3-alpha 4 and beta 4-beta 5
loops are consistent with these regions playing significant roles in the control 
of photocycle dynamics and, by comparison to other sensory Per-Arnt-Sim domains, 
in signal transduction. Because of its direct linkage to a measurable biological 
output, Ppr-PYP serves as an excellent system for understanding how changes in
photocycle dynamics affect signaling by PYPs.

PMCID: PMC149887
PMID: 12563032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jan 24;300(4):943-9.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligands repress T-cadherin expression in vascular
smooth muscle cells.

Niermann T(1), Schmutz S, Erne P, Resink T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Cardiovascular Laboratories, ZLF 320, Basel University
Hospital, Hebelstrasse 20, CH 4031 Basel, Switzerland.

T-cadherin, a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-modified cadherin subtype, is highly
expressed in cardiac and vascular tissues. Neither the functions nor regulation
of T-cadherin in these tissues is understood. We have cloned rat T-cadherin cDNA 
encoding the full length amino acid sequence. The 5(') untranslated nucleotide
sequences of rat, mouse, and human T-cadherin contain a conserved GCGTG motif
which constitutes the invariant core sequence of dioxin- or xenobiotic-regulatory
elements. These elements function as target sites for aryl hydrocarbon
receptor/aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (AhR/ARNT) in genes regulated by
this transcription factor. Using cultures of rat aortic smooth muscle cells this 
study presents data revealing T-cadherin as a putative target gene for negative
regulation of expression through AHR signalling. Prototypic AHR agonists
benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) or 7,12-dimethylbenzanthracene (DMBA) and
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) repressed T-cadherin mRNA levels.
Repression was antagonized by the cognate AHR antagonist alpha-naphthoflavone
(alpha-NF). Repression was insensitive to inhibitors of gene transcription
(actinomycin D) or de novo protein synthesis (cycloheximide), suggesting AHR/ARNT
functions directly in transcriptional repression of T-cad. Regulation of adhesion
proteins through the AHR pathway may represent a novel mechanism of action by
atherogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.

PMID: 12559965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Gene. 2003 Jan 16;303:197-206.

Characterization of two distinct aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR2) genes in
Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) and evidence for multiple AhR2 gene lineages in
salmonid fish.

Hansson MC(1), Wittzell H, Persson K, von Schantz T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Ecology, Lund University, Ecology Building, Sölvegatan
37, Sweden. maria.hansson@zooekol.lu.se

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) mediates the toxicity of several
environmental contaminants, e.g. 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, and other
halogenated hydrocarbons in vertebrates. This receptor initiates the
transcription of several biotransformation enzymes, which in turn are responsible
for causing severe harm to biological tissue. Here we describe the isolation and 
complete characterization of the first two AhR genes from the teleost fish
Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). The predicted amino acid sequences contain regions
characteristic of other vertebrate AhRs including basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
and PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) domains but show little similarity to other vertebrate
AhRs across the C-terminal half. Furthermore, they do not contain distinct Q-rich
domains as found in the mammalian AhR, which is in line with previously described
fish AhR genes. The salmon cDNAs encode 1106 and 1107 putative residues,
respectively, approximately 50 amino acids longer than previously characterized
AhR genes. Phylogenetic analyses demonstrated that the two salmon AhR sequences
cluster within the AhR subfamily of the bHLH-PAS family, in a clade containing
fish AhR2 genes. Although the two AhR2 forms are 92% identical at the amino acid 
level, the distribution of sequence differences and the presence of both forms in
30 tested individuals suggest that they are not allelic but derived from separate
loci. Interestingly, they are not orthologs of the rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss) AhR2 alpha and beta genes and the new salmon loci are therefore here
designated AhR2 gamma and AhR2 delta. In line with this, PCR with DNA from
rainbow trout revealed a new trout AhR locus that was more similar to the two
salmon genes than to the trout AhR2 alpha and beta genes, suggesting that the
rainbow trout possesses at least three distinct AhR2 genes. The presence of
multiple AhR genes in these species is probably a consequence of the genome
duplications that occurred in the early evolution of fish and later also
specifically in the salmonid lineage. Reverse transcription-PCR analyses revealed
that both AhR2 gamma and AhR2 delta are transcribed in the liver, spleen and
muscles of adult salmon.

PMID: 12559581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Feb;63(2):392-400.

Agonist but not antagonist ligands induce conformational change in the mouse aryl
hydrocarbon receptor as detected by partial proteolysis.

Henry EC(1), Gasiewicz TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.
ellen_henry@urmc.rochester.edu

The cytosolic transcription factor known as the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
undergoes transformation to a DNA-binding form by a series of processes initiated
by binding of ligand. Subsequent steps include dissociation of several proteins
that are complexed with the inactive receptor, nuclear translocation, and
dimerization with Arnt. We have used limited proteolysis of the in
vitro-translated mouse AhR to determine whether this technique can detect
conformational change(s) associated with AhR transformation and whether the
effect of agonist and antagonist ligands can be distinguished by this assay.
Limited digestion of [(35)S]AhR/AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt) by trypsin
produced a peptide of approximately 40 kDa that was more resistant to proteolysis
in the presence of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) than vehicle and
was also Arnt-dependent. This trypsin-resistant peptide was also elicited in the 
presence of other agonist ligands, but not with antagonist ligands that do not
form the DNA-binding AhR/Arnt complex. Immunoblot of trypsin-treated AhR/Arnt +/-
TCDD indicated that the trypsin-resistant peptide did not include the N-terminal 
portion of the AhR against which the antibody was made. Truncated AhRs were also 
subjected to limited trypsinization. From AhR(1-399), a TCDD-dependent peptide of
approximately 35 kDa was observed; from the constitutively active AhR(1-348), a
band of approximately 30 kDa was produced from vehicle- and TCDD-treated protein.
From these observations, we hypothesize that the trypsin-resistant peptide from
full-length AhR spans approximately from amino acid 80 to 440. We conclude that
agonist ligands initiate structural alteration in AhR that is Arnt-dependent and 
at least partially involves the ligand-binding/Per-Arnt-Sim domain.

PMID: 12527811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Neurotoxicology. 2002 Dec;23(6):783-93.

Constitutive and TCDD-induced expression of Ah receptor-responsive genes in the
pituitary.

Huang P(1), Ceccatelli S, Håkansson H, Grandison L, Rannug A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Toxicology and Neurotoxicology, Division of Occupational
Toxicology, Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, S-171 77 
Stockholm, Sweden.

The 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related substances cause a
wide variety of pathological alterations, with the most severe being progressive 
anorexia and body weight loss. These features suggest a possible involvement of
the nervous system and endocrine organs, including the pituitary gland.
TCDD-related toxicity is considered mainly to be mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR) protein, which binds TCDD, and heterodimerizes with its partner
protein, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), and binds to 
xenobiotica responsive elements (XREs) in the promoter regions of
biotransformation genes as well as genes involved in growth, differentiation and 
cellular homeostasis. In the present study, we have investigated the expression
of AHR responsive genes in the pituitary of untreated and TCDD treated
129/SV/C57BL/6 mice in vivo and in pituitary cells in vitro. After TCDD or
beta-naphthoflavone (beta NF) treatment, the relative levels of cytochrome
P4501A1 (CYP1A1) mRNA and protein were dramatically increased in pituitary cells.
The AHR repressor (AHRR) mRNA level was induced 7-13-fold by TCDD and beta NF.
Furthermore, the expression of the adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) precursor,
the proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene, was investigated. A three-fold increase in
POMC mRNA was observed in the pituitary of TCDD treated mice. POMC mRNA level was
also increased in the pituitary cell line AtT-20 after TCDD treatment. The
proteins encoded by POMC translational products, ACTH and beta-endorphin, were
found with immunocytochemistry staining to be increased in AtT-20 cells after
TCDD exposure. The presence of several XRE sequences in the promoter region and
in the first intron of the human POMC gene suggest that the up-regulation of POMC
expression in the pituitary may play a role in the endocrine alterations induced 
by TCDD. All together, the results point to the pituitary gland being a direct
target for TCDD.

PMID: 12520768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Toxicol Sci. 2003 Jan;71(1):20-6.

Correlation between gene expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR),
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt), cytochromes P4501A1 (CYP1A1)
and 1B1 (CYP1B1), and inducibility of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 in human lymphocytes.

Lin P(1), Hu SW, Chang TH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
ppl@csmu.edu.tw

The relationships between gene expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR),
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt), cytochromes P4501A1
(CYP1A1), 1B1 (CYP1B1), CYP1A1, and the inducibility of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 were
determined in 32 cultivated human lymphocytes. Cytochrome P450 induction was
performed by incubating lymphocytes with benzanthracene. The relative gene
expression levels were determined by quantitative real-time RT-PCR assay. We
found that gender is an important confounding factor for gene expression in
cultivated lymphocytes. AhR, CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 levels in noninduced lymphocytes
were significantly higher in female nonsmokers than in male nonsmokers (p <
0.05). Nevertheless, CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 inducibility was lower in female
nonsmokers. CYP1A1 inducibility was higher in male smokers than in male
nonsmokers (p < 0.05). After controlling for gender and cigarette smoking, AhR
levels positively correlated with CYP1B1 levels and CYP1A1 inducibility (p < 0.01
and p = 0.03, respectively). Arnt levels also correlated with CYP1B1 levels in
induced lymphocytes (p < 0.01). However, AhR levels were negatively correlated
with CYP1B1 inducibility. These data indicate that AhR expression associates with
individual variation of CYP1A1 inducibility and CYP1B1 expression in cultivated
lymphocytes. Furthermore, gender and cigarette smoking are important confounding 
factors for gene expression levels in cultivated lymphocytes.

PMID: 12520072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Biochemistry. 2003 Jan 14;42(1):2-10.

The LOV domain family: photoresponsive signaling modules coupled to diverse
output domains.

Crosson S(1), Rajagopal S, Moffat K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Chicago, 920
East 58th Street, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

For single-cell and multicellular systems to survive, they must accurately sense 
and respond to their cellular and extracellular environment. Light is a nearly
ubiquitous environmental factor, and many species have evolved the capability to 
respond to this extracellular stimulus. Numerous photoreceptors underlie the
activation of light-sensitive signal transduction cascades controlling these
responses. Here, we review the properties of the light, oxygen, or voltage (LOV) 
family of blue-light photoreceptor domains, a subset of the Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS)
superfamily. These flavin-binding domains, first identified in the higher-plant
phototropins, are now shown to be present in plants, fungi, and bacteria.
Notably, LOV domains are coupled to a wide array of other domains, including
kinases, phosphodiesterases, F-box domains, STAS domains, and zinc fingers, which
suggests that the absorption of blue light by LOV domains regulates the activity 
of these structurally and functionally diverse domains. LOV domains contain a
conserved molecular volume extending from the flavin cofactor, which is the locus
for light-driven structural change, to the molecular surface. We discuss the role
of this conserved volume of structure in LOV-regulated processes.

PMID: 12515534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. FASEB J. 2003 Mar;17(3):503-5. Epub 2003 Jan 2.

Regulation of the multidrug resistance transporter P-glycoprotein in
multicellular tumor spheroids by hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1) and reactive
oxygen species.

Wartenberg M(1), Ling FC, Müschen M, Klein F, Acker H, Gassmann M, Petrat K, Pütz
V, Hescheler J, Sauer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurophysiology, University of Cologne, D-50931 Cologne,
Germany.

Hypoxia in tumors is generally associated with chemoresistance and
radioresistance. However, the correlation between the heterodimeric
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) and the multidrug resistance transporter
P-glycoprotein (P-gp) has not been investigated. Herein, we demonstrate that with
increasing size of DU-145 prostate multicellular tumor spheroids the pericellular
oxygen pressure and the generation of reactive oxygen species decreased, whereas 
the alpha-subunit of HIF-1 (HIF-1alpha) and P-gp were up-regulated. Furthermore, 
P-gp was up-regulated under experimental physiological hypoxia and chemical
hypoxia induced by either cobalt chloride or desferrioxamine. The pro-oxidants
H2O2 and buthionine sulfoximine down-regulated HIF-1alpha and P-gp, whereas
up-regulation was achieved with the radical scavengers dehydroascorbate,
N-acetylcysteine, and vitamin E. The correlation of HIF-1alpha and P-gp
expression was validated by the use of hepatoma tumor spheroids that were either 
wild type (Hepa1) or mutant (Hepa1C4) for aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (ARNT), i.e., HIF-1beta. Chemical hypoxia robustly increased
HIF-1alpha as well as P-gp expression in Hepa1 tumor spheroids, whereas no
changes were observed in Hepa1C4 spheroids. Hence, our data demonstrate that
expression of P-gp in multicellular tumor spheroids is under the control of
HIF-1.

PMID: 12514119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Toxicology. 2002 Dec 27;181-182:143-6.

Effect of ARA9 on dioxin receptor mediated transcription.

Lees MJ(1), Whitelaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular BioScience (Biochemistry), Adelaide University,
Adelaide 5005, South Australia, Australia.

The dioxin (Aryl hydrocarbon) receptor (DR) is a unique bHLH transcription factor
which is activated by binding of planar aromatic hydrocarbons typified by dioxin 
(TCDD). The active receptor is key to metabolism of aryl hydrocarbon xenobiotics 
by being a potent inducer of CYP1A1 gene activity. Chlorinated dioxins are inert 
to metabolism and initiate multifarious toxicities, including potent tumour
promotion. These ill-effects are mediated by the activated DR and we are studying
the mechanisms by which the ligand binding domain of the DR controls activity of 
the protein. The DR ligand binding domain resides within a PAS (Per/Arnt/Sim
homology) region which is contiguous with the bHLH. The latent bHLH/PAS dioxin
receptor (DR) is found in the cytoplasm of most mammalian cell types in a complex
with heat shock protein 90, a novel immunophilin like protein termed
ARA9/XAP2/AIP, and the co-chaperone p23. Here we use antisense ARA9 constructs to
reveal that in the absence of ARA9, the DR is unable to form a transcriptionally 
active complex. Co-expression of antisense ARA9 with a form of the DR which is
constitutively targeted to the nucleus leads to dramatically decreased levels of 
the nuclear DR protein, implying that ARA9 may function beyond its currently
proposed role in cytoplasmic retention of the latent DR.

PMID: 12505299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Histochem Cytochem. 2003 Jan;51(1):41-54.

Expression of Arnt and Arnt2 mRNA in developing murine tissues.

Aitola MH(1), Pelto-Huikko MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere,
Finland.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH-PAS) proteins aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear 
translocator (Arnt) and Arnt2 are transcriptional regulators that function as
dimerizing partners for several bHLH-PAS proteins and also some nonrelated
partners. They are involved in various biological functions, including regulation
of developmental genes. In earlier studies, the developmental expression of Arnt 
was reported to be almost ubiquitous, whereas Arnt2 expression has been shown to 
be more limited, comprising neuronal tissues as the main site of expression. Here
we provide a detailed description of the expression of Arnt and Arnt2 mRNA in
mouse tissues during embryonic and early postnatal development. Arnt and also
Arnt2 transcripts, in contrast to earlier reports, are shown to be expressed more
widely during development yet show a temporally and spatially specific pattern.

PMID: 12502753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Presse Med. 2002 Nov 30;31(38):1810-2.

[Peptide-deformylase inhibitors, a new class of antibiotics].

[Article in French]

Dubreuil L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie, Faculté de pharmacie, 3, rue du Pr Laguesse, BP 
83, 59006 Lille. ldubreuil@phare.univ-lille2.fr

PEPTIDE-DEFORMYLASE: During protein synthesis in bacteria, a transformylase
coding the fmt gene provides a formyl group on methionine before binding to the
ARNm-ARNt complex. This tormylated methionine initiates the protein synthesis.
The adjunction of an amino acid to the peptide chain leads to a peptide
associated with a formylated methionine. The final stage requires a
metallo-enzyme, peptide deformylase, which releases the peptide and regenerates
the methionin. PEPTIDE-DEFORMYLASE INHIBITORS (PDF): Often rejected by the efflux
pumps of Gram negative bacteria, PDF inhibitors are administered in the form of
pro-drugs, capable of acting even in the bacteria that have lost their
transformylase gene. TWO PRODUCTS: These are VCR 4887 developed by Versicor and
Novartis and BB 83698 developed by British Biotechnology Genesoft. They are
presently in the process of clinical predevelopment. They represent an important 
innovation and widen the range of new antibiotic classes.

PMID: 12497724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2002 Dec 1;185(2):136-45.

Aromatic hydrocarbon receptor expression and function in liver of
hypophysectomized male rats.

Timsit YE(1), Chia FS, Bhathena A, Riddick DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical Sciences Building, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1A8, Canada.

The aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) acts as a ligand-activated transcription 
factor that mediates many of the biological responses to aromatic hydrocarbons,
such as 3-methylcholanthrene (MC) and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD).
Some toxic effects are thought to be the result of AHR-mediated changes in the
expression of endocrine-related genes, such as the estrogen receptor and genes
involved in cell growth and differentiation. Since little is known about
endocrine factors that regulate AHR expression and function, we evaluated the
effect of hypophysectomy (hypx) on these parameters in the liver of male rats.
Cytosolic AHR immunoreactive protein was reduced in hypx rats to 61% of levels in
sham-operated rats. Sucrose density gradient analysis of cytosolic AHR
radioligand binding using a saturating concentration of [3H]TCDD showed that
ligand binding was reduced in hypx rats to 31% of sham levels. TCDD showed
similar potency for transforming cytosolic AHR from hypx and sham rats to a
DNA-binding form; however, maximal AHR DNA-binding was reduced in hypx rats to
57% of sham levels, although this did not achieve statistical significance. These
changes observed at the protein level were not accompanied by a corresponding
decrease in hypx rats of mRNA for AHR or the AHR nuclear translocator. Despite
this change in AHR protein level, hypx rats were not compromised in hepatic
cytochrome P450 1A1 induction following in vivo administration of MC. These data 
indicate that the AHR signaling pathway is intact in hypx rats and that a
pituitary factor regulates hepatic AHR expression at the protein level.

PMID: 12490138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Jan;63(1):119-27.

Mechanism of rat UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A6 induction by oltipraz: evidence 
for a contribution of the Aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway.

Auyeung DJ(1), Kessler FK, Ritter JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Virginia Campus 
of Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298-0613, USA.

The utility of oltipraz as a cancer chemopreventive agent is thought to depend on
the induction of enzymes involved in phase 2 xenobiotic detoxification. Although 
studies of some enzymes induced by oltipraz implicate a novel transcriptional
activating pathway involving Nrf2 and antioxidant-response elements (AREs), the
mechanism of phenol UGT induction has remained unclear. Previous work showed that
UGT1A6 is transcribed from two promoters, P1 and P2, that are both induced by
oltipraz in rat liver. The effect also occurs in rat hepatocytes treated with
oltipraz (concentrations >3 microM). To investigate the mechanism, luciferase
reporter plasmids under the control of P1 [p(-1078/+27)1A6P1-luc] or P2
[p(-1354/+65)1A6P2-luc] were transfected into rat hepatocytes and tested for
inducibility. P1, but not P2, showed responsiveness to oltipraz (2- to 5-fold
increase) and 3-methylcholanthrene (10- to 30-fold increase). Because P1
contained no visible AREs, the role of a xenobiotic response element (XRE)
centered between bases -134 and -129 was evaluated. Mutation of the XRE core
reduced the effects of both oltipraz and 3-methylcholanthrene on the P1 reporter.
The 1A6 XRE conferred oltipraz responsiveness on the simian virus 40 promoter of 
pGL3-Promoter. Comparative effects of oltipraz and 3-methylcholanthrene on
transfected cytochrome P4501A1 reporters support the general but relatively weak 
XRE-stimulating activity of oltipraz. The involvement of the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR) and aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT) in mediating the 
effects of oltipraz on the XRE is supported by electrophoretic mobility
supershift data and AHR/ARNT overexpression studies. These data raise questions
about the contribution of AHR and other secondary induction pathways in the
mechanism of oltipraz.

PMID: 12488544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002 Nov;973:443-7.

CoCl2, a chemical inducer of hypoxia-inducible factor-1, and hypoxia reduce
apoptotic cell death in hepatoma cell line HepG2.

Piret JP(1), Mottet D, Raes M, Michiels C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie et Biochimie cellulaire, FUNDP, 5000 Namur, Belgium.
jppiret@fundp.ac.be

HIF-1 (hypoxia-inducible factor-1) is the major transcription factor that is
specifically activated during hypoxia. This transcription factor is composed of
two subunits: HIF-1alpha and ARNT (aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator). ARNT is constitutively expressed, whereas HIF-1alpha is targeted
to proteasome degradation by ubiquitination during normoxia. In hypoxia,
HIF-1alpha is stabilized and translocates to the nucleus, where it binds to ARNT.
The active HIF-1 induces expression of various genes whose products play an
adaptive role to the new conditions induced by hypoxia. Besides the role played
by HIF-1 in the adaptation to hypoxia, recent data describe a possible role for
HIF-1 in the modulation of apoptosis. According to some authors, hypoxia induces 
apoptosis. However, it has also been reported that hypoxia could protect cells
against apoptotic cell death induced by various agents such as serum deprivation 
and incubation in the presence of chemotherapy agents. These contradictory data
suggest that HIF-1 could display either a proapoptotic or an antiapoptotic role
according to the conditions. In order to study how HIF-1 can modulate apoptosis, 
we studied whether hypoxia or cobalt chloride, a chemical inducer of HIF-1, could
influence apoptosis induced by tert-butyl hydroperoxide (t-BHP), serum
deprivation, or both in hepatoma cell line HepG2. HepG2 cells were incubated 8
hours under normoxia or hypoxia in the presence of t-BHP with or without CoCl2.
CoCl2 reduced the apoptotic death of HepG2 cells induced by t-BHP and serum
deprivation, as measured by DNA fragmentation. This effect was confirmed by
measurement of the caspase activity. Moreover, hypoxia also prevented t-BHP- or
serum deprivation-induced DNA fragmentation and caspase activation-however, to a 
lower extent than CoCl2. These different data suggest a possible antiapoptotic
role of HIF-1. More experiments are needed to define if HIF-1 actually plays an
active role in cell death protection and to determine the exact mechanism
underlying this effect.

PMID: 12485908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Biomol Eng. 2003 Jan;20(1):1-5.

Synthesis of 32P-labelled protein probes using a modified thioredoxin fusion
protein expression system in Escherichia coli.

Delucchi AB(1), Jensen KA, Chan WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, Thomas J. Long School of 
Pharmacy and Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, 751 Brookside Road,
Stockton, CA 95211, USA.

The thioredoxin fusion protein expression system from invitrogen was modified so 
that 32P-labelled recombinant proteins can be easily obtained in large quantities
for functional studies. Proteins that are prone to form the inclusion bodies can 
be functionally expressed as thioredoxin fusion proteins in Escherichia coli.
After expression, the recombinant proteins can be easily phosphorylated with
32P-gamma ATP and the 32P-labelled protein can be obtained functionally via a
mild proteolytic digestion to cleave off the thioredoxin moiety. A deletion
construct of the Ah receptor nuclear translocator protein was used as an example 
to illustrate how this protein expression system works.

PMID: 12485679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 28;278(9):7683-91. Epub 2002 Dec 12.

Expression of hypoxia-inducible factors in the peri-implantation mouse uterus is 
regulated in a cell-specific and ovarian steroid hormone-dependent manner.
Evidence for differential function of HIFs during early pregnancy.

Daikoku T(1), Matsumoto H, Gupta RA, Das SK, Gassmann M, DuBois RN, Dey SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232-2678, USA.

Increased uterine vascular permeability and angiogenesis are hallmarks of
implantation and placentation. These events are profoundly influenced by vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF). We previously showed that VEGF isoforms and
VEGF receptors are expressed in the uterus, suggesting the role of VEGF in
uterine vascular permeability and angiogenesis required for implantation and
decidualization. We have recently shown that estrogen promotes uterine vascular
permeability but inhibits angiogenesis, whereas progesterone stimulates
angiogenesis with little effect on vascular permeability. However, the mechanism 
of differential steroid hormonal regulation of uterine angiogenesis remains
unresolved. Oxygen homeostasis is essential for cell survival and is primarily
mediated by hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs). These factors are intimately
associated with vascular events and induce VEGF expression by binding to the
hypoxia response element in the VEGF promoter. HIFalpha isoforms function by
forming heterodimers with the aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT)
(HIF-beta) family members. There is very limited information on the relationship 
among HIFs, ARNTs, and VEGF in the uterus during early pregnancy, although the
role of HIFs in regulating VEGF and angiogenesis in cancers is well documented.
Using molecular and physiological approaches, we here show that uterine
expression of HIFs and ARNTs does not correlate with VEGF expression during the
preimplantation period (days 1-4) in mice. In contrast, their expression follows 
the localization of uterine VEGF expression with increasing angiogenesis during
the postimplantation period (days 5-8). This disparate pattern of uterine HIFs,
ARNTs, and VEGF expression on days 1-4 of pregnancy suggests HIFs have multiple
roles in addition to the regulation of angiogenesis during the peri-implantation 
period. Using pharmacological, molecular, and genetic approaches, we also
observed that although progesterone primarily up-regulates uterine HIF-1alpha
expression, estrogen transiently stimulates that of HIF-2alpha.

PMID: 12482866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2002;16(6):317-25.

A dynamic role for the Ah receptor in cell signaling? Insights from a diverse
group of Ah receptor interacting proteins.

Carlson DB(1), Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, Department of Veterinary
Science, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor (AhR) is a member of the basic
helix-loop-helix PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) transcription factor family. Consistent with 
the notion that PAS proteins are biological sensors, AhR binding to Ah toxicants 
induces or represses transcription of a wide range of genes and results in a
cascade of toxic responses. However, an endogenous role for AhR in development
and homeostasis is supported by (1) the discovery of low affinity, endogenous
ligands; (2) studies demonstrating a role for the receptor in development of
liver and vascular systems, that were established using mice lacking AhR
expression; and (3) the presence of functional dioxin-responsive elements in
promoter regions of genes involved in cellular growth and differentiation. A
large body of recent literature has implicated AhR in multiple signal
transduction pathways. AhR is known to interact with signaling pathways that are 
mediated by estrogen receptor and other hormone receptors, hypoxia, nuclear
factor kappaB, and retinoblastoma protein. In addition, AhR complexes may affect 
cellular signaling through interactions with various other regulatory and
signaling proteins, including PAS heterodimerization partners (ARNT), chaperone
and immunophilin-like proteins (e.g. HSP90, XAP2/ARA9/AIP, p23), protein kinases 
and phosphatases (e.g. tyrosine kinases, casein kinase 2, protein kinase C), and 
coactivators (e.g. SRC-1, RIP 140, CBP/p300). Here we summarize the types of
molecular cross talk that have been identified between AhR and cell signaling
pathways.

Copyright 2002 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biochem Mol Toxicol 16:317-325, 2002;
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI
10.1002/jbt.10051

PMID: 12481307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jan 3;300(1):128-34.

Possible involvement of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) in adult T-cell leukemia 
(ATL) leukemogenesis: constitutive activation of AhR in ATL.

Hayashibara T(1), Yamada Y, Mori N, Harasawa H, Sugahara K, Miyanishi T, Kamihira
S, Tomonaga M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences, Sakamoto 1-12-4, Japan.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 is the etiologic agent of adult T-cell
leukemia (ATL), although the precise mechanism involved in the transformation
process has not yet been defined. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a
ligand-activated transcription factor that can influence cell proliferation and
differentiation. We investigated the expression and activation of AhR in ATL.
RT-PCR and Western blot analyses showed high expression levels of AhR in ATL cell
lines. The elevated expression of AhR was in part attributable to the action of
the viral transactivator protein, Tax. Interestingly, activation of the AhR was
found in ATL cell lines in the absence of apparent exogenous ligands.
Importantly, the increased expression and activation of AhR were also observed in
some primary ATL cells. To our best knowledge, this is the first report to show
the lymphoid malignancy having constitutive activation of AhR. A possible link
between increased AhR expression and leukemogenesis in ATL is discussed.

PMID: 12480531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2002 Dec;133(4):475-81.

Characterization of HIF-1 alpha overexpressing HeLa cells and implications for
gene therapy.

Hofer T(1), Desbaillets I, Höpfl G, Wenger RH, Gassmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 190,
CH-8057, Zürich, Switzerland.

Upon exposing mammalian tissues to hypoxia, expression of a number of
physiologically important genes such as erythropoietin and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) increases. The key regulator for this oxygen-dependent gene 
expression is the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), a heterodimeric
transcription factor consisting of an alpha and a beta subunit. Both HIF-1
subunits are widely expressed in the cells and tissue of vertebrates, flies,
fishes, worms and probably most other species. The beta subunit (also termed
ARNT, aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator) is abundantly expressed in 
an oxygen-independent manner. On the other hand, HIF-1alpha cannot be detected
above a critical partial pressure of oxygen when it is subjected to rapid
ubiquitinylation and proteasomal degradation. Hypoxic exposure leads to
stabilization of HIF-1alpha protein and subsequent activation of HIF-1-dependent 
target genes. HIF-1 is not only a master regulator of oxygen homeostasis, it also
appears to play a key role in tumor development as well as cardiovascular and
ischemic diseases. Genetic modulation of HIF-1alpha activity in vivo may
therefore represent a novel therapeutic approach to these disorders. In this
overview, we report on the generation of HIF-1alpha overexpressing HeLa cell
lines and demonstrate the feasibility of normoxic HIF-1 gene transfer in vitro
and in vivo thereby identifying the limiting steps for full activation of HIF-1.

PMID: 12458176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Virchows Arch. 2002 Nov;441(5):481-9. Epub 2002 Jun 27.

The arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR), but not the AhR-nuclear translocator (ARNT), 
is increased in hearts of patients with cardiomyopathy.

Mehrabi MR(1), Steiner GE, Dellinger C, Kofler A, Schaufler K, Tamaddon F, Plesch
K, Ekmekcioglu C, Maurer G, Glogar HD, Thalhammer T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University of Vienna, Austria.
mohammad.mehrabi@univie.ac.at

The objective of this study was to investigate the expression of the
arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and its partner AhR-nuclear translocator (ARNT) in
left ventricle specimens from explanted hearts from patients with cardiomyopathy 
(CMP). Explanted hearts from 16 patients with ischemic (n=9, age 63+/-12 years)
and dilative (n=7, age 54+/-12 years) CMP, undergoing heart transplantation were 
examined. Healthy donor hearts from five accident victims served as controls. As 
these donors were of younger age (32+/-11 years), additionally, donor hearts from
three older accident victims (age 48+/-15 years) without clinical symptoms but
with signs of ventricular hyperthrophy (n=1) or atherosclerotic lesions (n=2)
were included ("pathological controls"). Expression of AhR and ARNT was analyzed 
using semi-quantitative immunohistochemistry, and in selected samples, Western
blot- and reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction analysis were performed
to confirm AhR and ARNT expression. Immunohistological analysis revealed weak to 
intermediate staining of anti-AhR in control, but weak to intense staining in
CMP- and "pathologic control" specimens, indicating significantly increased AhR
levels in the diseased heart. Moreover, in CMP specimens, the percentage of
AhR-positive cells was strongly increased. Higher anti-AhR staining was also seen
in two atherosclerotic "pathologic control" specimens. In all groups, the
intensity of anti-ARNT staining was more pronounced than AhR staining, but
significant differences or any age-related alterations were not observed. In
conclusion, the increased cellular content of AhR in left ventricular specimens
from CMP patients suggests a role for AhR in heart disease.

PMID: 12447679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Biochem. 2002 Nov;132(5):795-802.

Overexpression of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) accelerates the cell
proliferation of A549 cells.

Shimba S(1), Komiyama K, Moro I, Tezuka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Science, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University,
Narashinodai, Funabashi, Chiba 274-8555. shimba@pha.nihon-u.ac.jp

The arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that mediates a spectrum of toxic and biological effects of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related compounds. Although the
physiological ligand for the AhR has not yet been identified, several reports
have suggested that the AhR may play important roles not only in the regulation
of xenobiotic metabolism but also in the maintenance of homeostatic functions
[Singh et al. (1996) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 329, 47-55; Crawford et al. (1997)
Mol. Pharmacol. 52, 921-927; Chang et al. (1998) Mol. Cell. Biol. 18, 525-535].
Several lines of evidence suggest that one of the possible physiological roles of
the AhR is regulation of cell proliferation. In this study, we first showed that 
treatment of A549 cells with the AhR agonist stimulates cell proliferation. The
effect was antagonized by co-treatment with alpha-naphthoflavone. To obtain
direct evidence that the AhR regulates cell proliferation, we isolated the clones
that overexpress the AhR. These clones grow faster than control cells, and the
rate of growth is proportional to the amount of the AhR. Cell cycle analysis
revealed that the acceleration of cell growth by overexpression of the AhR is
most probably due to shortening of the late M to S phases. Studies on the
expression profiles of cell cycle regulators showed that the AhR or AhR ligand
induces the expression of DP2, PCNA, and RFC38. DP2 is the transcription factor
that forms the functional dimer with E2F and regulates the expression of several 
genes involved in DNA synthesis. Interestingly, both PCNA and RFC38 are target
genes of E2F and the DP complex. Also, both of these factors are involved in
regulating DNA polymerase delta activity. E2F activity was substantially
increased in both the AhR-overexpressing cells and the AhR-agonist treated cells,
suggesting that AhR-activated E2F/DP2 may induce the expression of PCNA and RFC38
and subsequent DNA synthesis. Down-regulation of the expression of the Arnt by
RNAi diminished the effects of the AhR on the cell proliferation of the A549
cells. Consequently, we conclude that the AhR, presumably in collaboration with
the Arnt, activates the DNA synthesis and the subsequent cell proliferation in
A549 cells.

PMID: 12417031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Oct 11;1578(1-3):73-83.

Site-directed mutagenesis studies of the hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
DNA-binding domain.

Michel G(1), Minet E, Mottet D, Remacle J, Michiels C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Cellulaire, University of Namur, 61 rue
de Bruxelles, 5000 Namur, Belgium.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), a heterodimeric transcription factor, is
activated when cells are exposed to hypoxia. It is composed of two subunits,
HIF-1alpha and ARNT. When activated, it binds to the hypoxia-responsive element
(HRE) and up-regulates the expression of several genes (vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), erythropoietin (EPO), enolase, em leader ). By molecular
modeling, a 3-D model for the complex between the DNA-binding domain of HIF-1
(bHLH domain) and its consensus DNA sequence has been developed. Specific
interactions between three amino acids (Ser22, Ala25, Arg30) of the HIF-1alpha
subunit and DNA bases were identified. In order to further investigate the role
of these amino acids, we generated four mutants of the HIF-1alpha subunit using
site-directed mutagenesis. The activity of each mutant was tested using a
reporter gene containing either 6 HRE sequences or the authentic human VEGF
promoter. The results show that three mutants, Ala25Ser, Ala26Glu and Arg30Ala,
were no longer active in the reporter gene assay. On the other hand, the Ser22Ala
mutant increased the reporter gene expression, in normoxia as well as in hypoxia.
These results correlate with the ones obtained when the DNA-binding capability of
the mutants was assayed by electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA): Arg30Ala
and Ala26Glu mutants bind very weakly to HRE while the Ser22Ala mutant has the
same binding capacity as the wild-type HIF-1alpha. These results bring new
insights on the specificity of the protein/DNA interactions for HIF-1 towards
HRE.

PMID: 12393189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Pharmacol. 2002 Nov;62(5):975-82.

Reduction of hypoxia-induced transcription through the repression of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha/aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
DNA binding by the 90-kDa heat-shock protein inhibitor radicicol.

Hur E(1), Kim HH, Choi SM, Kim JH, Yim S, Kwon HJ, Choi Y, Kim DK, Lee MO, Park
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, University of Seoul, Tongdaemun-gu, Seoul, Korea.

Under low oxygen tension, cells increase the transcription of specific genes
involved in angiogenesis, erythropoiesis, and glycolysis. Hypoxia-induced gene
expression depends primarily on stabilization of the alpha subunit of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1alpha), which acts as a heterodimeric
trans-activator with the nuclear protein known as the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (Arnt). The resulting heterodimer (HIF-1alpha/Arnt)
interacts specifically with the hypoxia-responsive element (HRE), thereby
increasing transcription of the genes under HRE control. Our results indicate
that the 90-kDa heat-shock protein (Hsp90) inhibitor radicicol reduces the
hypoxia-induced expression of both endogenous vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) and HRE-driven reporter plasmids. Radicicol treatment (0.5 microg/ml) does
not significantly change the stability of the HIF-1alpha protein and does not
inhibit the nuclear localization of HIF-1alpha. However, this dose of radicicol
significantly reduces HRE binding by the HIF-1alpha/Arnt heterodimer. Our
results, the first to show that radicicol specifically inhibits the interaction
between the HIF-1alpha/Arnt heterodimer and HRE, suggest that Hsp90 modulates the
conformation of the HIF-1alpha/Arnt heterodimer, making it suitable for
interaction with HRE. Furthermore, we demonstrate that radicicol reduces
hypoxia-induced VEGF expression to decrease hypoxia-induced angiogenesis.

PMID: 12391259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Leuk Lymphoma. 2002 Jul;43(7):1455-9.

AINT/ERIC/TACC: an expanding family of proteins with C-terminal coiled coil
domains.

Lappin TR(1), Mullan RN, Stewart JP, Morgan NA, Thompson A, Maxwell AP.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Group, Cancer Research Centre, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast
City Hospital, UK. t.lappin@qub.ac.uk

The AINT/ERIC/TACC genes encode novel proteins with a coiled coil domain at their
C-terminus. The founding member of this expanding family of genes, transforming
acidic coiled coil 1 (TACC1), was isolated from a BAC contig spanning the breast 
cancer amplicon-1 on 8p11. Transfection of cells in vitro with TACC1 resulted in 
anchorage-independent growth consistent with a more "neoplastic" phenotype.
Database searches employing the human TACC1 sequence revealed other novel genes, 
TACC2 and TACC3, with substantial sequence homology particularly in the
C-terminal regions encoding the coiled coil domains. TACC2, located at 10q26, is 
similar to anti-zuai-1 (AZU-1), a candidate breast tumour suppressor gene, and
ECTACC, an endothelial cell TACC which is upregulated by erythropoietin (Epo).
The murine homologue of TACC3, murine erythropoietin-induced cDNA (mERIC-1) was
also found to be upregulated by Epo in the Friend virus anaemia (FVA) model by
differential display-PCR. Human ERIC-1, located at 4p16.3, has been cloned and
encodes an 838-amino acid protein whose N- and C-terminal regions are highly
homologous to the shorter 558-amino acid murine protein, mERIC-1. In contrast,
the central portions of these proteins differ markedly. The murine protein
contains four 24 amino acid imperfect repeats. ARNT interacting protein (AINT), a
protein expressed during embryonic development in the mouse, binds through its
coiled coil region to the aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator protein (ARNT)
and has a central portion that contains seven of the 24 amino acid repeats found 
in mERIC-1. Thus mERIC-1 and AINT appear to be developmentally regulated
alternative transcripts of the gene. Most members of the TACC family discovered
so far contain a novel nine amino acid putative phosphorylation site with the
pattern [R/K]-X(3)-[E]-X(3)-Y. Genes with sequence homology to the AINT/ERIC/TACC
family in other species include maskin in Xenopus, D-TACC in Drosophila and TACC4
in the rabbit. Maskin contains a peptide sequence conserved among eIF-4E binding 
proteins that is involved in oocyte development. D-TACC cooperates with another
conserved microtubule-associated protein Msps to stabilise spindle poles during
cell division. The diversity of function already attributed to this protein
family, including both transforming and tumour suppressor properties, should
ensure that a new and interesting narrative is about to unfold.

PMID: 12389629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. FEBS Lett. 2002 Oct 23;530(1-3):186-90.

Mitogen-inducible gene 6 (MIG-6), adipophilin and tuftelin are inducible by
hypoxia.

Saarikoski ST(1), Rivera SP, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, and Jonsson Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of California, P.O. Box 951732, Los Angeles 90095, USA.
airkku.saarikoski@occuphealth.fi

Adaptation to hypoxia is essential for tumor progression. Transcriptional
activation of hypoxia-regulated genes is mediated by hypoxia-inducible factor 1
(HIF-1), a heterodimer of HIF-1alpha and ARNT (Ah receptor nuclear translocator; 
HIF-1beta). Using representational difference analysis, we identified three novel
hypoxia-inducible genes: MIG-6 (gene 33), adipophilin and tuftelin. The mRNAs for
these genes were inducible by 1% O(2) in the human HepG2 and MCF-7 cell lines.
Hypoxic induction of the MIG-6 and tuftelin proteins was also observed. Induction
was ARNT-dependent. Induction also occurred in livers of mice treated with
CoCl(2), which mimics hypoxia. The potential roles of these genes in adaptation
to hypoxia and in tumorigenesis will be of considerable interest.

PMID: 12387890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Infect Immun. 2002 Nov;70(11):6121-8.

Genetic analysis and functional characterization of the Streptococcus pneumoniae 
vic operon.

Wagner C(1), Saizieu Ad Ad, Schönfeld HJ, Kamber M, Lange R, Thompson CJ, Page
MG.

Author information: 
(1)F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., 4070 Basel. Division of Microbiology, Biozentrum,
University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland.

The vic two-component signal transduction system of Streptococcus pneumoniae is
essential for growth. The vic operon comprises three genes encoding the
following: VicR, a response regulator of the OmpR family; VicK, its cognate
histidine kinase; and VicX, a putative protein sharing 55% identity to the
predicted product (YycJ) of an open reading frame in the Bacillus subtilis
genome. We show that not only is vic essential for viability but it also
influences virulence and competence. A putative transcriptional start site for
the vic operon was mapped 16 bp upstream of the ATG codon of vicR. Only one
transcript of 2.9 kb, encoding all three genes, was detected by Northern blot
analysis. VicK, an atypical PAS domain-containing histidine kinase, can be
autophosphorylated in vitro, and VicR functions in vitro as a phospho-acceptor
protein. (PAS is an acronym formed from the names of the proteins in which the
domains were first recognized: the Drosophila period clock protein [PER],
vertebrate aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator [ARNT], and Drosophila 
single-minded protein [SIM].) PAS domains are commonly involved in sensing
intracellular signals such as redox potential, which suggests that the signal for
vic might also originate in the cytoplasm. Growth rate, competence, and virulence
were monitored in strains with mutations in the vic operon. Overexpression of the
histidine kinase, VicK, resulted in decreased virulence, whereas the
transformability of a null mutant decreased by 3 orders of magnitude.

PMCID: PMC130280
PMID: 12379689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Carcinogenesis. 2002 Oct;23(10):1625-30.

The redox protein thioredoxin-1 regulates the constitutive and inducible
expression of the estrogen metabolizing cytochromes P450 1B1 and 1A1 in MCF-7
human breast cancer cells.

Husbeck B(1), Powis G.

Author information: 
(1)Arizona Cancer Center, University of Arizona, 1515 N. Campbell Avenue, Tucson,
AZ 85724-5024, USA.

The oxidative metabolites of estrogen have been proposed to play an important
role in the development of some human cancers. The two major pathways of estrogen
metabolism, to the carcinogenic 4-hydroxyestradiol (4-OHE2) and to the
non-carcinogenic 2-hydroxyestradiol (2-OHE2), are mediated by cytochromes P450
CYP1B1 and CYP1A1, respectively. The expression of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 is regulated
by the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor/Ah receptor nuclear translocator (AhR/ARNT) 
transcription factor complex. CYP1B1 expression is elevated in a wide range of
human cancers but is not found in corresponding normal tissue. Thioredoxin-1
(Trx-1) is a small redox protein that is overexpressed in a number of human
cancers. We report that the expression of CYP1B1 mRNA and protein is increased by
Trx-1 transfection of MCF-7 human breast cancer cells and decreased by a redox
inactive mutant Trx-1. The Trx-1 inhibitor PX-12 inhibits CYP1B1 gene expression.
Trx-1 transfected MCF-7 cells show increased AhR/ARNT DNA binding activity that
is not due to altered AhR or ARNT protein expression.
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD, dioxin) induced expression of CYP1B1
in MCF-7 cells is increased by Trx-1. Trx-1 does not effect the basal expression 
of CYP1A1, but increases CYP1A1 mRNA in response to TCDD. The redox inactive
mutant Trx-1 completely blocks the induction of both CYP1B1 and CYP1A1 by TCDD.
Expression of CYP1A1 but not CYP1B1 has been linked to estrogen receptor
(ERalpha) status. Trx-1 transfected MCF-7 cells have decreased ERalpha
expression, which may account for the lack of CYP1A1 induction by Trx-1 in the
absence of ligand. The results suggest that Trx-1 is involved in the constitutive
expression of CYP1B1 and is required for the induction of CYP1B1 and CYP1A1 by
TCDD in human MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

PMID: 12376470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Curr Drug Metab. 2002 Oct;3(5):481-90.

Pharmacogenomics, regulation and signaling pathways of phase I and II drug
metabolizing enzymes.

Rushmore TH(1), Kong AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Metabolism, Merck Research Laboratory, West Point, PA, USA.
rushmore@merck.com

Drug or xenobiotics metabolizing enzymes (DMEs or XMEs) play central roles in the
biotransformation, metabolism and/or detoxification of xenobiotics or foreign
compounds, that are introduced to the human body. In general, DMEs protect or
defend the body against the potential harmful insults from the environment. Once 
in the body, many xenobiotics may induce signal transduction events either
specifically or non-specifically leading to various cellular, physiological and
pharmacological responses including homeostasis, proliferation, differentiation, 
apoptosis, or necrosis. For the body to minimize the insults caused by these
xenobiotics, various tissues/organs are well equipped with diverse DMEs including
various Phase I and Phase II enzymes, which are present in abundance either at
the basal level and/or increased/induced after exposure. To better understand the
pharmacogenomic/gene expression profile of DMEs and the underlying molecular
mechanisms after exposure to xenobiotics or drugs, we will review our current
knowledge on DNA microarray technology in gene expression profiling and the
signal transduction events elicited by various xenobiotics mediated by either
specific receptors or non-specific signal transduction pathways. Pharmacogenomics
is the study of genes and the gene products (proteins) essential for
pharmacological or toxicological responses to pharmaceutical agents. In order to 
assess the battery of genes that are induced or repressed by xenobiotics and
pharmaceutical agents, cDNA microarray or oligonucleotide-based DNA chip
technology can be a powerful tool to analyze, simultaneously, the gene expression
profiles that are induced or repressed by xenobiotics. The regulation of gene
expression of the various phase I DMEs such as the cytochrome P450 (CYP) as well 
as phase II DMEs generally depends on the interaction of the xenobiotics with the
receptors. For instance, the expression of CYP1 genes can be induced via the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) which dimerizes with the AhR nuclear translocator
(ARNT), in response to many polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAHs). Similarly,
the steroid family of orphan receptors, the constitutive androstane receptor
(CAR) and pregnane X receptors (PXR), heterodimerize with the retinoid X receptor
(RXR), transcriptionally activate the promoters of CYP2B and CYP3A gene
expression by xenobiotics such as phenobarbital-like compounds (CAR) and
dexamethasone and rifampin-type of agents (PXR). The peroxisome proliferator
activated receptor (PPAR) which is one of the first characterized members of the 
nuclear hormone receptor, also dimerizes with RXR and it has been shown to be
activated by lipid lowering agent fibrate-type of compounds leading to
transcriptional activation of the promoters on the CYP4A genes. The
transcriptional activation of these promoters generally leads to the induction of
their mRNA. The physiological and the pharmacological implications of common
partner of RXR for CAR, PXR, and PPAR receptors largely remain unknown and are
under intense investigations. For the phase II DMEs, phase II gene inducers such 
as phenolic compounds butylated hydroxyanisol (BHA), tert-butylhydroquinone
(tBHQ), green tea polyphenol (GTP), (-)-epicatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) and the
isothiocyanates (PEITC, sulforaphane) generally appear to be electrophiles. They 
can activate the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway via
electrophilic-mediated stress response, resulting in the activation of bZIP
transcription factors Nrf2 which dimerizes with Mafs and binds to the
antioxidant/electrophile response element (ARE/EpRE) enhancers which are found in
many phase II DMEs as well as many cellular defensive enzymes such as
thioredoxins, gammaGCS and HO-1, with the subsequent induction of gene expression
of these genes. It appears that in general, exposure to phase I or phase II gene 
inducers or xenobiotics may trigger a cellular "stress" response leading to the
increase in the gene expression of these DMEs, which ultimately enhance the
elimination and clearance of the xenobiotics e xenobiotics and/or the "cellular
stresses" including harmful reactive intermediates such as reactive oxygen
species (ROS), so that the body will remove the "stress" expeditiously.
Consequently, this homeostatic response of the body plays a central role in the
protection of the organism against environmental insults such as xenobiotics.
Advances in DNA microarray technologies and mammalian genome sequencing will soon
allow quantitative assessment of expression profiles of all genes in the selected
tissues. The ability to predict phenotypic outcomes from gene expression profiles
is currently in its infancy, however, and will require additional bioinformatic
tools. Such tools will facilitate information gathering from literature and gene 
databases as well as integration of expression data with animal physiology
studies. The study of pharmacogenomic/gene expression profile and the
understanding of the regulation and the signal transduction mechanisms elicited
by pharmaceutical agents can be of potential importance during drug discovery and
the drug development.

PMID: 12369894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Cancer Res. 2002 Oct 1;62(19):5451-6.

Curcumin activates the aryl hydrocarbon receptor yet significantly inhibits
(-)-benzo(a)pyrene-7R-trans-7,8-dihydrodiol bioactivation in oral squamous cell
carcinoma cells and oral mucosa.

Rinaldi AL(1), Morse MA, Fields HW, Rothas DA, Pei P, Rodrigo KA, Renner RJ,
Mallery SR.

Author information: 
(1)College of Dentistry, Departments of Orthodontics and Oral Maxillofacial
Surgery and Pathology, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43218, USA.

The development of oral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) shows a positive
correlation with the carcinogen exposure that occurs during tobacco and alcohol
use. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether the naturally occurring
chemopreventive agent, curcumin, modulates expression and function of carcinogen-
metabolizing enzymes in human keratinocytes isolated from oral SCC tumors.
Dose-response studies demonstrated that curcumin concentrations of >or=25 micro M
were cytotoxic for oral SCC cells. Curcumin increased both expression (reverse
transcription-PCR analyses) and function (high-performance liquid chromatography 
determination of ethoxyresorufin metabolism) of cytochrome P-450 (CYP) 1A1 and/or
CYP1B1. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), which up-regulates a battery of
genes associated with carcinogen metabolism, is activated by polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons such as the tobacco-associated carcinogen benzo(a)pyrene.
Electromobility shift assays demonstrated that similar to the established AhR
ligand 2,3,7,8,-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, curcumin inclusion resulted in AhR
nuclear translocation and formation of the transcriptionally active AhR-aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator complex. Cellular capacity to
bioactivate the tobacco-associated carcinogen
(-)-benzo(a)pyrene-7R-trans-7,8-dihydrodiodiol was determined by evaluating
conversion of the carcinogenic metabolite diol epoxide to stable tetrols via
high-performance liquid chromatography. Results of our metabolism studies showed 
that curcumin significantly inhibited CYP1A1-mediated benzo(a)pyrene diol
bioactivation in both oral SCC cells and intact oral mucosa. Because CYP1A1 is
one of the primary carcinogen-activating enzymes in oral mucosa, the use of
curcumin as an oral cavity chemopreventive agent could have significant clinical 
impact via its ability to inhibit carcinogen bioactivation.

PMID: 12359752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Pflugers Arch. 2002 Sep;444(6):752-9. Epub 2002 Aug 1.

Increased expression of vascular endothelial growth factor in human skeletal
muscle in response to short-term one-legged exercise training.

Gustafsson T(1), Knutsson A, Puntschart A, Kaijser L, Nordqvist AC, Sundberg CJ, 
Jansson E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Library Sciences and Technology, Huddinge University
Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, 141 86 Stockholm, Sweden.
Thomas.Gustafsson@fyfa.ki.se

The effects of short-term exercise training on vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) and one of its regulatory transcription factors, the hypoxia inducible
factor 1 (HIF-1) subunit, were studied in eight healthy males. Muscle and blood
samples were obtained before the 1st, and 24 h after the 7th training session.
VEGF and HIF-1 mRNA were analysed using RT-PCR, VEGF mRNA localization with in
situ hybridization and VEGF protein with ELISA. Concurrent increases in VEGF mRNA
and protein levels were observed in skeletal muscle, and the mRNA was expressed
within the skeletal muscle fibres and in cells in the interstitium. These data
support the idea of a pretranslational regulation of exercise-induced changes in 
VEGF mRNA, and indicate that increased VEGF protein expression is an early event 
in skeletal muscle adaptation to training. Furthermore, different cell types may 
act as sources for the production of angiogenic factors in response to exercise. 
The levels of HIF-1 mRNA subunits did not change, suggesting no change in HIF-1
mRNA transcript levels in the regulation of training-induced VEGF expression. In 
contrast to increased tissue VEGF expression, the arterial and femoral venous
plasma levels of VEGF were decreased by training, which may indicate an
exercise-induced enhancement of the peripheral uptake of VEGF.

PMID: 12355175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 6;277(49):47014-21. Epub 2002 Sep 26.

Identification of functional hypoxia response elements in the promoter region of 
the DEC1 and DEC2 genes.

Miyazaki K(1), Kawamoto T, Tanimoto K, Nishiyama M, Honda H, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima
University, Japan.

Adaptation to hypoxia is a crucial process both physiologically (i.e. in
chondrocytes) and pathologically (i.e. in tumor cells). Previous studies have
shown that DEC1, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, is induced by
hypoxia in glioma cells (Ivanova, A. V., Ivanov, S. V., Danilkovitch-Miagkova,
A., and Lerman, M. I. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 15306-15315). In the present
study, we found that hypoxia or CoCl(2) enhanced the mRNA expression of DEC2, as 
well as DEC1, within 24 h in chondrogenic ATDC5, 293T, and HeLa cells. In
luciferase assays, the regions between -524 and -401 in the DEC1 promoter, and
between -863 and -258 in the DEC2 promoter, were responsible for the hypoxia- or 
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha)-induced transcription. In these
regions, we identified functional hypoxia response elements (HREs) that bound to 
HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta. In addition to an HIF-1 binding site consensus
sequence, the DEC1 HRE had cAMP response element-like and CACAG sequences, which 
were also involved in the transcription activation in response to HIF-1alpha.
Although the DEC2 HRE did not have a cAMP response element-like or CACAG
sequence, it showed a higher affinity for HIF-1 than did the DEC1 HRE. Because
DEC1 and DEC2 are directly inducible by HIF-1, these transcription factors may be
crucial for the adaptation to hypoxia.

PMID: 12354771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 29;277(48):46576-85. Epub 2002 Sep 26.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear transporter is modulated by the SUMO-1
conjugation system.

Tojo M(1), Matsuzaki K, Minami T, Honda Y, Yasuda H, Chiba T, Saya H,
Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Nakao M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regeneration Medicine, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear transporter (ARNT) is a member of the basic
helix-loop-helix/PAS (Per-ARNT-Sim) family of transcription factors, which are
important for cell regulation in response to environmental conditions. ARNT is an
indispensable partner of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) or hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha. This protein is also able to form homodimers such as ARNT/ARNT.
However, the molecular mechanism that regulates the transcriptional activity of
ARNT remains to be elucidated. Here, we report that ARNT is modified by SUMO-1
chiefly at Lys(245) within the PAS domain of this protein, both in vivo and in
vitro. Substitution of the target lysine with alanine enhanced the
transcriptional potential of ARNT per se. Furthermore, green fluorescent
protein-fused ARNT tended to form nuclear foci in approximately 20% of the
transfected cells, and the foci partly colocalized with PML nuclear bodies. PML, 
one of the well known substrates for sumoylation, was found to augment the
transcriptional activities of ARNT. ARNT bound AHR or PML, whereas the sumoylated
form of ARNT associated with AHR, but not with PML, resulting in a reduced effect
of PML on transactivation by ARNT. Our data suggest that the sumoylation of ARNT 
modulates its transcriptional role through affecting the ability of ARNT to
interact with cooperative molecules such as PML. This exemplifies a crucial role 
of protein sumoylation in modulating protein-protein interactions.

PMID: 12354770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 13;277(50):48610-6. Epub 2002 Sep 26.

A novel mutation (T65P) in the PAS domain of the human potassium channel HERG
results in the long QT syndrome by trafficking deficiency.

Paulussen A(1), Raes A, Matthijs G, Snyders DJ, Cohen N, Aerssens J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacogenomics, Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Research and 
Development, Beerse B-2340, Belgium. paulussen.aimee@advalvas.be

The congenital long QT syndrome is a cardiac disease characterized by an
increased susceptibility to ventricular arrhythmias. The clinical hallmark is a
prolongation of the QT interval, which reflects a delay in repolarization caused 
by mutations in cardiac ion channel genes. Mutations in the HERG (human
ether-à-go-go-related gene KCNH2 can cause a reduction in I(Kr), one of the
currents responsible for cardiac repolarization. We describe the identification
and characterization of a novel missense mutation T65P in the PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) 
domain of HERG, resulting in defective trafficking of the protein to the cell
membrane. Defective folding of the mutant protein could be restored by decreased 
cell incubation temperature and pharmacologically by cisapride and E-4031. When
trafficking was restored by growing cells at 27 degrees C, the kinetics of the
mutated channel resembled that of wild-type channels although the rate of
activation, deactivation, and recovery from inactivation were accelerated. No
positive evidence for the formation of heterotetramers was obtained by
co-expression of wild-type with mutant subunits at 37 degrees C. As a consequence
the clinical symptoms may be explained rather by haploinsufficiency than by
dominant negative effects. This study is the first to relate a PAS domain
mutation in HERG to a trafficking deficiency at body temperature, apart from
effects on channel deactivation.

PMID: 12354768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Genes Cells. 2002 Oct;7(10):1073-86.

Zebrafish CRY represses transcription mediated by CLOCK-BMAL heterodimer without 
inhibiting its binding to DNA.

Ishikawa T(1), Hirayama J, Kobayashi Y, Todo T.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Biology Center, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

BACKGROUND: CLOCK and BMAL1 proteins, members of the basic helix-loop-helix PAS
(PER-ARNT-SIM) superfamily of transcription factors which bind to the E-box DNA
motif, are required for the high-level expression of the circadian clock genes
period (per) and cryptochrome (cry). CRY inhibits transcriptional activity of the
CLOCK-BMAL1 heterodimer, generating a negative-feedback loop that is the core
element of the circadian oscillator.
RESULTS: We show that zebrafish CRY (zCRY1a) neither disrupts the association
between zfCLOCK and zfBMAL nor inhibits binding of the zfCLOCK-zfBMAL heterodimer
to an E-box-bearing DNA fragment. Instead it binds to the heterodimer to form a
stable zCRY1a-zfCLOCK-zfBMAL-E-box complex. Another zebrafish CRY protein, zCRY4,
does not have transcriptional inhibitor activity, whereas zCRY1a has strong
activity. zCRY4 does not associate with zfCLOCK and zfBMAL. We also show that the
presence of a chemical reductant in the reaction mixture is crucial for efficient
binding of the CLOCK-BMAL heterodimer to E-box bearing DNA, which is indicative
of the reduction/oxidation (redox)-sensitive character of the heterodimer.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that CRY represses CLOCK-BMAL-mediated
transcription by interacting directly with the zfCLOCK-zfBMAL-E-box complex.

PMID: 12354100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Mol Pharmacol. 2002 Oct;62(4):806-16.

Ligand-dependent and independent modulation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor
localization, degradation, and gene regulation.

Song Z(1), Pollenz RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.

Changes in the concentration or subcellular location of the key proteins involved
in signal transduction pathways have been shown to impact gene regulation.
Studies were designed to evaluate the relationship between aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR) localization, stability, and gene regulation in a defined system
where the endogenous AHR protein could be evaluated. The findings indicate that
treatment of cells with geldanamycin (GA) or MG-132 (an inhibitor of the 26S
proteasome) results in nuclear translocation of the endogenous AHR in both human 
HepG2 and murine Hepa-1 cells without induction of endogenous CYP1A1 protein.
Exposure to GA resulted in the degradation of AHR by >90% in the nucleus via the 
26S proteasome. Importantly, the reduced level of AHR resulted in a 50% reduction
in the maximal level of CYP1A1 induced by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD). In all treatments the concentration of the AHR nuclear translocator
(ARNT) protein was unchanged and had no impact on the localization of the AHR.
Thus, ligand-independent translocation of the AHR to the nucleus was not
sufficient to induce CYP1A1 in the absence of ligand, but reductions in the level
of the endogenous AHR protein pool shifted the dose-response curve for TCDD to
the right.

PMID: 12237327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 Sep;133(1):127-34.

Estrous cycle-regulated expression of CYP1B1 mRNA in the rat ovary.

Dasmahapatra AK(1), Trewin AL, Hutz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, NIEHS Marine and Freshwater Biomedical
Sciences Center, 308 Lapham Hall, 3209 North Maryland Avenue, University of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.

CYP1B1, a member of the cytochrome p450 superfamily, is expressed constitutively 
in the steroidogenic tissues of mammals and is inducible by peptide hormones,
cAMP and aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) ligands. The mechanism of induction 
of this cytochrome p450 is similar to that for CYP1A1, i.e. through the aromatic 
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) signaling pathway. We have recently reported that
CYP1B1, but not CYP1A1, is expressed in rat granulosa cells (GC) in the absence
of any external stimulus. The induction of CYP1B1 mRNA in rat GC by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in vitro was followed by an increase
in AHR and estrogen receptor (ER-beta) RNA levels. Estrous cycle-dependent
expression of AHR, AHR-nuclear translocator (ARNT) and ER-mRNAs in the rat ovary 
was reported. We suggest that CYP1B1 may play a major role in the regulation of
rat ovarian function/cycle but until now this has been unexplored experimentally.
The present study was therefore aimed at examining the expression of CYP1A1,
CYP1B1 and ER-mRNA in rat ovarian tissues throughout the estrous cycle to
establish any correlation in the expressions of these mRNAs in rat ovary. Total
RNA was extracted from the ovary and liver of cycling adult rats and the mRNAs
were analyzed using relative RT-PCR with gene-specific primers for the target
mRNA and for RPL 19 or S16 primers as an internal control. The results indicated 
that in the ovary, CYP1B1 mRNA increased significantly on the evening of
proestrus and dramatically decreased on the morning of estrus, while ER-mRNA
remained unaltered throughout the estrous cycle. CYP1A1 mRNA in the ovary and
both CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 mRNAs in the liver were undetectable. That the sudden
decrease of ovarian CYP1B1 mRNA on the morning of estrus was not an effect of the
LH surge was verified in vitro using our short-term GC culture model. GC prepared
from rats super-stimulated with equine chorionic gonadotropin (eCG) were cultured
for 6 h with or without LH and TCDD. It was observed that both CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 
mRNAs were induced by TCDD with no apparent effect of LH. It is suggested that
the high level of CYP1B1 mRNA expression on the evening of proestrus in rat ovary
might be involved in metabolism of estrogens to catecholestrogen (a known effect 
of CYP1B1), and that expression is unaffected in GC by LH.

PMID: 12223220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 15;277(46):44236-43. Epub 2002 Sep 5.

Synthetic Smac/DIABLO peptides enhance the effects of chemotherapeutic agents by 
binding XIAP and cIAP1 in situ.

Arnt CR(1), Chiorean MV, Heldebrant MP, Gores GJ, Kaufmann SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo
Graduate School, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) interact with and inhibit caspases-3, -7, 
and -9. This interaction can be inhibited by Smac/DIABLO, a polypeptide released 
from mitochondria upon initiation of the apoptotic signaling process. Here we
demonstrate that the first 4-8 N-terminal amino acids of Smac/DIABLO fused to the
Drosophila antennapaedia penetratin sequence, a carrier peptide, enhance the
induction of apoptosis and long term antiproliferative effects of diverse
antineoplastic agents including paclitaxel, etoposide,
7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin (SN-38), and doxorubicin in MCF-7 breast cancer
cells. Similar effects were observed in additional breast cancer and immortalized
cholangiocyte cell lines. Further analysis demonstrated that the Smac-penetratin 
fusion peptide crossed the cellular membrane, bound XIAP and cIAP1, displaced
caspase-3 from cytoplasmic aggregates, and enhanced drug-induced caspase action
in situ. These studies demonstrate that inhibition of IAP proteins can modulate
the efficacy of antineoplastic agents.

PMID: 12218061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Toxicol Sci. 2002 Sep;69(1):117-24.

2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin causes alterations in lymphocyte development 
and thymic atrophy in hemopoietic chimeras generated from mice deficient in
ARNT2.

Laiosa MD(1), Lai ZW, Thurmond TS, Fiore NC, DeRossi C, Holdener BC, Gasiewicz
TA, Silverstone AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, State University of New York,
Upstate Medical University, 750 East Adams Street, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.

It is well established that dioxins cause a variety of toxic effects and
syndromes including alterations of lymphocyte development. Exposure to the
prototypical dioxin, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) leads to severe
thymic atrophy in all species studied. It has been shown that most of this
toxicity is due to TCDD binding to and activating the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AHR). Upon activation, the AHR enters the nucleus, dimerizes with the AHR
nuclear translocator (ARNT), and this heterodimer modulates a number of genes
that mediate toxicity. The AHR and ARNT are members of the
basic-helix-loop-helix-Per, ARNT, and Sim homology (bHLH-PAS) family of
transcription factors. In this study, we wanted to determine if another bHLH-PAS 
transcription factor, ARNT2, which has high amino acid sequence identity to ARNT 
and has been shown to dimerize with the TCDD-activated AHR, is involved in
mediating TCDD's effect on lymphocyte development. We determined by RT-PCR that
ARNT2 is expressed at a low level in whole thymus, thymocytes, and bone marrow
lymphocytes. We created hemopoietic chimeras by lethally irradiating C57BL/6 mice
and reconstituting them with fetal liver stem cells that either have or are
deficient in a portion of chromosome 7 that contains ARNT2. Regardless of whether
chimeras possessed or lacked this chromosome fragment, equal sensitivity to
TCDD-induced thymic atrophy was observed despite expression of ARNT2 in the
thymus. Furthermore, the absence of ARNT2 (or any other genes found on this
portion of chromosome 7) did not confer any protection against TCDD-induced
alterations in bone marrow B-cell subsets. These data indicate that in this model
system the effects of TCDD-induced thymic atrophy and alterations in B-cell
maturation are not dependent on an AHR-ARNT2 heterodimer.

PMID: 12215665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 8;277(45):42953-7. Epub 2002 Sep 4.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 transactivates the human leptin gene promoter.

Grosfeld A(1), Andre J, Hauguel-De Mouzon S, Berra E, Pouyssegur J, Guerre-Millo 
M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 465, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Université Pierre et Marie
Curie, 15 Rue de l'Ecole de Médecine, 75006 Paris, France.

Increased placental leptin has been demonstrated in preeclampsia, a pregnancy
disorder associated with placental hypoxia. This suggests that leptin gene
expression is enhanced in response to oxygen deficiency in this organ. In support
of this hypothesis, we have previously shown that hypoxia activates the leptin
promoter in trophoblast-derived BeWo cells. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is
a heterodimeric HIF-1alpha/HIF-1beta complex that regulates the transcription of 
hypoxia-responsive genes. To test whether this factor is involved in
hypoxia-induced leptin promoter activation, BeWo cells were transiently
transfected with a HIF-1alpha expression vector. Exogenous HIF-1alpha markedly
increased luciferase reporter activity driven by the leptin promoter when
HIF-1beta was co-expressed in the same cells. This effect was similar to that
elicited by CoCl2, an agent known to stabilize endogenous HIF-1alpha. These data 
suggest that HIF-1alpha/HIF-1beta dimers are involved in the effect of CoCl2 to
activate the leptin promoter. To confirm the implication of HIF-1, the cells were
transfected with a dominant negative form of HIF-1alpha producing
transcriptionally inactive HIF-1beta/HIF-1alpha dimers. This mutant HIF-1alpha
protein abolished CoCl2 activation of the leptin promoter, providing direct
evidence that the effect of CoCl2 is mediated by endogenous HIF-1alpha. Deletion 
analysis and site-specific mutagenesis demonstrated that a HIF-1 consensus
binding site (HRE) spanning -120 to -116 bp relative to the start site was
required for CoCl2 and exogenous HIF-1alpha induction of leptin promoter
activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays performed with in
vitro-translated HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta proteins demonstrated binding to this
HRE and not to mutated sequences only when both subunits were used together.
These data demonstrate that leptin is a new hypoxia-inducible gene, which is
stimulated in a placental cell line through HIF-1 interaction with a consensus
HRE site located at -116 in the proximal promoter.

PMID: 12215445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Biochem Pharmacol. 2002 Sep;64(5-6):889-92.

Is HIF-1alpha a pro- or an anti-apoptotic protein?

Piret JP(1), Mottet D, Raes M, Michiels C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie cellulaire, University of Namur, 61 rue
de Bruxelles, 5000, Namur, Belgium

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is the major transcription factor specifically
activated by hypoxia. It induces the expression of different genes whose products
play an adaptive role for hypoxic cells and tissues. Besides these protective
responses, HIF-1 and/or hypoxia have also been shown to be either anti-apoptotic 
or pro-apoptotic, according to the cell type and experimental conditions. More
severe or prolonged hypoxia rather induces apoptosis that is, at least in part,
initiated by the direct association of HIF-1alpha and p53 and p53-induced gene
expression. On the other hand, HIF-1alpha dimerized with ARNT, as an active
transcription factor, can protect cells from apoptosis induced by several
conditions. This review is aimed to describe the different mechanisms that
account for these opposite effects of HIF-1alpha.

PMID: 12213583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Chem Biol Interact. 2002 Sep 20;141(1-2):63-76.

DNA binding and protein interactions of the AHR/ARNT heterodimer that facilitate 
gene activation.

Swanson HI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Biomedical Pharmacology, University of Kentucky
Medical Center, MS 303, Lexington 40536, USA. hswan@uky.edu

Gene activation by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and its DNA binding
partner, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) requires a
number of sequential steps that occur following the binding of ligand and entry
of the AHR into the nuclear compartment. This includes heterodimerization of the 
AHR and ARNT, formation of the appropriate amino acid/nucleotide contacts at the 
GCGTG recognition site and interactions between either the AHR or ARNT with
proteins that facilitate changes in chromatin structure. The majority of these
steps are likely modulated by changes in both phosphorylation and oxidation
status of the AHR, ARNT and associated proteins. Studies of both the basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors and the nuclear hormone receptor family
can provide significant insights into how this unique signaling pathway activates
its target genes.

PMID: 12213385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Chem Biol Interact. 2002 Sep 20;141(1-2):41-61.

The mechanism of AH receptor protein down-regulation (degradation) and its impact
on AH receptor-mediated gene regulation.

Pollenz RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of South Florida, 4202 E Fowler Avenue, SCA 
110, Tampa 33620-5200, USA. pollenz@chuma1.cas.usf.edu

The proteolytic degradation of transcription factors is an established mechanism 
of regulating signal transduction pathways. Recent reports have suggested that
the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) protein is rapidly downregulated (degraded)
following ligand binding. The downregulation of AHR has been observed in nine
distinct cells culture lines derived from human and rodent tissues and has also
been observed in rodent models following exposure to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). The downregulation of AHR appears to 
be ubiquitin mediated and occurs via the 26S proteasome pathway following nuclear
export of AHR. The consequence of blocking AHR degradation in cell culture
appears to be an increase in both the magnitude and duration of gene regulation
by the AHR.ARNT complex. Thus, the physiological role of AHR degradation may be
to modulate AHR-mediated gene regulation. This review provides analysis of the
studies that have focused on the degradation of AHR in vivo and in vitro and the 
hypothesis that the downregulation of AHR is critical in the attenuation of
AHR-mediated gene regulation.

PMID: 12213384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Chem Biol Interact. 2002 Sep 20;141(1-2):25-40.

The role of chaperone proteins in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor core complex.

Petrulis JR(1), Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, Center for Molecular Toxicology and
Carcinogenesis, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park 16802, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) exists in the absence of a ligand as a
tetrameric complex composed of a 95-105 kDa ligand binding subunit, a dimer of
hsp90, and the immunophilin-like X-associated protein 2 (XAP2). XAP2 has a highly
conserved carboxy terminal tetratricopeptide repeat domain that is required for
both hsp90 and AhR binding. Hsp 90 appears to be involved in the initial folding 
of newly synthesized AhR, stabilization of ligand binding conformation of the
receptor, and inhibition of constitutive dimerization with ARNT. XAP2 is capable 
of stabilizing the AhR, as well as enhancing cytoplasmic localization of the
receptor. XAP2 binds to both the AhR and hsp90 in the receptor complex, and is
capable of independently binding to both hsp90 and the AhR. However, the exact
functional role for XAP2 in the AhR complex remains to be fully established.

PMID: 12213383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Cancer Res. 2002 Sep 1;62(17):5089-95.

The redox protein thioredoxin-1 (Trx-1) increases hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha
protein expression: Trx-1 overexpression results in increased vascular
endothelial growth factor production and enhanced tumor angiogenesis.

Welsh SJ(1), Bellamy WT, Briehl MM, Powis G.

Author information: 
(1)Arizona Cancer Center, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, 85724-5024,
USA. swelsh@azcc.arizona.edu

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), a heterodimer of HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta
subunits, is a transcriptional activator central to the cellular response to low 
oxygen that includes metabolic adaptation, angiogenesis, metastasis, and
inhibited apoptosis. Thioredoxin-1 (Trx-1) is a small redox protein overexpressed
in a number of human primary tumors. We have examined the effects of Trx-1 on HIF
activity and the activation of downstream genes. Stable transfection of human
breast carcinoma MCF-7 cells with human Trx-1 caused a significant increase in
HIF-1alpha protein levels under both normoxic (20% oxygen) and hypoxic (1%
oxygen) conditions. Trx-1 increased hypoxia-induced HIF-1 transactivation
activity measured using a luciferase reporter under the control of the hypoxia
response element. Changes in HIF-1alpha mRNA levels did not account for the
changes observed at the protein level, and HIF-1beta protein levels did not
change. Trx-1 transfection also caused a significant increase in the protein
products of hypoxia-responsive genes, including vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) and nitric oxide synthase 2 in a number of different cell lines
(MCF-7 human breast and HT29 human colon carcinomas and WEHI7.2 mouse lymphoma
cells) under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions. The pattern of expression of
the different isoforms of VEGF was not changed by Trx-1. Transfection of a
redox-inactive Trx-1 (C32S/C35S) markedly decreased levels of HIF-1alpha protein,
HIF-1 transactivating activity, and VEGF protein in MCF-7 cells compared with
empty vector controls. In vivo studies using WEHI7.2 cells transfected with Trx-1
showed significantly increased tumor VEGF and angiogenesis. The results suggest
that Trx-1 increases HIF-1alpha protein levels in cancer cells and increases VEGF
production and tumor angiogenesis.

PMID: 12208766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Endocrinology. 2002 Sep;143(9):3575-81.

3-Methylcholanthrene, which binds to the arylhydrocarbon receptor, inhibits
proliferation and differentiation of osteoblasts in vitro and ossification in
vivo.

Naruse M(1), Ishihara Y, Miyagawa-Tomita S, Koyama A, Hagiwara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo
226-8501, Japan.

3-Methylcholanthrene (3MC) is a ligand for arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR), which 
binds dioxin. We examined the effects of 3MC on the proliferation and
differentiation of osteoblasts using cultures of rat calvarial osteoblast-like
cells (ROB cells) and mouse calvarial clonal preosteoblastic cells (MC3T3-E1
cells). Analysis by RT-PCR revealed that the mRNAs for AhR and AhR nuclear
translocators were expressed in both ROB and MC3T3-E1 cells. Cell proliferation
and the synthesis of DNA by ROB cells and MC3T3-E1 cells were markedly inhibited 
on exposure of cells to 3MC. Furthermore, 3MC reduced the activity of alkaline
phosphatase and the rate of deposition of calcium by cells. The level of
expression of mRNA for osteocalcin, which is a marker of osteoblastic
differentiation, was also depressed by 3MC. Moreover, when 3MC (1 mg/kg body
weight) was administered sc to pregnant mice at 10.5, 12.5, and 14.5 d post
coitus, fetuses examined subsequently at 15.5 or 17.5 d post coitus revealed
evidence of inhibition of appropriate calcification of bones. The treated
metacarpals showed no subperiosteal bone matrix histologically. Our findings
indicate that 3MC might have critical effects on the formation of bone both in
vivo and in vitro.

PMID: 12193573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. FASEB J. 2002 Aug;16(10):1151-62.

Cellular adaptation to hypoxia: O2-sensing protein hydroxylases,
hypoxia-inducible transcription factors, and O2-regulated gene expression.

Wenger RH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Carl-Ludwig-Institute of Physiology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. 
wenr@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

Although it was known for a long time that oxygen deprivation leads to the
transcriptional induction of the gene encoding erythropoietin, the molecular
mechanisms behind this process remained enigmatic. The cloning of the
hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs), the finding that HIF-1 regulates the expression
of many more genes apart from erythropoietin, and the elucidation of the
oxygen-dependent mechanisms degrading the HIF alpha subunits recently led to the 
spectacular discovery of the molecular principles of oxygen sensing. This review 
aims to summarize our current knowledge of oxygen-regulated gene expression..

PMID: 12153983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2002 Aug 15;404(2):309-16.

Induction and superinduction of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-rho-dioxin-inducible
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase: role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor/aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator transcription activation domains and a 
labile transcription repressor.

Ma Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Biology Laboratory, Toxicology and Molecular Biology Branch, Health
Effects Laboratory Division, National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Morgantown, WV 26505, USA.
qam1@cdc.gov

Erratum in
    Arch Biochem Biophys. 2003 Sep 1;417(1):129.

The environmental contaminant 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) induces 
a novel poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (TiPARP). In this study, the signaling
pathway of the induction was analyzed. Induction of TiPARP by TCDD occurs in both
hepa1c1c7 cells and C57 mouse liver. Induction is concentration and time
dependent. Genetic analyses reveal that induction is abolished in aromatic
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)- or aromatic hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(Arnt)-defective variants but restored upon reconstitution of the variant cells
with cDNAs expressing functional AhR or Arnt. Moreover, induction is largely
reduced in cells expressing a deletion mutant of AhR or Arnt lacking the
transcription activation (TA) domain, thus implicating the TA activities of both 
AhR and Arnt in the induction. Inhibition of protein synthesis by cycloheximide
enhances the induction of TiPARP in the presence of an AhR agonist. The
superinduction is transcriptional and does not require pretreatment with TCDD.
Finally, inhibition of the 26S proteasomes by MG132 superinduces TiPARP. These
findings establish that induction of TiPARP by TCDD is mediated through an AhR
and Arnt transcription activation-dependent signal transduction that is repressed
by a labile factor through the ubiquitin-26S proteasome-mediated protein
degradation.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12147270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2002 Jul 15;403(2):189-201.

The silencing mediator of retinoic acid and thyroid hormone receptors can
interact with the aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor but fails to repress Ah
receptor-dependent gene expression.

Rushing SR(1), Denison MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California at Davis,
Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Exposure to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related chemicals
causes a variety of tissue- and species-specific biological and toxicological
effects, most of which are mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). The
AhR complex is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that binds to its specific
DNA recognition site as a dimer with the AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT) and
activates gene transcription. Here, we have examined the ability of a nuclear
corepressor, the silencing mediator of retinoic acid and thyroid hormone
receptors (SMRT), to interact with and modulate AhR-dependent gene expression.
Using glutathione S-transferase (GST) "pull-down" binding assays, we have mapped 
a major interaction between these factors to the silencing domain of SMRT and the
PAS B ligand binding domain of AhR, and this interaction is unaffected by the
addition of an AhR ligand. Association of SMRT with the AhR:ARNT:DNA complex was 
not detected by GST pull-down or gel retardation assays. Transient
cotransfections of mammalian cells (Hepa1c1c7, MCF-7, and BG-1) with SMRT and a
TCDD-inducible luciferase reporter containing the dioxin-responsive domain from
the mouse CYP1A1 regulatory region revealed that SMRT does not repress, but
enhances, AhR signaling. However, when a reporter containing a human CYP1A1
upstream region was cotransfected with SMRT into human MCF-7 cells, AhR-driven
reporter activity was decreased by half, suggesting that SMRT acts on the human
CYP1A1 promoter via a factor other than the AhR in MCF-7 cells. Furthermore, the 
interaction between SMRT and the AhR may have implications in pathways other than
the AhR signaling pathway.

PMID: 12139968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Reprod Toxicol. 2002 May-Jun;16(3):299-307.

Alteration in ovarian gene expression in response to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin: reduction of cyclooxygenase-2 in the
blockage of ovulation.

Mizuyachi K(1), Son DS, Rozman KK, Terranova PF.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Reproductive Sciences and Department of Molecular & Integrative
Physiology, University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas
City, KS 66160-7417, USA.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is a reproductive toxicant and
endocrine disrupter that is known to block ovulation. This study was designed to 
investigate alterations in relevant ovarian genes that may be involved in the
blockage of ovulation by TCDD in immature intact rats primed with equine
chorionic gonadotropin (eCG). In this ovulation model, rats were given either 32 
microg/kg TCDD or corn oil by gavage on 25 days of age. The next day, eCG (5 IU) 
was injected subcutaneously (s.c.) to stimulate follicular development. Ovulation
occurs 72 h after administration of eCG in controls of this model. TCDD blocked
ovulation at the expected time and also reduced both ovarian and body weights. At
72 h after eCG (the morning after expected ovulation), TCDD did not alter
significantly serum concentrations of progesterone (P4) and androstenedione (A4).
However, estradiol (E2) was significantly higher at 72 h after eCG in
TCDD-treated rats when compared with controls. Western blots revealed that
ovarian CYP1A1 was induced by TCDD. In addition, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR) and AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT) were down- and up-regulated by TCDD,
respectively, indicating that AhR-mediated signal transduction was altered in the
ovary. Ovarian estrogen receptor (ER)alpha, ER beta and progesterone receptor
(PR) were not altered significantly by TCDD, but ovarian glucocorticoid receptor 
(GR) was increased at 24h after TCDD and decreased at 72 h after eCG when
compared with controls. TCDD induced the early appearance of ovarian plasminogen 
activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1), plasminogen activator inhibitor type-2
(PAI-2), urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA), and tissue plasminogen activator 
(tPA) at 24h after dosing when compared with controls. On the morning after
ovulation (72 h after eCG), no significant differences between control and
TCDD-treated rats were observed except that TCDD had still increased tPA and
decreased PAI-2 when compared with controls. Interestingly, ovarian COX-2 was
induced on the morning after ovulation (72 h after eCG) in controls, but was
greatly inhibited in TCDD-treated rats at that time. On the other hand, COX-1 was
constitutively expressed throughout the ovulatory period and remained unaffected 
by TCDD. Immunolocalization of COX-2 in the ovary revealed that TCDD inhibited
COX-2 expression in the granulosa cell layer when assessed in the morning of
expected ovulation. In conclusion, AhR signaling is activated in the ovary by
TCDD and inhibition of COX-2 appeared to be a critical step in the TCDD blockage 
of ovulation because blockage or reduction of COX-2 expression is well known to
be associated with failure of ovulation.

PMID: 12128104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2002 Aug 1;404(1):55-61.

Oct2 transcription factor of a teleost fish: activation domains and function from
an enhancer.

Cioffi CC(1), Pollenz RS, Middleton DL, Wilson MR, Miller NW, William Clem L,
Warr GW, Ross DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Oct2 transcription factors of the catfish (Ictalurus punctatus) are expressed as 
alternatively spliced alpha and beta isoforms. Functional analysis revealed an
N-terminal glutamine (Q)-rich transactivation domain common to both isoforms of
catfish Oct2. A C-terminal proline, serine, threonine (PST)-rich activation
domain was identified exclusively in the beta isoform. Activation domains of fish
and mammalian Oct2 showed cell type- and species-specific activity correlated
with their biochemical composition (Q-rich vs PST-rich). In contrast the
activation domains of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator of fish and mammals showed no correlation of activity with
biochemical composition or species of origin. Although isolated catfish Oct2
activation domains were unable to drive transcription from a site 1.9kb distal to
the promoter, Oct2beta activated transcription from both an IgH enhancer and an
array of octamer motifs at this distal position. The properties of catfish Oct2
activation domains differ depending on whether they are studied in isolation or
as components of the intact transcription factor.

PMID: 12127069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 6;277(36):32405-8. Epub 2002 Jul 15.

Inhibitory PAS domain protein (IPAS) is a hypoxia-inducible splicing variant of
the hypoxia-inducible factor-3alpha locus.

Makino Y(1), Kanopka A, Wilson WJ, Tanaka H, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska 
Institute, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

The inhibitory PAS (Per/Arnt/Sim) domain protein, IPAS, functions as a dominant
negative regulator of hypoxia-inducible transcription factors (HIFs) by forming
complexes with those proteins that fail to bind to hypoxia response elements of
target genes. We have previously observed that IPAS is predominantly expressed in
mice in Purkinje cells of the cerebellum and in corneal epithelium of the eye
where it appears to play a role in negative regulation of angiogenesis and
maintenance of an avascular phenotype. Sequencing of the mouse IPAS genomic
structure revealed that IPAS is a splicing variant of the HIF-3alpha locus. Thus,
in addition to three unique exons (1a, 4a, and 16) IPAS shares three exons (2, 4,
and 5) with HIF-3alpha as well as alternatively spliced variants of exons 3 and
6. In experiments using normal mice and mice exposed to hypoxia (6% O(2)) for 6 h
we observed alternative splicing of the HIF-3alpha transcript in the heart and
lung. The alternatively spliced transcript was only observed under hypoxic
conditions, thus defining a novel mechanism of hypoxia-dependent regulation of
gene expression. Importantly, this mechanism may establish negative feedback loop
regulation of adaptive responses to hypoxia/ischemia in these tissues.

PMID: 12119283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Arch Toxicol. 2002 Jul;76(7):404-13. Epub 2002 May 16.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) induces plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1 through an aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated pathway in mouse
hepatoma cell lines.

Son DS(1), Rozman KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo- p-dioxin (TCDD), a ubiquitous environmental
pollutant, elicits a variety of toxicities and is a well-known carcinogen. TCDD
alters the expression of many genes including CYP1A1/2, CYP1B1, glutathione
S-transferase Ya, aldehyde-3-dehydrogenase, NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase,
transforming growth factor (TGF)-alpha and TGF-beta. The present study was aimed 
at characterization of TCDD to induce plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1)
in mouse hepatoma cell lines. A Hepa1c1c7 wild-type cell [H1(wt)], an aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-deficient mutant [H1(AhR(-))] and an AhR nuclear
translocator (Arnt)-deficient mutant [H1(Arnt(-))] were used for this study. TCDD
induced PAI-1 in H1(wt) cells, but not in H1(AhR(-)) and H1(Arnt(-)) mutants,
indicating a functional role of the AhR-Arnt complex in this effect.
Cycloheximide (CHX) treatment resulted in increased PAI-1 mRNA induction,
indicating that this response to TCDD is a direct effect on transcription and not
a secondary effect mediated by other TCDD-induced proteins. Transfection with
PAI-1 promoter led to increased PAI-1 promoter activity in H1(wt) cells treated
with TCDD, but no such effect occurred in H1(AhR(-)) or H1(Arnt(-)) cells,
implying involvement of the AhR and Arnt. In addition, alpha-naphthoflavone and
phenanthroline, two AhR antagonists, each blocked the enhancing effect of TCDD on
PAI-1 promoter-coupled luciferase activity in H1(wt) cells. PAI-1 promoter
deletion analysis indicated that TCDD-induced PAI-1 transcription was distinctly 
different from TGF-beta-dependent PAI-1 transcription, particularly in the region
between -161 to +73. In summary, TCDD induced the PAI-1 gene directly via an AhR-
and Arnt-dependent mechanism, which was distinctly different from TGF-beta-driven
PAI-1 transcription.

PMID: 12111005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Med Chem. 2002 Jul 18;45(15):3280-5.

Synthesis and pharmacological testing of
1,2,3,4,10,14b-hexahydro-6-methoxy-2-methyldibenzo[c,f]pyrazino[1,2-a]azepin and 
its enantiomers in comparison with the two antidepressants mianserin and
mirtazapine.

Wikström HV(1), Mensonides-Harsema MM, Cremers TI, Moltzen EK, Arnt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University Center for Pharmacy, University 
of Groningen, A. Deusinglaan 1, NL-9713 AV, Groningen, The Netherlands.
h.v.wikstrom@farm.rug.nl

The synthesis and resolution of
1,2,3,4,10,14b-hexahydro-6-methoxy-2-methyldibenzo[c,f]pyrazino[1,2-a]azepin
(6-methoxymianserin, 6) are described. Furthermore, the in vitro and in vivo
effects of 6 and its enantiomers are presented. 6 displayed high affinity for the
5-HT2A/2C receptors, only moderate affinity for the adrenoceptors, and no
affinity for the NA reuptake site. Surprisingly, 6 also showed moderate to high
affinity for the dopamine D2 receptor, an effect that resides in the
(R)-(-)-enantiomer.

PMID: 12109911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Arch Toxicol. 2002 Jun;76(5-6):287-98. Epub 2002 Apr 10.

Induction of CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1 mRNAs by nitropolycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons in various human tissue-derived cells: chemical-, cytochrome P450
isoform-, and cell-specific differences.

Iwanari M(1), Nakajima M, Kizu R, Hayakawa K, Yokoi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Drug Metabolism, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kanazawa
University, Takara-machi 13-1, Kanazawa 920-0934, Japan.

Nitropolycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (NPAHs) are found in diesel exhaust and
ambient air. NPAHs as well as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are known
to have mutagenicity, carcinogenicity, and endocrine-disruptive effects. In the
present study, the inducibility of the human cytochrome P450-1 (CYP1) family by
NPAHs was compared with those produced by their parent PAHs and some reductive
metabolites, amino-PAHs. Furthermore, to investigate the differences in the
inducibility of the CYP1 family in human tissues, various human tissue-derived
cell lines, namely HepG2 (hepatocellular carcinoma), ACHN (renal carcinoma), A549
(lung carcinoma), MCF-7 (breast carcinoma), LS-180 (colon carcinoma), HT-1197
(bladder carcinoma), HeLa (cervix of uterus adenocarcinoma), OMC-3 (ovarian
carcinoma), and NEC14 (testis embryonal carcinoma), were treated with NPAHs,
PAHs, or amino-PAHs. The mRNA levels of CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1 were
determined with reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The
cell lines were classified into two groups: CYP1 inducible cell lines, comprising
HepG2, MCF-7, LS-180, and OMC-3 cells, and CYP1 non-inducible cell lines,
comprising ACHN, A549, HT-1197, HeLa, and NEC14 cells. In inducible cell lines,
the induction profile of chemical specificity was similar for CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and
CYP1B1, although the extent of induction differed among the cell lines and for
the CYP isoforms. Pyrene, 1-nitropyrene, 1-aminopyrene, 1,3-, 1,6-, and
1,8-dinitropyrenes slightly induced CYP1 mRNAs, but 1,3-dinitropyrene produced a 
6-fold induction of CYP1A1 mRNA in MCF-7 cells. 2-Nitrofluoranthene and
3-nitrofluoranthene exhibited stronger inducibility than fluoranthene in the
inducible cell lines. 6-Nitrochrysene induced CYP1 mRNAs to the same extent or
more potently than chrysene. The induction potencies of 6-nitrobenzo[ a]pyrene
and 7-nitrobenz[ a]anthracene were weaker than those of their parents benzo[
a]pyrene and benz[ a]anthracene, respectively. This study demonstrated that NPAHs
as well as PAHs induced human CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1 in a chemical-, CYP
isoform-, and cell-specific manner. Furthermore, the cell-specific induction of
the CYP1 family was not related to the expression levels of aryl hydrocarbon
receptor, aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator, or estrogen receptors alpha and 
beta.

PMID: 12107646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Biochem Pharmacol. 2002 Jul 1;64(1):49-60.

Analysis of rainbow trout Ah receptor protein isoforms in cell culture reveals
conservation of function in Ah receptor-mediated signal transduction.

Pollenz RS(1), Necela B, Marks-Sojka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of South Florida, 4202 East Fowler Avenue,
SCA 110, Tampa, FL 33620-5200, USA.

Two distinct aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) cDNAs have been isolated from
rainbow trout. The encoded receptor protein products termed rtAHR2alpha and
rtAHR2ss are 97% identical at the amino acid level but are reported to have
distinct functions with regard to AHR-mediated gene regulation. To test this
hypothesis, the two proteins were evaluated functionally both in vitro and in a
Chinese hamster lung cell line, E36. To facilitate analysis, both rtAHR2 isoforms
were tagged with the FLAG peptide and could be expressed and quantified in a
rabbit reticulocyte lysate. However, both proteins failed to form functional
complexes with mammalian or rainbow trout AHR nuclear translocator protein (ARNT)
that could associate with xenobiotic response elements (XREs) in a
ligand-dependent manner in vitro. In contrast, both proteins exhibited positive
function on AHR-mediated signaling when expressed in the E36 cell line. Both
rtAHR2 isoforms showed a cytoplasmic distribution in the unliganded state and
could drive the expression of a reporter gene under control of the trout CYP1A3
promoter. Although both proteins induced reporter gene activity to the same
magnitude, the EC(50) values of the two isoforms for
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) differed by an order of magnitude,
with the rtAHR2ss isoform less responsive to TCDD. When the functions of the
rtAHR2 isoforms were tested in the context of the dominant negative rtARNT(a)
protein, TCDD-mediated induction of reporter gene activity was reduced as the
level of rtARNT(a) protein increased. In summary, both rtAHR2 isoforms appear to 
exhibit positive function in AHR-mediated signaling, suggesting conservation of
function.

PMID: 12106605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Science. 2002 Aug 2;297(5582):840-3. Epub 2002 Jul 4.

White collar-1, a DNA binding transcription factor and a light sensor.

He Q(1), Cheng P, Yang Y, Wang L, Gardner KH, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2002 Aug 2;297(5582):777-8.

Blue light regulates many physiological processes in fungi, but their
photoreceptors are not known. In Neurospora crassa, all light responses depend on
the Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain-containing transcription factor white collar-1
(wc-1). By removing the WC-1 light, oxygen, or voltage domain, a specialized PAS 
domain that binds flavin mononucleotide in plant phototropins, we show that light
responses are abolished, including light entrainment of the circadian clock.
However, the WC-1-mediated dark activation of frq remains normal in this mutant, 
and the circadian clock can be entrained by temperature. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that the purified Neurospora WC-1-WC-2 protein complex is associated 
with stoichiometric amounts of the chromophore flavin-adenine dinucleotide.
Together, these observations suggest that WC-1 is the blue-light photoreceptor
for the circadian clock and other light responses in Neurospora.

PMID: 12098705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Biochem. 2002 Jul;132(1):37-44.

Human hypoxic signal transduction through a signature motif in hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4.

Tsuchiya T(1), Kominato Y, Ueda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Research Center for Molecular Medical
Science, 35-1 Shimo, Fussa, Tokyo 197-0023, Japan. rcmms@v004.vaio.ne.jp

We identified a human hypoxic signal transduction pathway acting through a
signature motif in the carboxyl terminal of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF-4), 
by functional comparison of the transcriptional and protein-protein interaction
activities of the wild type and mutants. It was previously shown that HNF-4
functions as a tissue-specific and hypoxia-activated transcription factor for the
erythropoietin (Epo) gene. Human HNF-4 (465 amino acid residues) has DNA-binding,
ligand-binding, and transactivation domains. The deletion mutant without the
carboxyl terminal transactivation domain (amino acids 369-465) has been shown to 
be a dominant-negative mutant that repressed Epo transcriptional activity in
hypoxia. Further characterization of the hypoxia-responsive domain by
site-directed mutagenesis indicated that a TKQE motif of the carboxyl terminal
(amino acids 460-463) in HNF-4 was essential for hypoxia-inducible Epo gene
expression. We also found, by means of immunoprecipitation and a mammalian
two-hybrid system, direct interactions between HNF-4 and hypoxia-inducible factor
1 (HIF-1), a heterodimer composed of alpha and beta subunits. HNF-4 was observed 
to interact with HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta (arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator, ARNT) during hypoxia. In addition, the TKQE motif of HNF-4 was
essential for protein-protein interactions with HIF-1alpha and ARNT. These
results indicate that the human hypoxic signal of HIF-1 is transduced through
interactions with the signature TKQE motif of the carboxyl terminal of HNF-4,
resulting in Epo gene expression as a response to hypoxia.

PMID: 12097158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Am Chem Soc. 2002 Jul 3;124(26):7664-5.

New poly(phenyleneethynylene)s with cationic, facially amphiphilic structures.

Arnt L(1), Tew GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Polymer Science and Engineering, University of
Massachusetts-Amherst, 120 Governors Drive, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Polymers based on meta substituted phenylene ethylene are prepared with patterned
polar and nonpolar groups to favor an extended conformation. These polymers were 
characterized at the air-water interface by Langmuir techniques and found to form
stable monolayers with an extended conformation based on molecular models. In
addition, these polymers show phospholipid membrane activity as measured by
induced leakage of calcein from large unilamellar vesicles. These polymers
represent new facially amphiphilic structures which are cationic in nature and
surface active.

PMID: 12083913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Int J Dev Biol. 2002 May;46(3):295-300.

Expression of the mediators of dioxin toxicity, aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)
and the AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT), is developmentally regulated in mouse
teeth.

Sahlberg C(1), Pohjanvirta R, Gao Y, Alaluusua S, Tuomisto J, Lukinmaa PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pedodontics and Orthodontics, Institute of Dentistry, University
of Helsinki, Finland. carin.sahlberg@helsinki.fi

Dioxins are persistent and ubiquitous environmental poisons that become enriched 
in the food chain. Besides being acutely lethal, the most toxic dioxin congener, 
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), is developmentally toxic to many
animal species. We have previously found that developing teeth of children may be
sensitive to environmental dioxins via their mother's milk and that rat and mouse
teeth are dioxin-sensitive throughout their development. The aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR) together with the AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) protein is
believed to mediate the toxic effects of dioxins. To study the potential
involvement of the AHR-ARNT pathway in the dental toxicity of TCDD, we analysed
the expression of AHR and ARNT by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry 
in developing mouse teeth. AHR mRNA first appeared in the epithelium of E12 first
molar tooth buds and both proteins were weakly expressed in the bud. After
cytodifferentiation the expression was up regulated and became intense in
secretory odontoblasts and ameloblasts. The coexpression of AHR and ARNT during
early tooth development as well as during the information and mineralization of
the dental matrices is suggestive of the AHR-ARNT pathway as a mediator of dental
toxicity of TCDD.

PMID: 12068950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Aquat Toxicol. 2002 Jul;58(1-2):57-73.

cDNA cloning and characterization of an aryl hydrocarbon receptor from the harbor
seal (Phoca vitulina): a biomarker of dioxin susceptibility?

Kim EY(1), Hahn ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, MS 32, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole,
MA 02543, USA.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related planar halogenated
aromatic hydrocarbons (PHAHs) are found at high concentrations in some marine
mammals. Species differences in sensitivity to TCDD and PHAHs are a major
limitation in assessing the ecological risk to these animals. Harbor seals
accumulate high levels of PHAHs and are thought to be highly sensitive to the
toxic effects of these compounds. To investigate the mechanistic basis for PHAH
toxicity in harbor seals (Phoca vitulina), we sought to characterize the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), an intracellular protein that is responsible for PHAH
effects. Here we report the cDNA cloning and characterization of a harbor seal
AHR. The harbor seal AHR cDNA has an open reading frame of 2529 nucleotides that 
encodes a protein of 843 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of 94.6 kDa.
The harbor seal AHR protein possesses basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and
Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domains. It is most closely related to the beluga AHR (82%)
and human AHR (79%) in overall amino acid identity, indicating a high degree of
conservation of AHR structure between terrestrial and some marine mammals. The
ligand binding properties of the harbor seal AHR were determined using protein
synthesized by in vitro transcription and translation from the cloned cDNA.
Velocity sedimentation analysis on sucrose gradients showed that the harbor seal 
AHR exhibits specific binding of [(3)H]TCDD. The [(3)H]TCDD-binding affinity of
the harbor seal AHR was compared with that of the AHR from a dioxin-sensitive
mouse strain (C57BL/6) using a hydroxylapatite assay. The equilibrium
dissociation constants of seal and mouse AHRs were 0.93+/-0.19 and 1.70+/-0.26
nM, respectively. Thus, the harbor seal AHR bound TCDD with an affinity that was 
at least as high as that of the mouse AHR, suggesting that this seal species may 
be sensitive to PHAH effects. The characteristics of the AHR potentially can be
used as a biomarker of susceptibility to dioxin-like compounds, contributing to
the assessment of the risk of these compounds to marine mammals and other
protected animals.

PMID: 12062155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Mol Biol Cell. 2002 Jun;13(6):2001-15.

Recruitment of dioxin receptor to active transcription sites.

Elbi C(1), Misteli T, Hager GL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-5055, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR or dioxin receptor) is a ligand-activated
transcription factor that heterodimerizes with the AhR nuclear translocator
(ARNT/HIF-1beta) to form an AhR/ARNT transcription factor complex. This complex
binds to specific DNA sites in the regulatory domains of numerous target genes
and mediates the biological effects of exogenous ligands. Herein, we have
investigated the subcellular distribution of the AhR/ARNT complex in response to 
ligand stimulation, by using live-cell confocal and high-resolution deconvolution
microscopy. We found that unliganded AhR shows a predominantly cytoplasmic
diffuse distribution in mouse hepatoma cells. On addition of ligand, AhR rapidly 
translocates to the nucleus and accumulates in multiple bright foci. Inhibition
of transcription prevented the formation of AhR foci. Dual- and
triple-immunolabeling experiments, combined with labeling of nascent RNA, showed 
that the foci are transcription sites, indicating that upon ligand stimulation,
AhR is recruited to active transcription sites. The interaction of AhR with ARNT 
was both necessary and sufficient for the recruitment of AhR to transcription
sites. These results indicate that AhR/ARNT complexes are recruited to specific
subnuclear compartments in a ligand-dependent manner and that these foci
represent the sites of AhR target genes.

PMCID: PMC117620
PMID: 12058065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2002 Jul;283(1):C103-14.

Alternative splicing yields novel BMAL2 variants: tissue distribution and
functional characterization.

Schoenhard JA(1), Eren M, Johnson CH, Vaughan DE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology,
Vanderbilt University, Tennessee 37235, USA.

The BMAL2 gene encodes a member of the basic helix-loop-helix PER-ARNT-SIM family
of transcription factors, which control diverse physiological processes including
circadian rhythms. We identified four novel human BMAL2 transcripts that differ
by alternative splicing within their NH2-terminal regions. Divergent expression
of these and previously reported transcripts was observed among human tissues.
The functional consequences of alternative splicing for transcriptional
activation by CLOCK:BMAL2 heterodimers were assessed using luciferase reporter
gene constructs that contained one of three diurnally regulated promoters,
namely, those of the mouse period1, mouse vasopressin, and human plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 genes. These studies revealed that alternative splicing
generates BMAL2 isoforms possessing high, medium, low, or no transcriptional
activity. Similar results were obtained with each promoter, suggesting that
alternative splicing may influence the amplitudes of both central and peripheral 
oscillators. Indeed, alternative splicing of BMAL2 may provide tissues with a
rheostat capable of regulating CLOCK:BMAL2 heterodimer function across a broad
continuum of potential transcriptional activities to accommodate varied metabolic
demands and physiological roles.

PMID: 12055078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Apr 26;293(1):446-50.

The dietary flavonoid quercetin modulates HIF-1 alpha activity in endothelial
cells.

Wilson WJ(1), Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska 
Institutet, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

The mechanism of activation of the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible
factor-1 (HIF-1) has been studied extensively. Under normal cellular oxygen
conditions protein levels of the alpha subunit (HIF-1 alpha) are kept low due to 
massive ubiquitination and subsequent proteosomal degradation. However, during
hypoxia ubiquitination is inhibited, causing stabilisation of the HIF-1 alpha
protein. HIF-1 alpha can then translocate to the nucleus and facilitate
transcription of numerous target genes, the majority of which are involved in
glycolysis and angiogenesis via heterodimerisation with the beta subunit (HIF-1
beta/ARNT). Until now hypoxia has been the only naturally occurring signal shown 
to activate this transcription factor. We report here that the dietary flavonoid 
quercetin also activates HIF-1 alpha in all steps of its activation pathway, in a
manner similar to hypoxia. We found that quercetin, an inhibitor of Ser/Thr
kinases, stabilises HIF-1 alpha and causes nuclear localisation of the protein in
a transcriptionally active state. Taken together these results strongly indicate 
that the dietary flavonoid quercetin regulates HIF-1 function at normal oxygen
concentrations.

PMID: 12054621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Cell Biol Toxicol. 2002;18(2):109-20.

Okadaic acid increases ARNT homodimer transactivation potential.

Levine SL(1), Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science and the Center for Molecular Toxicology and
Carcinogenesis, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park 16802, USA.

The human aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (hARNT) protein belongs to the
family of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) PAS transcription factors and regulates a
range of cellular processes by either homodimerizing or heterodimerizing with
other bHLH-PAS proteins. hARNT has been shown to be almost exclusively
phosphorylated on serine residues. However, regulation of hARNT with respect to
phosphorylation remains poorly understood. The phosphatase inhibitor okadaic acid
was used to explore whether a change in hARNT phosphorylation status could
influence hARNT homodimer activity. The hARNT homodimer has been shown to bind to
E boxes and E-box binding factors are believed to be important in the regulation 
of cell differentiation and proliferation. Okadaic acid significantly increased
hARNT-mediated class B, E-box-driven reporter activity in COS-1 cells,
transiently expressing hARNT without affecting hARNT protein levels. This
alteration in hARNT-mediated class B, E-box-driven reporter activity correlates
with an observed increase in [32P]orthophosphate incorporation into hARNT.
Treatment with okadaic acid resulted in a 12-fold increase in [32P]orthophosphate
incorporation into hARNT that was transiently expressed in COS-1 cells; an
increase in the number of tryptic phosphopeptides generated from hARNT digests on
two-dimensional phosphopeptide maps was also observed. Despite the significant
increase in [32P]orthophosphate incorporation into hARNT, serine remained the
predominantly phosphorylated residue. Clearly, increased serine phosphorylation
does not appear to negatively regulate hARNT homodimerization or transactivation 
potential. These results demonstrate that increased hARNT homodimer signaling in 
COS-1 cells may result from a direct change in hARNT phosphorylation status.

PMID: 12046689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Hum Genet. 2002;47(5):217-24.

Variability of the human aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)
gene.

Scheel J(1), Hussong R, Schrenk D, Schmitz HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Food Chemistry and Environmental Toxicology, University of Kaiserslautern,
Kaiserslautern, Germany. scheel@axaron.com

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) plays an essential role
in vertebrate transcriptional regulation as the common subunit of
transcriptionally active complexes like the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)/ARNT 
heterodimer and hypoxia-inducible factor 1, mediating cellular responses to
certain xenobiotics and to hypoxia, respectively. A cohort of healthy Caucasian
volunteers was screened for genetic variations of ARNT. Six polymorphic sites
could be identified, a variation in a G-stretch upstream of the ATG translation
start site, a frequent silent mutation (G567C), two polymorphic sites in intron
9, and two single nucleotide substitutions leading to amino acid exchanges,
G1531A (D511N) and T1551G (D517E). The frequencies were 0.005 for the Asn-coding 
allele and for the Glu-coding allele, respectively, with no linkage between these
two mutations. Although no significant correlation with activities of CYP1A2,
which is under regulatory control of the AHR/ARNT transcription complex, could be
established, metabolic or pathological phenotypes may be associated with these
variations.

PMID: 12032587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 May 28;99(11):7728-33.

Bimodal regulation of mPeriod promoters by CREB-dependent signaling and
CLOCK/BMAL1 activity.

Travnickova-Bendova Z(1), Cermakian N, Reppert SM, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique-Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale-Université Louis Pasteur, B.P. 10142, 67404
Illkirch-Strasbourg, France.

Circadian rhythmicity in mammals is under the control of a molecular pacemaker
constituted of clock gene products organized in transcriptional autoregulatory
loops. Phase resetting of the clock in response to light involves dynamic changes
in the expression of several clock genes. The molecular pathways used by light to
influence pacemaker-driven oscillation of clock genes remain poorly understood.
We explored the functional integration of both light- and clock-responsive
transcriptional regulation at the promoter level of the Period (Per) genes. Three
Per genes exist in the mouse. Whereas mPer1 and mPer2 are light-inducible in
clock neurons of the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus, mPer3 is not. We have 
studied the promoter structure of the three mPer genes and compared their
regulation. All three mPer promoters contain E-boxes and respond to the
CLOCK/brain and muscle aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)-like
protein 1 (BMAL1) heterodimer. On the other hand, only mPer1 and mPer2 promoters 
contain bona fide cAMP-responsive elements (CREs) that bind CRE-binding protein
(CREB) from suprachiasmatic nucleus protein extracts. The mPer1 promoter is
responsive to synergistic activation of the cAMP and mitogen-activated protein
kinase pathways, a physiological response that requires integrity of the CRE. In 
contrast, activation of mPer promoters by CLOCK/BMAL1 occurs regardless of an
intact CRE. Altogether, these results constitute strong evidence that CREB acts
as a pivotal endpoint of signaling pathways for the regulation of mPer genes. Our
results reveal that signaling-dependent activation of mPer genes is distinct from
the CLOCK/BMAL1-driven transcription required within the clock feedback loop.

PMCID: PMC124335
PMID: 12032351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jun;22(12):4319-33.

Recruitment of the NCoA/SRC-1/p160 family of transcriptional coactivators by the 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor/aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator complex.

Beischlag TV(1), Wang S, Rose DW, Torchia J, Reisz-Porszasz S, Muhammad K, Nelson
WE, Probst MR, Rosenfeld MG, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Molecular Biology Institute, 
and Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of
California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex heterodimeric transcription factor,
comprising the basic helix-loop-helix-Per-ARNT-Sim (bHLH-PAS) domain aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT) proteins, mediates the toxic effects of TCDD (2,3,7,8
tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin). The molecular events underlying TCDD-inducible gene
activation, beyond the activation of the AHRC, are poorly understood. The
SRC-1/NCoA-1, NCoA-2/GRIP-1/TIF-2, and p/CIP/AIB/ACTR proteins have been shown to
act as mediators of transcriptional activation. In this report, we demonstrate
that SRC-1, NCoA-2, and p/CIP are capable of independently enhancing
TCDD-dependent induction of a luciferase reporter gene by the AHR/ARNT dimer.
Furthermore, injection of anti-SRC-1 or anti-p/CIP immunoglobulin G into
mammalian cells abolishes the transcriptional activity of a TCDD-dependent
reporter gene. We demonstrate by coimmunoprecipitation and by a reporter gene
assay that SRC-1 and NCoA-2 but not p/CIP are capable of interacting with ARNT in
vivo after transient transfection into mammalian cells, while AHR is capable of
interacting with all three coactivators. We confirm the interactions of ARNT and 
AHR with SRC-1 with immunocytochemical techniques. Furthermore, SRC-1, NCoA-2,
and p/CIP all associate with the CYP1A1 enhancer region in a TCDD-dependent
fashion, as demonstrated by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. We demonstrate 
by yeast two-hybrid, glutathione S-transferase pulldown, and mammalian reporter
gene assays that ARNT requires its helix 2 domain but not its transactivation
domain to interact with SRC-1. This indicates a novel mechanism of action for
SRC-1. SRC-1 does not require its bHLH-PAS domain to interact with ARNT or AHR,
but utilizes distinct domains proximal to its p300/CBP interaction domain. Taken 
together, these data support a role for the SRC family of transcriptional
coactivators in TCDD-dependent gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC133867
PMID: 12024042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Chemosphere. 2002 Mar;46(9-10):1491-500.

A cycloheximide-sensitive factor regulates TCDD-induced degradation of the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor.

Ma Q(1), Baldwin KT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Toxicology Laboratory, Toxicology and Molecular Biology Branch,
Health Effects Laboratory Division, National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Morgantown, WV 26505,
USA. qam1@cdc.gov

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), a prototype of environmental
halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons, induces a rapid reduction in steady state aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Here, we analyzed the biochemical pathway and
function of the downregulation. Our results reveal that TCDD downregulates the
AhR protein by shortening the halflife of AhR. The TCDD-induced degradation of
AhR is inhibited by MG132, a potent inhibitor of the 26S proteasome, indicating
the ubiquitin-26S proteasome mediated proteolysis as a mechanism for the
degradation of AhR. Furthermore, inhibition of protein synthesis by cycloheximide
blocks the degradation of AhR by TCDD, suggesting a labile factor in controlling 
the stability of ligand-activated AhR (hence, designated as AhR degradation
promoting factor, or ADPF). Analyses of nuclear AhR demonstrated that
cycloheximide increases nuclear AhR protein and functional AhR/Arnt DNA-binding
complex, resulting in superinduction of CYP1A1. Lastly, genetic analyses by using
AhR- or Arnt-defective variant cells demonstrate that superinduction by
cycloheximide requires the transcription activation (TA) domain of AhR,
implicating the TA domain in the control of AhR turnover by ADPF. These findings 
provide new insights into the mechanism by which TCDD-activated AhR is regulated 
in nucleus through the 26S proteasome protein degradation pathway.

PMID: 12002481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Toxicology. 2002 May 24;174(2):119-29.

Effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) on preimplantation mouse
embryos.

Wu Q(1), Ohsako S, Baba T, Miyamoto K, Tohyama C.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Sciences Division, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba 305-8506, Japan.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is a potent environmental contaminant 
that can exert developmental toxicity. To investigate the stage-specific effects 
of TCDD on preimplantation embryos, we exposed mouse embryos to TCDD at different
stages (1-, 2-, and 8-cell) and collected them at different stages of development
(the 1- or 2-, 8-cell, and blastocyst stage, respectively). Semiquantitative
RT-PCR revealed increased constitutive gene expression of the arylhydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) and AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt) at the 1-cell stage, decreased
expression at the 2- to 8-cell stage, and increased expression again at the
blastocyst stage, and addition of TCDD to media did not affect their mRNA levels.
Interestingly, no cytochrome P4501A1 (CYP1A1) mRNA was detected in embryos at the
1-, 2-, and 8-cell stages after exposure to 10 nM TCDD for 12 or 24 h, whereas
CYP1A1 mRNA was significantly increased at the blastocyst stage in response to
TCDD, and its induction was found to be concentration-dependent on TCDD exposure 
from 0.01 to 10 nM for 24 h. In addition, no significant differences in
development rate of preimplantation embryos, cell number of blastocyst embryos,
or apoptotic indices, such as TUNEL-positive cell number or Bax/Bcl-2 expression 
ratios were observed at the blastocyst stage between TCDD-exposed groups and
non-exposed group. These results suggest that the sensitivity to TCDD differs
with the embryonic stage, which may reflect an ability of embryos to adapt to
environmental stressors, such as dioxins.

PMID: 11985889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Placenta. 2002 Apr;23 Suppl A:S47-57.

Adriana and Luisa Castellucci Award lecture 2001. Hypoxia inducible factor-1:
oxygen regulation of trophoblast differentiation in normal and pre-eclamptic
pregnancies--a review.

Caniggia I(1), Winter JL.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Development and Fetal Health, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, 
Mt Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Caniggia@mshri.on.ca

During early pregnancy, trophoblast differentiation occurs in an environment of
relative low oxygen tension which is essential for normal embryonic and placental
development. At around 10-12 weeks' gestation, when the intervillous space opens 
to maternal blood, there is an increase in Po(2). This increase correlates with
the time of maximal trophoblast invasion into the maternal decidua, which allows 
extravillous trophoblast cells to access and remodel the maternal spiral
arteries. Hypoxia Inducible Factor 1(HIF-1) is a transcription factor which
activates gene transcription in response to varying oxygen concentration of
cells. HIF-1 is a heterodimer composed of the inducible HIF-1alpha and the
constitutively expressed HIF-1beta/ARNT subunits. Using villous explants, we have
demonstrated that the oxygen-regulated events of early trophoblast
differentiation are in part mediated by TGFbeta(3), an inhibitor of trophoblast
differentiation, via HIF-1alpha. Pre-eclampsia is a disease of pregnancy that is 
characterized by shallow trophoblast invasion. Recently, we have reported that
TGFbeta(3) is over-expressed in pre-eclamptic pregnancy and that its
down-regulation restores invasive capability to trophoblast cells. Because
TGFbeta(3) is downstream of HIF-1alpha, in the present study we investigated the 
expression of HIF-1alpha in pre-eclamptic placentae and age-matched controls
using in situ hybridization and histochemical analyses. We found that HIF-1alpha 
mRNA and protein expression are abnormally elevated in pre-eclamptic placental
tissue when compared to normal placental tissue. We conclude that pre-eclampsia
may result from a developmental failure of oxygen to increase or of trophoblast
cells to respond and/or sense an increase in oxygen. This will prevent the normal
TGFbeta3 down-regulation and will lead to poor trophoblast invasion predisposing 
the pregnancy to pre-eclampsia.

Copyright 2002 IFPA and Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 11978059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Seikagaku. 2002 Mar;74(3):218-23.

[Biochemical studies of human DNA polymerase kappa and its transcriptional
regulation].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohashi E(1), Ogi T, Ohmori H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetic Information Analysis, Institute for Virus Research,
Kyoto University, Kawara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507.

PMID: 11974914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 28;277(26):23821-7. Epub 2002 Apr 22.

Characterization of a direct oxygen sensor heme protein from Escherichia coli.
Effects of the heme redox states and mutations at the heme-binding site on
catalysis and structure.

Sasakura Y(1), Hirata S, Sugiyama S, Suzuki S, Taguchi S, Watanabe M, Matsui T,
Sagami I, Shimizu T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials, Tohoku
University, Sendai 980-8577, Japan.

A protein containing a heme-binding PAS (PAS is from the protein names in which
imperfect repeat sequences were first recognized: PER, ARNT, and SIM) domain from
Escherichia coli has been implied a direct oxygen sensor (Ec DOS) enzyme. In the 
present study, we isolated cDNA for the Ec DOS full-length protein, expressed it 
in E. coli, and examined its structure-function relationships for the first time.
Ec DOS was found to be tetrameric and was obtained as a 6-coordinate low spin
ferric heme complex. Its alpha-helix content was calculated as 53% by CD
spectroscopy. The redox potential of the heme was found to be +67 mV versus SHE. 
Mutation of His-77 of the isolated PAS domain abolished heme binding, whereas
mutation of His-83 did not, suggesting that His-77 is one of the heme axial
ligands. Ferrous, but not ferric, Ec DOS had phosphodiesterase (PDE) activity of 
nearly 0.15 min(-1) with cAMP, which was optimal at pH 8.5 in the presence of
Mg(2+) and was strongly inhibited by CO, NO, and etazolate, a selective cAMP PDE 
inhibitor. Absorption spectral changes indicated tight CO and NO bindings to the 
ferrous heme. Therefore, the present study unequivocally indicates for the first 
time that Ec DOS exhibits PDE activity with cAMP and that this is regulated by
the heme redox state.

PMID: 11970957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Microvasc Res. 2002 May;63(3):243-51.

Microvascular endothelial cells differ in basal and hypoxia-regulated expression 
of angiogenic factors and their receptors.

Tscheudschilsuren G(1), Aust G, Nieber K, Schilling N, Spanel-Borowski K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy, Institute of Pharmacy, University of Leipzig,
Liebigstrasse 13, Germany.

Phenotypically and functionally different types of microvascular endothelial
cells (MVECs) derived from the developing corpus luteum were isolated and
characterized by our group. We investigated whether these cytokeratin-positive
(CK+) and cytokeratin-negative (CK-) MVECs differed in the expression of
angiogenic factors and their regulation under hypoxia. Using quantitative RT-PCR,
VEGF and its receptors, Flk-1 and Flt-1, were detected in CK- MVECs. The mRNA
expression of Flk-1 mRNA was 100 times as high as that of Flt-1 mRNA. CK+ MVECs
expressed VEGF and Flt-1 mRNA, but were devoid of Flk-1 transcripts. No Ang-1
mRNA was demonstrated in either cell type, and Ang-2 mRNA was found only in CK-
MVECs. Tie-2 mRNA was detected in both MVEC types, but levels were 150 times as
high in CK- MVECs as in CK+ MVECs. mRNA of hypoxia-inducible factors Hif-1alpha
and Hif-1beta was expressed in both MVEC types. After hypoxia, neither VEGF, nor 
Flk-1, nor Tie-2 mRNA expression was altered in either MVEC type. Flt-1
expression and Ang-2 mRNA expression were significantly increased at about
2.5-fold (P < 0.05) in CK- MVECs, but not in CK+ MVECs. Our study demonstrates
the varying expression and regulation of angiogenesis-related factors and
receptors in phenotypically different MVEC types.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11969301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2001;502:273-91.

Hypoxia-inducible factor in brain.

Sharp FR(1), Bergeron M, Bernaudin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Cincinnati, OH, USA.

HIF-1 is composed of HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta protein subunits. HIF-1 is induced 
by hypoxia and binds to promoter/enhancer elements and stimulates the
transcription of hypoxia-inducible target genes. Because HIF-1 activation might
promote cell survival in hypoxic tissues, we studied the effect of stroke on the 
expression of HIF-1alpha, HIF-1beta and several HIF-1 target genes in adult rat
brain. After focal cerebral ischemia, mRNAs encoding HIF-1alpha, glucose
transporter-1 and several glycolytic enzymes including lactate dehydrogenase were
up-regulated in the areas around the infarction. HIF and its target genes were
induced by 7.5 hours after the onset of ischemia and increased further at 19 and 
24 hours. Since hypoxia induces HIF in other tissues, systemic hypoxia (6% O2 for
4.5 h) was also shown to increase HIF-1alpha protein expression in the adult rat 
brain. It is proposed that decreased blood flow to the penumbra decreases the
supply of oxygen and that this induces HIF-1 and its target genes. Because HIF-1 
activation may promote cell survival in hypoxic tissues, we studied the effect of
hypoxic preconditioning on HIF-1 expression in neonatal rat brain. Hypoxic
preconditioning (8% O2/3 hrs), a treatment known to protect the newborn rat brain
against hypoxic-ischemic injury, markedly increased HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta
expression. We also studied the effect of two other known HIF-1 inducers, cobalt 
chloride (CoCl2) and desferrioxamine (DFX), on HIF-1 expression and
neuroprotection in newborn brain. HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta protein levels were
markedly increased after i.p. injection of CoCl2 and DFX. Preconditioning with
CoCl2 or DFX 24 hours before the stroke decreased infarction by 75% and 56%
respectively, compared with vehicle-injected, littermate controls. Thus, HIF-1
activation could contribute to protective brain preconditioning.

PMID: 11950144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2001;502:169-87.

Biology of erythropoietin.

Jelkmann W(1), Hellwig-Bürgel T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, Medical University of Luebeck, Germany.

Hypoxia induces tissue-specific gene products such as erythropoietin (EPO) and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which improve the peripheral O2
supply, and glucose transporters and glycolytic enzymes, which adapt cells to
reduced O2 availability. EPO has been the fountainhead in research on
pO2-dependent synthesis of proteins. The EPO gene enhancer (like the flanking
DNA-elements of several other pO2-controlled genes) contains a consensus sequence
(CGTG) that binds the trans-acting dimeric hypoxia-inducible factor 1
(HIF-1alpha/beta). The alpha-subunit of HIF-1 is rapidly degraded by the
proteasome under normoxic conditions, but it is stabilized on occurrence of
hypoxia. HIF-1 DNA-binding is also increased by insulin, and by interleukin-1 and
tumor necrosis factor. Thus, in some aspects there is synergy in the cellular
responses to hypoxia, glucose deficiency and inflammation. In viewing clinical
medicine recombinant human EPO (rHu-EPO) has become the mainstay of treatment for
renal anemia. Endogenous EPO and rHu-EPO are similar except for minor differences
in the pattern of their 4 carbohydrate chains. RHu-EPO is also administered to
patients suffering from non-renal anemias, such as in autoimmune diseases or
malignancies. The correction of anemia in patients with solid tumors is not
merely considered a palliative intervention. Hypoxia promotes tumor growth.
However, the benefits of the administration of rHu-EPO to tumor patients with
respect to its positive effects on tumor oxygenation, tumor growth inhibition and
support of chemo- and radiotherapy is still debatable ground.

PMID: 11950137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Eur J Pharmacol. 2002 Mar 29;439(1-3):107-11.

Repeated administration of the neurotensin analogue NT69L induces tolerance to
its suppressant effect on conditioned avoidance behaviour.

Hertel P(1), Olsen CK, Arnt J.

Author information: 
(1)Psychopharmacological Research, H. Lundbeck A/S, Ottiliavej 9, DK-2500 -Valby,
Copenhagen, Denmark. phe@lundbeck.com

Although acute neurotensin receptor stimulation exerts diverse behavioural
effects that resemble those seen after administration of antipsychotic drugs,
data on effects after repeated exposure to neurotensin receptor agonism is
relatively sparse. Here, we demonstrate that repeated administration of the novel
neurotensin-(8-13) analogue NT69L [(N-methyl-Arg), Lys, Pro, L-neo-Trp, tert-Leu,
Leu] induce tolerance to its suppressant effect on conditioned avoidance
behaviour in rats, a predictive assay for antipsychotic activity. In contrast,
the inhibitory effect of haloperidol on this behaviour was sustained despite
repeated administration of this classical antipsychotic drug. These findings
indicate that repeated exposure to neurotensin receptor stimulation induces
tolerance to the antipsychotic-like effects of neurotensin receptor agonists.

PMID: 11937099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Exp Zool. 2002 Apr 15;294(1):17-29.

Identification and functional characterization of hypoxia-inducible factor 2alpha
from the estuarine teleost, Fundulus heteroclitus: interaction of HIF-2alpha with
two ARNT2 splice variants.

Powell WH(1), Hahn ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Kenyon College, Gambier, Ohio 43022, USA.
powellw@kenyon.edu

The hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) are dimeric transcription factors that
mediate changes in gene expression during adaptation of animals to oxygen stress.
Both alpha (HIFalpha) and beta (ARNT) subunits are members of the basic
helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-Sim family of proteins. Mammals have at least three
different HIF-alpha subunits, paralogous proteins expressed in tissue-specific
fashion (HIF-1alpha, HIF-2alpha, and HIF-3alpha). However, the diversity and
functional properties of teleost HIFs are poorly understood. In efforts to
characterize mechanisms of hypoxia adaptation in estuarine fish, we have isolated
cDNAs encoding HIF subunits from Fundulus heteroclitus (Atlantic killifish or
mummichog), including a HIF-2alpha homolog and ARNT2alt, a splice variant of
ARNT2 that contains an additional exon encoding 16 amino acids near the amino
terminus. HIF-2alpha protein synthesized in vitro binds cognate DNA elements in
concert with either Fundulus ARNT2 splice variant or murine ARNT1. HIF-2alpha,
ARNT2, and ARNT2alt mRNAs are expressed in all organs examined. The HIF-2alpha
cDNA encodes a protein of 96.4 kDa, sharing 53-54% identity with mammalian and
avian orthologs. The oxygen-dependent degradation domain, however, exhibits
substantial divergence from well-conserved mammalian sequences, suggesting the
possibility of important functional differences, perhaps in the sensitivity to
induction of activity by hypoxia. Hypoxia-tolerant fishes such as F. heteroclitus
represent a unique opportunity for the study of functional and evolutionary
aspects of adaptation to hypoxia at the molecular, cellular, and organismal
levels. This study extends the understanding of hypoxia signaling in fish, the
evolution and diversity of HIF function, and the evolution of the PAS family of
proteins.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11932946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2002 Feb 10;122(4):397-400.

[Ethical aspects of xenotransplantation].

[Article in Norwegian]

Fiane AE(1), Geiran OR, Mollnes TE.

Author information: 
(1)Thoraxkirurgisk avdeling, Rikshospitalet 0027 Oslo.
arnt.fiane@rikshospitalet.no

The motivation for research on animals as a source of cells, tissues and organs
for human transplantation (xenotransplantation) is the scarcity of suitable
donors for patients with end-stage organ failure. Use of animals in both
experimental and clinical settings raise considerable ethical concerns,
especially when non-human primates are used. The pig may represent an acceptable 
source animal for xenotransplantation and is today regarded as the animal of
choice. Xenotransplantation seems defensible from an ethical perspective, but
should not be performed in humans until preclinical animal-to-animal
xenotransplantations have a predictable rate of success and the risk to society
at large is negligible. For the individual patient and his or her next of kin
involved, issues of autonomy and proper consent procedures must be given high
priority. Safeguards must be established, for the patient and for society at
large, in relation to health hazards from infectious organisms, particularly
retroviruses. Public monitoring of research on and clinical use of
xenotransplantation is mandatory.

PMID: 11915670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Biol Pharm Bull. 2002 Mar;25(3):383-5.

Cytochrome P450 (CYP) expression in human myeloblastic and lymphoid cell lines.

Nagai F(1), Hiyoshi Y, Sugimachi K, Tamura HO.

Author information: 
(1)Kyoritsu College of Pharmacy, Tokyo, Japan.

To explore the physiological roles of cytochrome P450 (CYP) in peripheral blood
cells, we examined which isoforms of CYP families were expressed in human myeloid
leukemia cell lines (U937, HL-60 and K562) and lymphoid cell lines (BALL-1,
MOLT-4 and Jurkat) by RT-PCR. We observed relatively high expression of CYP1A1,
CYP1B1, CYP2A6, CYP2A7, CYP2D6, and CYP2E1 in all cell types, but CYP2A13 and
CYP2C9 expression was not detected. Expressions of aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor
and Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), which mediate induction of the CYP1 
family, were also detected in all cell types. Cell-type specific expression of
CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 was observed in MOLT-4 and K562 cells. Weak, but significant,
expression of CYP3A7 was detected in K562 cells. The profile of CYP expression in
the culture cells reported here provides information that furthers our
understanding of the physiological roles of CYP enzymes in human blood cells.

PMID: 11913539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002 Jan;2(1):38-47.

Hypoxia--a key regulatory factor in tumour growth.

Harris AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Laboratories, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK. L.Richards@icrf.icnet.uk

Cells undergo a variety of biological responses when placed in hypoxic
conditions, including activation of signalling pathways that regulate
proliferation, angiogenesis and death. Cancer cells have adapted these pathways, 
allowing tumours to survive and even grow under hypoxic conditions, and tumour
hypoxia is associated with poor prognosis and resistance to radiation therapy.
Many elements of the hypoxia-response pathway are therefore good candidates for
therapeutic targeting.

PMID: 11902584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Genesis. 2002 Mar;32(3):231-9.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and its nuclear translocator (Arnt) are
dispensable for normal mammary gland development but are required for fertility.

Le Provost F(1), Riedlinger G, Hee Yim S, Benedict J, Gonzalez FJ, Flaws J,
Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892-0822, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and its nuclear translocator (Arnt) are
transcription factors that play a role in the detection of and adaptation to
environmental signals. AhR-null mice are viable but show impaired lactation.
Deletion of the Arnt gene from the mouse genome results in embryonic lethality.
To determine the role of Arnt in mammary development and function, we inactivated
the Arnt gene in mammary epithelium using Cre-loxP recombination. Inactivation of
the Arnt gene during pregnancy did not disrupt alveolar development or the
ability of dams to nurse their litters. In contrast, dams in which the Arnt gene 
had been inactivated during puberty and in ovaries were subfertile, exhibited
retarded mammary development, and impaired mammary function. To distinguish
defects autonomous to mammary epithelium from indirect effects controlled by
ovarian hormones, we transplanted Arnt-null and AhR-null mammary epithelium into 
wild-type mice and evaluated development after one pregnancy. Normal mammary
structures were observed in the absence of Arnt and AhR, demonstrating that
neither transcription factor is necessary for mammary development.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11892012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Int J Mol Med. 2002 Apr;9(4):411-6.

The environmental toxin 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin induces cytochrome
P450 activity in high passage PC 3 and DU 145 human prostate cancer cell lines.

Schaufler K(1), Haslmayer P, Jäger W, Pec M, Thalhammer T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

The study was conducted to investigate whether
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) induces cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A1 and 
CYP1B1 via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) in the hormone-independent human
prostate cancer cell lines PC 3 and DU 145. No quantitative differences in the
expression of AhR and its partner transcription factor ARNT were seen in low and 
high passage number PC 3 and DU 145 cells in the absence and presence of TCDD as 
assessed by RT-PCR and Western blotting. However, CYP1A1/1B1 activity, measured
by the 7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) assay, was induced by 10 and 100 nM 
TCDD only in high passage number PC 3 and DU 145 cells (PC 3, 7.7- and 2-fold
stimulation; DU 145, 8.5- and 19.7-fold stimulation). Besides stimulation of EROD
activity, induction of the expression of CYP1A1 and, to a lesser extend, of
CYP1B1 by TCDD was also demonstrated by RT-PCR and Western blotting. However,
1-100 nM TCDD did not significantly alter cell cycle distribution and cell growth
for up to five days. The induction of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 by TCCD in the
hormone-independent prostate cancer cell lines suggests that CYP induction should
be considered in patients with advanced prostate cancer. This could result in
higher elimination rates of concomitant drugs metabolized by these particular CYP
isoenzymes.

PMID: 11891538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2002 Apr;71(4):655-65.

Effects of the 5-HT(7) receptor antagonist SB-258741 in animal models for
schizophrenia.

Pouzet B(1), Didriksen M, Arnt J.

Author information: 
(1)Psychopharmacology--Psychosis Department, H. Lundbeck A/S, Ottiliavej 7-9,
DK-2500, Valby, Denmark. brp@lundbeck.com

The 5-HT(7) receptor is targeted by several new antipsychotics such as clozapine 
and risperidone. We studied the effect of
R-(+)-1-(toluene-3-sulfonyl)-2-[2-(4-methylpiperidin-1-yl)ethyl]-pyrrolidine
(SB-258741), a specific 5-HT(7) receptor antagonist, in three models for positive
symptoms, D-amphetamine-induced hyperactivity and D-amphetamine- and
phencyclidine (PCP)-disrupted prepulse inhibition (PPI) in rats, with the aim of 
investigating the role of this receptor in the clinical effect of antipsychotics.
We also tested this compound in a model for negative symptoms, PCP-disrupted
social interaction (SIT) in rats. Induction of side effects by this compound was 
evaluated by testing its potency to reduce spontaneous motility and to induce
catalepsy in rats. The effect of SB-258741 was compared to risperidone in all
models. This study showed that SB-258741 had no beneficial effect on
PCP-disrupted SIT. SB-258741 did not reverse D-amphetamine-disrupted PPI;
however, it dose-dependently normalised PCP-disrupted PPI. SB-258741 antagonised 
D-amphetamine-induced hyperactivity but reduced motility of rats at similar
doses. Thus, this specific 5-HT(7) receptor antagonist brought a clear positive
outcome in only one model for positive symptoms of schizophrenia and had no
beneficial effect in the model for negative symptoms. Consequently, it is clear
that SB-258741 affects the PPI phenomenon but is not expected to have an
antipsychotic effect on its own in clinic.

PMID: 11888557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2002 Apr;71(4):635-43.

Effects of the 5-HT(6) receptor antagonist, SB-271046, in animal models for
schizophrenia.

Pouzet B(1), Didriksen M, Arnt J.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lundbeck A/S, Psychopharmacology, Psychosis, Ottiliavej 7-9, Valby DK-2500,
Denmark. brp@lundbeck.com

The 5-HT(6) receptor is targeted by several new antipsychotics such as clozapine,
olanzapine, and sertindole. We studied the effect of SB-271046
[5-chloro-N-(4-methoxy-3-piperazin-1-yl-phenyl)-3-methyl-2-benzothiophenesulfonam
ide], a specific 5-HT(6) receptor antagonist, in three models for the positive
symptoms of schizophrenia---D-amphetamine-induced hyperactivity, and
D-amphetamine- or phencyclidine (PCP)-disrupted prepulse inhibition (PPI). We
also tested this compound in a model for the negative symptoms of schizophrenia, 
PCP-disrupted social interaction (SIT) in rats. Induction of side effects by this
compound was evaluated by testing its potency to reduce spontaneous motility, and
to induce catalepsy in rats. The effect of SB-271046 was compared to clozapine in
all models tested. This study showed that SB-271046 had no beneficial effect in
PCP-disrupted SIT. However, SB-271046 dose-dependently normalised
D-amphetamine-disrupted PPI, but did not reverse PCP-disrupted PPI. In addition, 
SB-271046 did not antagonise D-amphetamine-induced hyperactivity. Thus, this
specific 5-HT(6) receptor antagonist was associated with a clear positive outcome
in only one model for the positive symptoms of schizophrenia, and had no
beneficial effect in the model for negative symptoms. Consequently, it is clear
that SB-271046 is not expected to have an antipsychotic efficacy, at least when
given as monotherapy.

PMID: 11888555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Toxicol Lett. 2002 Mar 24;129(1-2):13-21.

The p23 co-chaperone facilitates dioxin receptor signaling in a yeast model
system.

Cox MB(1), Miller CA 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Environmental Health Sciences
Department, School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine and Center for
Bioenvironmental Research, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

Hsp90, p23 and other chaperosome proteins are critical for the function of
several enzymes and steroid hormone receptors. The dioxin receptor (DR) is an
Hsp90-regulated transcription factor that binds numerous toxic ligands, including
the environmental contaminant 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo(p)dioxin. We used a
yeast model system that expressed human DR and Arnt proteins to test whether p23 
affected DR signaling. Deletion of the SBA1 gene (yeast p23 homolog) in this
model system reduced ligand-mediated DR signaling by approximately 40% and
shifted the EC(50) of the beta-napthoflavone ligand by five-fold in a reporter
gene assay. DR signaling was restored in the sba1 strain by a plasmid-borne SBA1 
gene, confirming that the signaling defect was due to SBA1. The human p23 protein
substituted for yeast Sba1 protein in this model system. These genetic data show 
that p23 enhances DR signaling.

PMID: 11879970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Blood. 2002 Mar 15;99(6):2077-83.

Identification of a tightly regulated hypoxia-response element in the promoter of
human plasminogen activator inhibitor-1.

Fink T(1), Kazlauskas A, Poellinger L, Ebbesen P, Zachar V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virus and Cancer, Danish Cancer Society, Gustav Wieds Vej 10,
8000 Aarhus C, Denmark. trine@virus.au.dk

Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) plays a key role in control of
coagulation and tissue remodeling and has been shown to be regulated by a number 
of cell stimuli, among those hypoxia. In this study we characterize the
hypoxia-mediated induction of PAI-1 in human hepatoma cell line HepG2. We found
that PAI-1 is tightly regulated in a narrow oxygen gradient. After incubation at 
oxygen concentrations of 1% to 2%, a 60-fold increase in PAI-1 messenger RNA
levels was observed, whereas mild hypoxic conditions of more than 3.5% did not
appear to induce transcription. Moreover, increased levels of PAI-1 protein were 
observed after incubation at low oxygen tensions. Through sequence analysis,
several putative hypoxia-response elements (HREs 1-5) were identified in the
human PAI-I promoter. Reporter gene assays showed that the HRE-2 (-194 to -187)
was necessary and sufficient for the hypoxia-mediated response. By
electrophoretic mobility assay we observed hypoxia-dependent binding of a protein
complex to the HRE-2 motif. Further analysis demonstrated that HRE-2 was
specifically recognized by the hypoxia-inducible transcription factor
1alpha-arylhydrocarbon nuclear translocator complex. Taken together, our data
demonstrate that hypoxia-induced transcription is mediated through HIF-1
interaction with the HRE-2 site of the human PAI-1 promoter.

PMID: 11877282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Intern Med. 2002 Feb;41(2):79-83.

Involvement of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 in human cancer.

Semenza GL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) mediates transcriptional responses to hypoxia.
HIF-1 is composed of an O2- and growth factor-regulated HIF-1alpha subunit and a 
constitutively-expressed HIF-1beta subunit. Four lines of evidence indicate that 
HIF-1 contributes to tumor progression. First, HIF-1 controls the expression of
gene products that stimulate angiogenesis, such as vascular endothelial growth
factor, and promote metabolic adaptation to hypoxia, such as glucose transporters
and glycolytic enzymes, thus providing a molecular basis for involvement of HIF-1
in tumor growth and angiogenesis. Second, in mouse xenograft models, tumor growth
and angiogenesis are inhibited by loss of HIF-1 activity and stimulated by
HIF-1alpha overexpression. Third, immunohistochemical analyses of human tumor
biopsies indicate that HIF-1alpha is overexpressed in common cancers and that the
level of expression is correlated with tumor grade, angiogenesis, and mortality. 
Fourth, in addition to intratumoral hypoxia, genetic alterations in tumor
suppressor genes and oncogenes induce HIF-1 activity.

PMID: 11868612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Nihon Eiseigaku Zasshi. 2002 Jan;56(4):603-5.

[Proteins in response to environmental stress].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujita H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Biology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine,
North 15, West 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. alfujita@med.hokudai.ac.jp

Last decade, remarkable progress was achieved in the field of environmental
sciences, especially those related to biological functions against environmental 
stress. Recent progress has been focused on the transcriptional control of
proteins, such as cytochrome P450, UDP-glucronosyltransferase, and
metallothionein. Along with these studies, entirely new functions of some
proteins were identified; for example heme oxygenase-1, originally isolated by
the catalytic activity of heme, is nowadays recognized as one of the stress
proteins. We are, therefore, interested in the relationship among proteins of
body defense mechanisms; i.e., co-regulation of two (or more) distinct proteins, 
and why they should be under the same regulation. One possible idea is that they 
are members of the defense system against active oxygen, which will be described 
by Drs. Sato and Inoue in a future review. Alternatively, they might have evolved
from an ancestor of the defense system that originally protected from oxygen
toxicity. Findings on AhR/Arnt and HIF1 systems demonstrating that they are
members of the same PAS family seem to support this hypothesis. One of the
missing links of the hypothesis is the so called oxygen sensor, suggesting (a)
hemoprotein in 1988. A review by Dr. Ogawa on Bach1, the first vertebrate
transcription factor controlled by heme, will provide on answers to the missing
links. Through this series of reviews, we have a rough map of the biological
system against environmental stress to explore the new frontier of environmental 
science.

PMID: 11868388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2002 Mar;11(2):119-26.

A study on diurnal mRNA expression of CYP1A1, AHR, ARNT, and PER2 in rat
pituitary and liver.

Huang P(1), Ceccatelli S, Rannug A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Toxicology and Neurotoxicology, National Institute of
Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden;
Division of Genetic Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

The ligand activated basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS transcription factor, the 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) protein, heterodimerizes with its partner protein
the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT). The heterodimer
activates transcription via xenobiotic responsive elements to regulate the
transcription of a battery of biotransformation genes as well as genes involved
in growth, differentiation, and cellular homeostasis. In this study we have
investigated the diurnal expression of cytochrome P450 1A1, one of the genes in
the AHR target gene battery, in rat pituitary and liver. The mRNA expression
patterns of AHR, ARNT, and the periodic gene (PER2) were also analyzed. PER2
belongs to another group of bHLH-PAS transcription factor complexes, which are
involved in the control of circadian rhythms. Diurnal variation of cytochrome
P450 1A1 (CYP1A1) mRNA expression was observed in the anterior and posterior
pituitary and in the liver. The accumulation of CYP1A1 mRNA occurred during
different times of the day and exhibited an opposite expression in anterior and
posterior pituitary, respectively. A daily upregulation of CYP1A1 and PER2 mRNAs 
that was in antiphase to the AHR and ARNT mRNAs was seen in the liver. The
AHR/ARNT system is considered a defense system against toxic chemicals. The high 
inducibility of CYP1A1 in the pituitary, shown in an earlier study, as well as
the tissue specific expression patterns shown here, suggest that AHR and CYP1A1
may play a physiological role in controlling neuroendocrine functions.

PMID: 21782593  [PubMed]


305. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2001 Dec;79(1-5):305-14.

Differential tissue distribution, developmental programming, estrogen regulation 
and promoter characteristics of cyp19 genes in teleost fish.

Callard GV(1), Tchoudakova AV, Kishida M, Wood E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, 5 Cummington Street, Boston, MA
02215, USA. gvc@bio.bu.edu

Teleost fish are characterized by exceptionally high levels of brain estrogen
biosynthesis when compared to the brains of other vertebrates or to the ovaries
of the same fish. Goldfish (Carassius auratus) and zebrafish (Danio rerio) have
utility as complementary models for understanding the molecular basis and
functional significance of exaggerated neural estrogen biosynthesis. Multiple
cytochrome P450 aromatase (P450arom) cDNAs that derive from separate gene loci
(cyp19a and cyp19b) are differentially expressed in brain (P450aromB>>A) and
ovary (P450aromA>>B) and have a different developmental program (B>>A) and
response to estrogen upregulation (B only). As measured by increased P450aromB
mRNA, a functional estrogen response system is first detected 24-48 h
post-fertilization (hpf), consistent with the onset of estrogen receptor (ER)
expression (alpha, beta, and gamma). The 5'-flanking region of the cyp19b gene
has a TATA box, two estrogen response elements (EREs), an ERE half-site (ERE1/2),
a nerve growth factor inducible-B protein (NGFI-B)/Nur77 responsive element
(NBRE) binding site, and a sequence identical to the zebrafish GATA-2 gene neural
specific enhancer. The cyp19a promoter region has TATA and CAAT boxes, a
steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) binding site, and two aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR)/AhR nuclear translocator factor (ARNT) binding motifs. Both genes have
multiple potential SRY/SOX binding sites (16 and 8 in cyp19b and cyp19a,
respectively). Luciferase reporters have basal promoter activity in GH3 cells,
but differences (a>>b) are opposite to fish pituitary (b>>a). When microinjected 
into fertilized zebrafish eggs, a cyp19b promoter-driven green fluorescent
protein (GFP) reporter (but not cyp19a) is expressed in neurons of 30-48 hpf
embryos, most prominently in retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and their projections 
to optic tectum. Further studies are required to identify functionally relevant
cis-elements and cellular factors, and to determine the regulatory role of
estrogen in neurodevelopment.

PMID: 11850237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Clin Cancer Res. 2002 Feb;8(2):471-80.

Hypoxia-induced, perinecrotic expression of endothelial Per-ARNT-Sim domain
protein-1/hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha correlates with tumor progression,
vascularization, and focal macrophage infiltration in bladder cancer.

Onita T(1), Ji PG, Xuan JW, Sakai H, Kanetake H, Maxwell PH, Fong GH, Gabril MY, 
Moussa M, Chin JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, N6A 4G5
Canada.

Endothelial Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domain protein-1 (EPAS-1)/hypoxia-inducible
factor-2alpha (HIF-2alpha) is a member of the basic helix-loop-helix/PAS domain
protein family and is considered to be an endothelial-specific, hypoxia-inducible
transcription factor. Because hypoxia is a fundamental element of tumor biology
determining clinical outcome, we performed an immunohistochemical study of EPAS-1
expression in a cohort of bladder cancer cases and assessed the possible
correlation of EPAS-1 expression with tumor hypoxia and growth. In the 67 cases
(37 radical cystectomy and 30 transurethral resection) studied, overexpression of
EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha protein was not found in cancer cells or in normal tissues but 
was mostly found in stroma around cancer cells, and strong positive staining was 
noted in perinecrotic regions. The perinecrotic/tumorous expression of
EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha was correlated statistically with higher histological grade (P 
< 0.001), advanced pathological T stage (P < 0.001), and presence of necrosis (P 
< 0.001). A parallel immunohistochemical analysis of a marker gene of vascular
endothelial growth factor demonstrated its positive correlation with tumor grade,
stage, and EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha overexpression, supporting the correlation of
EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha up-regulation with tumor angiogenesis. To further clarify the
relationship between hypoxia and vascularity in the perinecrotic/tumorous area
with EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha expression, tissue microvessel density (MVD) was assessed.
No significant correlation (P = 0.442) was found between EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha
expression and MVD if the 67 tumors of different stages were all included.
However, EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha-positive cases had lower MVD than
EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha-negative cases (P = 0.001) if only invasive cancer cases were
analyzed. In addition, in all EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha-positive staining cases,
EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha-positive foci had lower MVD than EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha-negative
foci (P < 0.001). Finally, using serial sections, the location of EPAS-1/HIF
2alpha expression was identified mainly in tumor-associated macrophage (TAM) as
well as in some fibroblast cells. Focal TAM infiltration was identified at a
higher level in EPAS-1-positive cases than EPAS-1-negative cases (P < 0.001).
This is the first clinical report suggesting that hypoxia-induced, perinecrotic
EPAS-1/HIF-2alpha expression is correlated with tumor progression and
angiogenesis at higher grade and stage through focal TAM infiltration in invasive
bladder cancer.

PMID: 11839666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Teratology. 2002 Jan;65(1):10-8.

Characterization of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor gene and association 
of its Pro185Ala polymorphism with micropenis.

Fujita H(1), Kosaki R, Yoshihashi H, Ogata T, Tomita M, Hasegawa T, Takahashi T, 
Matsuo N, Kosaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Genetic background of a fetus contributes to the abnormal development
after teratogen exposure. In rodents, in utero exposure to dioxins affects male
external genital development. The effects of dioxins are mediated via the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and its binding protein, aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT). In mice, aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AHRR),
which binds to ARNT in competition with AHR, plays a critical negative regulatory
role in AHR signaling. We attempt to characterize the human AHRR gene and
investigate the relationship between AHRR polymorphisms and the incidence of
micropenis, a phenotype of undermasculinization.
METHODS: We identified and characterized the human homolog of mouse AHRR, taking 
advantage of the publicly available draft version of the human genome sequence.
After detecting an AHRR protein polymorphism by the direct sequencing of pooled
human genomic DNA, we evaluated the association between the polymorphism and the 
presence or absence of micropenis (< -2.5 SD) in patients with micropenis and
control subjects.
RESULTS: The deduced sequence for human AHRR (715 residues) and the mouse AHRR
protein exhibited 81% sequence homology to each other. The Pro185Ala polymorphism
was identified between the PAS-A region and the highly conserved
arginine/cysteine-rich RCFRCRL/VRC region. Forty-six percent (27/59) of patients 
with micropenis and 27% (22/80) of the controls were homozygous for 185Pro; this 
difference in frequencies was significant (P = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Homozygosity for the 185Pro allele of AHRR may increase the
susceptibility of a fetus to the undermasculinizing effects of dioxin exposure in
utero, presumably through the diminished inhibition of AHR-mediated signaling.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11835227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Biochem J. 2002 Feb 15;362(Pt 1):71-9.

A dominant-negative isoform lacking exons 11 and 12 of the human
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha gene.

Chun YS(1), Choi E, Kim TY, Kim MS, Park JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Seoul National University, College of Medicine, 28
Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu, Seoul 110-799, South Korea.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha), a member of the transcription
family characterized by a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain and a PAS domain, 
regulates the transcription of hypoxia-inducible genes involved in
erythropoiesis, vascular remodelling and glucose/energy metabolism. It contains
bHLH/PAS domains in the N-terminal half, and a nuclear localization signal (NLS) 
and two transactivation domains (TADs) in the C-terminal half. It also has an
oxygen-dependent degradation (ODD) domain, which is required to degrade
HIF-1alpha protein by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. In this study, we
identified a new alternatively spliced variant of human HIF-1alpha mRNA, which
lacked both exons 11 and 12, producing a frame shift and giving a shorter form of
HIF-1alpha. In the corresponding protein, a part of the ODD domain, both TADs and
the C-terminal NLS motif were missing. Expression of endogenous HIF-1alpha
variant protein was identified using immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting
methods. The expressed HIF-1alpha variant exhibited neither the activity of
transactivation nor hypoxia-induced nuclear translocation. In contrast with
HIF-1alpha, the variant was strikingly stable in normoxic conditions and not
up-regulated to such an extent by hypoxia, cobalt ions or desferrioxamine. It was
also demonstrated that the HIF-1alpha variant competed with endogenous HIF-1alpha
and suppressed HIF-1 activity, resulting in the down-regulation of mRNA
expression of hypoxia-inducible genes. The association of the variant and
arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator in the cytoplasm may be related to 
the inhibition of HIF-1 activity. It is assumed that this isoform preserves the
balance between aerobic and anaerobic metabolism by counteracting the overaction 
of HIF-1alpha.

PMCID: PMC1222361
PMID: 11829741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Hum Reprod. 2002 Feb;17(2):265-74.

Expression of hypoxia-inducible factors in human endometrium and suppression of
matrix metalloproteinases under hypoxic conditions do not support a major role
for hypoxia in regulating tissue breakdown at menstruation.

Zhang J(1), Salamonsen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Prince Henry's Institute of Medical Research, P.O.Box 5152, Clayton, Victoria 
3168, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Classical studies in monkeys suggested that menstruation results from
vasoconstriction, hypoxia and necrosis. The heterodimeric hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF) complex is critical in oxygen homeostasis via increased stability of
HIF-1alpha/2alpha monomers, and these act as markers of hypoxia. We hypothesized 
that focal hypoxia in perimenstrual endometrium results in locally increased
matrix metalloproteinases (MMP), leading to tissue destruction.
METHODS: HIF-1alpha, HIF-2alpha and HIF-1beta were immunolocalized in cycling
endometrium. Endometrial stromal cells were cultured under hypoxic and normoxic
conditions and MMP measured by zymography and Western blots.
RESULTS: HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha were detected in only some endometrial
samples, and not confined to the perimenstrual tissue. Where present, they were
primarily cytoplasmic, not nuclear. HIF-1beta was localized in epithelium,
leukocytes and some decidual cells. Cultured endometrial stromal cells responded 
to hypoxia with increased cellular HIF-1alpha and secreted vascular endothelial
growth factor. ProMMP-1 and proMMP-3 production was reduced in response to
hypoxia regardless of the steroidal milieu (no added steroids, estrogen or
estrogen plus progesterone). Active MMP-2 and membrane type 1 MMP but not
proMMP-2 or proMMP-9 production were also inhibited by hypoxia.
CONCLUSIONS: These results do not support a role for hypoxia in the focally
increased production and activation of MMP observed prior to and during
menstruation.

PMID: 11821262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Feb 1;290(4):1228-36.

The bHLH/PAS factor MOP3 does not participate in hypoxia responses.

Cowden KD(1), Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate Group, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19014, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix/PAS (bHLH/PAS) family of proteins regulates
transcriptional responses during development and in response to environmental
stimuli. bHLH/PAS factors act as heterodimers, and genetic and biochemical data
indicate that multiple heterodimeric combinations are found in vivo to regulate
hypoxic gene expression. For example, HIF1alpha heterodimerizes with the highly
related proteins ARNT or ARNT2 in neurons. In vivo, MOP3 interacts with CLOCK to 
regulate circadian rhythms; however, its role in hypoxia responses is unclear. We
show here that unlike ARNT and ARNT2, MOP3 does not effectively form HIF-1
complexes or restore HIF-1 target gene expression in response to low oxygen when 
expressed in Arnt(-/-) ES cells. Furthermore, Mop3(-/-) day 9.5 embryos exhibit
no angiogenic defects as shown for Arnt(-/-), Hif1alpha(-/-), and Hif2alpha(-/-) 
embryos. Therefore, by a variety of criteria, we show that MOP3 has little if any
role in the regulation of hypoxia responses in vivo.

©2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11811994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mol Pharmacol. 2002 Feb;61(2):334-42.

Unique property of some synthetic retinoids: activation of the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor pathway.

Gambone CJ(1), Hutcheson JM, Gabriel JL, Beard RL, Chandraratna RA, Soprano KJ,
Soprano DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Temple University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

Potential pharmacological applications in the areas of oncology, dermatology,
diabetes, and atherosclerosis of synthetic analogs of retinoic acid that target a
specific nuclear receptor and/or biological response have generated great
interest in the development of new retinoid and rexinoid drugs. The pan-retinoic 
acid receptor antagonist AGN 193109 has been previously reported to elevate
CYP1A1 levels, implicating the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) as an additional
target for this retinoid. AhR is a cytosolic ligand-dependent transcription
factor that, in conjunction with the AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt), binds to
dioxin response elements (DREs) located in the promoter region of target genes,
such as CYP1A1, and induces their transcription. The purpose of these studies was
to determine whether additional synthetic retinoids were capable of elevating
CYP1A1 levels and to examine the mechanism of this increase in CYP1A. Two
additional retinoids, AGN 190730 and AGN 192837, were found to be potent inducers
of DRE-driven transcriptional activity; AGN 190730 was the most potent. Moreover,
electrophoretic mobility-shift assays demonstrate that AGN 190730 can transform
AhR into its active DNA recognition form. In addition, trypsin digestion of AGN
190730-treated AhR reveals a conformational change in the protein similar to the 
conformational change of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-bound AhR.
Finally, competitive binding studies demonstrate that AGN 190730 can inhibit the 
binding of TCDD to AhR. The sum of the data demonstrates that some synthetic
retinoids in addition to activating the retinoic acid receptor/retinoid X
receptor pathway are capable of binding to AhR and activating the AhR/Arnt
pathway.

PMID: 11809858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 5;277(14):11821-7. Epub 2002 Jan 22.

Functional involvement of the Brahma/SWI2-related gene 1 protein in cytochrome
P4501A1 transcription mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex.

Wang S(1), Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center for the Health
Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095-1732, USA.

Chromatin remodeling is a key step in overcoming the nucleosomal repression of
active transcription in eukaryotes. The mammalian SWI/SNF ATP-dependent
chromatin-remodeling complexes contain multiple subunits. The ATPase activities
in these complexes are attributable to either BRG-1 or the related Brahma
protein. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), after binding xenobiotic ligands
such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), associates with the AHR
nuclear translocator (ARNT), and the dimer so formed activates transcription of
several genes, including the cytochrome P4501A1 (CYP1A1) gene. We show that BRG-1
potentiates AHR/ARNT-mediated reporter gene activity in a TCDD-dependent fashion 
in Hepa1c1c7 cells. Introduction of BRG-1 into the BRG-1- and hBrm-deficient SW13
and C33A human cell lines also enhances expression from a transiently transfected
AHR/ARNT-dependent reporter gene. Replenishment of BRG-1 to SW13 cells also
restores endogenous cytochrome P4501A1 (CYP1A1) gene expression, whereas an
ATPase-deficient mutant of BRG-1 is unable to do so. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated that BRG-1 associates with the enhancer
region of the mouse CYP1A1 gene in vivo in a TCDD- and ARNT-dependent fashion,
suggesting the specific recruitment of BRG-1 by AHR/ARNT. Finally, we demonstrate
that the glutamine-rich subdomain of the transcriptional activation domain of AHR
can interact with BRG-1. Together these studies reveal a functional involvement
of BRG-1 in activating CYP1A1 gene transcription and implicate the importance of 
ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling activity on inducible gene expression mediated
by AHR/ARNT.

PMID: 11805098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Jan;269(1):13-8.

A model for recognition of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins by the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor.

Procopio M(1), Lahm A, Tramontano A, Bonati L, Pitea D.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze dell'Ambiente e del Territorio, Università degli Studi
di Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy.

Ligand binding by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a member of the bHLH-PAS
family of transcriptional regulatory proteins, has been mapped to a region within
the second 'PAS' domain, a conserved sequence motif first discovered in the
Per-ARNT-Sim family of proteins. In addition to the bacterial photoactive yellow 
protein (PYP), which had been proposed as a structural prototype for the three
dimensional fold of PAS domains, two crystal structures of the PAS domain have
recently been determined: the human potassium channel HERG and the heme binding
domain of the bacterial O(2) sensing FixL protein. The three structures reveal a 
highly conserved structural framework in evolutionary rather distant PAS domains,
provide a more general view of how these domains can recognize their ligands and 
suggest a structure-function relationship that we exploited to build a
three-dimensional model of the ligand binding domain (LBD) of the mouse aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (mAhR). The model allowed us to putatively identify the
residues responsible for the recognition of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins
(PCDDs) by AhR receptors and to formulate an hypothesis on the signal
transduction mechanism.

PMID: 11784293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):10236-43. Epub 2002 Jan 8.

Differential activities of murine single minded 1 (SIM1) and SIM2 on a hypoxic
response element. Cross-talk between basic helix-loop-helix/per-Arnt-Sim homology
transcription factors.

Woods SL(1), Whitelaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular BioSciences, Center for the Molecular Genetics of
Development, Adelaide University, South Australia 5005, Australia.

The basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim homology (bHLH/PAS) protein family
comprises a group of transcriptional regulators that often respond to a variety
of developmental and environmental stimuli. Two murine members of this family,
Single Minded 1 (SIM1) and Single Minded 2 (SIM2), are essential for postnatal
survival but differ from other prototypical family members such as the dioxin
receptor (DR) and hypoxia-inducible factors, in that they behave as
transcriptional repressors in mammalian one-hybrid experiments and have yet to be
ascribed a regulating signal. In cell lines engineered to stably express SIM1 and
SIM2, we show that both are nuclear proteins that constitutively complex with the
general bHLH/PAS partner factor, ARNT. We report that the murine SIM factors, in 
combination with ARNT, attenuate transcription from the hypoxia-inducible
erythropoietin (EPO) enhancer during hypoxia. Such cross-talk between coexpressed
bHLH/PAS factors can occur through competition for ARNT, which we find evident in
SIM repression of DR-induced transcription from a xenobiotic response element
reporter gene. However, SIM1/ARNT, but not SIM2/ARNT, can activate transcription 
from the EPO enhancer at normoxia, implying that the SIM proteins have the
ability to bind hypoxia response elements and affect either activation or
repression of transcription. This notion is supported by co-immunoprecipitation
of EPO enhancer sequences with the SIM2 protein. SIM protein levels decrease with
hypoxia treatment in our stable cell lines, although levels of the transcripts
encoding SIM1 and SIM2 and the approximately 2-h half-lives of each protein are
unchanged during hypoxia. Inhibition of protein synthesis, known to occur in
cells during hypoxic stress in order to decrease ATP utilization, appears to
account for the fall in SIM levels. Our data suggest the existence of a hypoxic
switch mechanism in cells that coexpress hypoxia-inducible factor and SIM
proteins, where up-regulation and activation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
is concomitant with attenuation of SIM activities.

PMID: 11782478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Mol Cell Biochem. 2001 Oct;226(1-2):107-18.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor/dioxin receptor in human monocytes and macrophages.

Komura K(1), Hayashi S, Makino I, Poellinger L, Tanaka H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Asahikawa Medical College, Midorigaoka
Higashi, Japan.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) belongs to the bHLH/PAS transcription factor
family and is activated by various polycyclic or halogenated aromatic
hydrocarbons, e.g. 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD),
3-methylcholanthrene (3MC). In the present study, we showed that in U937 cells
and human macrophages AhR, with its partner cofactor Arnt, is expressed and
CYP1A1 mRNA expression is induced in the presence of AhR ligand 3MC. Moreover, we
showed that AhR, associating with Arnt, binds to target DNA sequences and
activates transcription. Since part of AhR is activated into DNA binding species 
in the absence of exogenous ligand and competitive AhR antagonist
alpha-naphthoflavone inhibits this activation process with reducing CYP1A1 mRNA
expression levels, the presence of endogenous ligand is indicated.

PMID: 11768231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2001 Oct;3(5):775-88.

Phototropins: a new family of flavin-binding blue light receptors in plants.

Briggs WR(1), Christie JM, Salomon M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA. briggs@andrew2.stanford.edu

Phototropin is the designation originally assigned to a recently characterized
chromoprotein that serves as a photoreceptor for phototropism. Phototropin is a
light-activated autophosphorylating serine/threonine kinase that binds two flavin
mononucleotide (FMN) molecules that function as blue light-absorbing
chromophores. Each FMN molecule is bound in a rigid binding pocket within
specialized PAS (PER-ARNT-SIM superfamily) domains, known as LOV (light, oxygen, 
or voltage) domains. This article reviews the detailed photobiological and
biochemical characterization of the light-activated phosphorylation reaction of
phototropin and follows the sequence of events leading to the cloning,
sequencing, and characterization of the gene and the subsequent biochemical
characterization of its encoded protein. It then considers recent biochemical and
photochemical evidence that light activation of phototropin involves the
formation of a cysteinyl adduct at the C(4a) position of the FMN chromophores.
Adduct formation causes a major conformational change in the chromophores and a
possible conformational change in the protein moiety as well. The review
concludes with a brief discussion of the evidence for a second phototropin-like
protein in Arabidopsis and rice. Possible roles for this photoreceptor are
discussed.

PMID: 11761327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Mol Hum Reprod. 2002 Jan;8(1):75-80.

Uterine and ovarian aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT) mRNA expression in benign and malignant
gynaecological conditions.

Khorram O(1), Garthwaite M, Golos T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Wisconsin, and
Wisconsin Regional Primate Research Center, Madison, WI, USA. okhorram@rei.edu

The transcriptional regulators aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) modulate the transcription of
genes involved in cellular differentiation and proliferation. In this study, we
investigated the expression of these transcriptional regulators in the female
reproductive tract. AHR and ARNT mRNA transcripts were readily detected by a
ribonuclease protection assay in all reproductive tissues examined. The
expression of these factors in the endometrium and myometrium did not vary during
the menstrual cycle, and was not different in pre- versus post-menopausal women. 
However, post-menopausal women on continuous hormone replacement therapy had
greater expression of AHR but not of ARNT in the endometrium and myometrium when 
compared with women not taking hormones. Leiomyomas expressed significantly less 
AHR and ARNT mRNA compared with normal myometrium. The ovaries expressed both AHR
and ARNT mRNA, and expression was unaffected by age. Endometriotic ovarian cysts 
expressed more AHR but not more ARNT mRNA compared with healthy ovarian tissue.
However, there were no changes in the expression of AHR or ARNT mRNA in ovarian
cancer. In conclusion, the female reproductive tract expresses mRNA for the
transcription factors AHR and ARNT, and changes in their expression at select
target sites in specific pathological conditions such as endometriosis and
uterine leiomyomas suggest a potential role for these factors in the pathogenesis
of these conditions.

PMID: 11756572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Biochem. 2002 Jan;131(1):79-85.

Characterization of the LxxLL motif in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor: effects on 
subcellular localization and transcriptional activity.

Ikuta T(1), Watanabe J, Kawajiri K.

Author information: 
(1)Saitama Cancer Center Research Institute, Komuro, Ina-machi, Kitaadachi-gun,
Saitama 362-0806, Japan. togo@cancer-c.pref.saitama.jp

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that acts in concert with the AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT). Subcellular
localization and transcriptional activation of target genes are mainly regulated 
by ligands such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). We have previously
reported that AhR migrates in cells as a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein
mediated by its nuclear localization and export signals. A short sequence motif
LxxLL (L is leucine and x is any amino acid) found in transcriptional
co-activators has been reported to mediate the binding to liganded nuclear
receptors. The role of the two LxxLL motifs, AhR[50-54] and [224-228], has now
been analyzed by determining the localization of AhR and its transcriptional
activity with Leu to Ala mutations in full-length AhR. Immunocytostaining
revealed that mutation of the motif at AhR[50-54] promotes the efficiency of
nuclear localization in the absence of ligand without altering HSP90 and ARA9
binding or nuclear export activity. Furthermore, this mutation decreases the
transcriptional activity of the AhR/ARNT system, which is likely due to the
suppression of AhR/ARNT/XRE complex formation. Another LxxLL motif at
AhR[224-227] affects neither the subcellular localization nor transcriptional
activity. These results indicate that the LxxLL motif at AhR[50-54] is important 
for the regulation of AhR activity.

PMID: 11754738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 1;277(9):6949-59. Epub 2001 Dec 12.

Regulatory interactions among three members of the vertebrate aryl hydrocarbon
receptor family: AHR repressor, AHR1, and AHR2.

Karchner SI(1), Franks DG, Powell WH, Hahn ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA
02543, USA.

The effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related compounds
occur via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), a member of the basic
helix-loop-helix-Per-ARNT-Sim homology (bHLH-PAS) protein superfamily. A single
AHR gene has been identified in mammals, whereas many fish species, including the
Atlantic killifish (Fundulus heteroclitus) possess two distinct AHR genes (AHR1
and a novel form, AHR2). A mouse bHLH-PAS protein closely related to AHR and
designated AHR repressor (AHRR) is induced by 3-methylcholanthrene and represses 
the transcriptional activity of the AHR. To determine whether AHRR is the
mammalian ortholog of fish AHR2 and to investigate the mechanisms by which AHRR
regulates AHR function, we cloned an AHRR ortholog in F. heteroclitus with high
sequence identity to the mouse and human AHRRs. Killifish AHRR encodes a
680-residue protein with a predicted molecular mass of 75.2 kDa. We show that in 
vitro expressed AHRR proteins from human, mouse, and killifish all fail to bind
[(3)H]TCDD or [(3)H]beta-naphthoflavone. In transient transfection experiments
using a luciferase reporter gene under control of AHR response elements,
killifish AHRR inhibited the TCDD-dependent transactivation function of both AHR1
and AHR2. AHRR mRNA is widely expressed in killifish tissues and is inducible by 
TCDD or polychlorinated biphenyls, but its expression is not altered in a
population of fish exhibiting genetic resistance to these compounds. The F.
heteroclitus AHRR promoter contains three putative AHR response elements. Both
AHR1 and AHR2 activated transcription of luciferase driven by the AHRR promoter, 
and AHRR could repress its own promoter. Thus, AHRR is an evolutionarily
conserved, TCDD-inducible repressor of AHR1 and AHR2 function. Phylogenetic
analysis shows that AHRR, AHR1, and AHR2 are distinct genes, members of an AHR
gene family; these three vertebrate AHR-like genes descended from a single
invertebrate AHR.

PMID: 11742002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Nutr. 2001 Dec;131(12):3281-7.

Soy and whey proteins downregulate DMBA-induced liver and mammary gland CYP1
expression in female rats.

Rowlands JC(1), He L, Hakkak R, Ronis MJ, Badger TM.

Author information: 
(1)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center and Department of Pediatrics, University 
of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA.
jcrowlands@salvitas.com

One possible mechanism by which diet may reduce cancer risk is through
enhancement of metabolic systems that prevent activation of carcinogens or
accelerate carcinogen inactivation. We studied the effects of diet and
7,12-dimethylbenz-(a)anthracene (DMBA) on hepatic and mammary gland CYP1A1,
CYP1A2 and CYP1B1 enzymes in female Sprague-Dawley rats. Diets (AIN-93G) were fed
from conception to adulthood, and DMBA was given by oral gavage at age 48-50 d.
The protein sources of diets were casein (CAS), soy protein isolate (SPI) or whey
protein hydrolysate (WPH). The DMBA-induced hepatic ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase 
and methoxyresorufin-O-demethylase activities and CYP1A1 protein and mRNA
expression were lower (P < 0.05) in SPI-fed rats compared with those fed casein. 
Differences in mammary gland CYP1 expression were also observed with decreased
DMBA induction (P < 0.05) of all three CYP1 proteins and mRNAs in rats fed either
SPI or WPH compared with those fed CAS. Most notable were the decreased
constitutive and DMBA-induced mammary gland expression of CYP1B1 protein of 93
and 96%, respectively, in the SPI-fed rats relative to the CAS-fed controls. The 
diet-induced changes in CYP1 enzyme expression were consistent with changes in
the AhR and ARNT transcription factors that regulate them. Decreased (P < 0.05)
mammary constitutive AhR and ARNT proteins were measured in SPI-fed rats. There
was also a 100% increase in constitutive AhR protein in the WPH-fed rats that
paralleled a 100% increase in constitutive CYP1B1 protein in the mammary gland.
These results demonstrate the importance of diet in regulation of phase I
metabolism in liver and mammary gland, and suggest a potential mechanism by which
soy or whey proteins reduce DMBA-induced mammary tumor incidence.

PMID: 11739881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Cell Sci. 2001 Nov;114(Pt 22):4051-61.

A new HIF-1 alpha variant induced by zinc ion suppresses HIF-1-mediated hypoxic
responses.

Chun YS(1), Choi E, Yeo EJ, Lee JH, Kim MS, Park JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Heart Research Institute, BK21 Human Life
Sciences, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 28 Yongon-dong,
Chongno-gu, Seoul 110-799, Korea.

The expressions of hypoxia-inducible genes are upregulated by hypoxia-inducible
factor 1 (HIF-1), which is a heterodimer of HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta/ARNT (aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear transporter). Under hypoxic conditions, HIF-1alpha
becomes stabilized and both HIF-1alpha and ARNT are translocated into the nucleus
and codimerized, binding to the HIF-1 consensus sequence and transactivating
hypoxia-inducible genes. Other than hypoxia, cobalt and nickel, which can
substitute for iron in the ferroprotein, induce the stabilization of HIF-1alpha
and the activation of HIF-1. We found previously that, although zinc, another
example of a metal substitute for iron, stabilized HIF-1alpha, it suppressed the 
formation of HIF-1 by blocking the nuclear translocation of ARNT. Here, we
identify a new spliced variant of human HIF-1alpha that is induced by zinc. The
isoform lacks the 12th exon, which produced a frame-shift and gave a shorter form
of HIF-1alpha (557 amino acids), designated HIF-1alphaZ (HIF-1alpha induced by
Zn). This moiety was found to inhibit HIF-1 activity and reduce mRNA expressions 
of the hypoxia-inducible genes. It blocked the nuclear translocation of ARNT but 
not that of endogenous HIF-1alpha, and was associated with ARNT in the cytosol.
These results suggest that HIF-1alphaZ functions as a dominant-negative isoform
of HIF-1 by sequestering ARNT in the cytosol. In addition, the generation of
HIF-1alphaZ seems to be responsible for the inhibitory effects of the zinc ion on
HIF-1-mediated hypoxic responses, because the expressed HIF-1alphaZ behaved in
the same manner as zinc in terms of inhibited HIF-1 activity and ARNT
translocation.

PMID: 11739637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2001 Nov;78(5):427-39.

Promoter characteristics of two cyp19 genes differentially expressed in the brain
and ovary of teleost fish.

Tchoudakova A(1), Kishida M, Wood E, Callard GV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, 5 Cummington Street, Boston, MA
02215, USA.

Teleost fish are characterized by exceptionally high levels of neural estrogen
biosynthesis when compared with the brains of other vertebrates or to the ovaries
of the same fish. Two P450arom mRNAs which derive from separate gene loci (cyp19a
and cyp19b) are differentially expressed in brain (b>>a) and ovary (a>>b) and
have a different developmental program (b>>a) and estrogen upregulation (b only).
A polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based genomic walking strategy was used to
isolate the 5'-flanking regions of the goldfish (Carassius auratus) cyp19 genes. 
Sequence analysis of the cyp19b gene approximately 1.8 kb upstream of the
transcription start site revealed a TATA box at nucleotide (nt) -30, two estrogen
responsive elements (EREs; nt -351 and -211) and a consensus binding site (NBRE) 
for nerve growth factor inducible-B protein (NGFI-B/Nur77) at -286, which
includes another ERE half-site. Also present were a sequence at nt -399 (CCCTCCT)
required for neural specificity of the zebrafish GATA-2 gene, and 16 copies of an
SRY/SOX binding motif. The 5'-flanking region ( approximately 1.0 kb) of the
cyp19a gene had TATA (nt -48) and CAAT (nt -71) boxes, a steroidogenic factor-1
(SF-1) binding site (nt -265), eight copies of the SRY/SOX motif, and two copies 
of a recognition site for binding the arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR)/AhR nuclear 
translocator factor (ARNT) heterodimer. Both genes had elements previously
identified in the brain specific exon I promoter of the mouse aromatase gene.
Cyp19a- and -b/luciferase constructs showed basal promoter activity in
aromatase-expressing rodent pituitary (GH3) cells, but differences (a>>b) did not
reflect expression in fish pituitary in vivo (b>>a), implying a lack of
appropriate cell factors. Consistent with the onset of cyp19b expression in
zebrafish embryos, microinjection of a green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter
plasmid into fertilized eggs revealed labeling in neural tissues at 30-48 h
post-fertilization (hpf), most prominently in retinal ganglion cells (RGC) and
axon-like projections to the optic tectum. Expression of a cyp19a/GFP reporter
was not detectable up to 72 hpf. Tandem analysis of cyp19a and cyp19b promoters
in living zebrafish embryos can be a useful approach for identifying cis-elements
and cellular factors involved in the correct tissue-specific, spatial, temporal
and estrogen regulated expression of aromatase genes during CNS and gonadal
development.

PMID: 11738553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Nature. 2001 Nov 29;414(6863):550-4.

Inhibitory PAS domain protein is a negative regulator of hypoxia-inducible gene
expression.

Makino Y(1), Cao R, Svensson K, Bertilsson G, Asman M, Tanaka H, Cao Y,
Berkenstam A, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska 
Institutet, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Alteration of gene expression is a crucial component of adaptive responses to
hypoxia. These responses are mediated by hypoxia-inducible transcription factors 
(HIFs). Here we describe an inhibitory PAS (Per/Arnt/Sim) domain protein, IPAS,
which is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/PAS protein structurally related to
HIFs. IPAS contains no endogenous transactivation function but demonstrates
dominant negative regulation of HIF-mediated control of gene expression. Ectopic 
expression of IPAS in hepatoma cells selectively impairs induction of genes
involved in adaptation to a hypoxic environment, notably the vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) gene, and results in retarded tumour growth and tumour
vascular density in vivo. In mice, IPAS was predominantly expressed in Purkinje
cells of the cerebellum and in corneal epithelium of the eye. Expression of IPAS 
in the cornea correlates with low levels of expression of the VEGF gene under
hypoxic conditions. Application of an IPAS antisense oligonucleotide to the mouse
cornea induced angiogenesis under normal oxygen conditions, and demonstrated
hypoxia-dependent induction of VEGF gene expression in hypoxic corneal cells.
These results indicate a previously unknown mechanism for negative regulation of 
angiogenesis and maintenance of an avascular phenotype.

PMID: 11734856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Cancer Res. 2001 Dec 1;61(23):8534-9.

Novel target genes of the Ah (dioxin) receptor: transcriptional induction of
N-myristoyltransferase 2.

Kolluri SK(1), Balduf C, Hofmann M, Göttlicher M.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, D-76021
Karlsruhe, Germany.

Dioxins are potent mammalian carcinogens and toxins affecting liver, skin, and
immune and reproductive systems. The intracellular Ah receptor, a
ligand-dependent transcription factor of the basic
region/helix-loop-helix/Per-Ahr/Arnt-Sim homology domain (bHLH-PAS) protein
family, mediates responses to dioxins. Target genes of the Ah receptor that
mediate dioxin toxicity and carcinogenicity are, however, mostly unknown. We used
5L rat hepatoma cells to identify dioxin-inducible genes by suppression
subtractive hybridization. Eleven cDNA fragments were identified that represented
novel sequences or genes for which induction by dioxins had not been known.
N-myristoyltransferase 2 (NMT2) is one of the later dioxin-inducible genes.
Induction of NMT2 was confirmed in livers of mice in vivo. NMT2 induction was a
direct consequence of Ah receptor activation in 5L cells. [(3)H]myristic acid
incorporation into 5L cell proteins was inducible by dioxins, indicating that
protein myristoylation is a regulated rather than a housekeeping function and
that NMT activity is limiting in noninduced 5L cells. Here we show for the first 
time that expression of NMT2 and induced protein myristoyltransferase activity
are direct responses to carcinogen exposure. Because inappropriate protein
NH(2)-terminal myristoylation appears to play a role in carcinogenesis, induction
of NMT2 may play a central role in dioxin carcinogenicity.

PMID: 11731439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mol Cells. 2001 Oct 31;12(2):190-6.

Induction of cytochrome P450 1A1 gene expression by a vitamin K3 analog in mouse 
hepatoma Hepa-1c1c7 cells.

Chun YJ(1), Lee BY, Yang SA, Ryu CK, Kim MY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Chungang University, Seoul, Korea. yjchun@cau.ac.kr

Nine vitamin K3 analogs were compared with respect to the induction of the
cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1) expression in mouse hepatoma Hepa-1c1c7 cells.
6-(4-Diethylamino)phenyl-7-chloro-5,8-quinolinedione (EA4) caused a significant
induction of the CYP1A1-mediated ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase activity in a time-
and concentration-dependent manner. The induction was accompanied by an increase 
of the Cyp1a1 mRNA transcription. The transient expression of the mouse
Cyp1a1-CAT gene into cells showed that EA4 induced CAT activity. However, the
aryl hydrocarbon receptor and its nuclear partner, aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator mRNA transcription, were unaffected by the EA4 treatment.
When the cells were incubated with EA4 in the presence of 1 nM TCDD, the
ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase activity that was induced by TCDD was significantly 
suppressed by EA4. Inhibition of protein synthesis by cycloheximide strongly
enhanced the EA4-dependent Cyp1a1 mRNA expression. Up-regulation of protein
kinase C by a 2 h preincubation with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate increased
the EA4-dependent expression of the Cyp1a1 gene. In human cells, such as HepG2
(human hepatocarcinoma), MCF-7 (human breast adenocarcinoma cell line), and HL-60
(human promyelocytic cell line), the expression of CYP1A1 mRNA was also induced
by EA4 treatment. Moreover, CYP1B1 mRNA was increased by EA4 in MCF-7 cells.
These results indicate that EA4 modulates CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 expressions by
transcriptional activation. Also, protein kinase C may be involved in the
induction mechanism of CYP1A1 by EA4.

PMID: 11710520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Gene. 2001 Oct 31;278(1-2):223-34.

An aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) homologue from the soft-shell clam, Mya
arenaria: evidence that invertebrate AHR homologues lack
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and beta-naphthoflavone binding.

Butler RA(1), Kelley ML, Powell WH, Hahn ME, Van Beneden RJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Maine, School of Marine Sciences, Orono, ME 04469, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) mediates numerous toxic effects following
exposure of vertebrate animals to certain aromatic environmental contaminants,
including 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). To investigate possible
effects of TCDD on invertebrates, a cDNA encoding an AHR homologue was cloned
from the soft-shell clam, Mya arenaria. The predicted amino acid sequence
contains regions characteristic of vertebrate AHRs: basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
and PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) domains and a glutamine-rich region. Phylogenetic analysis
shows that the clam AHR sequence groups within the AHR subfamily of the bHLH-PAS 
family, in a clade containing AHR homologues from Drosophila melanogaster and
Caenorhabditis elegans. AHR mRNA expression was detected in all tissue types
tested: adductor muscle, digestive gland, foot, gill, gonad, mantle, and siphon. 
The in vitro-expressed clam AHR exhibited sequence-specific interactions with a
mammalian xenobiotic response element (XRE). Velocity sedimentation analysis
using either in vitro-expressed clam AHR or clam cytosolic proteins showed that
this AHR homologue binds neither [(3)H]TCDD nor [(3)H]beta-naphthoflavone (BNF). 
Similarly, in vitro-expressed D. melanogaster and C. elegans AHR homologues
lacked specific binding of these compounds. Thus, the absence of specific,
high-affinity binding of the prototypical AHR ligands TCDD and BNF, is a property
shared by known invertebrate AHR homologues, distinguishing them from vertebrate 
AHRs. Comparative studies of phylogenetically diverse organisms may help identify
an endogenous ligand(s) and the physiological role(s) for this protein.

PMID: 11707340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. DNA Seq. 2001 Jul;12(1):13-25.

The human membrane progesterone receptor gene: genomic structure and promoter
analysis.

Bernauer S(1), Wehling M, Gerdes D, Falkenstein E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Clinical Medicine Mannheim,
University of Heidelberg, 68135 Mannheim, Germany.

Rapid, nongenomic effects of steroids are likely to be mediated by membrane
receptors not by intracellular steroid receptors. We recently identified a
progesterone membrane binding protein (mPR) from human liver. The corresponding
hmpr gene is comprised of 3 exons and 2 introns. The promoter sequence of hmpr
lacks a typical TATA box but contains instead a high homology to a transcription 
Initiatior consensus sequence, which overlaps the experimentally determined
transcriptional start site. The major proximal promoter is GC-rich and sequence
analysis revealed a CpG island spanning the transcriptional start site. Several
putative cis-regulatory DNA-motifs, which represent possible binding sites for
transcription factors like AP2, NF-AT, Ahr/Arnt and C/EBP were identified in the 
genomic upstream region by sequence homology. Functional analysis of differently 
deleted fragments of the hmpr upstream region in a GFP-reportergene assay in
transiently transfected cultured cells indicates the general testability of the
hmpr promoter in vivo.

PMID: 11697142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Life Sci. 2001 Oct 12;69(21):2533-42.

The regulation of the induction of vascular endothelial growth factor at the
onset of diabetes in spontaneously diabetic rats.

Braun L(1), Kardon T, Reisz-Porszasz ZS, Banhegyi G, Mandl J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry, Semmelweis University of Medicine, Budapest, 
Hungary.

Early induction of VEGF was studied in liver, kidney and lung of spontaneously
diabetic rats. Western blot analysis, northern hybridization were applied to show
the expression of VEGF in different organs. Radiolabelled hypoxia responsive
element (HRE) and cAMP responsive element (CRE) oligonucleotides were assayed by 
electrophoretic mobility shift (EMSA) or supershift using anti ARNT and anti
CREB-1 monoclonal antibodies. An increase in VEGF expression at the level of
protein and mRNA was demonstrated at the beginning of the disease. EMSAs showed: 
a.) a binding of HIF-1 to HRE and/or CRE, b.) in the same time the binding of
CREB- I was detected to both HRE and/or CRE sequences in the liver, kidney and
lung of diabetic animals. Based on these in vivo observations it is supposed that
HRE and CRE through the interaction between HIF-1 and CREB-1 are equally involved
in the regulation of VEGF expression at the onset of diabetes.

PMID: 11693260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Nov 2;288(3):503-8.

The 5'-flanking regions of CYP19A1 and CYP19A2 in zebrafish.

Kazeto Y(1), Ijiri S, Place AR, Zohar Y, Trant JM.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Marine Biotechnology, University of Maryland Biotechnology
Institute, Baltimore, Maryland 21202, USA.

This report describes the structure of the 5'-flanking regions of both the
CYP19A1 and A2 genes that were isolated from the genome of the zebrafish (Danio
rerio). Consensus sequences of three cAMP-responsive elements (CRE), an aryl
hydrocarbon-responsive element (AhR/Arnt), a steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) site, 
and a TATA box were observed in the 5'-flanking region of CYP19A1. In contrast,
the 5'-flanking region of CYP19A2 was located upstream of an untranslated exon
and possessed consensus sequences of a single CRE, an estrogen-responsive element
(ERE), a peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha/retinoid X receptor
alpha heterodimer-responsive element (PPARalpha/RXRalpha), and a TATA box. Primer
extension analysis revealed that the predominant transcription initiation sites
for CYP19A1 and A2 transcripts were 28 and 91 bp upstream from the putative
translation initiation codon, respectively. These analyses indicate that
substantially different regulators, including a variety of environmental
xenobiotics, control the expression the two CYP19 genes.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11676471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Pathol. 2001 Oct;195(3):367-74.

Expression of angiogenesis-related molecules in plexiform lesions in severe
pulmonary hypertension: evidence for a process of disordered angiogenesis.

Tuder RM(1), Chacon M, Alger L, Wang J, Taraseviciene-Stewart L, Kasahara Y, Cool
CD, Bishop AE, Geraci M, Semenza GL, Yacoub M, Polak JM, Voelkel NF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care
Medicine, Pulmonary Hypertension Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences
Center, Colorado, USA.

Pulmonary arteries of patients with severe pulmonary hypertension (SPH)
presenting in an idiopathic form (primary PH-PPH) or associated with congenital
heart malformations or collagen vascular diseases show plexiform lesions. It is
postulated that in lungs with SPH, endothelial cells in plexiform lesions express
genes encoding for proteins involved in angiogenesis, in particular, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and those involved in VEGF receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) 
signalling. On immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization, endothelial cells 
in the plexiform lesions expressed VEGF mRNA and protein and overexpressed the
mRNA and protein of VEGFR-2, and the transcription factor subunits HIF-1alpha and
HIF-1beta of hypoxia inducible factor, which are responsible for the
hypoxia-dependent induction of VEGF. When compared with normal lungs, SPH lungs
showed decreased expression of the kinases PI3 kinase and src, which, together
with Akt, relay the signal transduction downstream of VEGFR-2. Because markers of
angiogenesis are expressed in plexiform lesions in SPH, it is proposed that these
lesions may form by a process of disordered angiogenesis.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 11673836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Toxicol Sci. 2001 Nov;64(1):41-56.

cDNA cloning and characterization of a high affinity aryl hydrocarbon receptor in
a cetacean, the beluga, Delphinapterus leucas.

Jensen BA(1), Hahn ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole,
Massachusetts 02543.

Some cetaceans bioaccumulate substantial concentrations of planar halogenated
aromatic hydrocarbons (PHAHs) in their tissues, but little is known about the
effects of such burdens on cetacean health. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) and related PHAHs cause toxicity via activation of the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR), a member of the bHLH-PAS family of transcription factors.
Differences in AHR structure and function are known to contribute to
species-specific differences in susceptibility to PHAH toxicity. To ascertain the
potential for PHAH effects in a cetacean, we characterized an AHR from the beluga
whale, Delphinapterus leucas. The 3.2 kb cDNA encodes an 845-amino acid protein
with a predicted size of 95.5 kDa. Overall, the beluga AHR shares 85% amino acid 
sequence identity with the human AHR and 75% identity with the mouse AHR Ah(b-1) 
allele. Beluga AHR protein synthesized in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate system
demonstrated specific, high-affinity [(3)H]TCDD binding. Saturation binding
analysis was used to compare the [(3)H]TCDD binding affinity of the in
vitro-expressed beluga AHR with affinities of in vitro-expressed AHRs from a
dioxin-sensitive mouse strain (Ah(b-1) allele) and humans. The beluga AHR bound
[(3)H]TCDD with an affinity (K(d)= 0.43 +/- 0.16 nM) that was at least as high as
that of the mouse AHR (K(d)= 0.68 +/- 0.23 nM), and significantly greater than
that of the human AHR (K(d)= 1.63 +/- 0.64 nM). In electrophoretic mobility shift
assays, the beluga AHR exhibited sequence-specific, Arnt-dependent binding to a
dioxin responsive enhancer (DRE). Upon transient transfection into mammalian
cells, the beluga AHR activated transcription of a luciferase reporter under
control of a DRE-containing fragment of the mouse Cyp1a1 promoter. These results 
show that in an in vitro system, the beluga AHR possesses characteristics similar
to those of AHRs from other mammals that are considered sensitive to toxic
effects of PHAHs. Together, these results demonstrate that the use of in
vitro-expressed proteins is a promising approach for addressing molecular and
biochemical questions concerning PHAH toxicity in endangered or protected
species.

PMID: 11606800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Oct 23;98(22):12426-31. Epub 2001 Oct 16.

Sequential recruitment of steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1) and p300
enhances progesterone receptor-dependent initiation and reinitiation of
transcription from chromatin.

Liu Z(1), Wong J, Tsai SY, Tsai MJ, O'Malley BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Employing a cell-free chromatin transcription system that recapitulates
progesterone receptor (PR)-mediated transcription in vivo, we have investigated
further the coactivator functions of steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1) in
terms of its functional domains as well as cooperation with other coactivators in
PR transactivation. By analyzing wild-type and mutant SRC-1 with liganded PR in
the chromatin transcription system in vitro, the basic
helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim domain, the p300-binding domain, and the
carboxyl-terminal region (containing the PR-binding site) of SRC-1 were shown to 
be important for PR transactivation. Although in context of a synthetic promoter 
its histone acetyltransferase activity was nonessential for PR-mediated
transcription, SRC-1 was observed to act synergistically with p300 to enhance PR 
transactivation from chromatin. Moreover, SRC-1 and p300 were found to function
cooperatively to increase the efficiency of productive transcription initiation
and reinitiation. Further analysis of synergism between SRC-1 and p300 revealed
an obligatory "sequential" recruitment of SRC-1 and p300 to liganded PR.
Efficient recruitment of p300 required the presence of SRC-1. In addition,
functional analysis of SRC-2 and SRC-3 coactivators indicated that the SRC family
modulated PR transactivation from chromatin by a similar mechanism.

PMCID: PMC60070
PMID: 11606780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2001 Sep;78(3):253-60.

The effect of the arylhydrocarbon receptor on the human steroidogenic acute
regulatory gene promoter activity.

Sugawara T(1), Nomura E, Sakuragi N, Fujimoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Kita-ku,
Kita 15, Nishi 7, 060-8638, Sapporo, Japan. terusuga@med.hokudai.ac.jp

The steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein is a rate-limiting factor in
steroid hormone production. The StAR protein plays a role in the movement of
cholesterol from the outer membrane to the inner membrane, where cholesterol side
chain cleavage enzyme exists. Dioxins, which may act as 'endocrine disruptors',
mimic and antagonize endogenous hormone actions in vivo. Although the mechanism
of endocrine disruption is not clear, the actions of dioxins are known to be
mediated by binding to the arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR), and it is known that
dioxins act as transcription factors to endocrine-associated gene expression. In 
the present study, we examined the effect of the AhR on the human StAR gene
promoter, and we clarified the action mechanisms of environmental endocrine
disruptors. We transfected constructs containing the human StAR gene promoter
sequences pGL(2) 1.3-kb StAR (nt -1293 to +39) into mouse Y-1 adrenal tumor cells
and measured the promoter activity of the StAR gene. With the addition of
beta-napthoflavone (betaNF), which is a ligand of AhR, to the culture medium, the
activity of the StAR gene promoter increased significantly (P<0.05), and with the
addition of 1 microM of betaNF, it became maximum (3.1+/-0.6-fold higher than the
control value). When the AhR and ARNT were co-transfected together in Y-1 cells
or human adrenocortical carcinoma H295R cells, the promoter activity of the StAR 
gene significantly (P<0.05) increased, to a level 1.4+/-0.01-fold higher in Y-1
cells and to a level 1.6+/-0.04-fold higher in H295R cells than the control
level, when 1 microM of betaNF was added. We examined the effect of induction of 
cAMP with transfection with AhR or ARNT. With the addition of 1 mM 8-Br-cAMP,
there were no differences between the StAR gene promoter activities in the group 
in which AhR and ARNT was introduced and in the group in which they were not
introduced. The results suggest that AhR plays a role in the promoter activity of
the human StAR gene and that the effect of AhR on StAR gene expression may cause 
a disturbance to the human endocrine system.

PMID: 11595506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Oncogene. 2001 Sep 13;20(41):5779-88.

Dephosphorylated hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha as a mediator of p53-dependent
apoptosis during hypoxia.

Suzuki H(1), Tomida A, Tsuruo T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1,
Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

Under hypoxia, HIF-1alpha binds to aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT, also called HIF-1beta) to activate expression of genes important for cell 
survival. Alternatively, HIF-1alpha can bind to the tumor suppressor p53 and
promote p53-dependent apoptosis. Here we show that the opposite functions of
HIF-1alpha are distinguished by its phosphorylation status. Two distinguishable
forms of HIF-1alpha, phosphorylated and dephosphorylated, were induced during
hypoxia-induced apoptosis. The phosphorylated HIF-1alpha was the major form that 
bound to ARNT. Ectopically expressed ARNT was consistently able to enhance
HIF-1alpha phosphorylation in a binding-dependent manner. In contrast, the
dephosphorylated HIF-1alpha was the major form that bound to p53. Depletion of
the dephosphorylated HIF-1alpha, by using the Hsp90 inhibitor geldanamycin A that
had little effect on the phosphorylated HIF-1alpha expression, suppressed p53
induction and subsequent apoptosis. Depletion of dephosphorylated HIF-1alpha also
prevented hypoxia-induced nuclear accumulation of HDM2, a negative regulator of
p53. Our results indicate that the functions of HIF-1alpha varied with its
phosphorylation status and that dephosphorylated HIF-1alpha mediated apoptosis by
binding to and stabilizing p53.

PMID: 11593383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Mech Dev. 2001 Oct;108(1-2):227-31.

Molecular cloning and embryonic expression of the Xenopus Arnt gene.

Bollérot K(1), Angelier N, Coumailleau P.

Author information: 
(1)Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Groupe Genes et Developpement, UMR7622-CNRS 
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Développement, 9 quai St Bernard, 75252
Paris Cedex 05, France.

In this paper, we report the cloning of a Xenopus bHLH/PAS factor homologous to
the mammalian aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) or Drosophila
Tango gene. Sequence data analysis indicates that protein domains organization in
xArnt is strongly conserved and that xArnt is highly related to the mammalian
Arnt1 isoform. As revealed by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and
whole-mount in situ hybridization, xArnt gene is expressed during early and late 
development. At early stages, xArnt transcripts are restricted to the ectoderm
and extends to the marginal zone at gastrula stage. In tail bud embryo, xArnt is 
strongly expressed in branchial arches, optical and optical vesicles, and
pronephros and pronephritic duct.

PMID: 11578881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 9;276(45):41841-9. Epub 2001 Sep 10.

Definition of a dioxin receptor mutant that is a constitutive activator of
transcription: delineation of overlapping repression and ligand binding functions
within the PAS domain.

McGuire J(1), Okamoto K, Whitelaw ML, Tanaka H, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska 
Institute, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

The intracellular dioxin (aryl hydrocarbon) receptor is a ligand-activated
transcription factor that mediates the adaptive and toxic responses to
environmental pollutants such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and
structurally related congeners. Whereas the ligand-free receptor is characterized
by its association with the molecular chaperone hsp90, exposure to ligand
initiates a multistep activation process involving nuclear translocation,
dissociation from the hsp90 complex, and dimerization with its partner protein
Arnt. In this study, we have characterized a dioxin receptor deletion mutant
lacking the minimal ligand-binding domain of the receptor. This mutant did not
bind ligand and localized constitutively to the nucleus. However, this protein
was functionally inert since it failed to dimerize with Arnt and to bind DNA. In 
contrast, a dioxin receptor deletion mutant lacking the minimal PAS B motif but
maintaining the N-terminal half of the ligand-binding domain showed constitutive 
dimerization with Arnt, bound DNA, and activated transcription in a
ligand-independent manner. Interestingly, this mutant showed a more potent
functional activity than the dioxin-activated wild-type receptor in several
different cell lines. In conclusion, the constitutively active dioxin receptor
may provide an important mechanistic tool to investigate receptor-mediated
regulatory pathways in closer detail.

PMID: 11551926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 9;276(45):42302-10. Epub 2001 Sep 10.

The Q-rich subdomain of the human Ah receptor transactivation domain is required 
for dioxin-mediated transcriptional activity.

Kumar MB(1), Ramadoss P, Reen RK, Vanden Heuvel JP, Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science and the Center for Molecular Toxicology and
Carcinogenesis and the Graduate Program in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim
transcription factor, mediates many of the toxic and biological effects of the
environmental contaminant, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, which include the
transcriptional activation of dioxin-responsive genes such as CYP1A1. Many
aspects of this process are known; however, the mechanism of transcriptional
activation and the proteins that are key to this process remain to be determined.
The hAhR has a complex transactivation domain, composed of three potentially
distinct subdomains. Deletional analysis of the hAhR transactivation domain
indicates that removal of the P/S/T-rich subdomain enhances transcriptional
activity, whereas the Q-rich subdomain is critical for hAhR transactivation
potential, and the acidic subdomain by itself fails to activate a dioxin response
element-driven reporter gene. Deletional analysis of the Q-rich subdomain
identified a critical stretch of 23 amino acids between residues 666 and 688 of
the hAhR, which are required for transactivation potential. Alanine scanning
mutagenesis of this region identified a leucine residue (Leu-678), which is
required for hAhR activity. Functional analysis of this point mutant revealed
that it is capable of binding ligand, heterodimerization, and subsequent binding 
to dioxin response elements. Further, when hAhR/L678A and hAhR containing only
the acidic subdomain were overexpressed they acted as dominant negative receptors
and repressed wild-type hAhR activity. In addition, the hAhR/L678A failed to
activate CYP1A1 gene transcription in transfected BP-8 cells and exhibited
reduced binding to RIP140 in vitro. Thus, Leu-678 appears to be critical for
efficient transactivation activity of the hAhR and appears to disrupt recruitment
of co-regulators.

PMID: 11551916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 16;276(46):43122-31. Epub 2001 Sep 4.

An inner membrane enzyme in Salmonella and Escherichia coli that transfers
4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose to lipid A: induction on polymyxin-resistant mutants 
and role of a novel lipid-linked donor.

Trent MS(1), Ribeiro AA, Lin S, Cotter RJ, Raetz CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Duke NMR Spectroscopy Center, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Attachment of the cationic sugar 4-amino-4-deoxy-l-arabinose (l-Ara4N) to lipid A
is required for the maintenance of polymyxin resistance in Escherichia coli and
Salmonella typhimurium. The enzymes that synthesize l-Ara4N and transfer it to
lipid A have not been identified. We now report an inner membrane enzyme,
expressed in polymyxin-resistant mutants, that adds one or two l-Ara4N moieties
to lipid A or its immediate precursors. No soluble factors are required. A gene
located near minute 51 on the S. typhimurium and E. coli chromosomes (previously 
termed orf5, pmrK, or yfbI) encodes the l-Ara4N transferase. The enzyme, renamed 
ArnT, consists of 548 amino acid residues in S. typhimurium with 12 possible
membrane-spanning regions. ArnT displays distant similarity to yeast protein
mannosyltransferases. ArnT adds two l-Ara4N units to lipid A precursors
containing a Kdo disaccharide. However, as shown by mass spectrometry and NMR
spectroscopy, it transfers only a single l-Ara4N residue to the 1-phosphate
moiety of lipid IV(A), a precursor lacking Kdo. Proteins with full-length
sequence similarity to ArnT are present in genomes of other bacteria thought to
synthesize l-Ara4N-modified lipid A, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Yersinia pestis. As shown in the following article (Trent, M. S., Ribeiro, A. A.,
Doerrler, W. T., Lin, S., Cotter, R. J., and Raetz, C. R. H. (2001) J. Biol.
Chem. 276, 43132-43144), ArnT utilizes the novel lipid undecaprenyl
phosphate-alpha-l-Ara4N as its sugar donor, suggesting that l-Ara4N transfer to
lipid A occurs on the periplasmic side of the inner membrane.

PMID: 11535604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Cancer Res. 2001 Aug 15;61(16):6120-30.

Dietary indoles and isothiocyanates that are generated from cruciferous
vegetables can both stimulate apoptosis and confer protection against DNA damage 
in human colon cell lines.

Bonnesen C(1), Eggleston IM, Hayes JD.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Centre, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, University 
of Dundee, Dundee DD1 9SY, Scotland, United Kingdom.

The natural indoles 3,3'-diindolylmethane (DIM), ascorbigen (ASG),
indole-3-carbinol (I3C), and indolo[3,2-b]carbazole (ICZ), as well as the natural
isothiocyanates sulforaphane (SUL), benzyl isothiocyanate (BITC) and phenethyl
isothiocyanate (PEITC), all possess cancer chemopreventive properties. It is now 
shown that DIM, ICZ, SUL, and BITC can each stimulate apoptosis in human colon
adenocarcinoma LS-174 and Caco-2 cells. Treatment of LS-174 cells with nontoxic
doses of DIM, ASG, I3C, or ICZ affected an increase of up to 21-fold in
cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1). None of these indoles caused an elevation in either
aldo-keto reductase 1C1 (AKR1C1) or the gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase heavy
subunit (GCS(h)), but DIM, I3C, and ICZ produced a very modest increase in
NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1). By contrast, nontoxic doses of SUL,
BITC, or PEITC failed to induce expression of CYP1A1 in LS-174 cells, but caused 
an increase of between 11- and 17-fold in the protein levels of AKR1C1, NQO1, and
GCS(h). Treatment of the colon cell line with ICZ or SUL caused increases in the 
levels of mRNA for CYP1A1, AKR1C1, and NQO1 that were consistent with the enzyme 
data. Exposure of Caco-2 cells to media containing indoles or isothiocyanates
gave similar results to those obtained using LS-174 cells. Evidence is presented 
that the ability of indoles and isothiocyanates to stimulate either xenobiotic
response element- or antioxidant response element-driven gene expression accounts
for the two groups of phytochemicals inducing different gene batteries.
Pretreatment of LS-174 cells for 24 h with ICZ and SUL before exposure for 24 h
to benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) reduced to <20% the number of single-strand DNA breaks
produced by the carcinogen. Neither ICZ alone nor SUL alone were able to confer
the same degree of protection against DNA damage produced by BaP as they achieved
in combination. Similar results were obtained with H(2)O(2) as the genotoxic
agent. Together, these phytochemicals may prevent colon tumorigenesis by both
stimulating apoptosis and enhancing intracellular defenses against genotoxic
agents.

PMID: 11507062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 2;276(44):40537-44. Epub 2001 Aug 13.

The basic helix-loop-helix domain of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
transporter (ARNT) can oligomerize and bind E-box DNA specifically.

Huffman JL(1), Mokashi A, Bächinger HP, Brennan RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland, Oregon 97201, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear transporter (ARNT) is a basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein that contains a Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain. ARNT
heterodimerizes in vivo with other bHLH PAS proteins to regulate a number of
cellular activities, but a physiological role for ARNT homodimers has not yet
been established. Moreover, no rigorous studies have been done to characterize
the biochemical properties of the bHLH domain of ARNT that would address this
issue. To begin this characterization, we chemically synthesized a 56-residue
peptide encompassing the bHLH domain of ARNT (residues 90-145). In the absence of
DNA, the ARNT-bHLH peptide can form homodimers in lower ionic strength, as
evidenced by dynamic light scattering analysis, and can bind E-box DNA (CACGTG)
with high specificity and affinity, as determined by fluorescence anisotropy.
Dimers and tetramers of ARNT-bHLH are observed bound to DNA in equilibrium
sedimentation and dynamic light scattering experiments. The homodimeric peptide
also undergoes a coil-to-helix transition upon E-box DNA binding. Peptide
oligomerization and DNA affinity are strongly influenced by ionic strength. These
biochemical and biophysical studies on the ARNT-bHLH reveal its inherent ability 
to form homodimers at concentrations supporting a physiological function and
underscore the significant biochemical differences among the bHLH superfamily.

PMID: 11502749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 26;276(43):39736-41. Epub 2001 Aug 13.

An isoform of the coactivator AIB1 that increases hormone and growth factor
sensitivity is overexpressed in breast cancer.

Reiter R(1), Wellstein A, Riegel AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical 
Center, Washington, D. C. 20007, USA.

The AIB1 (amplified in breast cancer 1) protein is a coactivator that potentiates
the transcriptional activity of nuclear hormone receptors, and its gene is
amplified in a subset of human breast cancers. Here we report a splice variant of
AIB1 mRNA that lacks the exon 3 sequence. We determined that the AIB-Delta3 mRNA 
encoded a 130-kDa protein that lacks the NH(2)-terminal basic helix-loop-helix
and a portion of the PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim homology) dimerization domain. The 130-kDa
protein was detected in MCF-7 breast cancer cells at levels that were 5-10% of
the full-length protein, whereas in non-transformed mammary epithelium lines, the
AIB-Delta3 protein was present at significantly lower levels compared with the
full-length AIB1. Consistent with this finding, the abundance of AIB1-Delta3 mRNA
was increased in human breast cancer specimens relative to that in normal breast 
tissue. To determine whether there were phenotypic changes associated with the
overexpression of the AIB-Delta3 isoform, we performed functional reporter gene
assays. These revealed that the ability of AIB1-Delta3 to promote transcription
mediated by the estrogen or progesterone receptors was significantly greater than
that of the full-length protein. Surprisingly, the AIB1-Delta3 isoform was also
more effective than AIB1 in promoting transcription induced by epidermal growth
factor. Overexpression of AIB1-Delta3 may thus play an important role in
sensitizing breast tumor cells to hormone or growth factor stimulation.

PMID: 11502741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 Aug 20;182(1):39-48.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin increases steady-state estrogen receptor-beta
mRNA levels after CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 induction in rat granulosa cells in vitro.

Dasmahapatra AK(1), Wimpee BA, Trewin AL, Hutz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, 308 Lapham Hall, University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 3209 North Maryland Avenue, Milwaukee, WI 53211, USA.

Previous in-vitro investigations of rat granulosa cells (GC) have shown that
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) inhibits estrogen secretion and
FSH-induced aromatase activity. Although TCDD exerted no effect on basal
aromatase enzyme activity, TCDD did reduce steady-state aromatase mRNA levels in 
GC using competitive RT-PCR. TCDD is hypothesized to induce these changes through
aromatic hydrocarbon receptor(AHR)-mediated gene transcription and the modulation
of the estrogen receptor (ER)-signaling pathway. In this study we show that rat
GC express mRNA for AHR and the AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) as well as
biomarkers of TCDD action, CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 mRNA. Basal CYP1A1 and ER-alpha
mRNAs were present only in trace amounts. By relative RT-PCR analysis we showed
that CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 mRNA were induced significantly by TCDD at 6 h and that
induction of CYP1A1 was maintained throughout the experiment. Using competitive
RT-PCR, we observed no significant change in the mRNA levels of ARNT between
control and TCDD-treated GC. Both AHR and ER-beta mRNA levels increased
significantly at 48 h with TCDD compared with controls. Since ER-beta mRNA was
not increased significantly until 48 h in culture, we suggest that in rat GC, the
observed ER-beta mRNA increase by TCDD might be a result of CYP1A1/CYP1B1
catalyzed estrogen metabolism and aromatase mRNA inhibition via AHR.

PMID: 11500237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2001 Aug 15;392(2):270-8.

Accessibility and activity of the promoter for a dioxin-inducible ecto-ATPase
gene.

Gao L(1), Whitlock JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California 94305-5174, USA.

We have analyzed the core promoter for a dioxin-inducible ecto-ATPase gene in
mouse hepatoma cells. The transcriptional initiation site maps to a region that
contains neither a TATA sequence nor a consensus initiator sequence nor a
downstream promoter element. The core promoter has constitutive activity that
does not require either the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor or its
heterodimerization partner Arnt. Two GC-rich regions contribute approximately
equally to the constitutive activity. Proteins constitutively occupy the GC-rich 
regions in chromatin. The promoter assumes a non-nucleosomal configuration in its
native chromosomal setting in both uninduced and dioxin-induced cells. Our
findings imply that the GC-rich regions together with their cognate binding
proteins carry out core promoter functions for the ecto-ATPase gene. The promoter
is constitutively accessible in situ, and chromatin structure is not a limiting
factor for dioxin-inducible ecto-ATPase transcription in intact cells.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11488602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 16;276(46):43231-8. Epub 2001 Aug 2.

Differential usage of nuclear export sequences regulates intracellular
localization of the dioxin (aryl hydrocarbon) receptor.

Berg P(1), Pongratz I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm
S-171 77, Sweden.

The dioxin receptor belongs to the basic helix-loop helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH)/PAS
family of proteins and functions as a ligand-dependent transcription factor to
activate target genes. The function of the PAS domain of the dioxin receptor is
only partially understood. Whereas the C-terminal half of the PAS domain has been
shown to harbor ligand binding activity and to function as an accessory
dimerization interface, the precise functional role of the N-terminal half of the
PAS domain remains unclear. We have previously shown that this domain confers
dimerization specificity to the dioxin receptor. Here we report the
identification and characterization of a novel nuclear export sequence (NES)
motif, located in the N-terminal portion of the PAS domain, in addition to the
previously identified NES in the bHLH domain. By point mutagenesis, we have
generated a dominant positive form of the PAS domain NES motif that inhibits
accumulation of the dioxin receptor in the nuclear compartment of the cell. This 
mutant form of the receptor was furthermore unable to sustain reporter gene
activation. Importantly, we demonstrate that the ligand-free and ligand-occupied 
forms of the dioxin receptor differentially employ the two NES motifs. In the
absence of ligand, nuclear export is sustained via the PAS domain NES, whereas
following ligand-dependent activation nuclear export of the receptor is mediated 
by the NES in the bHLH domain.

PMID: 11486007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jul 31;98(16):9353-8.

Globin-coupled sensors: a class of heme-containing sensors in Archaea and
Bacteria.

Hou S(1), Freitas T, Larsen RW, Piatibratov M, Sivozhelezov V, Yamamoto A,
Meleshkevitch EA, Zimmer M, Ordal GW, Alam M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Chemistry, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 
96822, USA.

The recently discovered prokaryotic signal transducer HemAT, which has been
described in both Archaea and Bacteria, mediates aerotactic responses. The
N-terminal regions of HemAT from the archaeon Halobacterium salinarum (HemAT-Hs) 
and from the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis (HemAT-Bs) contain a
myoglobin-like motif, display characteristic heme-protein absorption spectra, and
bind oxygen reversibly. Recombinant HemAT-Hs and HemAT-Bs shorter than 195 and
176 residues, respectively, do not bind heme effectively. Sequence homology
comparisons and three-dimensional modeling predict that His-123 is the proximal
heme-binding residue in HemAT from both species. The work described here used
site-specific mutagenesis and spectroscopy to confirm this prediction, thereby
providing direct evidence for a functional domain of prokaryotic signal
transducers that bind heme in a globin fold. We postulate that this domain is
part of a globin-coupled sensor (GCS) motif that exists as a two-domain
transducer having no similarity to the PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS)-domain superfamily
transducers. Using the GCS motif, we have identified several two-domain sensors
in a variety of prokaryotes. We have cloned, expressed, and purified two
potential globin-coupled sensors and performed spectral analysis on them. Both
bind heme and show myoglobin-like spectra. This observation suggests that the
general function of GCS-type transducers is to bind diatomic oxygen and perhaps
other gaseous ligands, and to transmit a conformational signal through a linked
signaling domain.

PMCID: PMC55424
PMID: 11481493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Curr Drug Metab. 2001 Jun;2(2):149-64.

Induction of CYP1A1. The AhR/DRE paradigm: transcription, receptor regulation,
and expanding biological roles.

Ma Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Biology Laboratory, Toxicology and Molecular Biology Branch, Health
Effects Laboratory Division, National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Morgantown, WV 26505, USA.

The CYP1A1 gene encodes microsomal cytochrome P4501A1 that catalyzes the
metabolism of many xenobiotics, including the oxygenation of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAH). Induction of CYP1A1 enhances the metabolism of PAHs, and
therefore, represents an adaptive response to chemical exposure in mammalian
cells. Mechanistic studies reveal an AhR/DRE paradigm for the induction, which
involves activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) by an agonist,
dimerization of AhR with the Ah recceptor nuclear translocator (Arnt), followed
by binding of the AhR/Arnt heterodimer to the dioxin-responsive enhancer (DRE)
and transcription of the gene. The AhR mediated transcription is tightly
regulated through, at least, two mechanisms: (a) the cytoplasmic AhR interacts
with hsp90 and an immunophilin chaperone AIP for proper folding and receptivity, 
and (b) the agonist-activated, nuclear AhR is degraded through the ubiquitin-26S 
proteasome mediated protein turnover, such that the transcription by AhR is
controlled at a physiologically adequate level. In addition to CYP1A1 induction, 
AhR mediates a broad range of biological responses to CYP1A1 inducers, typified
by the environmental contaminant dioxin, via modulating gene expression. Thus,
mechanistic studies of CYP1A1 induction have provided insights into P450
induction, PAH carcinogenesis, dioxin action, AhR function, and receptor-mediated
mammalian gene expression.

PMID: 11469723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Clin Chem. 2001 Aug;47(8):1390-5.

Screening for mutations and polymorphisms in the genes KCNH2 and KCNE2 encoding
the cardiac HERG/MiRP1 ion channel: implications for acquired and congenital long
Q-T syndrome.

Larsen LA(1), Andersen PS, Kanters J, Svendsen IH, Jacobsen JR, Vuust J, Wettrell
G, Tranebjaerg L, Bathen J, Christiansen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Statens Serum Institut, Artillerivej 5,
DK-2300 Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: The voltage-gated, rapid-delayed rectifier current (I(Kr)) is
important for repolarization of the heart, and mutations in the genes coding for 
the K+-ion channel conducting this current, i.e., KCNH2 for the alpha-subunit
HERG and KCNE2 for the beta-subunit MiRP1, cause acquired and congenital long Q-T
syndrome (LQTS) and other cardiac arrhythmias.
METHODS: We developed a robust single-strand conformation
polymorphism-heteroduplex screening analysis, with identical thermocycling
conditions for all PCR reactions, covering all of the coding exons in KCNH2 and
KCNE2. The method was used to screen 40 unrelated LQTS patients.
RESULTS: Eleven mutations, of which six were novel, were found in KCNH2.
Interestingly, six mutations were found in the region of the gene coding for the 
Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) and PAS-S1 regions of the HERG protein, stressing the need to 
examine the entire gene when screening for mutations. No mutations were found in 
KCNE2, suggesting that direct involvement of MiRP1 in LQTS is rare. Furthermore, 
four novel single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and one amino acid polymorphism
(R1047L) were identified in KCNH2, and one novel SNP and one previously known
amino acid polymorphism (T8A) were found in KCNE2.
CONCLUSIONS: The potential role of rare polymorphisms in the HERG/MiRP1
K+-channel should be clarified with respect to drug interactions and
susceptibility to arrhythmia and sudden death.

PMID: 11468227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Mar Environ Res. 2000 Jul-Dec;50(1-5):39-44.

The evolution of aryl hydrocarbon signaling proteins: diversity of ARNT isoforms 
among fish species.

Powell WH(1), Hahn ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, MS#32, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole,
MA 02543, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) mediates aryl
hydrocarbon signaling and toxicity by dimerizing with the ligand-activated aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), forming a complex that binds specific DNA elements
and alters transcription of target genes. Two genes encode different forms of
ARNT in rodents: ARNT1, which is widely expressed, and ARNT2, which exhibits a
very restricted expression pattern. In an effort to characterize aryl hydrocarbon
signaling mechanisms in fishes, we previously isolated an ARNT cDNA from Fundulus
heteroclitus and discovered that this species expresses ARNT2 ubiquitously. This 
situation differs not only from mammals, but also from rainbow trout, which
expresses a divergent ARNT gene that we hypothesized was peculiar to salmonids
(rtARNTa/b). In this communication, we examine the ARNT sequences of multiple
fish species, including a newly isolated cDNA from scup (Stenotomus chrysops).
Our phylogenetic analysis demonstrates that zebrafish ARNT, like the Fundulus
protein, is an ARNT2. Contrary to expectations, the scup ARNT is closely related 
to the rainbow trout protein, demonstrating that the existence of this ARNT
isoform predates the divergence of salmonids from the other teleosts. Thus,
different species of fish express distinct and highly conserved isoforms of ARNT.
The number, type, and expression pattern of ARNT proteins may contribute to
interspecies differences in aryl hydrocarbon toxicity, possibly through distinct 
interactions with additional PAS-family proteins.

PMID: 11460724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Nat Genet. 2001 Aug;28(4):355-60.

Aromatic hydrocarbon receptor-driven Bax gene expression is required for
premature ovarian failure caused by biohazardous environmental chemicals.

Matikainen T(1), Perez GI, Jurisicova A, Pru JK, Schlezinger JJ, Ryu HY, Laine J,
Sakai T, Korsmeyer SJ, Casper RF, Sherr DH, Tilly JL.

Author information: 
(1)Vincent Center for Reproductive Biology, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2001 Aug;28(4):300-1.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are toxic chemicals released into the
environment by fossil fuel combustion. Moreover, a primary route of human
exposure to PAHs is tobacco smoke. Oocyte destruction and ovarian failure occur
in PAH-treated mice, and cigarette smoking causes early menopause in women. In
many cells, PAHs activate the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (Ahr), a member of
the Per-Arnt-Sim family of transcription factors. The Ahr is also activated by
dioxin, one of the most intensively studied environmental contaminants. Here we
show that an exposure of mice to PAHs induces the expression of Bax in oocytes,
followed by apoptosis. Ovarian damage caused by PAHs is prevented by Ahr or Bax
inactivation. Oocytes microinjected with a Bax promoter-reporter construct show
Ahr-dependent transcriptional activation after PAH, but not dioxin, treatment,
consistent with findings that dioxin is not cytotoxic to oocytes. This difference
in the action of PAHs versus dioxin is conveyed by a single base pair flanking
each Ahr response element in the Bax promoter. Oocytes in human ovarian biopsies 
grafted into immunodeficient mice also accumulate Bax and undergo apoptosis after
PAH exposure in vivo. Thus, Ahr-driven Bax transcription is a novel and
evolutionarily conserved cell-death signaling pathway responsible for
environmental toxicant-induced ovarian failure.

PMID: 11455387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Toxicol Sci. 2001 Aug;62(2):299-314.

Effect of TCDD exposure on CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 expression in explant cultures of
human endometrium.

Bofinger DP(1), Feng L, Chi LH, Love J, Stephen FD, Sutter TR, Osteen KG, Costich
TG, Batt RE, Koury ST, Olson JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnical and Clinical Laboratory Science, State University
of New York at Buffalo, 3435 Main Street, Buffalo, NY 1421, USA.
dbofinge@acsu.buffalo.edu

Endometriosis is a debilitating disease estimated to affect 10% of
reproductive-age women and characterized by the growth of endometrial tissue
outside of the uterus. The present study characterizes a human endometrial
explant culture model for studying the direct effects of TCDD exposure by
assessing the expression of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 mRNA (Northern blotting), protein
(Western blotting), and activity (7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase; EROD) in
explants cultured with and without TCDD. Explants were obtained at laparoscopy or
laparotomy from women undergoing surgery for tubal ligation, endometriosis, or
pelvic pain unrelated to endometriosis. The explants were cultured with 10 nM
estradiol (E(2)) or 1 nM E(2) plus 500 nM progesterone (P(4)) with or without
TCDD (first 24 h). The expression of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 mRNA was greatest with 10 
nM TCDD and increased up to 72 h after initial exposure. EROD activity increased 
up to 120 h. Explants from a secretory phase biopsy became reorganized in culture
and formed a new epithelial membrane, while maintaining basic endometrial
morphology and viability for up to 120 h. At 24 h, TCDD significantly increased
CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 mRNA, and at 72 h, TCDD significantly increased EROD activity
and CYP1B1 protein compared to explants cultured without TCDD for similar times. 
CYP1B1 protein also exhibited substantial constitutive expression that was
similar in uncultured biopsies, where CYP1B1 protein was immunolocalized in the
cytoplasm of epithelial glands, with only occasional patches of protein in the
surface epithelial membrane. In explants cultured with and without TCDD exposure,
CYP1B1 protein was localized in the cytoplasm of the new surface epithelial
membrane and glands closest to the surface. CYP1A1 protein was not detected in
uncultured biopsies or explants. Both younger age (age 30 and under) and
proliferative phase were associated with higher TCDD-induced EROD activity in
specimens treated with E(2):P(4). No significant endometriosis-related
differences were observed for any of the biomarkers, but the detection of
disease-specific change was limited by small sample size and variability in
tissue-cycle phase. The human endometrial explant culture model will be useful
for future studies of the effects of dioxin-like compounds on human endometrium
in relationship to cycle phase and hormonal exposure.

PMID: 11452143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Toxicol Sci. 2001 Aug;62(2):289-98.

Expression of AhR and ARNT mRNA in cultured human endometrial explants exposed to
TCDD.

Pitt JA(1), Feng L, Abbott BD, Schmid J, Batt RE, Costich TG, Koury ST, Bofinger 
DP.

Author information: 
(1)Curriculum in Toxicology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
USA.

Endometriosis is a debilitating disease found in 10-15% of reproductive-age women
and is characterized by the presence of endometrial tissue outside of the uterus.
The present study characterizes the expression of AhR and ARNT mRNA in a human
endometrial explant culture model in the absence and presence of TCDD exposure.
In a parallel, companion study using this model, TCDD exposure was shown to
induce CYP1A1 mRNA, CYP1B1 mRNA, EROD (7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase) activity, 
and CYP1B1 protein in human endometrial explants. Explants were prepared from
specimens obtained at laparoscopy or laparotomy from women undergoing surgery for
tubal ligation, endometriosis, or pelvic pain unrelated to endometriosis. These
specimens were a subset of the specimens used in the parallel study. The explants
were cultured in medium containing 10 nM estradiol (E(2)) or 1 nM estradiol plus 
500 nM progesterone (E(2) + P(4)) with or without TCDD (first 24 h). After
culture, AhR and ARNT mRNA expression were quantified by RT-PCR. TCDD treatment
significantly increased the expression of AhR mRNA, but not ARNT mRNA. The
expression of both genes was similar for all individual explants and the ratio of
AhR:ARNT mRNA expression across all samples was 1.7 to 1.8. Constitutive AhR mRNA
expression was donor age dependent (increasing with age), while ARNT mRNA
expression was donor age and tissue phase dependent (increased in older and
proliferative phase specimens). Similar to results in the parallel study on
expression of CYP1A1 mRNA, CYP1B1 mRNA, EROD activity, and CYP1B1 protein, the
presence of endometriosis did not affect the expression of AhR or ARNT mRNA,
either constitutively or following TCDD exposure. However, the detection of
disease-specific change was limited by small sample size and variability in
tissue cycle phase. The human endometrial explant culture model will be useful
for future studies of the effects of dioxin-like compounds on human endometrium
in relationship to cycle phase, hormonal exposure, and donor age.

PMID: 11452142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2001 Jul 15;174(2):153-9.

The synthetic retinoid AGN 193109 but not retinoic acid elevates CYP1A1 levels in
mouse embryos and Hepa-1c1c7 cells.

Soprano DR(1), Gambone CJ, Sheikh SN, Gabriel JL, Chandraratna RA, Soprano KJ,
Kochhar DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Temple University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

The synthetic retinoid AGN 193109 is a potent pan retinoic acid receptor (RAR)
antagonist. Treatment of pregnant mice with a single oral 1 mg/kg dose of this
antagonist on day 8 postcoitum results in severe craniofacial (median cleft face 
or frontonasal deficiency) and eye malformations in virtually all exposed
fetuses. Using differential display analysis, we have determined that CYP1A1 mRNA
levels are elevated in mouse embryos 6 h following treatment with AGN 193109.
Similarly, an elevation in CYP1A1 mRNA levels, protein levels, and aryl
hydrocarbon hydoxylase activity occurs in Hepa-1c1c7 cells, with the maximal
elevation observed when the cells were treated with 10(-5) M AGN 193109 for 4 to 
8 h. Elevation in CYP1A1 mRNA levels in mouse embryos and Hepa-1c1c7 cells does
not occur upon treatment with the natural retinoid, all-trans-retinoic acid.
Finally, elevation in CYP1A1 mRNA levels was not observed when mutant Hepa-1c1c7 
cells, which are defective in either the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) or aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), were treated with AGN 193109.
This suggests that the AhR/ARNT pathway and not the RAR/RXR pathway is mediating 
the elevation of CYP1A1 mRNA levels by AGN 193109, at least in the Hepa-1c1c7
cells. This is the first example of a retinoid that displays the abililty to
regulate both the RAR/RXR and AhR/ARNT transcriptional regulatory pathways.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11446831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Science. 2001 Jul 20;293(5529):510-4. Epub 2001 Jul 5.

Regulation of clock and NPAS2 DNA binding by the redox state of NAD cofactors.

Rutter J(1), Reick M, Wu LC, McKnight SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas-Southwestern Medical Center,
5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, Texas 75390-9152, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2001 Jul 20;293(5529):437-8.

Clock:BMAL1 and NPAS2:BMAL1 are heterodimeric transcription factors that control 
gene expression as a function of the light-dark cycle. Although built to
fluctuate at or near a 24-hour cycle, the clock can be entrained by light,
activity, or food. Here we show that the DNA-binding activity of the Clock:BMAL1 
and NPAS2:BMAL1 heterodimers is regulated by the redox state of nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NAD) cofactors in a purified system. The reduced forms of
the redox cofactors, NAD(H) and NADP(H), strongly enhance DNA binding of the
Clock:BMAL1 and NPAS2:BMAL1 heterodimers, whereas the oxidized forms inhibit.
These observations raise the possibility that food, neuronal activity, or both
may entrain the circadian clock by direct modulation of cellular redox state.

PMID: 11441146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Eur J Pharmacol. 2001 Jun 22;422(1-3):77-81.

Induction of tolerance to the suppressant effect of the neurotensin analogue
NT69L on amphetamine-induced hyperactivity.

Hertel P(1), Byskov L, Didriksen M, Arnt J.

Author information: 
(1)Psychopharmacological Research, H. Lundbeck A/S, Ottiliavej 9, DK-2500
Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark. phe@lundbeck.com

Although several studies have indicated that neurotensin administered acutely has
several pharmacological properties common with those of antipsychotic drugs, the 
effects of repeated exposure to neurotensin receptor agonism have been less well 
characterised. Here, we investigated the effect of the novel neurotensin-(8-13)
analogue NT69L [(N-methyl-Arg), Lys, Pro, L-neo-Trp, tert-Leu, Leu] in animal
models sensitive to central neurotensin receptor stimulation as well as in
predictive models for antipsychotic activity and motor side-effect liability.
Acute injection of NT69L (0.19-6.1 micromol/kg, s.c./i.p.) caused hypothermia
(>2.5 degrees C) and reduction in spontaneous locomotor activity but failed to
induce catalepsy. Furthermore, NT69L (0.10 micromol/kg, s.c.) counteracted the
hyperlocomotion elicited by amphetamine (0.5 mg/kg, s.c.). However, repeated
injections of NT69L (0.19 micromol/kg, s.c. for 6 days, twice daily)
significantly reduced its effect on spontaneous locomotor activity and completely
abolished its effect on amphetamine-elicited hyperactivity. Our data obtained
after single injections of NT69L indicate that this drug stimulates central
neurotensin receptors after peripheral administration and collectively support
the notion that neurotensin receptor agonism is associated with an attractive
pre-clinical profile as regards both antipsychotic activity and motor side-effect
liability. However, the present results also indicate that repeated neurotensin
receptor stimulation may cause a desensitisation of neurotensin receptor mediated
effects.

PMID: 11430916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Clin Chem. 2001;47(7):1311-4.

Quantification of aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and related genes by
calibrated reverse transcription-PCR in blood mononuclear cells.

Dassi C(1), Brambilla P, Signorini S, Gerthoux P, Molteni P, Sala R, Mocarelli P.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Milano-Bicocca,
Hospital of Desio, Via Mazzini 1, 20033 Desio, Milan, Italy.

PMID: 11427467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 31;276(35):33101-10. Epub 2001 Jun 21.

Structure and expression of the Ah receptor repressor gene.

Baba T(1), Mimura J, Gradin K, Kuroiwa A, Watanabe T, Matsuda Y, Inazawa J,
Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Science, Graduate School of Life Science, Tohoku
University, Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) repressor (AhRR) gene has been isolated and
characterized from a mouse genomic library. The gene is distributed as 11 exons
in a total length of about 60 kilobase pairs. Fluorescence in situ hybridization 
analysis has shown that the AhRR gene is located at mouse chromosome 13C2, at rat
chromosome 1p11.2, and at human chromosome 5p15.3. The AhRR gene has a TATA-less 
promoter and several transcription start sites. In addition, putative regulatory 
DNA sequences such as xenobiotic responsive element (XRE), GC box, and
NF-kappaB-binding sites have been identified in the 5'-upstream region of the
AhRR gene. Transient transfection analyses of HeLa cells with reporter genes that
contain deletions and point mutations in the AhRR promoter revealed that all
three XREs mediated the inducible expression of the AhRR gene by
3-methylcholanthrene treatment, and furthermore, GC box sequences were
indispensable for a high level of inducible expression and for constitutive
expression. Moreover, by using gel mobility shift assays we were able to show
that the AhR/Arnt heterodimer binds to the XREs with very low affinity, which is 
due to three varied nucleotides outside the XRE core sequence. We have also shown
that Sp1 and Sp3 can bind to the GC boxes. Finally, both transient transfection
analysis and gel mobility shift assay revealed that the AhRR gene is up-regulated
by a p65/p50 heterodimer that binds to the NF-kappaB site when the cells has been
exposed to 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, and this inducible expression
was further enhanced by cotreatment of 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate and
3-methylcholanthrene.

PMID: 11423533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Mar 30;282(2):602-7.

Hypoxia regulates avian cardiac Arnt and HIF-1alpha mRNA expression.

Catron T(1), Mendiola MA, Smith SM, Born J, Walker MK.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center,
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) and hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF)-1alpha mediate cellular responses to hypoxia. We investigated the
ability of hypoxia to regulate Arnt and HIF-1alpha mRNA in the heart in vivo. We 
cloned avian Arnt, developed an in vivo model of chronic cardiac hypoxia, and
measured expression of cardiac Arnt and HIF-1alpha mRNA by quantitative RT-PCR.
Chronic hypoxic exposure (24 h to 15% O(2)) of day 9 chick embryos resulted in a 
30-fold increase in covalent binding of (3)H-misonidazole, a hypoxic tissue
marker, to cardiac tissue, and a 2-fold induction of cardiac inducible nitric
oxide synthase mRNA, compared to normoxic controls. In this same model, cardiac
Arnt mRNA expression decreased by 35%, while HIF-1alpha mRNA expression increased
400%. These data suggest that regulation of Arnt and HIF-1alpha mRNA expression
may contribute to the physiological responses of the heart during prolonged
hypoxia.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11401503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Mar 30;282(2):487-92.

Ectopic expression of negative ARNT2 factor disrupts fish development.

Hsu HJ(1), Wang WD, Hu CH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Marine Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University, 2,
Pei-Ning Road, Keelung, Taiwan, 202-24, Republic of China.

ARNT factors are a cluster of bHLH-PAS factors that heterodimerize with other
specific bHLH-PAS factors to mediate a wide range of biological responses.
Previously, we obtained a truncated form of ARNT2-like factor, ARNT2A, from
zebrafish, which encompasses the basic-helix-loop-helix and PAS A/B domains, but 
lacks a transactivation domain at its carboxyl end. Herein, we report another
truncated ARNT2-like factor, ARNT2X, in zebrafish, which differs from ARNT2A at
its N-terminal region. In cultured ZLE cells, transiently expressed ARNT2X and
ARNT2A inhibited 2,3,7,8-TCDD-activated cyp1a1 transcription with different
efficiencies. In the developing embryo, arnt2X mRNA was consistently expressed in
the retinal and neural tube regions until the hatching stages, but it exhibited a
more specific pattern at larval stages, including expression in the brain, eyes, 
hypothalamus, pharyngeal skeleton, heart, liver, pronephros duct, pectoral fin,
and epithelial cells of the swim bladder. In contrast, arnt2A transcription
diminished after hatching. Microinjecting a recombinant arnt2X-expression vector 
into fertilized eggs before cleavage stages caused severe defects in brain, eyes,
pectoral fin, heart, and gut development. This suggests that the ARNT-mediated
signal transduction pathways play important roles in fish tissue development.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11401485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Hum Genet. 2001;46(6):342-6.

Human arylhydrocarbon receptor repressor (AHRR) gene: genomic structure and
analysis of polymorphism in endometriosis.

Watanabe T(1), Imoto I, Kosugi Y, Fukuda Y, Mimura J, Fujii Y, Isaka K, Takayama 
M, Sato A, Inazawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Japan.

The diversity of biological effects resulting from exposure to dioxin may reflect
the ability of this environmental pollutant to alter gene expression by binding
to the arylhydrocarbon receptor (AHR) gene and related genes. AHR function may be
regulated by structural variations in AHR itself, in the AHR repressor (AHRR), in
the AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT), or in AHR target molecules such as
cytochrome P-4501A1 (CYP1A1) and glutathione S-transferase. Analysis of the
genomic organization of AHRR revealed an open reading frame consisting of a
2094-bp mRNA encoded by ten exons. We found one novel polymorphism, a
substitution of Ala by Pro at codon 185 (GCC to CCC), in exon 5 of the AHRR gene;
among 108 healthy unrelated Japanese women, genotypes Ala/Ala, Ala/Pro, and
Pro/Pro were represented, respectively, by 20 (18.5%), 49 (45.4%), and 39 (36.1%)
individuals. We did not detect previously published polymorphisms of ARNT (D511N)
or the CYP1A1 promoter (G-469A and C-459T) in our subjects, suggesting that these
polymorphisms are rare in the Japanese population. No association was found
between uterine endometriosis and any polymorphisms in the AHRR, AHR, ARNT, or
CYP1A1 genes analyzed in the present study.

PMID: 11393538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jun 5;98(12):6692-7. Epub 2001 May 29.

Targeted mutation of the murine arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2
(Arnt2) gene reveals partial redundancy with Arnt.

Keith B(1), Adelman DM, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Cell and Developmental Biology, Abramson Family
Cancer Research Institute, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Pennsylvania, 421 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The ubiquitously expressed basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS protein ARNT
(arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear transporter) forms transcriptionally active
heterodimers with a variety of other bHLH-PAS proteins, including HIF-1alpha
(hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha) and AHR (arylhydrocarbon receptor). These
complexes regulate gene expression in response to hypoxia and xenobiotics,
respectively, and mutation of the murine Arnt locus results in embryonic death by
day 10.5 associated with placental, vascular, and hematopoietic defects. The
closely related protein ARNT2 is highly expressed in the central nervous system
and kidney and also forms complexes with HIF-1alpha and AHR. To assess unique
roles for ARNT2 in development, and reveal potential functional overlap with
ARNT, we generated a targeted null mutation of the murine Arnt2 locus. Arnt2(-/-)
embryos die perinatally and exhibit impaired hypothalamic development, phenotypes
previously observed for a targeted mutation in the murine bHLH-PAS gene Sim1
(Single-minded 1), and consistent with the recent proposal that ARNT2 and SIM1
form an essential heterodimer in vivo [Michaud, J. L., DeRossi, C., May, N. R.,
Holdener, B. C. & Fan, C. (2000) Mech. Dev. 90, 253-261]. In addition, cultured
Arnt2(-/-) neurons display decreased hypoxic induction of HIF-1 target genes,
demonstrating formally that ARNT2/HIF-1alpha complexes regulate oxygen-responsive
genes. Finally, a strong genetic interaction between Arnt and Arnt2 mutations was
observed, indicating that either gene can fulfill essential functions in a
dose-dependent manner before embryonic day 8.5. These results demonstrate that
Arnt and Arnt2 have both unique and overlapping essential functions in embryonic 
development.

PMCID: PMC34414
PMID: 11381139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2001 Jun;10(1-2):17-27.

Interactions between aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and hypoxia signaling
pathways.

Nie M(1), Blankenship AL, Giesy JP.

Author information: 
(1)National Food Safety and Toxicology Center, Department of Zoology and
Institute for Environmental Toxicology, Michigan State University, 48824-1311,
East Lansing, MI, USA

Most if not all of the toxic responses of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) are mediated through the AhR, which requires ARNT to regulate gene
expression. ARNT is also required by HIF-1alpha to enhance the expression of
various genes in response to hypoxia. Since both the AhR and hypoxia
transcriptional pathways require ARNT, some of the effects of TCDD and similar
types of ligands could be explained by interaction between the AhR and hypoxia
pathways involving ARNT. The studies on which we report here were conducted to
test the hypothesis that there is cross talk between AhR- and HIF-1-mediated
transcription pathways. TCDD significantly reduced the hypoxia-mediated reporter 
gene activity in B-1 cells. Reciprocally, the hypoxia response inducers
desferrioxamine or CoCl(2) inhibited AhR-mediated CYP1A1 enzyme activity in B-1
and Hepa 1 cells, and the AhR-mediated luciferase reporter gene activity in
H1L1.1c2 cells. The inhibition of AhR-mediated transcription by hypoxia inducers,
however, was not observed in H4IIE-luc cells. The interaction between the AhR-
and HIF-1-mediated transcription can be attributed to changes in DNA binding
activities. TCDD-induced protein binding to dioxin responsive element (DRE) was
diminished by desferrioxamine, and TCDD reduced the binding activity to HIF-1
binding site in desferrioxamine-treated Hepa 1 cells. This mutual repression may 
provide an underlying mechanism for many TCDD-induced toxic responses. The
results reported here indicate that there is cross talk between ARNT-requiring
pathways. Since ARNT is possibly required by a number of pathways, this type of
interaction may explain some of the pleiotropic effects caused by TCDD.

PMID: 11382553  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


362. Nat Genet. 2001 Jun;28(2):178-83.

A common polymorphism in the promoter of UCP2 is associated with decreased risk
of obesity in middle-aged humans.

Esterbauer H(1), Schneitler C, Oberkofler H, Ebenbichler C, Paulweber B,
Sandhofer F, Ladurner G, Hell E, Strosberg AD, Patsch JR, Krempler F, Patsch W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Landeskliniken Salzburg, Austria.

Obesity is the most common nutritional disorder in Western society. Uncoupling
protein-2 (UCP2) is a recently identified member of the mitochondrial transporter
superfamily that is expressed in many tissues, including adipose tissue. Like its
close relatives UCP1 and UCP3, UCP2 uncouples proton entry in the mitochondrial
matrix from ATP synthesis and is therefore a candidate gene for obesity. We show 
here that a common G/A polymorphism in the UCP2 promoter region is associated
with enhanced adipose tissue mRNA expression in vivo and results in increased
transcription of a reporter gene in the human adipocyte cell line PAZ-6. In
analyzing 340 obese and 256 never-obese middle-aged subjects, we found a modest
but significant reduction in obesity prevalence associated with the less-common
allele. We confirmed this association in a population-based sample of 791
middle-aged subjects from the same geographic area. Despite its modest effect,
but because of its high frequency (approximately 63%), the more-common risk
allele conferred a relatively large population-attributable risk accounting for
15% of the obesity in the population studied.

PMID: 11381268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan. 2000 Oct;31(4):334-6.

[A new transcriptional factor--EPAS1].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen W.

PMID: 11372426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2001 Jun 1;390(1):64-70.

Short heterodimer partner (SHP) orphan nuclear receptor inhibits the
transcriptional activity of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)/AHR nuclear
translocator (ARNT).

Klinge CM(1), Jernigan SC, Risinger KE, Lee JE, Tyulmenkov VV, Falkner KC, Prough
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Louisville
School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA.
carolyn.klinge@louisville.edu

SHP (short heterodimer partner) is an orphan nuclear receptor lacking a DNA
binding domain that interacts with nuclear receptors (NR) including thyroid
receptor (TR), retinoic acid receptors (RAR and RXR), and estrogen receptors
alpha and beta (ERalpha and ERbeta). SHP acts as a negative regulator of these
receptors by inhibiting DNA binding and transcriptional activation.
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) binds to arylhydrocarbon receptor
(AHR), activating the AHR/AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) heterodimer. We
investigated the physical and functional interaction of SHP with AHR/ARNT. In
RL95-2 human endometrial carcinoma cells, SHP inhibited TCDD-stimulated reporter 
activity from the AHR-responsive CYP1A1 and UGT1A6 gene promoters in a
concentration-dependent manner. In GST pull-down assays, ARNT interacted directly
with SHP in vitro, but AHR did not interact with GST-SHP. SHP inhibited
AHR/ARNT-DNA binding in vitro. These results identify ARNT as a novel SHP target.
We speculate a role for SHP in the suppression of agonist-activated AHR/ARNT
activity.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11368516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Toxicol Lett. 2001 Mar 31;120(1-3):1-7.

Molecular biology of the Ah receptor and its role in carcinogenesis.

Safe S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology & Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, 4466
TAMU, College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA. ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated nuclear transcription
factor that mediates responses to toxic halogenated aromatic toxins such as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons,
combustion products, and numerous phytochemicals such as flavonoids and
indole-3-carbinol (I3C). The nuclear AhR complex is a heterodimer containing the 
AhR and AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt) proteins, and the molecular mechanism of 
AhR action is associated with binding of the heterodimer to dioxin responsive
elements (DREs) in regulatory regions of Ah-responsive genes. TCDD, a
'xenodioxin', is a multi-site carcinogen in several species and possibly in
humans, whereas natural AhR ligands including I3C and flavonoids tend to protect 
against cancer. Both TCDD and phytochemicals inhibit estrogen-induced breast and 
endometrial cancer, and the molecular mechanisms of this common response will be 
described.

PMID: 11323156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Gene Ther. 2001 Apr;8(8):638-45.

Gene transfer of antisense hypoxia inducible factor-1 alpha enhances the
therapeutic efficacy of cancer immunotherapy.

Sun X(1), Kanwar JR, Leung E, Lehnert K, Wang D, Krissansen GW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science,
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

Solid tumors meet their demands for nascent blood vessels and increased
glycolysis, to combat hypoxia, by activating multiple genes involved in
angiogenesis and glucose metabolism. Hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a
constitutively expressed basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, formed by
the assembly of HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta (Arnt), that is stablized in response to
hypoxia, and rapidly degraded under normoxic conditions. It activates the
transcription of genes important for maintaining oxygen homeostasis. Here, we
demonstrate that engineered down-regulation of HIF-1alpha by intratumoral gene
transfer of an antisense HIF-1alpha plasmid leads to the down-regulation of VEGF,
and decreased tumor microvessel density. Antisense HIF-1alpha monotherapy
resulted in the complete and permanent rejection of small (0.1 cm in diameter)
EL-4 tumors, which is unusual for an anti-angiogenic agent where transient
suppression of tumor growth is the norm. It induced NK cell-dependent rejection
of tumors, but failed to stimulate systemic T cell-mediated anti-tumor immunity, 
and synergized with B7-1-mediated immunotherapy to cause the NK cell and CD8 T
cell-dependent rejection of larger EL-4 tumors (0.4 cm in diameter) that were
refractory to monotherapies. Mice cured of their tumors by combination therapy
resisted a rechallenge with parental tumor cells, indicating systemic antitumor
immunity had been achieved. In summary, whilst intensive investigations are in
progress to target the many HIF-1 effectors, the results herein indicate that
blocking hypoxia-inducible pathways and enhancing NK-mediated antitumor immunity 
by targeting HIF-1 itself may be advantageous, especially when combined with
cancer immunotherapy.

PMID: 11320410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Genes Cells. 2001 Apr;6(4):361-74.

Defective development of secretory neurones in the hypothalamus of Arnt2-knockout
mice.

Hosoya T(1), Oda Y, Takahashi S, Morita M, Kawauchi S, Ema M, Yamamoto M,
Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-8578, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Within the basic region-helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS family of
transcription factors, Arnt and Arnt2 play unique roles; these two factors not
only heterodimerize with themselves, but also with other members of this family
and they act as transcription regulators which bind to specific DNA elements.
Whereas Arnt is broadly expressed in various tissues, the expression of Arnt2 is 
known to be limited to the neural tissues.
RESULTS: To elucidate the function of Arnt2 in detail, we cloned the mouse Arnt2 
gene and its gene structure was determined. We subsequently generated germ line
Arnt2 mutant mice by gene targeting technology. Heterozygous Arnt2 mice were
viable, but homozygous Arnt2 gene knockout mice died shortly after birth.
Histological and immunological analyses revealed that the supraoptic nuclei (SON)
and the paraventricular nuclei (PVN) are hypocellular. Moreover, secretory
neurones identified by the expression of neurosecretory hormone such as arginine 
vasopressin, oxytocin, corticotrophin-releasing hormone and somatostatin are
completely absent in SON and PVN in the mutant Arnt2 mice. Consistent with these 
observations, prospective SON and PVN neurones which express Brn2 appeared around
E13.5 in the mantle zone, but no neurones which expressed the neurosecretory
hormones were found in the SON and PVN regions.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that the transcription factor Arnt2 controls the
development of the secretory neurones at the later or final stages of
differentiation rather than at the beginning stage. Strikingly similar
observations have been reported with the Sim1 deficient mice. Taken together, our
results demonstrate that Arnt2 is an indispensable transcription factor for the
development of the hypothalamus, and suggest that Arnt2 is an obligatory partner 
molecule of Sim1 in the developmental process of the neuroendocrinological cell
lineages.

PMID: 11318878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Clin Cancer Res. 2001 Apr;7(4):818-23.

Association of ARNT splice variants with estrogen receptor-negative breast
cancer, poor induction of vascular endothelial growth factor under hypoxia, and
poor prognosis.

Qin C(1), Wilson C, Blancher C, Taylor M, Safe S, Harris AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor that forms heterodimers with the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) or hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha to activate
transcription via xenobiotic response element or hypoxia response element,
respectively. Thus, it plays a major role in two key biochemical pathways
involved in tumor growth. We previously showed that estrogen receptor
(ER)-negative breast cancer cell lines expressed a splice variant of ARNT that
was associated with Ah nonresponsiveness. We have now used a sensitive PCR method
to analyze the expression of the variant in a series of 92 breast cancers to
assess interactions with the ER and prognosis. The splice variant could be
detected in all of the cases examined, with high ratios of variant:full-length
ARNT (> or =10) characterized in 10 cases. When the patient group was split into 
quartiles by increasing splice variant ratios, there was an inverse relationship 
of ER status to ARNT splice-variant ratios (P = 0.01, chi(2)). Univariate
analysis showed that cases with high ARNT splice-variant ratios > or =10 had a
worse relapse-free and overall survival (P > or = 0.03; hazard ratio, 2.7; and P 
= 0.006; hazard ratio, 3.9, respectively). In multivariate analysis for
relapse-free and overall survival, ARNT splice-variant ratio was the strongest
independent factor and, although inversely related to ER, remained a separate
risk factor. At least two potential mechanisms could explain this phenomenon: the
loss of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated antiestrogenic activity or the
blockade of a proapoptotic pathway induced by hypoxia. Because several enzymes
involved in drug resistance are induced through a xenobiotic response element,
the tumors presenting high ARNT splice-variant ratios may be specifically
targeted by drugs normally degraded or inactivated. This study shows the
biological importance of ARNT splice variants in the behavior of human breast
cancer and suggests that the breast cell lines in which the splice variant was
discovered may be useful models for further investigation.

PMID: 11309328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Chem Biol Interact. 2001 Jan 30;130-132(1-3):227-33.

Aldehyde dehydrogenase 3 gene regulation: studies on constitutive and
hypoxia-modulated expression.

Reisdorph R(1), Lindahl R.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Biology Research Group, The University of South Dakota 
School of Medicine, 57069, Vermillion, SD, USA. rindahl@usd.edu

We have previously shown that expression of the Class 3 aldehyde dehydrogenase
gene (ALDH3) is abrogated by hypoxia. This phenomenon occurs in rat hepatoma
systems in which ALDH3 expression is xenobiotic-inducible as well as in rat
primary corneal epithelial cells that exhibit high constitutive ALDH3 expression.
We have begun to test various segments of the ALDH3 5' flanking region for
elements that may mediate this effect using CAT reporter gene constructs. In
addition, although the involvement of the Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)
in xenobiotic induction of ALDH3 is well established, the role of ARNT in
constitutive ALDH3 expression is not clear. Moreover, ARNT is also a component of
the hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) bipartite transcription factor complex
that mediates hypoxic induction of a variety of genes. Concomitant activation of 
the xenobiotic and hypoxia pathways results in cross-talk and functional
interference. It has been hypothesized that this interference is due to limiting 
levels of ARNT. To examine if ARNT levels are limiting during hypoxic and
xenobiotic induction in the context of ALDH3 expression and to examine possible
roles of ARNT in constitutive expression of ALDH3 in corneal epithelial cells we 
co-transfected rat corneal epithelial cells and H4-II-EC3 rat hepatoma cells with
ALDH3 5' UTR-CAT reporter genes and expression vectors containing either wild
type or dominant negative forms of ARNT. Our results indicate that during hypoxia
and xenobiotic induction of ALDH3 in H4-II-EC3 cells ARNT is not the limiting
transcription factor. Further, neither wild type nor dominant negative ARNT had
effects on constitutive ALDH3 expression in corneal epithelial cells.

PMID: 11306047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Toxicol Sci. 2001 May;61(1):187-96.

Correlation of cardiotoxicity mediated by halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons to
aryl hydrocarbon receptor activation.

Heid SE(1), Walker MK, Swanson HI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Kentucky Medical Center, Lexington, 
Kentucky 40536, USA.

In mammals, the toxicity of halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (HAH) correlates
with their ability to activate the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR). To test this 
correlation in an avian model, we selected six HAHs based on their affinity for
the mammalian AHR, including: 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD);
1,2,3,7,8-pentachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (PCDD); 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran
(TCDF); 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (PCDF); 3,3',4,4'-tetrachlorobiphenyl
(PCB 77); and 2,2',4,4',5,5'-hexachlorobiphenyl (PCB 153). We determined the
ability of these compounds to induce cardiotoxicity, as measured by an increase
in heart wet weight on incubation day 10 in the chick embryo (Gallus gallus) and 
formation of the avian AHR/ARNT/DNA binding complex in chicken hepatoma cells.
Relative potency values (RPs) were calculated by dividing the TCDD EC(50)
(AHR/ARNT/DNA binding) or ED(50) (15% increase in day-10 heart wet weight) by the
HAH congeners EC(50) or ED(50), respectively. The rank order of potencies for
inducing cardiotoxicity were TCDD > PCDD = PCDF = TCDF > PCDF > PCB77, PCB 153,
no effect. The RP values for inducing AHR/ARNT DNA binding were then correlated
with those for inducing cardiotoxicity (the RP values of PCDD were determined to 
be statistical outliers). This correlation was found to be highly significant (r 
= 0.94, p = 0.017). The ability of PCDD to act as an AHR agonist was verified
using luciferase reporter assays and analysis of cytochrome P4501A1 protein
levels. These results indicate that the ability of HAHs to activate the avian AHR
signaling pathway, in general, correlates with their ability to mediate
cardiotoxicity in the chick embryo.

PMID: 11294989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Mol Cell Biol Res Commun. 2000 Sep;4(3):174-80.

Comparative effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin on MCF-7, RL95-2, and 
LNCaP cells: role of target steroid hormones in cellular responsiveness to CYP1A1
induction.

Jana NR(1), Sarkar S, Ishizuka M, Yonemoto J, Tohyama C, Sone H.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Exposure and Health Effects Research Team, National Institute for
Environmental Studies, 16-2 Onogawa,Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0053, Japan.

A study was conducted to investigate whether target hormones affect
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-inducible gene expression, using as an
experimental model system three human cancer cell lines, breast (MCF-7), uterine 
(RL95-2), and prostate (LNCaP). Exposure to TCDD induced the CYP1A1 gene in all
three cell lines. MCF-7 and RL95-2 cells showed more than 15- and 10-fold
induction of EROD (7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase) activity, respectively,
compared with the less responsive LNCaP cells. Surprisingly, however,
TCDD-induced reporter gene activity driven by a single XRE element was similar in
RL95-2 and LNCaP cells. The steady-state levels of expression of aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) were
similar in all three cell lines. Expression of the CYP1B1 and PAI-2 genes was
induced by TCDD in MCF-7 and RL95-2, but not in LNCaP, cells. Transient
coexpression of estradiol receptor-alpha (ER-alpha) with a TCDD-responsive
reporter plasmid and subsequent TCDD treatment increased responsiveness to TCDD
in RL95-2 and LNCaP cells. Treatment with AZA-C, a DNA methyltransferase
inhibitor, enhanced responsiveness to TCDD, in terms of EROD activity in LNCaP
cells, but not in MCF-7 and RL95-2 cells, suggesting that DNA methylation in the 
CpG dinucleotide within the XRE core sequence is another factor involved in
silencing of CYP1A1 in LNCaP cells. TCDD markedly inhibited E(2)- or
testosterone-induced reporter gene activities in all three cell lines.
Conversely, these target hormones inhibited TCDD-induced EROD activity in the
three cell lines. These findings suggest that TCDD and the target steroid
hormones negatively regulate each other's activity.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11281733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Drug Metab Rev. 2001 Feb;33(1):37-47.

Competitive inhibition of the transcription of rabbit CYP1A1 gene by upstream
stimulatory factor 1 (USF1).

Takahashi Y(1), Kamataki T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

The induction of CYP1A1 by 3-methylcholanthrene occurs in neonatal but not in
adult rabbits. The expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and AhR nuclear 
translocator (Arnt) mRNAs is seen even in adult rabbits. The CYP1A1 inducibility 
does not seem to be regulated by DNA methylation, known to inhibit the
transcription of a gene(s). Preliminary experiments suggest that a constitutive
factor(s) in adult liver nuclear extracts is bound to the core sequence of rabbit
xenobiotic-responsive element (XRE). The sequence of rabbit XRE overlaps with
that of the upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1)-binding site. The
AhR/Arnt-mediated activation of XRE-TK/Luc reporter gene in RK13 cells is blocked
by transfection with a USF1 expression vector. These results indicate that the
XRE of the rabbit CYP1A1 gene is recognized by the basic helix-loop-helix
proteins to regulate the expression of CYP1A1 in both an agonistic (AhR/Arnt) and
an antagonistic (USF1) manner.

PMID: 11270661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 Apr;59(4):664-73.

Maximal aryl hydrocarbon receptor activity depends on an interaction with the
retinoblastoma protein.

Elferink CJ(1), Ge NL, Levine A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Toxicology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan
48201, USA. cornelis_elferink@wayne.edu

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) belongs to the basic
helix-loop-helix/periodicity/AhR nuclear translocator/simple-minded
(Per-Arnt-Sim) family of transcription factors that regulate critical functions
during development and tissue homeostasis. Within this family, the AhR is the
only member conditionally activated in response to ligand binding, typified by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). We recently demonstrated that the AhR
interacts with the retinoblastoma protein (pRb). This report presents evidence
that a LXCXE motif in the AhR protein confers pRb binding, which is necessary for
maximal TCDD induced G(1) arrest in rat 5L hepatoma cells. The data support a
mechanism whereby pRb seems to regulate G(1) cell cycle progression distinct from
the direct repression of E2F-mediated transcription. Furthermore, the results
indicate that the AhR-pRb interaction regulates TCDD induction of CYP1A1,
suggesting that pRb may be a general AhR coactivator.

PMID: 11259609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;21(7):2594-607.

The hsp90 chaperone complex regulates intracellular localization of the dioxin
receptor.

Kazlauskas A(1), Sundström S, Poellinger L, Pongratz I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska 
Institutet, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

The molecular chaperone complex hsp90-p23 interacts with the dioxin receptor, a
ligand-dependent basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/Per-Arnt-Sim domain transcription 
factor. Whereas biochemical and genetic evidence indicates that hsp90 is
important for maintenance of a high-affinity ligand binding conformation of the
dioxin receptor, the role of hsp90-associated proteins in regulation of the
dioxin receptor function remains unclear. Here we demonstrate that the integrity 
of the hsp90 complex characterized by the presence of the hsp90-associated
cochaperone p23 and additional cochaperone proteins is important for regulation
of the intracellular localization of the dioxin receptor by two mechanisms.
First, in the absence of ligand, the dioxin receptor-hsp90 complex was associated
with the immunophilin-like protein XAP2 to mediate cytoplasmic retention of the
dioxin receptor. Second, upon exposure to ligand, the p23-associated hsp90
complex mediated interaction of the dioxin receptor with the nuclear import
receptor protein pendulin and subsequent nuclear translocation of the receptor.
Interestingly, these two modes of regulation target two distinct functional
domains of the dioxin receptor. Whereas the nuclear localization
signal-containing and hsp90-interacting bHLH domain of the receptor regulates
ligand-dependent nuclear import, the interaction of the p23-hsp90-XAP2 complex
with the ligand binding domain of the dioxin receptor was essential to mediate
cytoplasmic retention of the ligand-free receptor form. In conclusion, these data
suggest a novel role of the hsp90 molecular chaperone complex in regulation of
the intracellular localization of the dioxin receptor.

PMCID: PMC86890
PMID: 11259606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Mar 13;98(6):2995-3000. Epub 2001 Feb 27.

Structure of a flavin-binding plant photoreceptor domain: insights into
light-mediated signal transduction.

Crosson S(1), Moffat K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Advanced
Radiation Sources, and Institute for Biophysical Dynamics, University of Chicago,
920 East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. scrosson@midway.uchicago.edo

Phototropin, a major blue-light receptor for phototropism in seed plants,
exhibits blue-light-dependent autophosphorylation and contains two light, oxygen,
or voltage (LOV) domains and a serine/threonine kinase domain. The LOV domains
share homology with the PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) superfamily, a diverse group of sensor
proteins. Each LOV domain noncovalently binds a single FMN molecule and exhibits 
reversible photochemistry in vitro when expressed separately or in tandem. We
have determined the crystal structure of the LOV2 domain from the phototropin
segment of the chimeric fern photoreceptor phy3 to 2.7-A resolution. The
structure constitutes an FMN-binding fold that reveals how the flavin cofactor is
embedded in the protein. The single LOV2 cysteine residue is located 4.2 A from
flavin atom C(4a), consistent with a model in which absorption of blue light
induces formation of a covalent cysteinyl-C(4a) adduct. Residues that interact
with FMN in the phototropin segment of the chimeric fern photoreceptor (phy3)
LOV2 are conserved in LOV domains from phototropin of other plant species and
from three proteins involved in the regulation of circadian rhythms in
Arabidopsis and Neurospora. This conservation suggests that these domains exhibit
the same overall fold and share a common mechanism for flavin binding and
light-induced signaling.

PMCID: PMC30595
PMID: 11248020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2001 Mar;24(3):339-44.

Induction and regulation of the carcinogen-metabolizing enzyme CYP1A1 by
marijuana smoke and delta (9)-tetrahydrocannabinol.

Roth MD(1), Marques-Magallanes JA, Yuan M, Sun W, Tashkin DP, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90095-1690,
USA. mroth@mednet.ucla.edu

Induction of the carcinogen-metabolizing enzyme cytochrome P4501A1 (CYP1A1) is a 
key step in the development of tobacco-related cancers. To determine if marijuana
smoke activates CYP1A1, a murine hepatoma cell line expressing an inducible
CYP1A1 gene (Hepa-1) was exposed in vitro to tar extracts prepared from either
tobacco, marijuana, or placebo marijuana cigarettes. Marijuana tar induced higher
levels of CYP1A1 messenger RNA (mRNA) than did tobacco tar, yet resulted in much 
lower CYP1A1 enzyme activity. These differences between marijuana and tobacco
were primarily due to Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol (Delta(9)-THC), the
psychoactive component of marijuana. Here we show that Delta(9)-THC acts through 
the aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex to activate transcription of CYP1A1. A
2-microg/ml concentration of Delta(9)-THC produced an average 2.5-fold induction 
of CYP1A1 mRNA, whereas a 10- microg/ml concentration of Delta(9)-THC produced a 
4.3-fold induction. No induction was observed in Hepa-1 mutants lacking
functional aryl-hydrocarbon receptor or aryl-hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator genes. At the same time, Delta(9)-THC competitively inhibited the
CYP1A1 enzyme, reducing its ability to metabolize other substrates. Spiking
tobacco tar with Delta(9)-THC resulted in a dose-dependent decrease in the
ability to generate CYP1A1 enzyme activity as measured by the
ethoxyresorufin-o-deethylase (EROD) assay. This inhibitory effect was confirmed
by Michaelis-Menton kinetic analyses using recombinant human CYP1A1 enzyme
expressed in insect microsomes. This complex regulation of CYP1A1 by marijuana
smoke and the Delta(9)-THC that it contains has implications for the role of
marijuana as a cancer risk factor.

PMID: 11245634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Mar;21(5):1700-9.

Proteasome inhibition induces nuclear translocation and transcriptional
activation of the dioxin receptor in mouse embryo primary fibroblasts in the
absence of xenobiotics.

Santiago-Josefat B(1), Pozo-Guisado E, Mulero-Navarro S, Fernandez-Salguero PM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular y Genética, Facultad de
Ciencias, Universidad de Extremadura, 06071 Badajoz, Spain.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a transcription factor that is highly
conserved during evolution and shares important structural features with the
Drosophila developmental regulators Sim and Per. Although much is known about the
mechanism of AHR activation by xenobiotics, little information is available
regarding its activation by endogenous stimuli in the absence of exogenous
ligand. In this study, using embryonic primary fibroblasts, we have analyzed the 
role of proteasome inhibition on AHR transcriptional activation in the absence of
xenobiotics. Proteasome inhibition markedly reduced cytosolic AHR without
affecting its total cellular content. Cytosolic AHR depletion was the result of
receptor translocation into the nuclear compartment, as shown by transient
transfection of a green fluorescent protein-tagged AHR and by immunoblot analysis
of nuclear extracts. Gel retardation experiments showed that proteasome
inhibition induced transcriptionally active AHR-ARNT heterodimers able to bind to
a consensus xenobiotic-responsive element. Furthermore, nuclear AHR was
transcriptionally active in vivo, as shown by the induction of the endogenous
target gene CYP1A2. Synchronized to AHR activation, proteasome inhibition also
induced a transient increase in AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) at the protein
and mRNA levels. Since nuclear levels of AHR and ARNT are relevant for AHR
transcriptional activation, our data suggest that proteasome inhibition, through 
a transient increase in ARNT expression, could promote AHR stabilization and
accumulation into the nuclear compartment. An elevated content of nuclear AHR
could favor AHR-ARNT heterodimers able to bind to xenobiotic-responsive elements 
and to induce gene transcription in the absence of xenobiotics. Thus, depending
on the cellular context, physiologically regulated proteasome activity could
participate in the control of endogenous AHR functions.

PMCID: PMC86716
PMID: 11238907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Mar 9;281(4):1057-62.

Cloning of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha cDNA from chick embryonic ventricular 
myocytes.

Takahashi T(1), Sugishita Y, Nojiri T, Shimizu T, Yao A, Kinugawa K, Harada K,
Nagai R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan. toshitak-tky@umin.ac.jp

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is composed of HIF-1alpha and arylhydrocarbon 
nuclear receptor translocator (ARNT), which belong to the
basic-helix-loop-helix-Per/ARNT/Sim (bHLH-PAS) family of transcription factors.
HIF plays key roles in oxygen homeostasis and embryonic cardiovascular
development. In this study, we have cloned cDNAs encoding the chick HIF-1alpha
from cultured embryonic ventricular myocytes (CEVM) and then examined its
expression in various embryonic tissues. The deduced amino acid sequence of the
chick HIF-1alpha cDNA showed 79% identity with that of the human HIF-1alpha cDNA.
In contrast, sequence homology between the chick HIF-1alpha and endothelial PAS
protein 1 (EPAS1), another member of the bHLH-PAS proteins, was only low (49%).
HIF-1alpha mRNA was expressed abundantly in CEVM, but scarcely in the liver,
which was quite different from expression pattern of EPAS1 mRNA. These data
suggest that HIF-1alpha may be involved in embryonic cardiovascular development. 
HIF-1alpha and EPAS1 may play distinct roles during developmental stages.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11237772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Biochem Pharmacol. 1999 May 15;57(10):1177-90.

Functional analysis of activation and repression domains of the rainbow trout
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (rtARNT) protein isoforms.

Necela B(1), Pollenz RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) protein is involved in 
many signaling pathways. Rainbow trout express isoforms of ARNT protein that are 
divergent in their C-terminal domains due to alternative RNA splicing. Rainbow
trout ARNT(b) (rtARNT(b)) contains a C-terminal domain rich in glutamine and
asparagine (QN), whereas the C-terminal domain of rtARNT(a) is rich in proline,
serine, and threonine (PST). rtARNT(b) functions positively in AH
receptor-mediated signaling, whereas rtARNT(a) functions negatively. Studies were
performed to understand how changes in the C-terminal domains of the two rtARNT
isoforms affect function. Deletion of the QN-rich C-terminal domain of rtARNT(b) 
did not affect function in aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)-mediated signaling,
whereas deletion of the PST-rich domain of rtARNT(a) restored function.
Expression of the PST-rich domain on truncated rtARNT(b) or mouse ARNT (mARNT)
reduced function of this protein by 50-80%. Gel shift assays revealed that the
PST-rich domain affected AHR-mediated signaling by inhibiting DNA binding of the 
AHR*ARNT heterodimer. Gal4 transactivation assays revealed a potent
transactivation domain in the QN-rich domain of rtARNT(b). In contrast, Gal4
proteins containing the PST-rich domain of rtARNT(a) did not transactivate
because the proteins did not bind to DNA. Secondary structure analysis of the
PST-rich domain revealed hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions. Truncation of the
hydrophobic domain that spanned the final 20-40 amino acids of the rtARNT(a)
restored function to the protein, suggesting that repressor function was related 
to protein misfolding or masking of the basic DNA binding domain. Functional
diversity within the C-terminal domain is consistent with other negatively acting
transcription factors and illustrates a common biological theme.

PMID: 11230806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Nihon Rinsho. 2000 Dec;58(12):2446-51.

[Regulatory mechanism of genes by the Ah receptor which mediates toxic effects of
dioxins].

[Article in Japanese]

Sogawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor(AhR) plays a central role in the metabolic pathways
involved in the detoxification of important environmental carcinogens, most of
which act as ligand for the receptor, although no endogeneous ligand has not yet 
been known. Activation of the AhR is responsible for a variety of toxic responses
in animals and humans. The activation mechanisms become clear that include
binding of ligand to receptor, transfer to the nucleus, formation of a ternary
complex with Arnt, followed by binding to response elements upstream of the
relevant target genes. However, the specific mechanisms responsible for the toxic
responses of dioxins are unknown.

PMID: 11187735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Pharmacogenetics. 2000 Nov;10(8):741-51.

An uncommon phenotype of poor inducibility of CYP1A1 in human lung is not
ascribable to polymorphisms in the AHR, ARNT, or CYP1A1 genes.

Anttila S(1), Lei XD, Elovaara E, Karjalainen A, Sun W, Vainio H, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Johnson Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of California, Los Angeles, USA.

Cigarette smoking can induce CYP1A1 in the lung. Induction requires the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT) proteins. Lung samples from seven of 75 Finnish patients who smoked until 
the time of surgery exhibited absent or low levels of CYP1A1 protein, mRNA and
enzymatic activity, suggesting that these individuals might be genetically non or
poorly inducible for CYP1A1. All seven lung samples expressed normal levels of
AHR mRNA and ARNT mRNA, indicating that they did not carry inactivating
polymorphisms in the 5' upstream regulatory regions of these genes. Sequencing of
cDNAs encompassing the complete coding regions of AHR and ARNT identified a
previously known codon 554 polymorphism in AHR, which was present in the
homozygous state in one individual. This polymorphism, which leads to an amino
acid substitution, has previously been reported either to have no effect or to
enhance CYP1A1 induction. Previously unreported silent single nucleotide
polymorphisms were identified in codon 44 of AHR and codon 189 of ARNT. 1500 bp
of genomic sequence from the 5' upstream regulatory sequence of the CYP1A1 gene
was also sequenced in the non-inducible individuals. A nucleotide substitution
polymorphism at position -459 was detected in the heterozygous state in two
individuals. This polymorphic site does not reside in any known regulatory
sequence. The complete CYP1A1 coding sequence and intron/exon boundaries were
then sequenced. None of the non or poorly inducible individuals exhibited any
polymorphisms, either homozygous or heterozygous compared to representative
inducible individuals or the previously published CYP1A1 sequence. Thus, no
polymorphisms in the AHR, ARNT or CYP1A1 genes were identified that could be
responsible for the non/low inducibility phenotype observed.

PMID: 11186136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Neurosci Lett. 2001 Mar 9;300(2):111-4.

Cloning of mouse BMAL2 and its daily expression profile in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus: a remarkable acceleration of Bmal2 sequence divergence after Bmal gene
duplication.

Okano T(1), Sasaki M, Fukada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, The
University of Tokyo, Japan.

Brain-Muscle-Arnt-Like-protein 2 (BMAL2; Arnt4) (aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator) is a recently identified basic
Helix-Loop-Helix-Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS) transcription factor, which contributes 
to a positive regulation of autoregulatory feedback loop in vertebrate circadian 
clock systems. In this study, we cloned cDNAs encoding mouse and rat BMAL2
(mBMAL2 and rBMAL2) from mouse midbrain and rat-1 fibroblast cells, respectively.
A phylogenetic analysis strongly suggested that vertebrate Bmal1 and Bmal2 genes 
were generated by a single gene duplication of an ancestral Bmal gene, a
vertebrate ortholog of dCyc gene, and that 'BMAL2's putatively termed so far are 
orthologous. Interestingly, BMAL2 proteins have diverged about 20-fold more
rapidly than BMAL1 proteins after the duplication, suggesting an
as-yet-unidentified function conserved in BMAL1 but not in BMAL2. mBmal2 mRNA was
constitutively expressed throughout the day under light-dark cycle in the mouse
hypothalamus containing suprachiasmatic nucleus, the site of the central
circadian oscillator in mammals.

PMID: 11207387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 Mar;59(3):557-66.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)/AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT) activity is
unaltered by phosphorylation of a periodicity/ARNT/single-minded (PAS)-region
serine residue.

Levine SL(1), Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science and Center for Molecular Toxicology and
Carcinogenesis, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania,
USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT) protein belongs to the family of
basic helix-loop-helix (HLH)-periodicity/ARNT/single-minded [Per/ARNT/Sim (PAS)] 
transcription factors and regulates a range of cellular processes by either
homodimerizing or heterodimerizing with other basic HLH-PAS proteins. To date, it
has been shown that both the HLH and PAS domains are required for aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) ARNT heterodimerization and that phosphorylation of
ARNT is also required for this heterodimerization. Presently, regulation of ARNT 
with respect to phosphorylation is poorly understood. In an earlier study, murine
ARNT was shown to be a phosphoprotein, to display charge heterogeneity, and to
have a shift in its predominant isoforms after heterodimerization with the AhR.
It was hypothesized that this shift may represent a change in ARNT
phosphorylation status. Metabolic [(32)P]orthophosphate labeling of human
ARNT-transfected COS-1 cells, in conjunction with phosphoamino acid analysis,
Edman degradation, and phosphopeptide mapping, demonstrated that ARNT is
predominantly phosphorylated on serine residues and that serine 348 (S348) in the
PAS domain is phosphorylated. Alanine and glutamic acid substitutions were used
to demonstrate that loss of phosphorylation at this site did not influence
AhR-mediated xenobiotic response elements-driven or ARNT-mediated class B
E-box-driven signaling. Additionally, the phosphorylation pattern of ARNT was
unaltered after AhR heterodimerization. Although phosphorylation of S348 did not 
modulate AhR-ARNT or ARNT-ARNT signaling, phosphorylation of this PAS-region
serine residue may be important in other ARNT-mediated gene expression systems.

PMID: 11179451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 13;98(4):1877-82. Epub 2001 Feb 6.

Herpes simplex virus 1 alpha regulatory protein ICP0 functionally interacts with 
cellular transcription factor BMAL1.

Kawaguchi Y(1), Tanaka M, Yokoymama A, Matsuda G, Kato K, Kagawa H, Hirai K,
Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Virology, Division of Virology and Immunology, Medical
Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

The infected cell protein no. 0 (ICP0) of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) is a
promiscuous transactivator shown to enhance the expression of gene introduced
into cells by infection or transfection. At the molecular level, ICP0 is a 775-aa
ring finger protein localized initially in the nucleus and late in infection in
the cytoplasm and mediates the degradation of several proteins and stabilization 
of others. None of the known functions at the molecular level account for the
apparent activity of ICP0 as a transactivator. Here we report that ICP0
functionally interacts with cellular transcription factor BMAL1, a member of the 
basic helix-loop-helix PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) super family of transcriptional
regulators. Specifically, sequences mapped to the exon II of ICP0 interacted with
BMAL1 in the yeast two-hybrid system and in reciprocal pull-down experiments in
vitro. Moreover, the enhancement of transcription of a luciferase reporter
construct whose promoter contained multiple BMAL1-binding sites by ICP0 and BMAL1
was significantly greater than that observed by ICP0 or BMAL1 alone. Although the
level of BMAL1 present in nuclei of infected cells remained unchanged between 3
and 8 h after infection, the level of cytoplasmic BMAL1 was reduced at 8 h after 
infection. The reduction of cytoplasmic BMAL1 was significantly greater in cells 
infected with the ICP0-null mutant than in the wild-type virus-infected cells,
suggesting that ICP0 mediates partial stabilization of the protein. These results
indicate that ICP0 interacts physically and functionally with at least one
cellular transcription-regulatory factor.

PMCID: PMC29350
PMID: 11172044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2000 Dec 1;384(1):190-8.

Failure of Ah receptor to mediate induction of cytochromes P450 in the CYP1
family in the human hepatoma line SK-Hep-1.

Roberts EA(1), Harper PA, Wong JM, Wang Y, Yang S.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Programme, The Hospital for Sick Children Research Institute,
University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. eve.roberts@sickkids.on.ca

The Ah receptor mediates the induction of cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1) and
toxicities of 2,3,7,8tetrachlorodibanzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). It has been detected in 
tissues of many species and in murine and human hepatoma lines. We show that the 
human hepatoma line SK-Hep-1 has cytosolic Ah receptor detectable by specific
binding of [3H]TCDD. Concentrations of Ah receptor were low (mean = 43 +/- 3
fmol/mg cytosol protein compared to 430 fmol/mg protein in Hepa-1); the estimated
number of receptor sites per cell is approximately 9,000, compared to 35,000 in
Hepa-1. Ah receptor in SK-Hep-1 cells was physicochemically similar to Ah
receptor in C57BL/6 mouse liver and in other human hepatoma lines studied to date
except that binding affinity for TCDD, the most avidly bound ligand, was lower
(estimated Kd was 14 nM by Woolf plot analysis). Translocation of the Ah
receptor-ligand complex to the nucleus was shown; binding of the activated Ah
receptor-ligand complex to an XRE in the 5'-upstream region of the CYP1A1 gene
was demonstrated by gel-shift analysis. However, after SK-Hep-1 cells were
incubated with typical PAHs including 3-methylcholanthrene, benzanthracene, and
dibenz(a,h)anthracene, each over a wide range of concentrations, no induction of 
aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase activity was detectable. On Northern analysis, no
message for human CYP1A1 was detected in mRNA prepared from noninduced SK-Hep-1
cells or from cells treated for 24 h with 13 microM dibenz(a,h)anthracene.
Further analysis by RT-PCR did not detect the induction of CYP1A1, CYP1A2, or
CYP1B1 message in response to 10(-7) M TCDD, 10(-5) M benzanthracene, or 10(-5) M
3-methylcholanthrene. Transient transfection of reporter constructs containing
either a minimal promoter or the CYP1A1 promoter fused to a reporter gene
(luciferase) did not show any expression in response to increasing concentrations
of TCDD up to 10(-8) M. Estimation of the size of the transcripts for AhR and
ARNT protein revealed normal sizes, 2.7 and 2.4 kb, respectively. Together, these
data suggest that SK-Hep-1 cells express an Ah receptor defective at the level of
trans-activation of gene expression. SK-Hep-1 is the first human hepatoma line
described with a demonstrable defect in CYP1A1 or its regulation.

PMID: 11147830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Hum Genet. 2000 Oct;107(4):397-9.

Genomic structure of the human Ah receptor nuclear translocator gene (hARNT).

Scheel J(1), Schrenk D.

Author information: 
(1)Food Chemistry and Environmental Toxicology, University of Kaiserslautern,
Germany.

The vertebrate basic helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-Sim (bHLH/PAS protein) ARNT (aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator) plays a crucial role in
transcriptional regulation as the common subunit of a number of transcriptionally
active complexes. Several studies indicate that ARNT might be involved in the
pathogenesis of various genetic diseases. In this study we provide the first
report on the genomic structure of the human ARNT gene (hARNT). Human BAC and PAC
libraries were screened, and clones positive for ARNT were mapped, subcloned, and
sequenced. The gene has an overall size of about 65 kb and consists of 22 exons
varying in size from 25 to 214 bp. Splice junctions follow the GT/AG consensus
except for intron 11 starting with GC at its 5' end. Knowledge of exon-intron
boundaries and intronic sequences neighboring the exons allows the extended
search for polymorphisms and variants in human genomic DNA. The exonintron
arrangement is highly similar to the murine arnt gene (marnt) except for a slight
shift in the last three exons. 5' RACE indicated several transcription start
sites, one of them identical with the major transcription start site of marnt.

PMID: 11129342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Genes Dev. 2000 Dec 15;14(24):3191-203.

Placental cell fates are regulated in vivo by HIF-mediated hypoxia responses.

Adelman DM(1), Gertsenstein M, Nagy A, Simon MC, Maltepe E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Placental development is profoundly influenced by oxygen (O(2)) tension. Human
cytotrophoblasts proliferate in vitro under low O(2) conditions but differentiate
at higher O(2) levels, mimicking the developmental transition they undergo as
they invade the placental bed to establish the maternal-fetal circulation in
vivo. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), consisting of HIF-1alpha and ARNT
subunits, activates many genes involved in the cellular and organismal response
to O(2) deprivation. Analysis of Arnt(-/-) placentas reveals an aberrant cellular
architecture due to altered cell fate determination of Arnt(-/-) trophoblasts.
Specifically, Arnt(-/-) placentas show greatly reduced labyrinthine and
spongiotrophoblast layers, and increased numbers of giant cells. We further show 
that hypoxia promotes the in vitro differentiation of trophoblast stem cells into
spongiotrophoblasts as opposed to giant cells. Our results clearly establish that
O(2) levels regulate cell fate determination in vivo and that HIF is essential
for mammalian placentation. The unique placental phenotype of Arnt(-/-) animals
also provides an important tool for studying the disease of preeclampsia.
Interestingly, aggregation of Arnt(-/-) embryonic stem (ES) cells with tetraploid
wild-type embryos rescues their placental defects; however, these embryos still
die from yolk sac vascular and cardiac defects.

PMCID: PMC317149
PMID: 11124810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Int J Oncol. 2001 Jan;18(1):147-9.

Suppression of cytochrome P450 1A1 and 4A1 gene expression in renal carcinomas of
TSC2 gene mutant (Eker) rats.

Okamoto T(1), Momose S, Hino O.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratories, Nippon Chemiphar Co., Ltd, Saitama 341-0005, Japan.

In the kidney, cytochrome P450 (CYP) is involved in arachidonic acid metabolism
and the maintenance of homeostasis, but only scarce information is available as
to how CYP expression is altered in rodent renal carcinomas (RCs). TSC2 gene
mutant (Eker) rat RCs are an example of a Mendelian dominantly inherited
predisposition to a specific cancer in an experimental animal. In the present
study, the expression of CYP in Eker RCs was studied. In the normal kidney, CYP
1A1 and 4A1 mRNAs were expressed, but this expression was suppressed in
spontaneously-induced Eker RCs and in cell line Lk9dL and Lk9dR. In Lk9dL and
Lk9dR, Ah receptor nuclear translocator and haemoxygenase-1 mRNAs were expressed,
but this expression was inconsistent in spontaneously-induced Eker RCs. The
present results showed the suppression of CYP 1A1 and 4A1 mRNA expression in
spontaneously-induced Eker RCs and this suppression indicates altered metabolic
conditions in Eker RCs.

PMID: 11115552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jan;21(1):39-50.

Analysis of the steroid receptor coactivator 1 (SRC1)-CREB binding protein
interaction interface and its importance for the function of SRC1.

Sheppard HM(1), Harries JC, Hussain S, Bevan C, Heery DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester, LE1 7RH,
United Kingdom.

The transcriptional activity of nuclear receptors is mediated by coactivator
proteins, including steroid receptor coactivator 1 (SRC1) and its homologues and 
the general coactivators CREB binding protein (CBP) and p300. SRC1 contains an
activation domain (AD1) which functions via recruitment of CBP and and p300. In
this study, we have used yeast two-hybrid and in vitro interaction-peptide
inhibition experiments to map the AD1 domain of SRC1 to a 35-residue sequence
potentially containing two alpha-helices. We also define a 72-amino-acid sequence
in CBP necessary for SRC1 binding, designated the SRC1 interaction domain (SID). 
We show that in contrast to SRC1, direct binding of CBP to the estrogen receptor 
is weak, suggesting that SRC1 functions primarily as an adaptor to recruit CBP
and p300. In support of this, we show that the ability of SRC1 to enhance
ligand-dependent nuclear receptor activity in transiently transfected cells is
dependent upon the integrity of the AD1 region. In contrast, the putative histone
acetyltransferase domain, the Per-Arnt-Sim basic helix-loop-helix domain, the
glutamine-rich domain, and AD2 can each be removed without loss of ligand-induced
activity. Remarkably, a construct corresponding to residues 631 to 970, which
contains only the LXXLL motifs and the AD1 region of SRC1, retained strong
coactivator activity in our assays.

PMCID: PMC86566
PMID: 11113179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Behav Pharmacol. 2000 Jun;11(3-4):291-8.

In-vivo assessment of 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C antagonistic properties of newer
antipsychotics.

Sánchez C(1), Arnt J.

Author information: 
(1)Neuropharmacology Department, H. Lundbeck A/S, Valby, Denmark. CS@lundbeck.com

The effects of serotonin (5-HT) receptor ligands on the MK 212
(6-chloro-2[1-piperazinyl]pyrazine) discriminative stimulus and quipazine-induced
head twitches were studied in rats. 5-HT1A (8-OH-DPAT) and preferential 5-HT2A
(DOI) receptor agonists did not generalize to the discriminative stimulus. The
5-HT2B/2C-receptor antagonist, SB 206553
(5-methyl-1-(3-pyridylcarbamoyl)-1,2,3,5-tetrahydropyrrolo[2 ,3-f]indole), and
the 5-HT2A/2C-receptor antagonist, ritanserin, acted as potent antagonists,
whereas the 5-HT2A-receptor antagonist, MDL 100.151
([(+/-)-alpha-(2,3-dimethoxyphenyl)-1-[2-(4-fluorophenylethyl)]-4-
piperidine-methanol), produced minor and inconsistent inhibition. SB 206553 was a
weak antagonist against quipazine-induced head twitches, whereas MDL 100.151 and 
ritanserin were potent antagonists. This suggests that the MK 212 discriminative 
stimulus is mediated by 5-HT2C receptors, while quipazine-induced head twitches
are mediated primarily by 5-HT2A receptors. The effects on quipazine-induced head
twitches were comparable to previously published effects on the DOI
discriminative stimulus. 5-HT2A- and 5-HT2C-receptor antagonistic potencies of
clozapine, olanzapine, risperidone, sertindole and ziprasidone were compared in
the same models. Clozapine showed similar potencies in both models, while
sertindole, olanzapine and risperidone inhibited quipazine-induced effects more
potently than the MK 212 discriminative stimulus. Ziprasidone exerted a minor
preference for 5-HT2A- compared to 5-HT2C-receptor-mediated effects. The ratio
between in vivo inhibitory potencies at 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C receptors did not
correlate with corresponding ratios from in-vitro affinity and ex-vivo occupancy 
studies in the literature.

PMID: 11103883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2000 Dec 1;169(2):159-67.

Effect of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin on the expression of cytochrome
P450 1A1, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator in rat brain and pituitary.

Huang P(1), Rannug A, Ahlbom E, Håkansson H, Ceccatelli S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Toxicology and Neurotoxicology, National Institute of
Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, S-171 77, Stockholm, Sweden.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related substances are ubiquitous 
environmental pollutants causing a wide variety of pathological alterations, with
the most severe being progressive anorexia and body weight loss. These features
suggest a possible involvement of the nervous system and neuroendocrine-related
organs including the pituitary gland. However, so far there is little evidence
for direct effects of TCDD on these areas. In the present study, male
Sprague-Dawley rats were treated with a single oral dose of TCDD (10 microg/kg)
and euthanized 1, 3, or 28 days after treatment. The expression of cytochrome
P450 1A1 (CYP1A1), the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), and the aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) were analyzed in different brain regions and
pituitaries using semiquantitative RT-PCR and Western blotting. Relative levels
of CYP1A1 mRNA and protein were dramatically increased in the pituitary. A
significant increase in CYP1A1 mRNA was also detected in all the brain regions
examined including olfactory bulb, striatum-caudate, hypothalamus, hippocampus,
cortex, cerebellum, and substantia nigra. The increase in the expression was
time-dependent with the highest level observed 1 day after TCDD treatment. The
AHR and ARNT mRNAs were detected in the same areas but in contrast to CYP1A1 the 
changes in AHR and ARNT mRNA expression were limited to the 28-day time point.
The present results provide evidence for the presence of CYP1A1, AHR, and ARNT in
the central nervous system and in the pituitary, suggesting that TCDD may exert a
direct effect on these regions.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11097868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 16;276(7):4819-27. Epub 2000 Nov 28.

Aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AhR).AhR nuclear translocator- and p53-mediated
induction of the murine multidrug resistance mdr1 gene by 3-methylcholanthrene
and benzo(a)pyrene in hepatoma cells.

Mathieu MC(1), Lapierre I, Brault K, Raymond M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H2W 1R7,
Canada.

The mouse multidrug resistance gene family consists of three genes (mdr1, mdr2,
and mdr3) encoding P-glycoprotein. We show that the expression of mdr1 is
increased at the transcriptional level upon treatment of the hepatoma cell line
Hepa-1c1c7 with the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon 3-methylcholanthrene (3-MC). 
This increase is not observed in the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR)-defective TAOc1BP(r)c1 and the AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt)-defective
BP(r)c1 variants, demonstrating that the induction of mdr1 by 3-MC requires
AhR.Arnt. We show that the mdr1 promoter (-1165 to +84) is able to activate the
expression of a reporter gene in response to 3-MC in Hepa-1c1c7 but not in
BP(r)c1 cells. Deletion analysis indicated that the region from -245 to -141
contains cis-acting sequences mediating the induction, including a potential p53 
binding sequence. 3-MC treatment of the cells increased the levels of p53 and
induced p53 binding to the mdr1 promoter in an AhR.Arnt-dependent manner.
Mutations in the p53 binding site abrogated induction of mdr1 by 3-MC, indicating
that p53 binding to the mdr1 promoter is essential for the induction.
Benzo(a)pyrene, a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon and AhR ligand, which, like
3-MC, is oxidized by metabolizing enzymes regulated by AhR.Arnt, also activated
p53 and induced mdr1 transcription. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, an AhR
ligand resistant to metabolic breakdown, had no effect. These results indicate
that the transcriptional induction of mdr1 by 3-MC and benzo(a)pyrene is directly
mediated by p53 but that the metabolic activation of these compounds into
reactive species is necessary to trigger p53 activation. The ability of the
anticancer drug and potent genotoxic agent daunorubicin to induce mdr1
independently of AhR.Arnt further supports the proposition that mdr1 is
transcriptionally up-regulated by p53 in response to DNA damage.

PMID: 11096091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Annu Rev Genet. 2000;34:533-562.

Genetics of the mammalian circadian system: Photic entrainment, circadian
pacemaker mechanisms, and posttranslational regulation.

Lowrey PL(1), Takahashi JS.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Neurobiology and Physiology,
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA. p-lowrey@northwestern.edu

During the past four years, significant progress has been made in identifying the
molecular components of the mammalian circadian clock system. An autoregulatory
transcriptional feedback loop similar to that described in Drosophila appears to 
form the core circadian rhythm generating mechanism in mammals. Two basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) PAS (PER-ARNT-SIM) transcription factors, CLOCK and
BMAL1, form the positive elements of the system and drive transcription of three 
Period and two Cryptochrome genes. The protein products of these genes are
components of a negative feedback complex that inhibits CLOCK and BMAL1 to close 
the circadian loop. In this review, we focus on three aspects of the circadian
story in mammals: the genetics of the photic entrainment pathway; the molecular
components of the circadian pacemaker in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic
nucleus; and the role of posttranslational regulation of circadian elements. A
molecular description of the mammalian circadian system has revealed that
circadian oscillations may be a fundamental property of many cells in the body
and that a circadian hierarchy underlies the temporal organization of animals.

PMID: 11092838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Toxicology. 2000 Nov 16;153(1-3):73-82.

Is CYP1A1 induction always related to AHR signaling pathway?

Delescluse C(1), Lemaire G, de Sousa G, Rahmani R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmaco-Toxicologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, INRA, Centre de
Recherches, 41 Bd du Cap, 06606, Antibes, France.

Humans are daily subjected to ever increasing amounts of exogenous compounds.
Some of them are capable of inducing cytochrome P450s, a process that allows the 
cell to adapt to changes in its chemical environment. One of the most widely CYP 
studied is CYP1A1 because it metabolises a large number of xenobiotics to
cytotoxic and/or mutagenic derivatives. To date, results from the literature
indicate that induction of CYP1A1 does not only involve the classical activation 
cascade of the Ah receptor, e.g. binding of the ligand to the AhR,
heterodimerisation with Arnt protein, constitution of a complex with XRE
responsive element and subsequent gene activation. Indeed, some xenobiotics do
activate CYP1A1 gene expression in spite of their inability to compete with TCDD 
for binding to the AhR. Other signaling pathways must therefore also be
considered. Firstly, the CYP1A1 inducer compounds could be very weak AhR ligands 
or may be metabolized into a form which is in turn capable of binding to the Ah
receptor. A second hypothesis would be that these molecules could act through
other signaling cascades. At this time, two of them seem to be implicated. One
concerns the RARs signal transduction pathway, as already described for retinoic 
acid. The second may involve tyrosine kinase activation, but the precise
relationship between this activation and CYPA1 induction remains yet to be
established. For the moment there is still a black box which needs to be
investigated.

PMID: 11090948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2000 Oct;18(2):169-79.

A model for the complex between the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) and its
consensus DNA sequence.

Michel G(1), Minet E, Ernest I, Roland I, Durant F, Remacle J, Michiels C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Moléculaire Structurale, Facultés Universitaires,
Notre-Dame-de-la-Paix, Namur, Belgium. gaetan.michel@fundp.ac.be

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a heterodimeric transcription factor
activated by hypoxia. When activated, HIF-1 mediates the differential expression 
of genes such as erythropoietin and Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF)
during hypoxia. It is composed of two different subunits, HIF-1alpha and ARNT
(Aryl Receptor Nuclear Translocator). These two subunits belong to the bHLH
(basic Helix-Loop-Helix) PAS (Per, Ahr/ARNT, Sim) family. The bHLH domain of
these factors is responsible for dimerization through the two helices and for DNA
binding through their basic domain. In this work, we used various methods of
molecular modeling in order to develop a 3D structure for the HIF-1 bHLH domain
bound to its DNA consensus sequence. Firstly, the 3D structure of the bHLH domain
of both subunits based on their amino acid sequence was defined. Secondly, we
compared this model with data from known crystal structures of basic leucine
zipper-DNA and bHLH-DNA complexes in order to determine a potential canvas for
HIF-1. Thirdly, we performed a manual approach of the HIF-1 bHLH domain onto the 
DNA recognition site using this canvas. Finally, the protein-DNA complex 3D
structure was optimized using a Monte Carlo program called MONTY. The model
predicted a pattern of interactions between amino acids and DNA bases which
reflect for ARNT what is experimentally observed among different X-ray structures
of other bHLH transcription factors possessing the H (His), E (Glu), R (Arg)
triad, as ARNT does. On the other hand, only the Arg residue is conserved in HIF-
1alpha. We propose from this model that a serine replaces the histidine while an 
alanine and a lysine also make contacts with DNA. From these results, we
postulate that the specificity of HIF-1 toward its DNA sequence could be driven
by the HIF-1alpha subunit. The predicted model will be verified by X-Ray
currently ongoing.

PMID: 11089639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Dev Dyn. 2000 Dec;219(4):526-38.

Placental defects in ARNT-knockout conceptus correlate with localized decreases
in VEGF-R2, Ang-1, and Tie-2.

Abbott BD(1), Buckalew AR.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Toxicology Division, National Health and Environmental Effects
Research Laboratory, Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park,
North Carolina 27711, USA. abbott.barbara@epa.gov

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is a transcriptional
regulator that heterodimerizes with Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) proteins. ARNT also
dimerizes with hypoxia inducible factor1alpha (HIF1alpha), inducing expression of
vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF) to promote angiogenesis. The
angiogenesis/vasculogenesis pathway is required for embryonic survival and
includes several receptors (VEGFR1, VEGFR2, Tie2) and ligands (VEGF, Ang1, Ang2, 
neuropillin). Transgenic knockout of ARNT in mice is lethal due to abnormal
placentation. This study examines the VEGF pathway in GD9.5 embryos of wild-type 
(+/+), heterozygous (+/-), or knockout (-/-) ARNT genotype. All genotypes
expressed abundant VEGF in trophoblastic giant cells. However, -/- conceptuses
had less VEGFR2 in placental labyrinth and trophoblastic giant cells. Ang1 and
Tie2 decreased in trophoblastic giant cells and Ang2 was decreased in placental
endothelial cells. Abnormal development of the labyrinth correlated with
decreased binding of VEGF and decreased expression of VEGFR2. In addition, VEGFR2
seemed to be the primary VEGF binding receptor in the labyrinth and blood lacunae
of the placenta, as binding could be eliminated by masking the VEGFR2 receptor
with inactive antibody complex. VEGFR1 may be primarily responsible for binding
of VEGF to yolk sac and embryonic tissues, as masking VEGFR2 did not reduce VEGF 
binding in those areas, and it is interesting that major structural defects were 
also not found in those regions. In summary, in the ARNT knockout conceptus, the 
impact of ARNT deficiency on placental expression of VEGFR2 seems to provide an
explanation for the failure of the placental labyrinth to progress, whereas the
vascularization of the yolk sac and embryo appear relatively unaffected on GD9.5.
Published 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11084652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Anat Rec. 2000 Dec 1;260(4):327-34.

Expression and subcellular localization of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear 
translocator (ARNT) protein in mouse and chicken over developmental time.

Sojka KM(1), Kern CB, Pollenz RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29403, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is a
basic-helix-loop-helix/Per- ARNT-Sim (bHLH/PAS) transcription factor that is
involved in multiple signaling pathways. This study focuses on the tissue
distribution and subcellular localization of ARNT during embryological
development of the mouse and chicken. Two different species were chosen to
determine the consistency of the ARNT staining pattern. Immunohistochemical
techniques were used to stain sections of embryos over three developmental time
points for each species. Mouse tissues evaluated from embryonic day 10.5, 12.5,
and 15, exhibited predominant nuclear staining with little change in expression
patterns over time. Chicken tissues evaluated from embryonic day 2, 4, and 10
also showed predominant nuclear staining within all cells and little change in
expression over developmental time, as well as, low levels of cytoplasmic ARNT
staining in some cells. Importantly, in all tissues, the level of ARNT staining
within the nuclear compartment was greater than staining observed in the
cytoplasm. Thus, the overall conclusions from these studies are that i) the
predominant subcellular localization of ARNT protein is nuclear, and ii) that
mouse and chicken appear to maintain ARNT protein expression in many cell types
over developmental time. These data support vertebrate ARNT as a nuclear
transcription factor and a model in which dimerization partners require nuclear
localization for interaction.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11074397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Nov 15;1494(1-2):117-28.

Identification and expression of alternatively spliced aryl hydrocarbon nuclear
translocator 2 (ARNT2) cDNAs from zebrafish with distinct functions.

Tanguay RL(1), Andreasen E, Heideman W, Peterson RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 80262, USA. robert.tanguay@uchsc.edu

In order to further establish zebrafish as a vertebrate model for studying the
mechanism of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) toxicity it is necessary 
to characterize the aryl hydrocarbon receptor/aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (AhR/ARNT) signaling pathways in this species. In this study, three 
zfARNT2 cDNAs were isolated, expressed, and characterized and named zfARNT2b,
zfARNT2c, and zfARNT2a. zfARNT2b, zfARNT2c, and zfARNT2a encode proteins with
theoretical molecular weights of 81, 79, and 45 kDa, respectively. zfARNT2b and
zfARNT2a proteins are identical over the first 403 amino acids but differ in
their C-terminal domains as a result of alternative mRNA splicing. zfARNT2c is
nearly identical to zfARNT2b, with the exception of an in frame 15 amino acid
deletion adjacent to the basic region of zfARNT2c. Using quantitative RT-PCR
methods the tissue distribution of each zfARNT2 isoform was determined. In COS-7 
cells expressing zfARNT2b and zfAhR2, 10 nM TCDD causes a nine-fold induction of 
a dioxin responsive reporter gene. In COS-7 cells expressing zfARNT2a or
zfARNT2c, TCDD does not induce reporter gene expression. In contrast, all three
zfARNT2 proteins induce reporter gene activity under control of hypoxia
responsive elements when cotransfected with the zebrafish endothelial specific
PAS protein 1. DNA gel shift analysis suggests that the decreased function of
zfARNT2a is due to inefficient binding of zfARNT2a/zfAhR2 complexes to dioxin
responsive elements. These results also indicate that alternative mRNA splicing
results in formation of ARNT proteins with distinct functional properties.

PMID: 11072074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Comp Neurol. 2000 Nov 20;427(3):428-39.

Distribution of mRNAs encoding the arylhydrocarbon receptor, arylhydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator, and arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator-2 in the rat brain and brainstem.

Petersen SL(1), Curran MA, Marconi SA, Carpenter CD, Lubbers LS, McAbee MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Center for Neuroendocrine Studies, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts 01003, USA. sandyp@bio.umass.edu

Dioxin exposure alters a variety of neural functions, most likely through
activation of the arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) pathway. Many of the adverse
effects, including disruption of circadian changes in hormone release and
depressed appetite, seem to be mediated by hypothalamic and/or brainstem neurons.
However, it is unclear whether these effects are direct or indirect, because
there have been no comprehensive studies mapping the expression of components of 
the AhR pathway in the brain. Therefore, we used a sensitive in situ
hybridization histochemical (ISHH) method to map the neural expression of AhR
mRNA, as well as those of the mRNAs encoding the AhR dimerization partners,
arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) and ARNT2. We found that
AhR, ARNT, and ARNT2 mRNAs were widely distributed throughout the brain and
brainstem. There was no neuroanatomic evidence that AhR is preferentially
colocalized with ARNT or ARNT2. However, ARNT2, unlike ARNT expression, was
relatively high in most regions. The most noteworthy regions in which we found
AhR, ARNT, and ARNT2 mRNA were several hypothalamic and brainstem regions
involved in the regulation of appetite and circadian rhythms, functions that are 
disrupted by dioxin exposure. These regions included the arcuate nucleus (Arc),
ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH), paraventricular nucleus (PVN), suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN), nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), and the dorsal and median
raphe nuclei. This neuroanatomic information provides important clues as to the
sites and mechanisms underlying the previously unexplained effects of dioxins in 
the central nervous system.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11054704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2000 Jul;126(3):305-19.

Molecular characterization and developmental expression of the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor from the chick embryo.

Walker MK(1), Heid SE, Smith SM, Swanson HI.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center,
Albuquerque 87131, USA. mkwalker@unm.edu

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) was cloned from the chick embryo and its
function and developmental expression characterized. Chicken AhR cDNA coded for
858 amino acid protein and 396 bp of 3' UTR. The basic helix loop helix domain
exhibited 87-100% amino acid identity to avian, mammalian, and amphibian AhR, and
69-74% to piscine AhR. The PAS (Per-ARNT-Sim) region was slightly less well
conserved with (a) 97% identity to other avian sequences, (b) 81-86% to amphibian
and mammalian AhR, and (c) 64-69% with piscine AhR. The carboxy terminus diverged
the most among species with less than 53% amino acid identity between chicken and
any available mammalian and piscine AhR sequences. The chicken AhR RNA and
protein were 6.1 kb and 103 kDa, respectively. Chicken AhR dimerized with human
AhR nuclear translocator and bound the mammalian dioxin-response element in a
ligand-dependent manner. AhR protein was detected in neural ganglia; smooth,
cardiac, and skeletal muscle; and epithelium involved in
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transformations, such as pituitary, gastrointestinal
tract, limb apical-ectodermal ridge, and kidney collecting ducts. AhR mRNA was
detected in all tissues expressing protein, except myocardium. Cytochrome P4501A4
mRNA was highly induced by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in a subset
of tissues expressing AhR, including small intestine, liver, kidney, blood
vessels, and outflow tract myocardium. In conclusion, the AhR sequence and
function is highly conserved between birds and mammals, and although many tissues
express AhR during chick embryo development, only a subset are responsive to TCDD
induction of CYP1A4.

PMID: 11048681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Oct;14(10):1674-81.

Conditional disruption of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(Arnt) gene leads to loss of target gene induction by the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor and hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha.

Tomita S(1), Sinal CJ, Yim SH, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

To determine the function of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT), a conditional gene knockout mouse was made using the Cre-loxP system.
Exon 6, encoding the conserved basic-helix-loop-helix domain of the protein, was 
flanked by loxP sites and introduced into the Arnt gene by standard gene
disruption techniques using embryonic stem cells. Mice homozygous for the floxed 
allele were viable and had no readily observable phenotype. The Mx1-Cre
transgene, in which Cre is under control of the interferon-gamma promoter, was
introduced into the Arnt-floxed mouse line. Treatment with
polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid to induce expression of Cre resulted in complete 
disruption of the Arnt gene and loss of ARNT messenger RNA (mRNA) expression in
liver. To determine the role of ARNT in gene control in the intact animal mouse
liver, expression of target genes under control of an ARNT dimerization partner, 
the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), was monitored. Induction of CYP1A1, CYP1A2, 
and UGT1*06 mRNAs by the AHR ligand 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin was
absent in livers of Arnt-floxed/Mx1-Cre mice treated with
polyinosinic-polycytidylic. These data demonstrate that ARNT is required for AHR 
function in the intact animal. Partial deletion of the Arnt allele was found in
kidney, heart, intestine, and lung. Despite more than 80% loss of the ARNT
expression in lung, maximal induction of CYP1A1 was found, indicating that the
expression level of ARNT is not limiting to AHR signaling. Cobalt chloride
induction of the glucose transporter-1 and heme oxygenase-1 mRNAs was also
markedly abrogated in mice lacking ARNT expression, suggesting an inhibition of
HIF-1alpha activity. These studies establish a critical role for ARNT in AHR and 
HIF-1alpha signal transduction in the intact mouse.

PMID: 11043581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2000 Sep 15;381(2):302-12.

Regulation of DNA binding activity of the ligand-activated aryl hydrocarbon
receptor by tyrosine phosphorylation.

Park S(1), Henry EC, Gasiewicz TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a member of the bHLH-PAS family, is a
ligand-activated transcription factor which plays an important role in normal
liver development and in mediating the toxicity of polycyclic and halogenated
aromatic hydrocarbon pollutants such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.
Phosphorylation is known to regulate the transformation process of unliganded AhR
into functionally active AhR/ARNT heterodimer that has high affinity for
dioxin-responsive elements (DRE) and transactivation activity. Here, we report
that DRE binding activity of the AhR is regulated by phosphorylation on the
AhR/ARNT complex itself. Studies with specific protein phosphatases indicated
that tyrosine phosphorylation is involved in this modulation. In addition, the
AhR is phosphorylated at tyrosine residue(s) as determined by
anti-phosphotyrosine immunoblot analysis. These results suggest that tyrosine
phosphorylation on the AhR is required for its DNA binding activity and may
provide mammalian cells with another layer of control mechanism that allows cell 
type specific and developmental stage specific induction of the AhR target genes.

PMID: 11032419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Eur J Neurosci. 2000 Oct;12(10):3701-8.

Two splice variants of the hypoxia-inducible factor HIF-1alpha as potential
dimerization partners of ARNT2 in neurons.

Drutel G(1), Kathmann M, Héron A, Gros C, Macé S, Schwartz JC, Arrang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Neurobiologie et Pharmacologie Moléculaire (U.109) INSERM, Centre
Paul Broca, 2ter rue d'Alésia, 75014 Paris, France.

The hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1alpha), a basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor, is known to heterodimerize with ARNT1, a nuclear translocator, to trigger
the overexpression in many cells of genes involved in resistance to hypoxia.
Although HIF-1alpha and ARNT1 are both expressed in brain, their cellular
localization and function therein are unknown. Here, using in situ hybridization 
and immunocytochemistry, we show that HIF-1alpha is expressed in normoxic
cerebral neurons together with not only ARNT1 but also ARNT2, a cerebral
translocator homologous to ARNT1 but displaying, unlike ARNT1, a selective
neuronal expression. In contrast, other potential partners of the translocators, 
i.e. the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and the single-minded protein 2 (SIM2), 
are not expressed in the adult brain. We also identify two splice variants of
HIF-1alpha in brain, one of which dimerizes with ARNT2 even more avidly than with
ARNT1. The resulting heterodimer, in contrast with the HIF-1alpha/ARNT1 complex, 
does not recognize the HIF-1-binding site of the hypoxia-induced erythropoietin
(Epo) gene, suggesting that it controls transcription of a distinct set of genes.
We therefore propose that HIF-1alpha and ARNT2 function as preferential
dimerization partners in neurons to control specific responses, some of which may
not be triggered by hypoxia. In support of this proposal, in nonhypoxic PC12
cells constitutively coexpressing HIF-1alpha, ARNT1 and ARNT2, downregulation of 
either HIF-1alpha or ARNT2, obtained with selective antisense nucleotides,
resulted in inhibition of [3H]thymidine incorporation.

PMID: 11029639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2000 Jun;164(1-2):5-18.

Demonstration of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin attenuation of P450
steroidogenic enzyme mRNAs in rat granulosa cell in vitro by competitive reverse 
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction assay.

Dasmahapatra AK(1), Wimpee BA, Trewin AL, Wimpee CF, Ghorai JK, Hutz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 53211,
USA.

We investigated the effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), in
prepubertal (PP) and adult (A) rat granulosa cells (GC) in vitro by examining the
changes in estrogen secretion, aromatase enzyme activity and mRNAs for
steroidogenic enzymes P450scc, 3beta-HSDI, P450arom; and for components of the
AHR signaling pathway-CYP1A1, aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), and the AHR
nuclear translocator protein (ARNT). In PP and A rat GC, TCDD (3.1 nM) reduced
estrogen secretion at 48 h without altering aromatase enzyme activity. Addition
of FSH (50 ng/ml) increased aromatase activity in GC with or without TCDD.
FSH-induced aromatase activity was significantly reduced by TCDD (3.1 nM) at 48
h. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR showed a significant increase in CYP1A1 mRNA both at 
24 and 48 h with TCAP, while a significant reduction in P450scc and P450arom mRNA
was observed with competitive RT-PCR. All steroidogenic enzyme mRNAs were
significantly lower in adults than in PP GC. We conclude that in rat GC, TCDD
modulates the level of cytochrome P450 enzymes involved in the steroid
biosynthetic cascade. This effect may be attributable to AHR interaction with
dioxin-responsive elements present in the genes encoding these enzymes.

PMID: 11026553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mech Dev. 2000 Oct;97(1-2):13-26.

Isolation and characterization of AINT: a novel ARNT interacting protein
expressed during murine embryonic development.

Sadek CM(1), Jalaguier S, Feeney EP, Aitola M, Damdimopoulos AE, Pelto-Huikko M, 
Gustafsson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Center for Biotechnology, Novum, Karolinska
Institute, 141 57, Huddinge, Sweden. christine.sadek@cbt.ki.se

Basic helix-loop-helix-PER-ARNT-SIM (bHLH-PAS) proteins form dimeric
transcription factors to mediate diverse biological functions including
xenobiotic metabolism, hypoxic response, circadian rhythm and central nervous
system midline development. The Ah receptor nuclear translocator protein (ARNT)
plays a central role as a common heterodimerization partner. Herein, we describe 
a novel, embryonically expressed, ARNT interacting protein (AINT) that may be a
member of a larger coiled-coil PAS interacting protein family. The AINT
C-terminus mediates interaction with the PAS domain of ARNT in yeast and
interacts in vitro with ARNT and ARNT2 specifically. AINT localizes to the
cytoplasm and overexpression leads to non-nuclear localization of ARNT. A dynamic
pattern of AINT mRNA expression during embryogenesis and cerebellum ontogeny
supports a role for AINT in development.

PMID: 11025203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Toxicol Sci. 2000 Oct;57(2):302-11.

Antiestrogenic effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in mouse uterus:
critical role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor in stromal tissue.

Buchanan DL(1), Sato T, Peterson RE, Cooke PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois
61802, USA.

The effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and the role of aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) in estradiol (E(2))-induced uterine epithelial
mitogenic activity and secretory protein mRNA expression were determined.
Ovariectomized wild-type (wt) and AhR-knockout (AhRKO) mice received oil, E(2),
or 5 microg/kg TCDD+E(2). E(2) stimulated similar large increases in the uterine 
epithelial labeling index (LI) and mRNA abundance for the E(2)-dependent
epithelial secretory protein, lactoferrin (LF), in both wt and AhRKO mice.
However, uterine epithelial LI and LF mRNA were significantly reduced by
TCDD+E(2) in wt but not AhRKO mice. To determine the roles of stromal and
epithelial AhR in the TCDD effect, uterine stroma and epithelium from AhRKO and
wt mice were enzymatically separated and recombined into four types of tissue
recombinants that either contained or lacked AhR in one or more tissue
compartments. Tissue recombinants were grafted into nude mice, which were later
ovariectomized and given oil, E(2), or TCDD+E(2). Epithelial LI was significantly
reduced by TCDD in grafts containing stromal AhR, regardless of epithelial AhR
status. However, LI was unaffected by TCDD in grafts lacking stromal AhR, even
when epithelial AhR was present. Thus, TCDD inhibits E(2)-induced uterine
epithelial mitogenic and secretory activity, and this requires AhR.
Anti-proliferative effects of TCDD on uterine epithelia appear to be mediated
indirectly through stromal AhR, suggesting that liganded AhR alters epithelial
function by disrupting normal E(2)-induced stromal activity. This is the first
demonstration that TCDD impairs uterine epithelial function by altering normal
stromal-epithelial interactions in vivo.

PMID: 11006360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Mol Pharmacol. 2000 Oct;58(4):845-51.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor is required for p300-mediated induction of DNA
synthesis by adenovirus E1A.

Tohkin M(1), Fukuhara M, Elizondo G, Tomita S, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institute of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0001, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that mediates the biological responses to environmental contaminants such as
2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Embryonic fibroblast (EF) isolated from
AHR-null mice exhibited slow cell growth compared with wild-type EF.
Reintroduction of AHR into AHR-null EF increased cell growth, suggesting that AHR
is involved in cell cycle control. The role of the AHR in cell cycle control was 
examined using the adenovirus oncoprotein E1A. EF, derived from wild-type and
AHR-null mice, were transfected with two mutant E1A expression plasmids that
inactivate either p300/CBP or retinoblastoma protein (pRb). Although DNA
synthesis of wild-type EF was induced by both E1A mutants, DNA synthesis in the
AHR-null EF was induced only by the mutant that binds pRb, not by the mutant to
p300/CBP. These data show that both pRb and p300/CBP were the target of
E1A-induced DNA synthesis in wild-type EF. In AHR-null mice, however, only pRb
was the target of E1A-induced DNA synthesis and p300/CBP cannot be inactivated by
E1A in the absence of AHR. Immunoprecipitation revealed that AHR directly bound
to p300, thus suggesting the intriguing possibility that AHR is involved in
control of the cell cycle via interaction with p300.

PMID: 10999956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Neurosci Lett. 2000 Sep 15;291(2):117-20.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator is induced by kainic acid in rat
hippocampal glial cells.

Kitamura Y(1), Takata K, Kakimura J, Umeki M, Azukawa S, Suzuki S, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University, Misasagi,
Yamashina-ku, 607-8412, Kyoto, Japan. yo-kita@mb.kyoto-phu.ac.jp

The localization and function of aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT) in the brain are still unclear. In this study, we examined changes of ARNT
protein in rat hippocampus, by immunoblotting and immunohistochemical analysis
using anti-ARNT antibody. Treatment of kainic acid (KA) induced marked increase
in ARNT protein in both cytosolic and organellar fractions. ARNT immunoreactivity
was markedly increased, predominantly in microglia and partly in astrocytes,
similar to the immunoreactivity of heme oxygenase-1. In contrast, protein level
of dioxin receptor did not change and hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha protein was
undetectable. These results suggest that ARNT expression in glial cells may
participate in KA-induced episodes in the hippocampus.

PMID: 10978588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Sep 7;1493(1-2):125-34.

Efficient translation of mouse hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha under normoxic and
hypoxic conditions.

Görlach A(1), Camenisch G, Kvietikova I, Vogt L, Wenger RH, Gassmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Zürich-Irchel, Winterthurerstrasse 190,
CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

The heterodimeric hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), consisting of the subunits 
HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta/ARNT, is a master transcriptional regulator of oxygen
homeostasis. Under hypoxic conditions, HIF-1alpha levels very rapidly increase,
mostly due to protein stabilization. However, translational regulation of
HIF-1alpha has not been directly analyzed so far. Mouse HIF-1alpha exists as two 
mRNA isoforms (termed mHIF-1alphaI.1 and mHIF-1alphaI. 2) containing structurally
different 5'-termini which might modulate translation initiation. Whereas the in 
vitro translation efficiency of these two mRNA isoforms was about equal, the
mHIF-1alphaI.2 5'-untranslated region (5'-UTR) conferred significantly higher in 
vivo luciferase reporter gene activity than the mHIF-1alphaI.1 5'-UTR. Similar
corresponding luciferase mRNA levels indicate translational rather than
transcriptional alterations. Reporter gene expression was not affected upon
exposure of transiently transfected cells to hypoxia (1% oxygen). Direct
assessment of translational regulation by polysomal profile analysis of HeLaS3
cells showed that HIF-1alpha (and to a lower extent ARNT) mRNA was found mainly
in the translationally active polyribosomal fractions under both normoxic and
hypoxic conditions. In contrast, the association of mRNAs for beta-actin and
ribosomal protein L28 with the polyribosomal fractions was substantially reduced 
under hypoxic conditions, suggesting decreased overall protein synthesis. Thus,
efficient translation of mouse HIF-1alpha in a situation where the general
translation efficiency is reduced represents a prerequisite for the very rapid
accumulation of HIF-1alpha protein upon exposure to hypoxia.

PMID: 10978514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Sep 12;97(19):10436-41.

A genomewide survey of basic helix-loop-helix factors in Drosophila.

Moore AW(1), Barbel S, Jan LY, Jan YN.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Departments of Physiology and Biochemistry,
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143-0725, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors play important roles in
the specification of tissue type during the development of animals. We have used 
the information contained in the recently published genomic sequence of
Drosophila melanogaster to identify 12 additional bHLH proteins. By sequence
analysis we have assigned these proteins to families defined by Atonal,
Hairy-Enhancer of Split, Hand, p48, Mesp, MYC/USF, and the bHLH-Per, Arnt, Sim
(PAS) domain. In addition, one single protein represents a unique family of bHLH 
proteins. mRNA in situ analysis demonstrates that the genes encoding these
proteins are expressed in several tissue types but are particularly concentrated 
in the developing nervous system and mesoderm.

PMCID: PMC27042
PMID: 10973473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Mar Biotechnol (NY). 2000 Jul;2(4):376-386.

Overexpression of a Zebrafish ARNT2-like Factor Represses CYP1A Transcription in 
ZLE Cells.

Wang WD(1), Wu JC, Hsu HJ, Kong ZL, Hu CH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Marine Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University, 2
Pei-Ning Road, Keelung 20224, Taiwan, Republic of China

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) factors belong to a novel
basic-helix-loop-helix-PAS (bHLH-PAS) transcription factor family that controls a
variety of physiological and developmental processes. In a previous study, we
obtained a partial complementary DNA fragment of an ARNT2-like factor from
zebrafish embryo, liver, and other tissues by reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction. In an effort to characterize the function of this factor, we
screened an embryonic complementary DNA library and obtained a complete cDNA of
this ARNT2-like factor, zARNT2A. The deduced protein sequence of zARNT2A
encompasses the basic-helix-loop-helix and PAS-A/B motifs and shares highest
sequence similarity with the amino-terminal half of mouse ARNT2 factor. However, 
it lacks a carboxy-terminal transactivation motif following the PAS-A/B motifs.
Transient expression of zARNT2A in cultured cells resulted in repression of
TCDD-dependent CYP1A transcription. Whole-mount in situ hybridization revealed
that zARNT2A is expressed in brain and pronephros at prime-5 stages. In adult
fish, zARNT2A messenger RNA is transcribed in a wide range of tissues, which
indicates that zARNT2A and its corresponding signal transduction mechanisms have 
important roles in fish development and other physiological aspects.

PMID: 10960127  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


412. Mol Pharmacol. 2000 Sep;58(3):515-25.

The bioflavonoid galangin blocks aryl hydrocarbon receptor activation and
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-induced pre-B cell apoptosis.

Quadri SA(1), Qadri AN, Hahn ME, Mann KK, Sherr DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, Boston University School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Bioflavonoids are plant compounds touted for their potential to treat or prevent 
several diseases including cancers induced by common environmental chemicals.
Much of the biologic activity of one such class of pollutants, polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), is mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor/transcription factor (AhR). For example, the AhR regulates PAH
immunotoxicity that manifests as pre-B cell apoptosis in models of B cell
development. Because bioflavonoids block PAH-induced cell transformation and are 
structurally similar to AhR ligands, it was postulated that some of them would
suppress PAH-induced, AhR-dependent immunotoxicity, possibly through a direct AhR
blockade. This hypothesis was tested using a model of B cell development in which
pre-B cells are cultured with and are dependent on bone marrow stromal or hepatic
parenchymal cell monolayers. Of seven bioflavonoids screened, galangin
(3,5,7-trihydroxyflavone) blocked PAH-induced but not C(2)-ceramide- or
H(2)O(2)-induced pre-B cell apoptosis. Because galangin blocked AhR-dependent
reporter gene expression, AhR complex-DNA binding, and AhR nuclear translocation,
inhibition of a relatively early step in AhR signaling was implicated. This
hypothesis was supported by the ability of galangin to bind the AhR and stabilize
AhR-90-kDa heat shock protein complexes in the presence of AhR agonists. These
studies demonstrate the utility of pre-B cell culture systems in identifying
compounds capable of blocking PAH immunotoxicity, define at least one mechanism
of galangin activity (i.e., repression of AhR activation), and motivate the use
of this and similar dietary bioflavonoids as relatively nontoxic inhibitors of
AhR agonist activity and as pharmacologic agents with which to dissect AhR
signaling pathways.

PMID: 10953044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Gene Expr. 1999;8(5-6):273-86.

Nuclear receptor coactivator SRC-1 interacts with the Q-rich subdomain of the AhR
and modulates its transactivation potential.

Kumar MB(1), Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park 16802, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a soluble cytosolic protein, mediates many
of the toxic effects of TCDD and related chemicals. The toxic effects are largely
cell, tissue, and promoter context dependent. Although many details of the
overall dioxin signal transduction have been elucidated, the transcriptional
regulation of dioxin-induced genes like cyp1A1 is not yet completely understood. 
Previously, we have shown that the co-regulator RIP140 is a potential AhR
coactivator. In this report, the role of coactivator, SRC-1, in AhR-mediated
transcriptional regulation was examined. SRC-1 increased AhR-mediated,
TCDD-dependent reporter gene activity three-fold in Hepa-1 and COS-1 cells. In in
vitro interaction assays, SRC-1 was found to interact with AhR but not with ARNT.
SRC-1 interacted weakly with AhR in the absence of TCDD and the addition of
ligand further increased SRC-1 binding to AhR. Deletional mapping studies of the 
AhR revealed that SRC-1 binds to the AhR transactivation domain. Finer mapping of
the SRC-1-interacting subdomains in the AhR transactivation domain suggested that
the Q-rich subdomain was necessary and sufficient for interaction, similar to
that seen with RIP140. Using GFP-tagged constructs, SRC-1 was shown to interact
with AhR in cells. Unlike RIP140, LXXLL motifs in SRC-1 were necessary for
interaction with AhR in vitro and for coactivation in Hepa-1 cells. The
recruitment of certain coactivators by a variety of receptors suggests possible
common coactivator pools and competition among receptors for limiting
coactivators. Examination of the role of SRC-1 in AhR/ARNT transactivation in
ARNT-deficient mutant Hepa-1 c4 cells demonstrates that the AhR transactivation
domain is sufficient for enhanced coactivation mediated by SRC-1 in the presence 
of a transactivation domain deleted ARNT protein.

PMID: 10947077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 6;275(40):30801-5.

Functional interaction between the p160 coactivator proteins and the
transcriptional enhancer factor family of transcription factors.

Belandia B(1), Parker MG.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London WC2A
3PX, United Kingdom.

SRC1, initially identified as a nuclear receptor coactivator, was found to
interact with a member of the transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF) family of
transcription factors, TEF-4. The interaction, which occurs in both intact cells 
and in a cell-free system, is mediated by the highly conserved basic
helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS) domain present in the N-terminal region 
of SRC1. Moreover, all three members of the p160 family of nuclear receptor
coactivators, SRC1, TIF2, and RAC3, are able to potentiate transcription from a
TEF response element in transient transfection experiments, and this activation
requires the presence of the bHLH-PAS domain. These results suggest that the p160
proteins could be bona fide coactivators of the TEF family of transcription
factors.

PMID: 10934189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Aug 1;97(16):9082-7.

Expression of the gene encoding the proapoptotic Nip3 protein is induced by
hypoxia.

Bruick RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75235-9152, USA. bruick@biochem.swmed.edu

The ability to sense and respond to changes in oxygen availability is critical
for many developmental, physiological, and pathological processes, including
angiogenesis, control of blood pressure, and cerebral and myocardial ischemia.
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) is a basic-helix-loop-helix
(bHLH)containing member of the PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) family of transcription factors
that plays a central role in the response to hypoxia. HIF-1alpha, and its
relatives HIF-2alpha/endothelial PAS domain protein (EPAS) and HIF-3alpha, are
induced in response to hypoxia and serve to coordinately activate the expression 
of target genes whose products facilitate cell survival under conditions of
oxygen deprivation. When cells are exposed to chronic hypoxia, the protective
response can fail, resulting in apoptosis. This study shows that transcription of
the gene encoding Nip3, a proapoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family of cell death
factors, is strongly induced in response to hypoxia. The Nip3 promoter contains a
functional HIF-1-responsive element (HRE) and is potently activated by both
hypoxia and forced expression of HIF-1alpha. Exposure of cultured cells to
chronic hypoxia results in the accumulation of a protein recognized by antibodies
raised against Nip3. This study demonstrates a direct link between HIF-1alpha and
a proapoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family and offers a reasonable physiological
function for members of the Bcl-2 subfamily, including Nip3 and its close
relative Nix. These observations indicate that Nip3 may play a dedicated role in 
the pathological progression of hypoxia-mediated apoptosis, as observed after
ischemic injury.

PMCID: PMC16825
PMID: 10922063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;20(16):6095-104.

Analysis of the complex relationship between nuclear export and aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor-mediated gene regulation.

Pollenz RS(1), Barbour ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, USA. rpollen@chuma.cas.usf.edu

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) contains signals for both nuclear import and 
nuclear export (NES). The purpose of the studies in this report was to determine 
the relationship between the nuclear export of the AHR and AHR-mediated gene
regulation. Blockage of nuclear export in HepG2 cells with leptomycin B (LMB)
resulted in increased levels of AHR-AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) complex in
the nucleus and correlative reductions in agonist-stimulated AHR degradation.
However, LMB exposure inhibited agonist-mediated induction of numerous
AHR-responsive reporter genes by 75 to 89% and also inhibited induction of
endogenous CYP1A1. LMB did not transform the AHR to a ligand binding species or
affect activation by TCDD (2, 3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin). Mutagenesis of 
leucines 66 and 71 of the putative AHR NES resulted in a protein with reduced
function in dimerization to ARNT and binding to DNA, while alanine substitution
at leucine 69 (AHR(A69)) resulted in an AHR that bound with ARNT and associated
with DNA. AHR(A69) protein injected directly into the nuclei of E36 cells
remained nuclear following 6 h of agonist stimulation. In transient-transfection 
assays, AHR(A69) accumulated within the nucleus was not degraded efficiently
following agonist exposure. Finally, AHR(A69) supported induction of
AHR-responsive reporter genes in an agonist-dependent manner. These findings show
that it is possible to generate an AHR protein defective in nuclear export that
is functional in agonist-mediated gene induction. This implies that the negative 
effect of LMB on agonist-mediated gene induction is independent of the nuclear
export of the AHR.

PMCID: PMC86085
PMID: 10913191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Food Addit Contam. 2000 Apr;17(4):261-6.

Mechanistic aspects--the dioxin (aryl hydrocarbon) receptor.

Poellinger L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. lorenz.poellinger@cmb.ki.se

The Ah receptor mediates the toxicological responses of 2,3,7,8-TCDD and related 
compounds. Receptor-deficient animals were shown to be resistant to the toxic
effects of dioxin, although there is also evidence for the existence of a
receptor-independent pathway for dioxin-induced toxicity. In the cytosol the
receptor is present in a non-activated ligand binding conformation. Association
with Arnt in the nucleus turns the receptor complex into a ligand activated form.
The physiological role of the receptor is not yet understood; however, the
conservation of the receptor in a wide range of animal species (including humans)
suggests a fundamental role in cellular physiology.

PMID: 10912240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Biochem J. 2000 Aug 1;349 Pt 3:885-93.

The pro-apoptotic protein death-associated protein 3 (DAP3) interacts with the
glucocorticoid receptor and affects the receptor function.

Hulkko SM(1), Wakui H, Zilliacus J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Novum, S-141 86
Huddinge, Sweden. sanna.hulkko@mednut.ki.se

The yeast two-hybrid system was used to isolate cDNAs encoding proteins that
interact with the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) ligand-binding domain in a
ligand-dependent manner. One isolated cDNA encoded a fragment of death-associated
protein 3 (DAP3), which has been implicated as a positive mediator of apoptosis. 
In vitro experiments showed that the full-length DAP3 also interacted with GR.
The main interaction domain was mapped to the N-terminal region of DAP3 that had 
previously been shown to function in a dominant-negative fashion, protecting
cells from apoptosis. Co-transfection experiments in COS-7 cells showed that DAP3
had a stimulatory effect on the ligand-induced transcriptional activation by GR
and also increased the steroid-sensitivity. Furthermore, DAP3 formed a complex
with several other nuclear receptors and some basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim
proteins, as well as with heat-shock protein 90 (hsp90) (Arnt is the
aryl-hydrocarbon-receptor nuclear translocator, and Per and Sim are the
Drosophila proteins Period and Single-minded). The results suggest that DAP3
could have an important role in GR action, possibly by modulating the cytoplasmic
GR-hsp90 complex. Since glucocorticoids can induce apoptosis, the pro-apoptotic
DAP3 protein may be involved in this function of GR.

PMCID: PMC1221218
PMID: 10903152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Jun 24;273(1):231-8.

The role of ARNT2 in tumor angiogenesis and the neural response to hypoxia.

Maltepe E(1), Keith B, Arsham AM, Brorson JR, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology and Oncology, Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois 60637, USA.

The Hypoxia-Inducible Factor-1 (HIF-1) activates the transcription of many genes 
required for cellular and organismal responses to oxygen deprivation. The HIF-1
complex is composed of the ubiquitously expressed basic helix-loop-helix/PAS
(bHLH/PAS) proteins HIF-1alpha and Arylhydrocarbon Receptor Nuclear Translocator 
(ARNT). ARNT2 is a conserved ARNT homolog that is highly expressed in neurons,
suggesting that ARNT2/HIF-1alpha heterodimers mediate transcriptional responses
to oxygen deprivation in the nervous system. We show here that ARNT2 forms
functional HIF complexes in vivo, and that ARNT2 restores hypoxia-induced gene
expression to ARNT-deficient ES cells and hepatocytes. Formation of neural
ARNT2/HIF-1alpha complexes in Arnt(-/-) ES cell-derived teratocarcinomas may
explain why these tumors express VEGF, vascularize and grow efficiently, in
contrast to ARNT-deficient hepatomas. Interestingly, all neural cell types
studied accumulate both ARNT- and ARNT2-containing HIF complexes. We conclude
that ARNT2 forms functional HIF complexes in neurons and plays an integral role
in hypoxic responses in the CNS.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10873592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jun 15;28(12):2286-91.

An aryl hydrocarbon receptor conformation acts as the functional core of nuclear 
dioxin signaling.

Kronenberg S(1), Esser C, Carlberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Immunologie des Medizinischen Instituts für Umwelthygiene and
Institut für Physiologische Chemie I, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf,
Postfach 10 10 07, D-40001 Düsseldorf, Germany.

DNA-complexed heterodimers of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) with the Ah
receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) are the molecular switches for nuclear
signaling of 2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). AhR-Arnt heterodimers
regulate genes involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics or fatty acids and
various genes important for growth and differentiation. In this report several
potent methods, such as the limited protease digestion, gel shift and gel shift
clipping assays, allowed the investigation of ligand-stabilized conformations of 
AhR monomers in comparison to that of AhR-Arnt heterodimers. Interestingly, the
ligand sensitivity of monomeric AhR was found to be very low at 25 nM, whereas
DNA-dependent methods consistently provided EC(50) values between 0.12 and 0.6 nM
for AhR in a heterodimeric complex, i. e. an approximate 100-fold higher ligand
sensitivity. This indicates that complex formation of AhR with Arnt on DNA is an 
important and critical step in transforming AhR into a high affinity receptor for
TCDD. A comparison of wild-type AhR with different C-terminal receptor
truncations suggests that the PAS-B subregion of its PAS domain is of central
importance for stabilization of a functional, i. e. ligand-sensitive, AhR-Arnt
conformation, whereas the PAS-A subregion appears to be critical for dimerization
of AhR and Arnt. In conclusion, the results of this study provide important
information on the ligand sensitivity of AhR and AhR-Arnt heterodimer
conformations.

PMCID: PMC102727
PMID: 10871357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Neurosci. 2000 Jul 1;20(13):RC83.

The basic helix-loop-helix-PAS protein MOP9 is a brain-specific heterodimeric
partner of circadian and hypoxia factors.

Hogenesch JB(1), Gu YZ, Moran SM, Shimomura K, Radcliffe LA, Takahashi JS,
Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)The McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

PAS (PER, ARNT, SIM) proteins play important roles in adaptation to low
atmospheric and cellular oxygen levels, exposure to certain environmental
pollutants, and diurnal oscillations in light and temperature. In an attempt to
better understand how organisms sense environmental changes, we have
characterized a novel member of the PAS superfamily, MOP9 (member of PAS
superfamily), that maps to human chromosome 12p11.22-11.23. This protein displays
significant homology to the Drosophila circadian factor CYCLE and its putative
mammalian ortholog MOP3/bMAL1. Like its homologs, MOP9 forms a transcriptionally 
active heterodimer with the circadian CLOCK protein, the structurally related
MOP4, and hypoxia-inducible factors, such as HIF1alpha. In a manner consistent
with its role as a biologically relevant partner of these proteins, MOP9 is
coexpressed in regions of the brain such as the thalamus, hypothalamus, and
amygdala. Importantly, MOP9 is coexpressed with CLOCK in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus, the site of the master circadian oscillator in mammals.

PMID: 10864977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2000;475:275-84.

HIF-1 is essential for multilineage hematopoiesis in the embryo.

Adelman DM(1), Maltepe E, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

PMID: 10849668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2000;475:87-99.

Regulation of the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha. ARNT is not necessary for
hypoxic induction of HIF-1 alpha in the nucleus.

Gassmann M(1), Chilov D, Wenger RH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Zürich-Irchel, Switzerland.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a master regulator of mammalian oxygen
homeostasis. HIF-1 consists of two subunits, HIF-1 alpha and the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT). Whereas hypoxia prevents ubiquitination and
proteasomal degradation of HIF-1 alpha, ARNT expression is thought to be
oxygen-independent. We and others previously showed that ARNT is indispensable
for HIF-1 DNA-binding and transactivation function. To examine the requirement of
ARNT for accumulation and nuclear translocation of HIF-1 alpha in hypoxia, we
used ARNT-mutant mouse hepatoma and ARNT-deficient embryonic stem cells. As shown
by immunofluorescence, HIF-1 alpha accumulation in the nucleus of hypoxic cells
did not require ARNT, demonstrating that nuclear translocation is intrinsic to
HIF-1 alpha. During biochemical separation, both HIF-1 alpha and ARNT tend to
leak from the nuclei in the absence of the corresponding subunit, suggesting that
heterodimerization is required for stable association within the nuclear
compartment. Nuclear stabilization of the heterodimer might also explain the
hypoxically increased total cellular ARNT levels observed in some of the cell
lines examined.

PMID: 10849651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 1999 Jun 14;38(1):81-97.

The expression and regulation of drug metabolism in human placenta.

Pasanen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Oulu, Kajaanintie 52 
D, SF-90220 Oulu, Finland; National Agency for Medicines, Helsinki, Finland

The human placenta oxidizes several xenobiotics, although the spectrum of
substrates and metabolic activities when compared with the liver appears
restricted. Maternal cigarette smoking or PCB exposure increase the expression of
CYP1A1. This induced activity is able to catalyze the activation of
benzo(a)pyrene into DNA-bound adducts, both in vitro and in vivo. Studies with
RT-PCR technique have demonstrated that first trimester placentae express at the 
mRNA level CYP1A1, 1A2, 2C, 2D6, 2E1, 2F1, 3A4, 3A5, 3A7 and 4B1 and at full term
CYP1A1, 2E1, 2F1, 3A3/4, 3A5 and 3A7. However, more detailed studies on cDNA
probes or with specific antibodies or 'diagnostic' substrates for other than
CYP1A1, 2E1 and 3A gene products have yielded negative results. Studies on human 
placenta and a chorioncarcinoma cell line, JEG 3 cells, boulster the concept that
placental CYP1A1 and 1B1 - although their expression is Ah receptor and ARNT
mediated - is controlled by distinct mechanisms. Aromatase, CYP19, and
cholesterol side-chain cleaving, CYP11B, genes, proteins and activities are
catalytically active in human placentae throughout the pregnancy and those
parameters do not seem to be affected by maternal cigarette smoking but rather
maternal health status. However, the substrate binding pocket of aromatase
accepts as its substrate several xenobiotics and is responsible for constitutive 
xenobiotic biotransformations.Functional placental glutathione S-transferase,
N-acetyl transferase and epoxide hydrolase are expressed via one gene each and
their function reflects the placenta as an endocrine organ rather than a
xenobiotic-metabolizing unit. However, markers for oxidative stress can be
detected in decreased glutathione S-transferase activities.Because human placenta
has quite well defined metabolic characteristics, and obtaining placental samples
will not meet any drastic ethical difficulties, it could be used more intensively
as a source of metabolizing enzymes in in vitro studies during the course of a
drug development program. The human placenta, or its subcellular organelles,
could serve as a real alternative model for an extrahepatic tissue in replacing
recombinant expression systems especially if CYP11, 19, 1A1 or potentially 2E1
are target enzymes for potential metabolic interactions.

PMID: 10837748  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


425. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2000;40:519-61.

The PAS superfamily: sensors of environmental and developmental signals.

Gu YZ(1), Hogenesch JB, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine, Madison 53706, USA. ygu@oncology.wisc.edu

Over the past decade, PAS domains have been identified in dozens of signal
transduction molecules and various forms have been found in animals, plants, and 
prokaryotes. In this review, we summarize this rapidly expanding research area by
providing a detailed description of three signal transduction pathways that
utilize PAS protein heterodimers to drive their transcriptional output. It is
hoped that these model pathways can provide a framework for use in understanding 
the biology of the less well-understood members of this emerging superfamily, as 
well as of those to be characterized in the days to come. We use this review to
develop the idea that most eukaryotic PAS proteins can be classified by
functional similarities, as well as by predicted phylogenetic relationships. We
focus on the alpha-class proteins, which often act as sensors of environmental
signals, and the beta-class proteins, which typically act as broad-spectrum
partners that target these heterodimers to their genomic targets.

PMID: 10836146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Jun 6;97(12):6757-62.

The t(1;12)(q21;p13) translocation of human acute myeloblastic leukemia results
in a TEL-ARNT fusion.

Salomon-Nguyen F(1), Della-Valle V, Mauchauffe M, Busson-Le Coniat M, Ghysdael J,
Berger R, Bernard OA.

Author information: 
(1)U434 Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale-Centre d'Etude 
du Polymorphisme Humain-Fondation Jean Dausset, 27 rue Juliette Dodu, 75010,
Paris, France.

The TEL/ETV6 gene is located at 12p13 and encodes a member of the ETS family of
transcription factors. Translocated ETS leukemia (TEL) is frequently involved in 
chromosomal translocations in human malignancies, usually resulting in the
expression of fusion proteins between the amino-terminal part of TEL and either
unrelated transcription factors or protein tyrosine kinases. We have
characterized a t(1;12)(q21;p13) translocation in an acute myeloblastic leukemia 
(AML-M2). At the protein level, the untranslocated TEL copy and, as a result of
the t(1;12) translocation, a fusion protein between TEL and essentially all of
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) are expressed. The
involvement of ARNT in human leukemogenesis has not been previously described.
The ARNT protein belongs to a subfamily of the "basic region helix-loop-helix"
(bHLH) protein that shares an additional region of similarity called the PAS
(Per, ARNT, SIM) domain. ARNT is the central partner of several heterodimeric
transcription factors, including those containing the aryl hydrocarbon (dioxin)
receptor (AhR) and the hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF1alpha). Our results
show that the TEL-ARNT fusion protein is the crucial product of the translocation
and suggest that interference with the activity of AhR or HIF1alpha can
contribute to leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC18730
PMID: 10829078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Hepatology. 2000 Jun;31(6):1296-304.

Cloning and functional characterization of the bile acid-sensitive methotrexate
carrier from rat liver cells.

Honscha W(1), Dötsch KU, Thomsen N, Petzinger E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Giessen, Germany.
Walter.Honscha@vetmed.uni-giessen.de

We have cloned two complementary DNAs (cDNAs), RL-Mtx-1 and RL-Mtx-2,
corresponding to the bile acid- sensitive methotrexate carrier from rat liver by 
direct full-length rapid amplification of cDNA ends polymerase chain reaction
(RACE-PCR) using degenerated primers that were deduced from published sequences
of tumor cell methotrexate transporters. When expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes
and cosM6 cells, both clones mediate methotrexate and bumetanide transport.
RL-Mtx-1 consists of 2,445 bp with an open reading frame of 1,536 bp. The
corresponding protein with 512 amino acids has a molecular weight of 58 kd.
RL-Mtx-2 (2,654 bp) differs by an additional insert of 203 bp. This insert is
located in frame at position 1,196 of the RL-Mtx-1 and contains the typical
splice junction sites at the 5' and 3' end, indicating that the RL-Mtx-2
messenger RNA (mRNA) is generated by alternative splicing. The insert contains a 
stop codon that shortens the RL-Mtx-2 protein to 330 amino acids (38 kd). Both
cDNAs contain the binding site sequence for the dioxin/nuclear translocator
responsive element (Ah/Arnt-receptor) in conjunction with a barbiturate
recognition sequence (Barbie box). Preliminary results show that the Barbie box
acts as a negative regulatory element. The two liver cDNA clones show homologies 
to the published sequences of folate and the reduced folate carriers, but no
homology is found to the transport systems for organic anions like the Ntcp1,
oatp1, OAT-K1, and OAT1. Expression of the mRNA for the methotrexate carrier is
found in liver, kidney, heart, brain, spleen, lung, and skeletal muscle, but not 
in the testis as revealed by Northern blot analysis. The highest abundance of the
mRNA is found in the kidney.

PMID: 10827155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2000 Apr;72(5):197-207.

Estrogen and aryl hydrocarbon receptor expression and crosstalk in human Ishikawa
endometrial cancer cells.

Wormke M(1), Castro-Rivera E, Chen I, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A & M University, 
TX 77843-4466, College Station, USA.

Ishikawa endometrial cancer cells express the estrogen receptor (ER), and this
study investigates aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) expression and inhibitory
AhR-ER crosstalk in this cell line. Treatment of Ishikawa cells with the AhR
agonist [3H]2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) gave a radiolabeled
nuclear complex that sedimented at 6.0 S in sucrose density gradients, and
Western blot analysis confirmed that Ishikawa cells expressed human AhR and AhR
nuclear translocator (Arnt) proteins. Treatment of Ishikawa cells with 10 nM TCDD
induced a 9.7-fold increase in CYP1A1-dependent ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase
(EROD) activity and a 10.5-fold increase in chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
(CAT) activity in cells transfected with pRNH11c containing an Ah-responsive
human CYP1A1 gene promoter insert (-1142 to +2434). Inhibitory AhR-ER crosstalk
was investigated in Ishikawa cells using E2-induced cell proliferation and
transcriptional activation assays in cells transfected with E2-responsive
constructs containing promoter inserts from the progesterone receptor and
vitellogenin A2 genes. AhR agonists including TCDD, benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) and
6-methyl-1,3,8-trichlorodibenzofuran, inhibited 32-47% of the E2-induced
responses. In contrast, neither estrogen nor progesterone inhibited EROD activity
induced by TCDD in Ishikawa cells, whereas inhibitory ER-AhR crosstalk was
observed in ECC-1 endometrial cells suggesting that these interactions were cell 
context-dependent.

PMID: 10822009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Biochem Pharmacol. 2000 Jun 15;59(12):1549-56.

Inhibition of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-stimulated Cyp1a1
promoter activity by hypoxic agents.

Kim JE(1), Sheen YY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Ewha Womans University, # 11-1, Daehyun-dong,
Sudaemun-ku, Seoul, South Korea.

Since hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and the arylhydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) shared the AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt) for hypoxia- and
AhR-mediated signaling, respectively, it was possible to establish the hypothesis
that hypoxia could regulate cytochrome P450 1a1 (Cyp1a1) expression. In order to 
test this hypothesis, we undertook to examine the effect of hypoxia on Cyp1a1
transcription in Hepa-I cells. Mouse Cyp1a1 5'-flanking DNA, 1.6 kb was cloned
into pGL3 expression vector in order to construct pmCyp1a1-Luc. Hepa-I cells were
transfected with pmCyp1a1-Luc and treated with
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in the presence or absence of various 
hypoxic agents such as 1-100 microM cobalt chloride, 1-100 microM picolinic acid,
and 1-100 microM desferrioxamine. Luciferase activity of the reporter gene was
measured from pmCyp1a1-Luc-transfected Hepa-I cell lysate which contains 2
microgram total protein using luciferin as a substrate. Hypoxic agents such as
cobalt chloride, picolinic acid, and desferrioxamine showed inhibition of
luciferase activity that was induced by 1-nM TCDD treatment in a dose-and
time-dependent manner. Concomitant treatment of 150 microM ferrous sulfate with
1-100 microM desferrioxamine or 1-100 microM picolinic acid recovered luciferase 
activity from that inhibited by hypoxic agents or induced by TCDD. These data
demonstrated that iron-chelating and hypoxic agents inhibited dioxin-induced
Cyp1a1 transcription in Hepa-I cells. Thus, we might suggest that hypoxia
inhibits TCDD-induced Cyp1a1 expression due to the competition between HIF-1alpha
and the AhR for the Arnt in Hepa-I cells.

PMID: 10799651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Biol Chem. 2000 Apr 28;275(17):12676-83.

Superinduction of CYP1A1 gene expression. Regulation of 2,3,7,
8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-induced degradation of Ah receptor by
cycloheximide.

Ma Q(1), Renzelli AJ, Baldwin KT, Antonini JM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Toxicology Laboratory, Toxicology and Molecular Biology Branch,
Health Effects Laboratory Division, NIOSH, National Institutes of Health, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, Morgantown, West Virginia 26505, USA.

Cycloheximide superinduces the transcription of CYP1A1 in the presence of an
agonist for the Ah receptor (AhR). To investigate the molecular target for
"superinduction," we analyzed the agonist-induced degradation of AhR. Whereas
2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), a potent agonist of AhR, induces a
rapid reduction of the AhR protein, cycloheximide blocks the down-regulation of
steady state AhR. Analyses of the turnover of AhR reveal that cycloheximide
blocks the shortening of the half-life of AhR by TCDD. Blocking of the
TCDD-induced AhR degradation requires inhibition of protein synthesis, because
(a) cycloheximide inhibits protein synthesis at the concentration at which it
causes superinduction and inhibition of AhR degradation; and (b) puromycin, an
inhibitor of protein synthesis by mimicking aminoacyl-tRNA, also blocks the
TCDD-induced AhR degradation. The blocking of the TCDD-induced AhR degradation
correlates with the superinduction of CYP1A1 gene expression in a time- and
dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, cycloheximide is shown to increase the
accumulation of the TCDD-activated AhR and the functional AhR x Arnt complex in
nucleus. Collectively, our results reveal a mechanism of superinduction by
cycloheximide by enhancing the stability of agonist-activated AhR. The finding
that inhibition of protein synthesis blocks the TCDD-induced AhR turnover
implicates a cycloheximide-sensitive, labile factor (designated as AhR
degradation promoting factor, or ADPF) in controlling the removal of
agonist-activated AhR in nucleus.

PMID: 10777561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2000 Apr;182(4):767-75.

Expression of dioxin-related transactivating factors and target genes in human
eutopic endometrial and endometriotic tissues.

Bulun SE(1), Zeitoun KM, Kilic G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Illinois at Chicago,
60612, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Although an association between dioxin exposure and endometriosis has 
been proposed, the effects of this environmental toxin on human endometriosis are
not known. To understand the potential underlying molecular mechanisms we studied
the expressions of cytochrome P-450 genes (CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1 ), which
are induced by dioxin, and the expressions of cytosolic receptor for dioxin, aryl
hydrocarbon receptor, and its nuclear translocator, aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator protein, in endometriotic and eutopic endometrial tissues.
STUDY DESIGN: Levels of transcripts of CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, aryl hydrocarbon
receptor, and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator protein were
determined by a quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and 
Southern blot assay in total ribonucleic acid samples from endometriotic and
eutopic endometrial tissues. Eutopic endometrial tissue samples (n = 33) and
endometriotic tissue samples (n = 10) were obtained at the time of uterine
curettage and laparoscopy from disease-free women and from patients with
endometriosis. Portions of these eutopic endometrial and endometriotic tissues
were obtained simultaneously from the same patients (n = 8 pairs of samples).
Levels of transcripts of CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, aryl hydrocarbon receptor, and
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator protein were determined in
endometrial and endometriotic tissues during follicular and luteal phases of the 
cycle and in cultured endometriotic stromal cells treated with forskolin, phorbol
diacetate, medroxyprogesterone acetate,and serum.
RESULTS: Transcripts of dioxin receptor, its nuclear translocator, and two
dioxin-induced target genes (CYP1A2 and CYP1B1) were demonstrated during
follicular and luteal phases of the cycle in both eutopic endometrial tissues and
tissues affected by pelvic endometriosis, with no readily detectable differences 
between these tissues. On the other hand, levels of transcripts of another
dioxin-induced gene, CYP1A1, were found to be strikingly higher in endometriotic 
tissues than in the eutopic endometrium. Mean levels in endometriotic tissues
were 8.7 times those found in eutopic endometrium. Various hormonal treatments of
endometriotic stromal cells did not significantly alter these levels.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated for the first time the expression of dioxin-related
transcription factors aryl hydrocarbon receptor and aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator protein and target genes CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1 in
endometriotic tissues and stromal cells. Strikingly elevated CYP1A1 transcripts
in endometriosis may give rise to significantly increased P-4501A1 enzyme
activity and thus promote the development and growth of endometriosis by either
activating procarcinogens or inducing the formation of catechol estrogens or
both. In fact, the proposed link between dioxin exposure and endometriosis may be
explained in part by the up-regulation of the CYP1A1 gene expression in
endometriotic tissues.

PMID: 10764452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Biochem. 2000 Mar;127(3):503-9.

Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor.

Ikuta T(1), Tachibana T, Watanabe J, Yoshida M, Yoneda Y, Kawajiri K.

Author information: 
(1)Saitama Cancer Center Research Institute, Komuro, Ina-machi, Kitaadachi-gun,
Saitama 362-0806, Japan. togo@cancer-c.pref.saitama.jp

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that acts in concert with the AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT), and alters gene
expression in response to environmental contaminants such as 2,3,7,
8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). We have previously shown that AhR contains 
both a nuclear localization signal (NLS), AhR(13-39), and a nuclear export signal
(NES), AhR(55-75), in its NH(2)-terminal region. In this study, we obtained
direct evidence for the nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of AhR and show the
biological significance of the shuttling in terms of the transcriptional
activation of its target gene, CYP1A1. When AhR(13-75) fused with glutathione
S-transferase (GST)-green fluorescent protein (GFP) was microinjected into the
nucleus of a polykaryotic of BHK21 cell, the GST-AhR(13-75)-GFP migrated from one
nucleus to the other. This event, nucleocytoplasmic shuttling, was completely
inhibited in the presence of leptomycin B (LMB). The interaction between
chromosome region maintenance 1 (CRM1) and endogenous AhR was shown by
immunoprecipitation with antibodies to AhR followed by immunoblot analysis with
antibodies to CRM1. The inhibition of the nuclear export of AhR by LMB repressed 
the transcriptional activation of the CYP1A1 gene. The findings suggest that
nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling of AhR is essential for the inducible expression of
the CYP1A1 protein.

PMID: 10731723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Chem Biol Interact. 2000 Feb 1;124(3):205-16.

Estrous cycle-dependent changes in the expression of aromatic hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR) and AHR-nuclear translocator (ARNT) mRNAs in the rat ovary and
liver.

Chaffin CL(1), Trewin AL, Hutz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 53211,
USA.

The aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and AHR nuclear translocator protein
(ARNT) mediate the toxic effects of a wide variety of halogenated and polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons. While it can be assumed that AHR has an endogenous
function, its role in reproduction is currently undefined. The present study
seeks to examine the regulation of AHR and ARNT mRNAs in liver and ovarian
tissues across the rat estrous cycle. Message for hepatic AHR was increased
significantly on the morning of proestrus, and decreased dramatically by the
evening of proestrus; while hepatic ARNT mRNA was significantly decreased between
diestrus and the morning of proestrus, and between the evening of proestrus and
the morning of estrus. Ovarian AHR mRNA was unchanged from diestrus to proestrus,
and was decreased on the evening of proestrus. Changes in the expression of ARNT 
mRNA mirrored changes in the liver. To assess interaction between the AHR- and
estrogen-receptor (ER)-signaling pathways and to test the hypothesis that
estrogen regulates AHR mRNA, 25-day-old female rats were injected with either
17beta-estradiol, the ER antagonist ICI 182 780, or with vehicle, and hepatic AHR
mRNA was measured. Treatment with estrogen or the estrogen antagonist did not
alter the abundance of AHR mRNA in the liver. These data suggest that while
estrogen may not be the key regulator of AHR mRNA expression, a factor associated
with the rat reproductive cycle may be important in regulating the expression of 
both the AHR and ARNT genes in the ovary and liver.

PMID: 10728779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Endocr J. 1999 Dec;46(6):765-72.

Expression of Ah receptor and dioxin-related genes in human uterine endometrium
in women with or without endometriosis.

Igarashi T(1), Osuga U, Tsutsumi O, Momoeda M, Ando K, Matsumi H, Takai Y,
Okagaki R, Hiroi H, Fujiwara O, Yano T, Taketani Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, The University
of Tokyo, Japan.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) has been suggested as a possible
etiologic factor for endometriosis, a condition in which endometrium-like tissues
are present outside the uterus. The prevailing view pertaining to the origin of
endometriotic cells is that they are from eutopic endometrial cells which
regurgitate through fallopian tubes. In order to get insight into the possible
involvement of TCDD in the pathogenesis of endometriosis, we suspected that TCDD 
may act differently on the endometrium with or without endometriosis. To address 
this, we examined the presence of messenger RNAs of arylhydrocarbon receptor
(AhR), AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt) and two dioxin-responsive genes,
cytochrome P-450 1B1 (CYP1B1) and downstream of tyrosine kinases (p62(dok)), in
the endometrium of women with or without endometriosis using semi-quantitative
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. All the genes were expressed
throughout the menstrual cycle. The expression level of p62(dok) was higher in
the proliferative phase than in the secretory phase. In contrast, the expression 
levels of AhR, Arnt and CYP1B1 seemed to be constant during the cycle. In terms
of the comparison between non-endometriosis and endometriosis group, the mRNA
levels of AhR, Arnt, CYP1B1 and p62(dok) were essentially similar. Interestingly,
AhR mRNA level was significantly lower in smokers than in non-smokers. Based on
the regression analysis, significant linear and positive correlations were
observed between AhR and Arnt mRNA levels, and between Arnt and p62(dok) mRNA
levels. In summary, expression of AhR and dioxin-related genes in the endometrium
did not differ in women with or without endometriosis.

PMID: 10724351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 24;275(12):8432-8.

2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-induced degradation of aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Role of the transcription
activaton and DNA binding of AhR.

Ma Q(1), Baldwin KT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Toxicology Laboratory, Toxicology and Molecular Biology Branch,
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Morgantown, West Virginia 26505, USA. qam1@cdc.gov

Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) by 2,3,7,
8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), a potent agonist of AhR, induces a marked
reduction in steady state AhR. To analyze the mechanism of regulation of
ligand-activated AhR, we examined the biochemical pathway and function of the
down-regulation of the receptor by TCDD. Pulse-chase experiments reveal that TCDD
shortens the half-life (t1/2) of AhR from 28 to 3 h in mouse hepatoma cells.
Inhibitors of the 26 S proteasome, lactacystin and MG132, block the TCDD-induced 
turnover of AhR. The TCDD-induced degradation of AhR involves ubiquitination of
the AhR protein, because (a) TCDD induces formation of high molecular weight,
ubiquitinated AhR and (b) degradation of AhR is inhibited in ts20 cells, which
bear a temperature-sensitive mutation in the ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1, at a
nonpermissive temperature. Inhibition of proteasomal degradation of AhR increases
the amount of the nuclear AhR.Arnt complex and "superinduces" the expression of
endogenous CYP1A1 gene by TCDD, indicating that the proteasomal degradation of
AhR serves as a mechanism for controlling the activity of the activated receptor.
We also show that deletion of the transcription activation domain of AhR
abolishes the degradation, whereas a mutation in the DNA-binding region of AhR or
Arnt reduces the degradation; these data implicate the transcription activation
domain and DNA binding in AhR degradation. Our findings provide new insights into
the regulation of TCDD-activated AhR through ubiquitin-mediated protein
degradation.

PMID: 10722677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Hum Genet. 2000;45(2):92-3.

Human aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator gene (ARNT) D/N511
polymorphism.

Cao H(1), Hegele RA.

Author information: 
(1)Blackburn Cardiovascular Genetics Laboratory, John P. Robarts Research
Institute, London, Ontario, Canada.

We found a novel A-->C change in codon 511 of the ARNT gene, which predicted the 
substitution of Asn (AAC) for Asp (GAC) at this position. Amplification using
mismatched primers allowed the ARNT D/N511 polymorphism to be detected by
digestion with endonuclease Tth111I. The frequency of the ARNT N511 allele was
0.019 in Caucasians and 0.026 in Africans. Because of the importance of the ARNT 
gene product in the metabolism of xenobiotics, this polymorphism may be useful in
the study of associations with metabolic phenotypes and in pharmacogenetic
studies.

PMID: 10721670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Vitam Horm. 2000;59:241-64.

The aromatic hydrocarbon receptor, transcription, and endocrine aspects of dioxin
action.

Okino ST(1), Whitlock JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
California 94305, USA.

The widespread and persistent environmental contaminant
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin elicits adaptive and adverse biological
responses by inducing changes in gene transcription. Some of dioxin's effects
reflect disruption of endocrine homeostasis. The aromatic hydrocarbon receptor
protein, together with its heterodimerization partner, the aromatic hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator protein, mediates dioxin action. There are notable 
similarities between the mechanism of dioxin action and the mechanisms of
steroid/retinoid/thyroid hormone action. Studies of dioxin action may provide
insights into the regulation of hormone-responsive genes and endocrine
physiology.

PMID: 10714242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 10;275(10):6922-7.

Identification of alternative spliced variants of human hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha.

Gothié E(1), Richard DE, Berra E, Pagès G, Pouysségur J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Signaling, Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, CNRS UMR
6543, Centre Antoine Lacassagne, 33 Avenue Valombrose, 06189 Nice, France.
gothie@unice.fr

Mammalian cells are able to sense oxygen and regulate a number of genes in
response to hypoxia. The transcription factor Hypoxia Inducible Factor-1 (HIF-1) 
was identified as an important key component of the hypoxia signaling pathway.
HIF-1 is a heterodimer composed of two members of the basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor superfamily containing a PAS (PER-ARNT-SIM) domain:
HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta/ARNT. During the cloning by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction of the human HIF-1alpha subunit, we
isolated two cDNA clones which corresponded to alternative splicing of the
HIF-1alpha gene. Polymerase chain reaction analysis and sequencing revealed that 
both clones possessed three additional base pairs between exons 1 and 2. Also,
one of them lacked 127 base pairs corresponding to exon 14. We demonstrate that
the mRNA of this truncated form is expressed in several human cells lines and
human skin but apparently not in rodents. When transfected in HEK 293 cells, the 
corresponding 736 amino acid protein (HIF-1alpha(736)) is regulated by hypoxia in
a similar manner as the full-length HIF-1alpha (HIF-1alpha(FL)). In luciferase
transfection assays, both recombinant proteins HIF-1alpha(736) and HIF-1alpha(FL)
dimerize with HIF-1beta/ARNT and activate the VEGF promoter upon hypoxia.
However, the shorter HIF-1alpha isoform is 3-fold less active than
HIF-1alpha(FL), a result consistent with the lack of the C-terminal
transactivation domain. As expected, this small isoform can compete with the
endogenous and transfected full-length HIF-1alpha. Altogether, these results
suggest that the HIF-1alpha(736) isoform modulates gene expression upon hypoxia.

PMID: 10702253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 3;275(9):6381-7.

Cardiovascular basic helix loop helix factor 1, a novel transcriptional repressor
expressed preferentially in the developing and adult cardiovascular system.

Chin MT(1), Maemura K, Fukumoto S, Jain MK, Layne MD, Watanabe M, Hsieh CM, Lee
ME.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Developmental Cardiovascular Biology, Cardiovascular Program of
Developmental Cardiovascular Biology, Cardiology Division, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We have cloned a cardiovascular-restricted basic helix-loop-helix factor that
interacts with arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) in a yeast
two-hybrid screen. Cardiovascular helix-loop-helix factor 1 (CHF1) is distantly
related to the hairy family of transcriptional repressors. We analyzed its
expression pattern during mouse embryo development. At day 8.5, the expression of
CHF1 is first detected in the primitive ventricle of the primordial heart tube
and persists throughout gestation. In rat hearts, this expression is
down-regulated after birth, concurrent with terminal differentiation of
cardiomyocytes. In the developing vasculature, CHF1 first appears in the dorsal
aorta at day 9.0, which precedes the reported expression of smooth muscle cell
markers, and persists into adulthood. In an in vitro system of smooth muscle cell
differentiation, CHF1 mRNA was barely detectable in undifferentiated cells but
was induced highly in differentiated smooth muscle cells. To determine whether
CHF1 might affect the function of ARNT, we performed transfection studies.
Co-transfection of CHF1 inhibited ARNT/EPAS1-dependent transcription by 85%, and 
this inhibition is dose-dependent. In electrophoretic mobility studies, CHF1
inhibited the binding of the ARNT/EPAS1 heterodimer to its target site. Our data 
suggest that CHF1 functions as a transcriptional repressor and may play an
important role in cardiovascular development.

PMID: 10692439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Neurosci. 2000 Mar 1;20(5):1746-53.

dCLOCK is present in limiting amounts and likely mediates daily interactions
between the dCLOCK-CYC transcription factor and the PER-TIM complex.

Bae K(1), Lee C, Hardin PE, Edery I.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Microbiology, Rutgers University, Center for Advanced
Biotechnology and Medicine, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

In Drosophila melanogaster four circadian clock proteins termed PERIOD (PER),
TIMELESS (TIM), dCLOCK (dCLK), and CYCLE (CYC/dBMAL1) function in a
transcriptional feedback loop that is a core element of the oscillator mechanism.
dCLK and CYC are members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/PAS (PER-ARNT-SIM) 
superfamily of transcription factors and are required for high-level expression
of per and tim and repression of dClk, whereas PER and TIM inhibit
dCLK-CYC-mediated transcription and lead to the activation of dClk. To understand
further the dynamic regulation within the circadian oscillator mechanism, we
biochemically characterized in vivo-produced CYC, determined the interactions of 
the four clock proteins, and calculated their absolute levels as a function of
time. Our results indicate that throughout a daily cycle the majority of the dCLK
present in adult heads stably interacts with CYC, indicating that CYC is the
primary in vivo partner of dCLK. dCLK-CYC dimers are bound by PER and TIM during 
the late evening and early morning, suggesting the formation of a tetrameric
complex with impaired transcriptional activity. Although dCLK is present in
limiting amounts and CYC is by far the most abundant of the four clock proteins
that have been examined, PER and TIM appear to interact preferentially with dCLK.
Our results suggest that dCLK is the main component regulating the daily
abundance of transcriptionally active dCLK-CYC complexes.

PMID: 10684876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 18;275(7):4618-27.

A redox mechanism controls differential DNA binding activities of
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) 1alpha and the HIF-like factor.

Lando D(1), Pongratz I, Poellinger L, Whitelaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Adelaide, Adelaide 5005, South
Australia.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and the HIF-like factor (HLF) are
two highly related basic Helix-Loop-Helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH/PAS) homology
transcription factors that undergo dramatically increased function at low oxygen 
levels. Despite strong similarities in their activation mechanisms (e.g. they
both undergo rapid hypoxia-induced protein stabilization, bind identical target
DNA sequences, and induce synthetic reporter genes to similar degrees), they are 
both essential for embryo survival via distinct functions during vascularization 
(HIF-1alpha) or catecholamine production (HLF). It is currently unknown how such 
specificity of action is achieved. We report here that DNA binding by HLF, but
not by HIF-1alpha, is dependent upon reducing redox conditions. In vitro DNA
binding and mammalian two-hybrid assays showed that a unique cysteine in the
DNA-binding basic region of HLF is a target for the reducing activity of redox
factor Ref-1. Although the N-terminal DNA-binding domain of HIF-1alpha can
function in the absence of Ref-1, we found that the C-terminal region containing 
the transactivation domain requires Ref-1 for full activity. Our data reveal that
the hypoxia-inducible factors are subject to complex redox control mechanisms
that can target discrete regions of the proteins and are the first to establish a
discriminating control mechanism for differential regulation of HIF-1alpha and
HLF activity.

PMID: 10671489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. FEBS Lett. 2000 Jan 21;466(1):80-6.

Different transcriptional properties of mSim-1 and mSim-2.

Moffett P(1), Pelletier J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, 3655 Drummond St., Montreal,
Que., Canada.

The mSim-1 and mSim-2 gene products are mammalian homologues of the Drosophila
Sim gene. The dSim gene product transactivates through a DNA binding site known
as the CNS midline enhancer (CME) element. We have investigated the
transcriptional properties of mSIM-1 and mSIM-2 mediated through the CME element 
in concert with their dimerization partners, ARNT and ARNT-2. The mSIM-1/ARNT
heterodimer transactivates reporter constructs via the ARNT carboxy-terminus.
However, mSIM-2 quenches ARNT transactivation. We find that mSIM-2 competes with 
mSIM-1 for binding to ARNT, suggesting a possible antagonism between these
transcription factors.

PMID: 10648817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Mech Dev. 2000 Feb;90(2):253-61.

ARNT2 acts as the dimerization partner of SIM1 for the development of the
hypothalamus.

Michaud JL(1), DeRossi C, May NR, Holdener BC, Fan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montréal, Canada.

One major function of the hypothalamus is to maintain homeostasis by modulating
the secretion of pituitary hormones. The paraventricular (PVN) and supraoptic
(SON) nuclei are major integration centers for the output of the hypothalamus to 
the pituitary. The bHLH-PAS transcription factor SIM1 is crucial for the
development of several neuroendocrine lineages within the PVN and SON. bHLH-PAS
proteins require heterodimerization for their function. ARNT, ARNT2, and BMAL1
are the three known general heterodimerization partners for bHLH-PAS proteins.
Here, we provide evidence that Sim1 and Arnt2 form dimers in vitro, that they are
co-expressed in the PVN and SON, and that their loss of function affects the
development of the same sets of neuroendocrine cell types within the PVN and SON.
Together, these results implicate ARNT2 as the in vivo dimerization partner of
SIM1 in controlling the development of these neuroendocrine lineages.

PMID: 10640708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Toxicol Sci. 1999 Dec;52(2):217-25.

Differential gene expression in wild-type and arnt-defective mouse hepatoma
(Hepa1c1c7) cells.

Seidel SD(1), Denison MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis 95616,
USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (Arnt) is a basic helix-loop-helix
(per/Arnt/Ahr/sim) PAS-containing protein that can heterodimerize with the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha, and other
PAS-containing proteins to form transcriptionally active complexes. To identify
the genes whose expression is modulated by Arnt, we used the technique of
differential display to compare the expression of genes in wild-type and
Arnt-defective (BPRc1) mouse hepatoma (Hepa1c1c7) cells. Here we report two gene 
products whose expression was reduced in BPRc1 cells (a WW domain-binding,
protein-like factor and one unknown gene product) when compared to wild-type
cells, and two that were elevated (Steel factor and a serpin-like protein).
Comparison of the relative expression of these gene products between two
independently-derived, Arnt-defective cell lines, as well as in BPRc1 cells in
which Arnt expression was restored by a stably integrated Arnt-expression
plasmid, revealed that each gene was expressed in an Arnt-independent manner. Our
results clearly demonstrate that gene expression in the variant cell clones is
distinctly different from that of the parental wild-type Hepa1c1c7 cells from
which they were derived and involves genes in addition to, and unrelated to, that
of Arnt. The identification of these differentially expressed gene products
suggests that caution should be exercised when using these variant cell lines to 
confirm the role of the AhR/Arnt-signaling pathway in a given cellular response.

PMID: 10630574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Behav Brain Res. 2000 Jan;107(1-2):21-33.

Intracranial self-stimulation and sucrose intake differ as hedonic measures
following chronic mild stress: interstrain and interindividual differences.

Nielsen CK(1), Arnt J, Sánchez C.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacological Research, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark.
ckn@lundbeck.com

The present study was designed to assess the utility of sucrose intake and
intracranial self-stimulation (ICSS) as hedonic measures for chronic mild stress 
(CMS) induced behavioural deficits. Wistar and PVG hooded rats were exposed to a 
variety of mild stressors, e.g. periods of food and/or water deprivation, soiled 
cage, light/dark reversal, confinement to small cages and pairing, during 6-9
weeks. The intake of 1% sucrose solution was significantly reduced in stressed
PVG hooded rats compared to control animals. The sucrose intake in stressed
Wistar rats remained unaltered, indicating that CMS-induced decreases in sucrose 
intake are strain dependent. However, sucrose intake has in our experience been
shown to be unreliable as the observed decreases following CMS were inconsistent 
over time. ICSS behaviour was evaluated from rate/frequency functions by
determining the frequency that supported 50% of maximal response rate. Neither
the Wistar nor the PVG hooded rats showed an overall decrease in ICSS behaviour
following CMS. However, the ICSS measures revealed interindividual differences in
both rat strains. In the stress groups a subgroup (14 +/- 2.4%) of rats
progressively exhibited an attenuated ICSS behaviour. These findings may reflect 
the interindividual variability observed in humans as stress does not invariably 
lead to depression. The model may in its present form be used to study the
pathophysiology of depressive disorders. However, the utility of the CMS model to
study antidepressant drug actions has to be questioned. Our results show there is
a need for rat strains in which there is a greater sensitivity for detecting
stress effects. It emphasises the fact that replication of CMS-induced decreases 
in ICSS behaviour can be as problematic as inducing decreases in sucrose intake.

PMID: 10628727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2000 Jan 1;373(1):163-74.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacts with estrogen receptor alpha and orphan
receptors COUP-TFI and ERRalpha1.

Klinge CM(1), Kaur K, Swanson HI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Louisville School of Medicine,
Louisville, Kentucky, 40292, USA. carolyn.klinge@louisville.edu

The molecular mechanisms underlying the apparent "cross-talk" between estrogen
receptor (ER)- and arylhydrocarbon receptor (AHR)-mediated activities are
unknown. To determine how AHR ligand 2, 3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) 
may inhibit ER action and, conversely, to examine how 17-beta-estradiol (E(2))
affects AHR activity, we examined discrete activities of each receptor, i.e.,
protein-protein interactions, DNA binding, and transcriptional activation. We
report that AHR interacts directly with ERalpha, COUP-TF, and ERRalpha1, in a
ligand-specific manner in vitro. Unoccupied or beta-napthoflavone
(beta-NF)-occupied AHR showed stronger interaction with ERalpha, COUP-TF, and
ERRalpha1 than when AHR was occupied by the partial antagonist
alpha-naphthoflavone (alpha-NF), indicating a role for ligand in AHR interaction 
with these proteins. We also report that AHR interacts with COUP-TF in
transfected CV-1 cells. In contrast, the AHR nuclear translocator protein (ARNT) 
did not interact with COUP-TF, ERRalpha1, or ERalpha. We next examined the
interaction of either ERalpha or COUP-TF with a consensus xenobiotic response
element (XRE). Purified ERalpha did not bind the consensus XRE, but COUP-TFI
bound the consensus XRE, suggesting a role for COUP-TF as a AHR/ARNT competitor
for XRE binding. In transiently transfected MCF-7 human breast cancer cells,
overexpression of COUP-TFI inhibited TCDD-activated reporter gene activity from
the CYP1A1 promoter. TCDD inhibited estradiol (E(2))-activated reporter gene
activity from a consensus ERE and from the EREs in the pS2 and Fos genes, and
COUP-TFI did not block the antiestrogenic activity of TCDD. The specific
interaction of COUP-TF with XREs and AHR together with the inhibition of
TCDD-induced gene expression by COUP-TF suggests that COUP-TF may regulate AHR
action both by direct DNA binding competition and through protein-protein
interactions.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10620335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1999 Nov 25;157(1-2):105-19.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)/AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) heterodimer
interacts with naturally occurring estrogen response elements.

Klinge CM(1), Bowers JL, Kulakosky PC, Kamboj KK, Swanson HI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Louisville
School of Medicine, KY 40292, USA. carolyn.klinge@louisville.edu

To determine the molecular mechanisms underlying the "cross talk" between the
activity of 2,3,7,8-tetra-chlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), which binds to
arylhydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and estradiol (E2)-liganded estrogen receptor
(ER), we first examined the initial step of estrogen action, ligand binding to
ER. None of the AHR ligands tested, i.e. TCDD, benzo[a]pyrene,
3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl, beta-naphthoflavone, or alpha-naphthoflavone,
bound to ER alpha. We report the first examination of TCDD interaction with ER
beta: TCDD did not displace E2 from ER beta. We then examined a second possible
mechanism, i.e. direct inhibition of ER alpha binding to estrogen response
elements (EREs) by the AHR/AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) complex. The AHR/ARNT 
heterodimer did not bind either a full or half-site ERE. However, AHR/ARNT bound 
specifically to oligomers containing naturally occurring EREs derived from the
human c-fos, pS2, and progesterone receptor (PR) gene promoters that include
xenobiotic response element (XRE)-like sequences. In contrast, neither purified
E2-liganded-ER from calf uterus or recombinant human ER alpha bound a consensus
XRE. TCDD inhibited E2-activated reporter gene activity from a consensus ERE and 
from EREs in the pS2, PR, and Fos genes in transiently transfected MCF-7 human
breast cancer cells. However, this inhibition was not reciprocal since E2 did not
inhibit TCDD-stimulated luciferase activity from the CYP1A1 promoter in
transiently transfected MCF-7 or human endometrial carcinoma HEC-1A cells. We
propose that at least part of the mechanism by which the AHR/ARNT complex
inhibits estrogen action is by competitively inhibiting ER alpha binding to
imperfect ERE sites, adjacent to or overlapping XREs.

PMID: 10619402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Mol Pharmacol. 2000 Jan;57(1):82-92.

Role of heat shock protein 90 dissociation in mediating agonist-induced
activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor.

Heid SE(1), Pollenz RS, Swanson HI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Kentucky Medical Center, Lexington, 
Kentucky, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a cytosolic basic helix-loop-helix protein
that associates with a chaperone complex that includes two molecules of heat
shock protein 90 (HSP90). It has been hypothesized that after ligand binding, the
AhR dissociates from its chaperone complex and translocates into the nucleus,
where it heterodimerizes with its DNA binding partner, the AhR nuclear
translocator (ARNT), and activates specific genes. However, it remains unclear
whether nuclear translocation of the AhR occurs before or after dissociation of
the HSP90/chaperone complex. Because sodium molybdate stabilizes the AhR-HSP90
interaction and inhibits the gene activation of a number of steroid receptors, we
reasoned that molybdate would be a useful tool in delineating the role of HSP90
dissociation in AhR nuclear translocation. In this study, we demonstrate that
molybdate inhibits AhR gene activation in both HepG2 and Hepa-1 cells in a
concentration-dependent manner and protects the AhR against agonist-induced
proteolysis. In addition, we demonstrate that AhR/ARNT dimerization, but not
nuclear translocation of the AhR, is inhibited by molybdate. This indicates that 
1) HSP90 dissociation is not required for nuclear translocation of the AhR, 2)
HSP90 dissociation is essential for formation of the AhR/ARNT heterodimer, and 3)
an additional undefined regulatory step is required for AhR/ARNT dimerization in 
the nucleus.

PMID: 10617682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Endocrinology. 2000 Jan;141(1):450-3.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor of
the PAS gene family, is required for normal ovarian germ cell dynamics in the
mouse.

Robles R(1), Morita Y, Mann KK, Perez GI, Yang S, Matikainen T, Sherr DH, Tilly
JL.

Author information: 
(1)Vincent Center for Reproductive Biology, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston 02114, 
USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), so-designated based on the ability of the
protein to bind with and be activated by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH)
and related halogenated hydrocarbons, is part of an emerging family of
ligand-activated transcriptional regulators that are distinct from the
steroid-thyroid hormone receptor superfamily. Once bound by ligand, the AhR
interacts with the AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT) protein to form the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor complex (AHRC). Both subunits of the AHRC contain sequences 
corresponding to basic helix-loop-helix domains, a motif that is shared by a
number of other dimeric transcription factors. Although the natural ligand(s) for
the AhR remains to be elucidated, to date over fifteen genes, including enzymes, 
growth factors and other transcription factors, have been identified as potential
targets for transcriptional regulation by the chemically-activated AHRC. In the
ovary, PAH exposure is known to cause destruction of oocytes within immature
follicles, implying that one function of the AhR is to mediate cell death
signaling in the female germ line. To assess this possibility, we explored AhR
expression patterns in the murine ovary, and then determined the impact of
AhR-deficiency (gene knockout) on female germ cell dynamics. Immunohistochemical 
analysis of ovaries of wild-type female mice indicated that AhR protein was
abundantly and exclusively expressed in oocytes and granulosa cells of follicles 
at all stages of development. Histomorphometric analysis of serial ovarian
sections revealed a two-fold higher number of primordial follicles in Ahr-null
versus wild-type females at day 4 postpartum. This phenotype likely results from 
a cell-intrinsic death defect in the developing germ line since AhR-deficiency
attenuated the magnitude of oocyte apoptosis in fetal ovaries cultured without
hormonal support for 72 h. We propose that the AhR, activated by an as yet
unknown endogenous ligand(s), serves to regulate the size of the oocyte reserve
endowed at birth by affecting germ cell death during female gametogenesis.

PMID: 10614669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Leukemia. 1999 Dec;13(12):1975-81.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of chromosome 1 abnormalities in
hematopoietic disorders: rearrangements of DNA satellite II and new recurrent
translocations.

Busson-Le Coniat M(1), Salomon-Nguyen F, Dastugue N, Maarek O, Lafage-Pochitaloff
M, Mozziconacci MJ, Baranger L, Brizard F, Radford I, Jeanpierre M, Bernard OA,
Berger R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U434 and CNRS SD401 No. 434, CEPH, Institut de Génétique Moléculaire,
Paris, France.

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis, breakpoints involving the long
arm of chromosome 1 (1q) were localized in 36 patients with various hematopoietic
disorders and rearrangements of the proximal part of 1q, as ascertained with
banding techniques. The breakpoint was localized within the satellite II (sat II)
domain in 14 patients with various abnormalities, between the sat II domain and
the BCL9 locus in eight, between the BCL9 and ARNT loci in two, between sat II
and ARNT in two others, and distal to ARNT in seven. A dicentric chromosome 1 was
present in two patients. A high incidence of heterochromatin heteromorphism of
chromosome 1 was present in this series. Two recurrent translocations were
identified, t(1;2)(q12;q37) in three patients suffering from three different
acute leukemia subtypes, and t(1;16)(q12;q24) in two patients with different
diseases. Two patients had jumping translocations. Most of the rearrangements of 
1q were secondary abnormalities, included in complex karyotypes. The roles of
methylation, interactions with the proteins interfering with heterochromatin and 
possible gene silencing due to heterochromatin rearrangements are discussed.

PMID: 10602418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 17;274(51):36351-6.

Degradation of the basic helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-Sim homology domain dioxin
receptor via the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway.

Roberts BJ(1), Whitelaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia 5005. broberts@biochem.adelaide.edu.au

The basic helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-Sim homology domain dioxin receptor (DR)
translocates to the nucleus upon binding of aromatic hydrocarbon ligands typified
by dioxin, whereupon it partners the Ah receptor nuclear translocator and
initiates transcription. Concurrently, ligand binding down-regulates receptor
levels via an unknown mechanism. In this study we show that receptor levels are
dependent upon cellular compartmentalization, with entry into the nucleus leading
to the rapid destruction of the DR. Ligand-induced DR translocation was bypassed 
by adding a heterologous nuclear localization signal to the DR, creating a
constitutively nuclear form of the dioxin receptor (DRNLS). The DRNLS protein was
shown to be unstable with a half-life of </=1 h whether partnering ARNT or HSP90.
Thus, the structural changes induced by ligand binding have no inherent effect on
DR stability but are critical in transporting the receptor prior to degradation. 
The proteolytic pathway that degrades the nuclear receptor is suggested to
involve ubiquitination as it was inhibited by the proteasome inhibitor MG132 or
co-expression of DRNLS with the ubiquitin mutant UbK48R. Incubation of cells
expressing DRNLS with the phosphatase inhibitor calyculin resulted in the rapid
phosphorylation and ubiquitination of DRNLS, suggesting that a nuclear kinase is 
required to trigger receptor proteolysis. Overall, this study demonstrates a
novel mechanism of proteolysis whereby the simple relocation of a transcription
factor from cytoplasm to nucleus initiates its rapid destruction.

PMID: 10593927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999 Dec 1;161(2):123-39.

Metabolism-based polycyclic aromatic acetylene inhibition of CYP1B1 in 10T1/2
cells potentiates aryl hydrocarbon receptor activity.

Alexander DL(1), Zhang L, Foroozesh M, Alworth WL, Jefcoate CR.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Toxicology Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, 
53705, USA.

We have used polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) alkyne metabolism-based
inhibitors to test whether CYP1B1 metabolism is linked to aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) activation in mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEF). 1-ethynylpyrene
(1EP) selectively inactivated CYP1B1 dimethylbenzanthracene (DMBA) metabolism in 
C3H10T1/2 MEFs; whereas 1-(1-propynyl)pyrene (1PP) preferentially inhibited
CYP1A1 activity in Hepa-1c1c7 mouse hepatoma cells (Hepa). In each cell type >90%
inhibition of DMBA metabolism after 1 h treatment with each inhibitor (0.1
microM) was progressively reversed and then increased to levels seen with
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) induction (fourfold stimulation). It
was found that 0.1 microM 1EP and 1PP maximally induce CYP1B1 and CYP1A1 mRNA
levels in10T1/2 and Hepa cells, respectively, after 6 h. 1-Ethylpyrene (EtP),
which lacks the activatable acetylene moiety, was far less effective as an
inhibitor and as an inducer. AhR activation is essential for 1EP induction as
evidenced by the use of AhR antagonists and AhR-deficient MEFs and absence of
induction following inhibition of DMBA metabolism with carbon monoxide (CO).
Inhibition of CYP1B1 was linked to enhanced AhR activation even at early stages
prior to significant ligand depletion. 1EP and EtP were similarly effective in
stimulating AhR nuclear translocation, though 5-10 times slower compared with
TCDD, and produced no significant down-regulation of the AhR. TCDD activated
AhR/Arnt complex formation with an oligonucleotide xenobiotic response element
far more extensively than 1EP or EtP, even at concentrations of 1EP that
increased CYP1B1 mRNA to similar levels. CO did not influence these responses to 
EtP, event hough CO treatment potentiated EtP induction of CYP1B1 mRNA. These
differences suggest a fundamental difference between PAH/AhR and TCDD/AhR
complexes where CYP1B1 metabolic activity regulates the potency, rather than the 
formation of the AhR/Arnt complex.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10581206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Mol Pharmacol. 1999 Dec;56(6):1127-37.

Analysis of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated signaling during physiological
hypoxia reveals lack of competition for the aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator
transcription factor.

Pollenz RS(1), Davarinos NA, Shearer TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29403, USA. pollenzr@musc.edu

The aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT) protein functions as a
transcription factor after dimerization with other basic helix-loop-helix
proteins. Thus, dimerization of ARNT within one pathway may limit the
availability of this protein to others. To investigate this issue, aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)-mediated signaling was investigated in mouse (Hepa-1),
rat (H4IIE), and human (HepG2) hepatoma cell lines undergoing physiologically
induced hypoxia (<1% O(2)). Basal levels of ARNT protein were not affected by
hypoxia in any cell line, and ARNT remained exclusively nuclear. Furthermore,
quantitative Western blotting revealed that the concentration of ARNT sequestered
during hypoxia represented a small fraction of the total ARNT protein pool (12
and 15% in Hepa-1 and H4 cells, respectively). When the AHR-mediated signaling
pathway was activated during hypoxia by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, the 
induction of P4501A1 protein was reduced by 55% without changes in the level of
mRNA in Hepa-1 cells, whereas the levels of induction of both P4501A1 protein and
CYP1A1 mRNA were reduced by >80% in the H4 cell line. Importantly, gel mobility
shift analysis and Western blotting showed that the same level of AHR/ARNT
complexes could be detected in cells treated with
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin during hypoxia and normoxia. These data
suggest that the effects of hypoxia on AHR-mediated gene regulation occur distal 
to the formation of AHR/ARNT complexes and imply that functional interference
between hypoxia and AHR-mediated signaling does not occur through competition for
ARNT protein.

PMID: 10570039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 19;274(47):33814-24.

Identification and functional characterization of two highly divergent aryl
hydrocarbon receptors (AHR1 and AHR2) in the teleost Fundulus heteroclitus.
Evidence for a novel subfamily of ligand-binding basic helix loop
helix-Per-ARNT-Sim (bHLH-PAS) factors.

Karchner SI(1), Powell WH, Hahn ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole,
Massachusetts 02543, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
through which 2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related compounds
cause altered gene expression and toxicity. The AHR belongs to an emerging
multigene family of transcription factors possessing basic helix loop helix
(bHLH) and Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) domains. Most bHLH-PAS proteins occur as duplicates
or "paralog groups" in mammals, but only a single mammalian AHR has been
identified. Here we report the cDNA cloning of two distinct AHRs, designated
FhAHR1 and FhAHR2, from a single vertebrate species, the teleost Fundulus
heteroclitus (Atlantic killifish). Both Fundulus AHR proteins possess bHLH and
PAS domains that are closely related to those of the mammalian AHR. FhAHR1 and
FhAHR2 are highly divergent (40% overall amino acid identity; 61% identity in the
N-terminal half), suggesting that they arose from a gene duplication predating
the divergence of mammals and fish. Photoaffinity labeling with
2-azido-3-[(125)I]iodo-7, 8-dibromodibenzo-p-dioxin and velocity sedimentation
analysis using 2,3,7,8-[1,6-(3)H]TCDD showed that both FhAHR1 and FhAHR2 exhibit 
specific, high-affinity binding of dioxins. Both AHRs also showed specific, TCDD-
and ARNT-dependent interactions with a mammalian xenobiotic response element. The
two Fundulus AHR genes displayed different tissue-specific patterns of
expression; FhAHR1 transcripts were primarily expressed in brain, heart, ovary,
and testis, while FhAHR2 transcripts were equally abundant in many tissues.
Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that Fundulus AHR1 is an ortholog of mammalian
AHRs, while AHR2 forms in Fundulus and other fish are paralogous to Fundulus AHR1
and the mammalian AHRs and thus represent a novel vertebrate subfamily of
ligand-binding AHRs.

PMID: 10559277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Nov 15;371(2):246-59.

Lack of an absolute requirement for the native aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
and AhR nuclear translocator transactivation domains in protein kinase C-mediated
modulation of the AhR pathway.

Long WP(1), Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Toxicology, Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Protein kinase C (PKC)-mediated modulation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
pathway was examined in CHOK1-derived L10.I cells stably transfected with the
pGUDLUC6.1 reporter; pGUDLUC6.1 is solely controlled by four dioxin-responsive
enhancer elements. Co treatment of L10.I cells with 10 nM 2,3,7,
8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and 81 nM phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
(PMA), an activator of sn-1,2-diacylglyerol binding PKCs, enhanced
transactivation of the reporter construct several-fold relative to cells treated 
with a saturating 10 nM TCDD dose alone; this effect was dubbed the "PMA effect."
A domain swapping and deletional analysis of the native AhR and AhR nuclear
translocator (ARNT) protein transactivation domains (TADs) was performed to
determine if these domains are absolutely required for the AhR x ARNT
dimer-mediated PMA effect in the L10.I model system; controls demonstrate the
suitability of the L10.I model for these analyses and that endogenous AhR and
ARNT levels are extremely low in this model. Transient coexpression of the AhR
and ARNT-474-FLAG, an ARNT protein lacking the native ARNT TAD, in L10.I cells
reveals the native ARNT TAD is not absolutely required for the AhR x
ARNT-474-FLAG dimer to mediate the PMA effect. Transient coexpression of
AhRDeltaCVP, a chimeric AhR protein in which the native AhR TAD has been replaced
with the VP16 (herpes simplex virus protein 16) TAD (which control experiments
demonstrate is unaffected by PMA), and ARNT in L10.I cells indicates that the
native AhR TAD is not absolutely required for this AhRDeltaCVP x ARNT dimer to
mediate the PMA effect. These observations strongly suggest that PKC-mediated
modulation of the AhR pathway is not absolutely dependent on coactivators
recruited to the AhR. ARNT dimer by the native TADs of the AhR and its
heterodimerization partner ARNT.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10545212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999 Nov 1;160(3):297-303.

A human aryl hydrocarbon receptor signaling pathway constructed in yeast displays
additive responses to ligand mixtures.

Miller CA 3rd(1).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Sciences Department, Tulane University School of Public
Health and Tropical Medicine, Tulane-Xavier Center for Bioenvironmental Research,
1430 Tulane Avenue, New Orleans, Louisiana, 70112, USA.

An optimized signal transduction pathway that reproduces the response of human
aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor to ligands has been established in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Ligand treatment induced a 50-fold increase in beta-galactosidase
activity from a reporter plasmid in yeast engineered to express human Ah receptor
and Ah nuclear translocator (Arnt) proteins. The archetypal Ah receptor ligand,
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo(p)dioxin, activated Ah receptor and induced lacZ
reporter activity at concentrations of >/=0.3 nM. Mixtures of halogenated and
nonhalogenated Ah receptor ligands produced additive signaling responses in this 
yeast bioassay. These results were consistent with the existence of a common
binding site and mechanism of ligand-mediated Ah receptor activation. Although
yeast have no natural counterpart to the Ah receptor pathway, expression of human
Ah receptor and Arnt under the appropriate conditions provides a functional model
system for studying Ah receptor activation and signal transduction.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10544064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. FEBS Lett. 1999 Oct 29;460(2):251-6.

Hypoxia-induced activation of HIF-1: role of HIF-1alpha-Hsp90 interaction.

Minet E(1), Mottet D, Michel G, Roland I, Raes M, Remacle J, Michiels C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Cellulaire, Facultés Universitaires de la
Paix, 61 rue de Bruxelles, 5000, Namur, Belgium. emmanuel.minet@fundp.ac.be

The protein chaperone heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is a major regulator of
different transcription factors such as MyoD, a basic helix loop helix (bHLH)
protein, and the bHLH-Per-aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT)-Sim (PAS) 
factors Sim and aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Ahr). The transcription factor
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha), involved in the response to
hypoxia, also belongs to the bHLH-PAS family. This work was aimed to investigate 
the putative role of Hsp90 in HIF-1 activation by hypoxia. Using a
EGFP-HIF-1alpha fusion protein, co-immunoprecipitation experiments evidenced that
the chimeric protein expressed in COS-7 cells interacts with Hsp90 in normoxia
but not in hypoxia. We also demonstrated that Hsp90 interacts with the bHLH-PAS
domain of HIF-1alpha. Moreover, Hsp90 is not co-translocated with HIF-1alpha into
the nucleus. At last, we showed that Hsp90 activity is essential for HIF-1
activation in hypoxia since it is inhibited in the presence of geldanamycin.
These results indicate that Hsp90 is a major regulator in HIF-1alpha activation.

PMID: 10544245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999 Nov 1;160(3):231-7.

Expression of the arylhydrocarbon receptor and the arylhydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator during early gestation in the rabbit uterus.

Tscheudschilsuren G(1), Hombach-Klonisch S, Küchenhoff A, Fischer B, Klonisch T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Martin Luther University Faculty of Medicine, Halle
(Saale), D-06097, Germany.

The arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and the arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (ARNT) are members of the PAS gene family mediating toxic effects of
xenobiotics such as dioxin and polychlorinated biphenyls. We have analyzed the
expression and cellular distribution of rabbit AhR and ARNT mRNA and protein
level in the nonpregnant uterus and the pregnant and pseudopregnant uterus at
Days 6 to 12 of gestation. In the preimplantation uterus at Day 6 of gestation
and in the interimplantation and pseudopregnant uterus at Days 7, 8, 9, and 12 of
gestation, low levels of AhR transcripts were detected in the glandular uterine
epithelium. Upon attachment of the blastocyst at Day 7 of gestation, a strong
expression of AhR and ARNT mRNA was observed in the luminal and glandular
epithelium of the antimesometrial uterine compartment. In contrast, AhR and ARNT 
expression was low in the luminal epithelium of the paraplacental and the
mesometrial placental fold. AhR mRNA was also detected in the trophoblast cells. 
During early placentation at Day 9 of gestation, expression of AhR and ARNT was
first observed in the perivascular decidualized stromal cells and, at Day 12,
extended to the decidualized stromal cells of the placental bed. Within the
placenta, the syncytiotrophoblast expressed only low levels of AhR and ARNT mRNA 
and no protein. The specific expression patterns of AhR and ARNT during early
gestation suggest functional roles for both transcription factors during
feto-maternal interactions in the rabbit.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10544057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Genes Dev. 1999 Oct 1;13(19):2478-83.

Multilineage embryonic hematopoiesis requires hypoxic ARNT activity.

Adelman DM(1), Maltepe E, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI),
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Although most cells undergo growth arrest during hypoxia, endothelial cells and
placental cytotrophoblasts proliferate in response to low O(2). We demonstrate
that proliferation of embryonic multilineage hematopoietic progenitors is also
regulated by a hypoxia-mediated signaling pathway. This pathway requires HIF-1
(HIF-1alpha/ARNT heterodimers) because Arnt(-/-) embryoid bodies fail to exhibit 
hypoxia-mediated progenitor proliferation. Furthermore, Arnt(-/-) embryos exhibit
decreased numbers of yolk sac hematopoietic progenitors. This defect is cell
extrinsic, is accompanied by a decrease in ARNT-dependent VEGF expression, and is
rescued by exogenous VEGF. Therefore, "physiologic hypoxia" encountered by
embryos is essential for the proliferation or survival of hematopoietic
precursors during development.

PMCID: PMC317070
PMID: 10521392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Life Sci. 1999;65(13):1339-49.

Differential response to benzo[A]pyrene in human lung adenocarcinoma cell lines: 
the absence of aryl hydrocarbon receptor activation.

Chang KW(1), Lee H, Wang HJ, Chen SY, Lin P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, Chung-Shan Medical and Dental College, Taichung,
Taiwan, ROC.

Benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P) has been shown to produce DNA adducts and to initiate
pulmonary carcinogenesis in animals. We observed differential susceptibility to
B[a]P in two human lung adenocarcinoma cell lines, A427 and CL3. DNA adducts were
induced by B[a]P treatment in CL3 cells, however, A427 cells were much less
responsive to B[a]P treatment. Cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1) is involved in
bioactivation of B[a]P in nonhepatic tissues. Cotreatment with
alpha-naphthoflavone, a CYP1A1 inhibitor, abolished DNA adduct formation by B[a]P
in CL3 cells. Nevertheless, CYP1A1 inducer beta-naphthoflavone, enhanced DNA
adduct formation by B[a]P in both A427 and CL3 cells. Both enzyme activity and
mRNA levels of CYP1A1 were highly induced by 1 or 10 microM B[a]P treatment for
24 hr in CL3 cells but not in A427 cells. Protein levels of AhR and aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) were similar in A427 and CL3
cells before B[a]P treatment. However, B[a]P induced a retarded band with the
[32P]-dioxin responsive element in CL3 cells, but not in A427 cells. This study
demonstrated that variation in AhR-mediated CYP1A1 induction contributes to
differential susceptibility to B[a]P-DNA adduct formation in human lung cells.
Since AhR and/or Arnt function is impaired in A427 cells, this cell line offers a
model for investigating the repression mechanisms of CYP1A1 induction by B[a]P in
lung cells.

PMID: 10503953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Hum Genet. 1999;44(5):293-9.

Transitional change in interaction between HIF-1 and HNF-4 in response to
hypoxia.

Zhang W(1), Tsuchiya T, Yasukochi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Japan. 
yyasmgen@mri.tmd.ac.jp

The roles of the erythropoietin (Epo) 3' enhancer in the activation of gene
expression in response to hypoxia were investigated. The enhancer contains
hypoxia-inducible enhancer binding site 1 (HIF-1 element) and two direct repeats 
of hexanucleotide consensus nuclear receptor half site (HNF-4 element). HIF-1,
which is a heterodimeric complex of HIF-1 alpha and aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translecator (ARNT), binds to HIF-1 element. HNF-4 binds to HNF-4 element
as a homodimeric complex. Studies on mutant reporter plasmids demonstrated that
both HIF-1 alpha and HNF-4 elements were necessary for augmentation of the
enhancer activity, since mutation of either the HIF-1 or the HNF-4 element caused
loss of inducibility under hypoxic conditions. Mammalian two-hybrid experiments
in vivo revealed that transitional change took place from the interaction of
HNF-4 with ARNT to that with HIF-1 alpha in response to hypoxia. Such interactive
domains were identified in amino acids 369-465 containing the C-terminal of HNF-4
and amino acids 1-458 containing basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and
Per-ARNT-AHR-Sim (PAS) domains of ARNT in normoxia. Also, an extended sequence
containing ligand and dimerization domains, and the C-terminal of HNF-4 (amino
acids 135-465), and the PAS domain (amino acids 106-526) of HIF-1 alpha were used
for the interaction between the two transcription factors in hypoxia. From these 
data, the functional significance of the transitional change in the augmentation 
of gene expression by the Epo enhancer in hypoxia is discussed.

PMID: 10496070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. IARC Sci Publ. 1999;(148):149-57.

Chapter 14. Ah receptor gene polymorphisms and human cancer susceptibility.

Garte S(1), Sogawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences Institute, UMDNJ, Piscataway,
NJ, USA.

The Ah receptor (Ahr) gene occupies a central role in the metabolic pathways
involved in the detoxification of important environmental carcinogens. The
structures of the rodent and human genes have been elucidated, and the molecular 
details of the receptor function, including its interaction with other proteins
such as Arnt and hsp90, have been thoroughly investigated. The Ahr gene is
polymorphic in mice and in humans. In mice, good correlations have been found
between structural polymorphisms in the gene and functional variants in various
genetic strains. In humans, work on polymorphisms and their possible role in gene
function as well as cancer susceptibility is just beginning.

PMID: 10493256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Exp Neurol. 1999 Sep;159(1):65-72.

HIF-1alpha and p53 promote hypoxia-induced delayed neuronal death in models of
CNS ischemia.

Halterman MW(1), Federoff HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Neurology, University
of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, New
York, 14642, USA.

Brain ischemia is a cause of substantial morbidity and mortality during the later
decades of life. In light of this, many studies have used in vitro and in vivo
models of acute necrosis to test candidate therapeutic agents. More recently, the
existence of a genetically programmed component of ischemic death has become
widely accepted. We have used molecular genetic approaches to investigate the
potential link between hypoxia-induced gene transcription and the delayed death
of ischemic neurons. Hypoxia-induced gene expression is an evolutionarily
conserved response comprising both transcriptional activation and
posttranscriptional and posttranslational stabilization events. Members of the
PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) family of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors have
been shown to regulate hypoxic transcripts in nonneuronal cultured lines.
However, evidence for ischemic activation of PAS proteins within the neuronal
compartment or possible involvement in neuronal death is lacking. The
tumor-suppressor protein p53 is a known transcriptional activator within the
central nervous system that is clearly involved in the pathologic response to
ischemia. This article will provide data that implicate the coordinate activities
of p53 and the PAS protein HIF-1alpha in driving ischemia-induced delayed
neuronal death. Background regarding mechanisms of ischemic neuronal death will
also be provided with special attention paid to the role of de novo gene
expression in promoting this pathologic sequence. The identification of the
HIF-1alpha/p53-mediated signaling pathway in neurons highlights a novel target
toward which anti-ischemic neuroprotective drug discovery can be applied.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10486175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Biochemistry. 1999 Aug 31;38(35):11490-500.

Regulation of constitutive gene expression through interactions of Sp1 protein
with the nuclear aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex.

Wang F(1), Wang W, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station 77843-4466, USA.

The region of residues -145 to -119 (CD/L) of the cathepsin D gene promoter
contains a GC-rich motif that binds Sp1 protein and an adjacent pentanucleotide
(CACGC) that corresponds to the core sequence of a dioxin responsive element
(DRE) and binds the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-AhR nuclear translocator
(Arnt) complex. This Sp1(N)(4)DRE(core) motif has been identified in promoters of
several genes in which Sp1 plays an important role in basal gene expression. In
transient transfection assays with MCF-7 human breast cancer cells using
wild-type pCD/L and constructs mutated in the core DRE (pCD/L(m1)) and Sp1
(pCD/L(m2)) sites, it was shown that both motifs were required for maximal basal 
activity. The requirements for AhR-Arnt interactions with Sp1 protein for maximal
activity of pCD/L were confirmed in wild-type MCF-7 and Hepa 1c1c7 cells and
Arnt-deficient Hepa 1c1c7 cells using antisense Arnt and Arnt expression
plasmids. The functional interactions of Sp1 with AhR-Arnt were paralleled by
physical interactions showing that AhR-Arnt and Sp1 proteins were
co-immunoprecipitated and AhR-Arnt enhanced Sp1-[(32)P]CD/L binding in
electrophoretic mobility shift assays. The physical and functional interactions
of Sp1 with AhR-Arnt proteins bound to the Sp1(N)(4)DRE(core) motif were also
dependent on the proximity of these sites, and both the activity and the extent
of Sp1-DNA binding decreased as the number of intervening nucleotides increased
from 4 to 20. These studies show that regulation of basal expression of some
genes by Sp1 may also require interactions with AhR-Arnt.

PMID: 10471301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Aug 1;27(15):3205-12.

Specificity of DNA binding of the c-Myc/Max and ARNT/ARNT dimers at the CACGTG
recognition site.

Swanson HI(1), Yang JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA. 
hswan@pop.uky.edu

Basic helix-loop-helix proteins that interact with the DNA recognition site
CACGTG include the c-Myc/Max heterodimer and the ARNT
(Ahreceptornucleartranslocator) homodimer. We have utilized a PCR-based protocol 
to identify high affinity binding sites of either the c-Myc/Max or ARNT/ARNT
dimers and analyzed the ability of these dimers to interact with their derived
consensus sequences and activate genes. chi(2)analysis of the selected DNA
recognition sites revealed that DNA binding of the ARNT homodimer is symmetric,
resulting in the consensus sequence RTCACGTGAY. Gel shift analysis demonstrated
that the flanking nucleotides play an important role in dictating DNA binding
affinity of the ARNT homodimer. These flanking sequences also regulate the
ability of ARNT to competitively displace the c-Myc/Max heterodimer from a
CACGTG-containing sequence. However, transient transfection analyses in CV-1
cells revealed that ARNT and c-Myc/Max exhibited similar abilities to activate
transcription through each other's consensus sequences. Taken together, these
results indicate that although binding affinity of these dimers for the CACGTG
core sequences may be differentially influenced by flanking nucleotides,
transcriptional activity may also be determined by other factors, such as
cellular concentrations of these proteins and their co-activators.

PMCID: PMC148549
PMID: 10454619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999 Aug 15;159(1):41-51.

Transactivation activity of human, zebrafish, and rainbow trout aryl hydrocarbon 
receptors expressed in COS-7 cells: greater insight into species differences in
toxic potency of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxin, dibenzofuran, and biphenyl
congeners.

Abnet CC(1), Tanguay RL, Heideman W, Peterson RE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy and Environmental Toxicology Center, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, 53706, USA.

Transactivation assays were used to compare the potency and efficacy of
polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxin (PCDD), dibenzofuran (PCDF), and biphenyl (PCB) 
congeners in activating aryl hydrocarbon receptors (AhRs) from rainbow trout
(rtAhR2alpha and rtAhR2beta), zebrafish (zfAhR2), and human (huAhR),
respectively. All AhRs were expressed with their species-specific AhR nuclear
translocator (ARNT) in COS-7 cells. Transactivation activity was determined for
two PCDD, two PCDF, and seven PCB congeners with each of the four AhR/ARNT pairs 
using prt1Aluc, a luciferase reporter driven by two dioxin-responsive enhancer
elements (DREs) from the rainbow trout cyp1A gene. Maximal-fold induction, EC50, 
and relative potency values were calculated for congeners that exhibited
dose-related activity in the assay. Of the four AhR/ARNT pairs tested with PCDD, 
PCDF, and non-ortho PCB congeners, three exhibited high activity (rainbow trout
AhR2alpha, zebrafish AhR2, and human AhR), while rainbow trout AhR2beta had very 
weak or no activity. Comparisons between these AhRs showed that while mono-ortho 
PCBs were able to activate the human AhR, they were generally ineffective in
activating rainbow trout and zebrafish AhR2s. This supports the hypothesis that
structural differences between mammalian and fish AhRs may account for
differences in relative potencies of the mono-ortho PCBs between mammals and
fish. Another important finding was a significant difference in transactivation
activity between the two rainbow trout AhR2 isoforms despite the fact that they
are 95% identical at the amino acid level. For all PCDD, PCDF, and PCB agonists
tested, rainbow trout AhR2alpha was significantly more active than AhR2beta.
However, rainbow trout AhR2beta is active as a
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-activated transcription factor, with
enhancer elements from the mouse cyp1A gene. This suggests that AhR2beta may have
evolved to serve a different physiological function than AhR2alpha in salmonid
fish species.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10448124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Development. 1999 Sep;126(17):3937-45.

The spineless-aristapedia and tango bHLH-PAS proteins interact to control
antennal and tarsal development in Drosophila.

Emmons RB(1), Duncan D, Estes PA, Kiefel P, Mosher JT, Sonnenfeld M, Ward MP,
Duncan I, Crews ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA.

The Drosophila spineless (ss) gene encodes a basic-helix-loop-helix-PAS
transcription factor that is required for proper specification of distal antennal
identity, establishment of the tarsal regions of the legs, and normal bristle
growth. ss is the closest known homolog of the mammalian aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (Ahr), also known as the dioxin receptor. Dioxin and other aryl
hydrocarbons bind to the PAS domain of Ahr, causing Ahr to translocate to the
nucleus, where it dimerizes with another bHLH-PAS protein, the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt). Ahr:Arnt heterodimers then activate
transcription of target genes that encode enzymes involved in metabolizing aryl
hydrocarbons. In this report, we present evidence that Ss functions as a
heterodimer with the Drosophila ortholog of Arnt, Tango (Tgo). We show that the
ss and tgo genes have a close functional relationship: loss-of-function alleles
of tgo were recovered as dominant enhancers of a ss mutation, and tgo-mutant
somatic clones show antennal, leg, and bristle defects almost identical to those 
caused by ss(-) mutations. The results of yeast two-hybrid assays indicate that
the Ss and Tgo proteins interact directly, presumably by forming heterodimers.
Coexpression of Ss and Tgo in Drosophila SL2 cells causes transcriptional
activation of reporters containing mammalian Ahr:Arnt response elements,
indicating that Ss:Tgo heterodimers are very similar to Ahr:Arnt heterodimers in 
DNA-binding specificity and transcriptional activation ability. During
embryogenesis, Tgo is localized to the nucleus at sites of ss expression. This
localization is lost in a ss null mutant, suggesting that Tgo requires
heterodimerization for translocation to the nucleus. Ectopic expression of ss
causes coincident ectopic nuclear localization of Tgo, independent of cell type
or developmental stage. This suggests that the interaction of Ss and Tgo does not
require additional signals, unlike the ligand-dependent interaction of Ahr and
Arnt. Despite the very different biological roles of Ahr and Arnt in insects and 
mammals, the molecular mechanisms by which these proteins function appear to be
largely conserved.

PMID: 10433921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 6;274(32):22155-64.

Differential recruitment of coactivator RIP140 by Ah and estrogen receptors.
Absence of a role for LXXLL motifs.

Kumar MB(1), Tarpey RW, Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Toxicology, Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

The Ah receptor (AhR), a soluble cytosolic protein, mediates most of the toxic
effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related environmental
contaminants. The mechanism of ligand-mediated AhR activation has been, in part, 
elucidated. The sequence of events following the binding of the AhR/AhR nuclear
translocator protein (ARNT) heterodimer to dioxin response elements has yet to be
completely understood. The role of coactivator, RIP140, in the modulation of
transcriptional activity of AhR/ARNT heterodimer was examined. RIP140 enhanced
TCDD-mediated, dioxin response element-driven reporter gene activity in three
cell lines. Co-immunoprecipitation and co-localization assays revealed that
RIP140 interacted with AhR, but not with ARNT, both in vitro and in cells.
Mapping of the interaction sites revealed that RIP140 was recruited by the AhR
transactivation domain via the Q-rich subdomain. The RIP140 domain that interacts
with the AhR was mapped to a location between amino acid residues 154 and 350,
which is distinct from those involved in estrogen receptor binding. The signature
motif, LXXLL, which is responsible for binding of several coactivators to nuclear
receptors, is not required for RIP140 binding to AhR. These results demonstrate
that the AhR recruits coactivators that are capable of enhancing transcription
and, thus, the AhR may compete with steroid receptors for a common coactivator
pool. In addition, the data suggest that there are distinct motif(s) for the
recruitment of RIP140 to AhR and possibly other non-steroid
receptors/transcription factors.

PMID: 10428779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Aug 2;261(2):534-40.

HIF1A gene transcription is dependent on a core promoter sequence encompassing
activating and inhibiting sequences located upstream from the transcription
initiation site and cis elements located within the 5'UTR.

Minet E(1), Ernest I, Michel G, Roland I, Remacle J, Raes M, Michiels C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Cellulaire, Facultés Universitaires de la
Paix, 61 rue de Bruxelles, Namur, 5000, Belgium. emmanuel.minet@fundp.ac.be

Hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a transcription factor composed of two
subunits, HIF-1alpha and ARNT, which is activated under hypoxia. HIF-1alpha mRNA 
is expressed constitutively in a wide variety of cell types, whereas in some
others HIF1A gene expression is upregulated by hypoxia. In this report, we show
that in endothelial cells (HMEC-1) the HIF-1alpha mRNA expression level is the
same in both normoxia and hypoxia. Deletion analysis experiments of the HIF1A
promoter showed that in hypoxia HIF1A gene expression is upregulated through a
short sequence located next to the transcription initiation site. We also show
that in hypoxia another sequence located upstream from the +1 initiation site
plays an inhibitory role on HIF1A transcription in HMEC-1 but not in hepatoma
cells and brings back this expression level to that observed in normoxia.
Finally, we demonstrate that HIF1A gene transcription is dependent on Sp1 binding
sites and that the 5'UTR sequence also contains other important cis-acting
elements.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10425220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Aug 1;368(1):31-9.

Role of estradiol receptor-alpha in differential expression of 2,3,7,
8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-inducible genes in the RL95-2 and KLE human
endometrial cancer cell lines.

Jana NR(1), Sarkar S, Ishizuka M, Yonemoto J, Tohyama C, Sone H.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Exposure and Health Effects Research Team, Regional Environment
Division, Environmental Health Sciences Division, National Institute for
Environmental Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Ibaraki, Tsukuba, 305 0053, Japan.

The present study was conducted to investigate the mechanism of the response of
human uterine endometrial carcinoma cells, RL95-2 and KLE, to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). RL95-2 cells were highly responsive
to TCDD in terms of cytochrome P4501A1 (CYP1A1), cytochrome P4501B1 (CYP1B1), and
plasminogen activator inhibitor-2 (PAI-2), whereas KLE cells showed little
stimulatory effects only at high doses. Neither showed any growth inhibition upon
exposure to TCDD. KLE cells expressed higher levels of aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
(AhR) than RL95-2 and gel mobility shift assay also identified more liganded
AhR-ARNT complex bound to xenobiotic response elements (XRE). TCDD had no
downregulatory effects on the expression of either AhR or the estradiol receptor 
(ER). Though both cell types expressed ER-alpha almost equally,
immunofluorescence demonstrated a defect in its nuclear translocation in KLE
cells where ER-alpha was mainly cytoplasmic and estradiol-17beta (E(2)) was
unable to translocate it to the nucleus. However, both cells were nonresponsive
to E(2) in terms of transcriptional activation and transient expression of normal
ER-alpha restored the E(2) responsiveness. Transient expression of ER-alpha in
KLE cells also restored its responsiveness to TCDD on transcriptional activation.
Collectively, these results indicate that ER-alpha acts as a positive modulator
in regulation of the TCDD-inducible genes.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10415108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Biochemistry. 1999 Jul 13;38(28):8907-17.

Characterization of the AhR-hsp90-XAP2 core complex and the role of the
immunophilin-related protein XAP2 in AhR stabilization.

Meyer BK(1), Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Molecular
Toxicology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park 16802, USA.

The unliganded aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) exists in the cytoplasm in a
tetrameric 9S core complex, consisting of the AhR ligand-binding subunit, a dimer
of hsp90, and the hepatitis B virus X-associated protein 2 (XAP2), an
immunophilin-related protein sharing homologous regions with FKBP12 and FKBP52.
Interactions between the recently identified XAP2 subunit and other members of
the unliganded AhR complex and its precise role in the AhR signal transduction
pathway are presently unknown. Mapping studies indicate that XAP2 requires the
PAS, hsp90, and ligand binding domain(s) of the AhR for binding, and that both
proteins directly interact in the absence of hsp90. XAP2 is also able to interact
with hsp90 complexes in the absence of the AhR, and C-terminal sequences of XAP2 
are required for this interaction. XAP2 binds to the C-terminal end of hsp90,
which contains a tetratricopeptide repeat domain acceptor site, whereas the AhR
binds to a domain in the middle of hsp90. XAP2 was not found to be associated
with the AhR-Arnt heterocomplex either in vitro or in nuclear extracts isolated
from Hepa 1 cells treated with TCDD. Transient expression of XAP2 in COS-1 cells 
resulted in enhanced cytosolic AhR levels, suggesting a role for XAP2 in
regulating the rate of AhR turnover.

PMID: 10413464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Aug;19(8):5811-22.

Multiple roles of ligand in transforming the dioxin receptor to an active basic
helix-loop-helix/PAS transcription factor complex with the nuclear protein Arnt.

Lees MJ(1), Whitelaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Adelaide, Adelaide 5005, South
Australia, Australia.

The dioxin receptor is a ligand-activated transcription factor belonging to an
emerging class of basic helix-loop-helix/PAS proteins which show interaction with
the molecular chaperone hsp90 in their latent states and require
heterodimerization with a general cofactor, Arnt, to form active DNA binding
complexes. Upon binding of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons typified by dioxin,
the dioxin receptor translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus to allow
interaction with Arnt. Here we have bypassed the nuclear translocation step by
creating a cell line which expresses a constitutively nuclear dioxin receptor,
which we find remains in a latent form, demonstrating that ligand has functional 
roles beyond initiating nuclear import of the receptor. Treatment of the nuclear 
receptor with dioxin induces dimerization with Arnt to form an active
transcription factor complex, while in stark contrast, treatment with the hsp90
ligand geldanamycin results in rapid degradation of the receptor. Inhibition of
degradation by a proteasome inhibitor allowed geldanamycin to transform the
nuclear dioxin receptor to a heterodimer with Arnt (DR-Arnt). Our results
indicate that unchaperoned dioxin receptor is extremely labile and is consistent 
with a concerted nuclear mechanism for receptor activation whereby hsp90 is
released from the ligand-bound dioxin receptor concomitant with Arnt
dimerization. Strikingly, artificial transformation of the receptor by
geldanamycin provided a DR-Arnt complex capable of binding DNA but incapable of
stimulating transcription. Limited proteolysis of DR-Arnt heterodimers indicated 
different conformations for dioxin versus geldanamycin-transformed receptors. Our
studies of intracellular dioxin receptor transformation indicate that ligand
plays multiple mechanistic roles during receptor activation, being important for 
nuclear translocation, transformation to an Arnt heterodimer, and maintenance of 
a structural integrity key for transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC84430
PMID: 10409767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Aug;19(8):5316-25.

PER and TIM inhibit the DNA binding activity of a Drosophila CLOCK-CYC/dBMAL1
heterodimer without disrupting formation of the heterodimer: a basis for
circadian transcription.

Lee C(1), Bae K, Edery I.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers University,
Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854,
USA.

The Drosophila CLOCK (dCLOCK) and CYCLE (CYC) (also referred to as dBMAL1)
proteins are members of the basic helix-loop-helix PAS (PER-ARNT-SIM) superfamily
of transcription factors and are required for high-level expression of the
circadian clock genes period (per) and timeless (tim). Several lines of evidence 
indicate that PER, TIM, or a PER-TIM heterodimer somehow inhibit the
transcriptional activity of a putative dCLOCK-CYC complex, generating a
negative-feedback loop that is a core element of the Drosophila circadian
oscillator. In this report we show that PER and/or TIM inhibits the binding of a 
dCLOCK-CYC heterodimer to an E-box-containing DNA fragment that is present in the
5' nontranscribed region of per and acts as a circadian enhancer element.
Surprisingly, inhibition of this DNA binding activity by PER, TIM, or both is not
accompanied by disruption of the association between dCLOCK and CYC. The results 
suggest that the interaction of PER, TIM, or both with the dCLOCK-CYC heterodimer
induces a conformational change or masks protein regions in the heterodimer,
leading to a reduction in DNA binding activity. Together with other findings, our
results strongly suggest that daily cycles in the association of PER and TIM with
the dCLOCK-CYC complex probably contribute to rhythmic expression of per and tim.

PMCID: PMC84375
PMID: 10409723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Nature. 1999 Jul 8;400(6740):169-73.

The mPer2 gene encodes a functional component of the mammalian circadian clock.

Zheng B(1), Larkin DW, Albrecht U, Sun ZS, Sage M, Eichele G, Lee CC, Bradley A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Circadian rhythms are driven by endogenous biological clocks that regulate many
biochemical, physiological and behavioural processes in a wide range of life
forms. In mammals, there is a master circadian clock in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus of the anterior hypothalamus. Three putative mammalian homologues (mPer1,
mPer2 and mPer3) of the Drosophila circadian clock gene period (per) have been
identified. The mPer genes share a conserved PAS domain (a dimerization domain
found in Per, Arnt and Sim) and show a circadian expression pattern in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus. To assess the in vivo function of mPer2, we generated
and characterized a deletion mutation in the PAS domain of the mouse mPer2 gene. 
Here we show that mice homozygous for this mutation display a shorter circadian
period followed by a loss of circadian rhythmicity in constant darkness. The
mutation also diminishes the oscillating expression of both mPer1 and mPer2 in
the suprachiasmatic nucleus, indicating that mPer2 may regulate mPer1 in vivo.
These data provide evidence that an mPer gene functions in the circadian clock,
and define mPer2 as a component of the mammalian circadian oscillator.

PMID: 10408444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Jul 14;260(3):760-7.

Characterization of three splice variants and genomic organization of the mouse
BMAL1 gene.

Yu W(1), Ikeda M, Abe H, Honma S, Ebisawa T, Yamauchi T, Honma K, Nomura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Saitama Medical School, Moroyama, Saitama, 350-0495,
Japan.

The BMAL1 gene encodes a member of the basic helix-loop-helix/PER-ARNT-SIM
(bHLH/PAS) family of transcription factors. It is a key regulator of circadian
rhythms. Using sequence information from human BMAL1 (hBMAL1) cDNAs previously
reported by our laboratory, we have isolated and characterized cDNAs encoding
three splice variants of the mouse BMAL1 (mBMAL1) gene. Of the three splice
variants, mBMAL1b extends for 1878 bp in the coding sequence, which is 91%
identical to that of hBMAL1b; its deduced amino acid sequence is 626 residues
long and is 98% identical to that of hBMAL1b, and sequence identities in the
bHLH, PAS-A, and PAS-B regions are 98, 100, and 100%, respectively. mBMAL1b'
arises from alternative usage of exon 2, which results in a 7-amino-acid
insertion and alternative splice acceptor usage at the intron 9/exon 10 splice
junction, which causes an alanine residue deletion. mBMAL1b' encodes 632 amino
acids and contains the bHLH/PAS domains. mBMAL1g' is generated by alternative
splice acceptor usage at the intron 6/exon 7 splice junction, which results in a 
28-bp deletion adjacent to the 5' end of the PAS domain. Since the 28-bp deletion
shifts the reading frame, mBMAL1g' is predicted to encode a product of only 222
amino acids that lacks the PAS domain. The tissue distributions of the three
splice variants showed some variation. The variations in the tissue distributions
and predicted amino acid sequences suggest that the three splice variants may
have different functions. Direct sequencing of the genomic mBMAL1 clones
indicated that the coding sequence of mBMAL1 spans 32 kb and includes 17 exons.
An unusual exon/intron donor sequence was found in intron 14, which begins with
GC at the 5' end. Comparison with the bHLH/PAS family genes revealed that the
intron/exon splice pattern of mBMAL1 most closely matches that of the mAhr, which
suggests that BMAL1 and Ahr belong to the same subclass and may be derived from a
common primordial gene.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10403839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Jul 5;260(2):557-61.

Characterization of an oxygen/redox-dependent degradation domain of
hypoxia-inducible factor alpha (HIF-alpha) proteins.

Srinivas V(1), Zhang LP, Zhu XH, Caro J.

Author information: 
(1)Cardeza Foundation for Hematologic Research, Department of Medicine, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19107-5099, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factors are heterodimeric DNA-binding complexes that control
the hypoxia responses of several genes and regulate the adaptive responses to the
lack of oxygen. The complex is composed of two b-HLH protein subunits, HIF-1beta 
(ARNT), that is constitutively expressed, and a HIF-alpha subunit, that is
present only in hypoxic cells. HIF-alpha proteins are continuously synthesized,
but are rapidly degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system under oxic
conditions. Hypoxia, transition metals, iron chelators, and several antioxidants 
stabilize the HIF-alpha proteins, allowing the formation of the transcriptionally
active HIF complex. However, the sequences and mechanisms involved in the
regulated degradation of the alpha protein subunits are poorly understood.
Analysis of the available cloned sequences of human and mouse members of the
HIF-alpha family of proteins revealed an area of about 15 amino acids with strong
sequence conservation between all the members. This area corresponds to the
region encompassing amino acids 557-571 of the hHIF-1alpha subunit. Fragments of 
HIF-1alpha and HIF-3alpha proteins containing this conserved sequence were able
to confer hypoxia regulation when expressed as fusion proteins in Hep-3B cells.
Regulation was observed with all the known hypoxia "mimics," including the
reducing thiol donor N-mercaptopropionylglycine (NMPG). Selective alanine
substitutions of amino acids 561-568 stabilized the protein in normoxic
conditions. Furthermore, transfection with an expression vector containing a
fragment of hHIF-1alpha comprising amino acids 540-580 enhanced transactivation
activity of the full-length hHIF-1alpha protein. These results suggest that the
above-mentioned conserved sequences are likely involved in the hypoxic
stabilization of HIF-alpha proteins. The mechanisms and the interacting
ubiquitin-ligases involved in the selective degradation process remain unknown.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10403805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Jul 15;367(2):250-7.

Interactions of nuclear receptor coactivator/corepressor proteins with the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor complex.

Nguyen TA(1), Hoivik D, Lee JE, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas, 77843-4466, USA.

MCF-7 human breast cancer cells express the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), and 
treatment with AhR agonists such as 2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)
inhibits estrogen receptor (ER)-mediated responses. This study investigates
physical and functional interactions of the AhR complex with a prototypical
coactivator (estrogen receptor associating protein 140, ERAP 140) and corepressor
(silencing mediator for retinoic acid and thyroid hormone receptor, SMRT) for ER 
and other members of the nuclear receptor superfamily. The AhR, AhR nuclear
translocator (Arnt), and AhR/Arnt proteins were coimmunoprecipitated with
35S-ERAP 140 and 35S-SMRT and, in gel mobility shift assays, AhR/Arnt binding to 
32P-dioxin response element (DRE) was enhanced by ERAP-140 and inhibited by SMRT;
supershifted bands were not observed. In transactivation assays, coactivator and 
corepressor proteins enhanced or inhibited AhR-mediated gene expression; however,
these responses varied with the amount of coactivator/corepressor expression.
These results confirmed functional and physical interactions of AhR/Arnt with
ERAP 140 and SMRT in breast cancer cells.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10395741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Cancer Lett. 1999 May 24;139(2):199-205.

Differential expression of CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1 in human kidney tumours.

Cheung YL(1), Kerr AC, McFadyen MC, Melvin WT, Murray GI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, UK.

The presence of mRNA of individual members of the CYP1 gene family in normal and 
neoplastic kidney has been investigated by RTPCR. CYP1B1 mRNA was consistently
expressed in both normal and neoplastic kidney while CYP1A1 was present in the
majority of normal and neoplastic whereas CYP1A2 was infrequently expressed.
Expression of the Ah receptor and Arnt which are involved in the transcriptional 
activation of the CYP1 genes was also studied. The Ah receptor mRNA and Arnt mRNA
were consistently expressed both in kidney tumours and normal kidney. These
results indicate differential expression of individual members of the CYP1 gene
family in normal and neoplastic kidney and suggest that several mechanisms
including the Ah receptor complex could be involved in their regulation.

PMID: 10395179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Respir Physiol. 1999 Apr 1;115(2):239-47.

Oxygen sensing and signaling: impact on the regulation of physiologically
important genes.

Zhu H(1), Bunn HF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

A growing number of physiologically relevant genes are regulated in response to
changes in intracellular oxygen tension. It is likely that cells from a wide
variety of tissues share a common mechanism of oxygen sensing and signal
transduction leading to the activation of the transcription factor
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1). Besides hypoxia, transition metals (Co2+,
Ni2+ and Mn2+) and iron chelation also promote activation of HIF-1. Induction of 
HIF-1 by hypoxia is blocked by the heme ligands carbon monoxide and nitric oxide.
There is growing, albeit indirect, evidence that the oxygen sensor is a flavoheme
protein and that the signal transduction pathway involves changes in the level of
intracellular reactive oxygen intermediates. The activation of HIF-1 by hypoxia
depends upon signaling-dependent rescue of its alpha-subunit from
oxygen-dependent degradation in the proteasome, allowing it to form a heterodimer
with HIF-1beta (ARNT), which then translocates to the nucleus and impacts on the 
transcription of genes whose cis-acting elements contain cognate hypoxia response
elements.

PMCID: PMC3045521
PMID: 10385037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Mar Biotechnol (NY). 1999 Mar;1(2):155-166.

Trout CYP1A3 Gene: Recognition of Fish DNA Motifs by Mouse Regulatory Proteins.

Carvan MJ 3rd(1), Ponomareva LV, Solis WA, Matlib RS, Puga A, Nebert DW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Genetics and Department of Environmental Health,
University of Cincinnati Medical Center, P.O. Box 670056, Cincinnati, OH
45267-0056, U.S.A.

: Transcriptional up-regulation of mammalian CYP1A1 genes by dioxin is known to
require binding of dioxin to the Ah receptor (AHR), subsequent interaction of
this ligand-receptor complex with the AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT), and
binding of this heterodimer to aromatic hydrocarbon response elements (AHREs)
located in the 5' flanking sequences. From the rainbow trout (Oncorhyncus
mykiss), we have isolated and sequenced the CYP1A3 gene-spanning 4.0 kb and
containing seven exons and six introns-and 1897 bp of the 5' flanking region. The
transcription start site was determined by primer extension analysis. Five
putative AHREs were found between -451 and -1820, with an overlap of AHRE3 and
AHRE4 sharing 1 bp. The 5' flanking region of the trout CYP1A3 gene was fused to 
the firefly luciferase (luc) reporter gene and transiently transfected into mouse
hepatoma Hepa-1c1c7 wild-type (wt) cell cultures and three
benzo[a]pyrene-resistant mutant lines: c2, containing less than 10% levels of
functional AHR; c4, defective in ARNT; and c37, deficient in CYP1A1 metabolism.
We compared the trout CYP1A3 promoter-luc constructs with mouse and human CYP1A1 
promoter-luc constructs. All of our trout CYP1A3 promoter data are consistent
with dioxin-inducible luciferase activity being controlled by two or more AHREs
via cooperativity with a GC-rich region (-1852)-as has previously been
demonstrated for AHREs in mammalian CYP1A1 promoters. The dependence of trout
CYP1A3 promoter activity on the AHR and on the ARNT, and the enhancement of
CYP1A3 promoter activity in the absence of CYP1A1 metabolic capacity, are all
similar to that with mammalian CYP1A promoters. These findings indicate that the 
DNA motifs in trout, and the mouse liver proteins that bind to these motifs, are 
evolutionarily conserved elements.

PMID: 10373624  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


481. Matrix Biol. 1999 Apr;18(2):155-61.

Complete genomic structure of the mouse cathepsin K gene (Ctsk) and its
localization next to the Arnt gene on mouse chromosome 3.

Rantakokko J(1), Kiviranta R, Eerola R, Aro HT, Vuorio E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Turku, Finland.

In preparation for gene manipulative experiments in mice we have isolated genomic
clones covering the entire murine cathepsin K gene (Ctsk). Sequence analysis
revealed that the gene spans 10.1 kb and contains eight exons and seven introns. 
The sizes of the coding exons 2-7 as well as the pattern of intron sizes are
conserved between the human and mouse cathepsin K genes. Genomic organization of 
the mouse cathepsin K gene also closely resembles those of cathepsins S and L.
More than 26% of the Ctsk sequence consists of different repetitive elements.
Detailed sequence analysis of 1.7 kb of Ctsk promoter revealed several putative
binding sites for transcription factors and two stretches of 280-320 bp which
were > 70% homologous with the human cathepsin K promoter. Analysis of genomic
clones extending further upstream of the Ctsk gene identified the 3' end of the
gene coding for arylhydrocarbon-receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt). This places
Ctsk approximately 4.5 kb downstream of Arnt on mouse chromosome 3 at locus 47.9.

PMID: 10372556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Pathol Biol (Paris). 1999 Apr;47(4):358-63.

[Transcription factors and angiogenesis].

[Article in French]

Soncin F(1), Fafeur V, Vandenbunder B.

Author information: 
(1)EP 560 CNRS, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Institut de Biologie de Lille, France.

Various strategies led to the identification of transcription factors that take
part to the control of different steps during the formation of new blood vessels:
the description of the expression pattern of genes encoding these factors during 
embryonic development for ETS-1, ERG and FLI, SCL/TAL, GATA1 and 2, the
description of the phenotype of embryos obtained after gene inactivation by
homologous recombination for ARNT or LKLF, and the study of transcriptional
regulation in cultured endothelial cells for EGR1 or HOX-D3. Altogether, these
results showed that there is no transcription factor specific for endothelial
cells or for one step in the formation of blood vessels. Rather, factors
controlling gene expression induced by hypoxia, shear-stress or growth factors
take part in the morphogenesis of the vascular tree. The study of these factors
may allow to identify potential therapeutic targets for treatments aimed at
inhibiting or stimulating the development of new blood vessels.

PMID: 10372405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999 Jun 1;157(2):125-33.

Induction of arylhydrocarbon receptor expression in embryoblast cells of rabbit
preimplantation blastocysts upon degeneration of Rauber's polar trophoblast.

Tscheudschilsuren G(1), Küchenhoff A, Klonisch T, Tetens F, Fischer B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Martin Luther University Faculty of
Medicine, Halle (Saale), D-06097, Germany.

The arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor and
mediates carcinogenic, teratogenic, and toxic effects of xenobiotics such as
dioxin and coplanar polychlorinated biphenyls. The AhR nuclear translocator
(ARNT) is involved in AhR signal transduction. We have analyzed the expression of
AhR and ARNT mRNA and AhR protein in Day 3 pc (postcoitum) rabbit morulae and
Days 4 and 6 pc blastocysts using RT-PCR, nested PCR, whole mount in situ
hybridization, and whole mount immunohistochemistry with subsequent confocal
laser scanning analysis. AhR and ARNT transcripts were detected in all stages
investigated, indicating coexpression of both transcription factors. AhR protein 
was localized in the cytoplasm. It was detected in Day 3 pc morulae and in
blastocysts. In Day 4 pc blastocysts, only trophoblast cells but not embryoblast 
cells were immunopositive. However, at Day 6 pc, the embryoblast cells also
expressed AhR protein and this expression was correlated with the degeneration of
Rauber's trophoblast layer.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10366545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Carcinogenesis. 1999 Jun;20(6):947-55.

Expression of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 depends on cell-specific factors in human breast 
cancer cell lines: role of estrogen receptor status.

Angus WG(1), Larsen MC, Jefcoate CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Environmental Toxicology Center, University of 
Wisconsin, 3770 Medical Sciences Center, 1300 University Avenue, Madison, WI
53706, USA.

The impact of estrogen receptor (ER) was examined for expression and activity of 
cytochrome P4501B1 (CYP1B1) and cytochrome P4501A1 (CYP1A1) in two pairs of
ER+/ER- human breast epithelial cell lines derived from single lineages, and
representing earlier (T47D) or later (MDA-MB-231) stages of tumorigenesis. Acute 
loss of ER was evaluated using the anti-estrogen ICI 182,780 (ICI). In all lines,
CYP1B1 was expressed constitutively and was induced by 2,3,7,
8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), whereas CYP1A1 was expressed only following
induction. Expression of each CYP (with or without TCDD) was greater in T47D
cells than MDA cells. The ER impacted expression of these genes in opposite
directions. The ER- phenotype was associated with less TCDD-induced CYP1A1
expression, but greater basal and induced CYP1B1 expression. A 48 h treatment of 
ER+ cells with ICI did not revert the P450 expression pattern to that of ER-
cells. Based on activities of recombinant enzyme and expression levels,
differences in 7,2-dimethylbenz [a]anthracene (DMBA) metabolism between the cell 
lines were consistent with differences in CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 expression. In T47D
lines, basal microsomal DMBA metabolism was primarily due to CYP1B1, based on
regioselective metabolite distribution and inhibition by anti-CYP1B1 antibodies
(>80%). Metabolism in TCDD-induced microsomes was mostly due to CYP1A1 and was
inhibited by anti-CYP1A1 antibody (>50%). TCDD-induced MDA+ cells demonstrated
CYP1A1 activity, whereas TCDD-induced MDA- cells displayed CYP1B1 activity. Aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) levels, but not AhR nuclear translocator protein
(ARNT) levels were highly dependent on cell type; AhR was high and ER-independent
in MDA, and low and ER-linked in T47D. AhR levels were insensitive to ICI. ER
does not directly modulate the expression of CYP1A1, CYP1B1 or AhR. Indeed,
factors that have replaced ER in growth regulation during clonal selection
predominate in this regulation. Characteristics unique to each cell line,
including ER status, determine CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 expression.

PMID: 10357772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1999;463:159-64.

Negative regulation of rat hepatic aldehyde dehydrogenase 3 by glucocorticoids.

Lindahl R(1), Xiao GH, Falkner KC, Prough RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of South Dakota School of Medicine,
Vermillion 57069, USA.

The expression of the aldehyde dehydrogenase 3 gene is known to be controlled by 
multiple regulatory processes. In liver, inducible expression appears to be
mediated by two AhRE sequences which allow regulation of this gene by xenobiotic 
compounds which are ligands for the Ah receptor (Takimoto et al., 1994; this
work). Constitutive expression of ALDH3 in tissues such as the cornea also
involves the -3,500 region which contains an AhRE (Boesch et al., 1996; Boesch et
al, 1998). However, the constellation of transcription factors which appear to
interact with the AhRE in constitutively expressing corneal cells does not
include either the Ah receptor nor the prototypical ARNT protein (Boesch et al., 
1998). For both inducible and constitutive ALDH3 expression the more distal 5'
flanking region sequences appear to interact with more proximal regulatory
elements. Of particular interest is the region near -1 kb which includes the GC
(-930 to -910) and cAMP (-1057 to -991) responsive elements as well as the 2 NF1 
sites (-916 to -815), all of which appear to act as negative modulators of ALDH3 
expression. A second putative ALDH3 negative regulatory region lies even more
distal than -3,500 bp. To date, this region has been little studied, but appears 
to be involved in regulating both inducible and constitutive ALDH3 expression.
This region may also be responsible for some of the tissue-specificity of ALDH3
expression. With respect to the work described here, in both isolated hepatocytes
and HepG2 cells, no consistent negative regulation by glucocorticoids was
observed in the basal expression of ALDH3. This indicates that the mechanism of
GC-mediated negative regulation involves direct interference with ALDH3 gene
activation mediated by the Ah receptor. Our results suggest a complex interplay
between multiple transcription factors, including the GC and Ah receptors,
regulates the hepatic expression of the ALDH3 gene. Active recruitment of
transcription factors needed for gene transactivation, amelioration of the
actions of negative regulatory trans-acting factors or cis-acting elements and/or
chromatin remodeling may be required for achieve proper regulation of the
aldehyde dehydrogenase 3 gene.

PMID: 10352681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Mol Cells. 1999 Apr 30;9(2):172-8.

Aromatic hydrocarbon nuclear translocator as a common component for the hypoxia- 
and dioxin-induced gene expression.

Park H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, University of Seoul, Korea. hspark@uoscc.uos.ac.kr

Aromatic hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (Arnt) is an ubiquitously expressed
protein that contains basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and Per-AhR-Arnt-Sim (PAS)
motifs. Other bHLH-PAS proteins, hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and
aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) mediate hypoxia- and dioxin-signal pathway,
respectively. Arnt has been identified as a heterodimerization partner for AhR.
AhR/Arnt heterodimer binds the regulatory region of xenobiotic-induced genes and 
activates their transcription. Here, in vivo results provide evidence that Arnt
is involved in not only xenobiotic- but also hypoxia-induced transcriptional
activation. In hypoxic condition, Arnt dimerizes with HIF-1alpha to make
HIF-1alpha/Arnt heterodimer which is able to bind hypoxia-responsive DNA
elements. The HIF-1alpha/Arnt heterodimer functions as a transactivator for
hypoxia-inducible genes. Given that the expression of Arnt is limited, HIF-1alpha
may compete with AhR for recruiting Arnt as a heteromeric partner. Consistent
with this idea, the results indicate that the hypoxic activation of HIF-1alpha
reduces dioxin-induced AhR's function on the dioxin-responsive reporter gene and 
the endogenous gene.

PMID: 10340472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 1999;39:103-25.

Induction of cytochrome P4501A1.

Whitlock JP Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
California 94305-5332, USA. jpwhit@leland.stanford.edu

Cytochrome P4501A1 is a substrate-inducible microsomal enzyme that oxygenates
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, such as the carcinogen benzo(a)pyrene, as the
initial step in their metabolic processing to water-soluble derivatives. Enzyme
induction reflects increased transcription of the cognate CYP1A1 gene. The
environmental toxicant 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin is the most potent
known cytochrome P4501A1 inducer. Two regulatory proteins, the aromatic (aryl)
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and the AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt), mediate
induction. AhR and Arnt are prototypical members of the basic
helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim class of transcription factors. Mechanistic
analyses of cytochrome P4501A1 induction provide insights into ligand-dependent
mammalian gene expression, basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim protein function, 
and dioxin action; such studies also impact public health issues concerned with
molecular epidemiology, carcinogenesis, and risk assessment.

PMID: 10331078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Mol Carcinog. 1999 May;25(1):48-54.

Factors influencing elevation of intracellular Ca2+ in the MCF-10A human mammary 
epithelial cell line by carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.

Tannheimer SL(1), Lauer FT, Lane J, Burchiel SW.

Author information: 
(1)Toxicology Program, University of New Mexico College of Pharmacy, Albuquerque,
USA.

Carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and a halogenated aromatic
hydrocarbon, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), were evaluated for their
effects on intracellular Ca2+ in the human mammary epithelial cell line MCF-10A. 
After two 18-h incubations with MCF-10A cells, benzo[a]pyrene (BaP; 1, 3, and 10 
microM) produced a dose-dependent increase in intracellular Ca2+.
7,12-Dimethylbenz[a]anthracene increased Ca2+ at 10 microM, whereas
3-methylcholanthrene and TCDD did not. The Ca2+-elevating effect of BaP appeared 
to be dependent on the influx of extracellular Ca2+, as addition of the Ca2+
chelator EGTA to the extracellular medium prevented the increase in Ca2+. MCF-10A
cells were found by polymerase chain reaction to express cytochrome P4501A and
P4501B isozymes as well as the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator mRNAs associated with cytochrome P450 induction.
Certain cytochrome P450-derived metabolites, including benzo[a]pyrene-7,8-diol
(BP-diol) and benzo[a]pyrene-7,8-diol-9,10-epoxide (BPDE), were more effective in
increasing Ca2+ than was BaP. The Ca2+-elevating effect of BP-diol was prevented 
by alpha-naphthoflavone, a cytochrome P4501A and P4501B inhibitor, but not by the
antioxidant N-acetylcysteine. These results suggest that cytochrome
P450-dependent formation of BPDE from BP-diol is a major mechanism required for
elevation of Ca2+ in MCF-10A cells.

PMID: 10331744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 7;274(19):13519-24.

Evidence that the co-chaperone p23 regulates ligand responsiveness of the dioxin 
(Aryl hydrocarbon) receptor.

Kazlauskas A(1), Poellinger L, Pongratz I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, S-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.

The dioxin (aryl hydrocarbon) receptor is a ligand-dependent transcription factor
that induces expression of a number of genes encoding drug metabolizing enzymes. 
In the absence of ligand the dioxin receptor is present in the cytoplasmic
compartment of the cell associated with the molecular chaperone hsp90, which has 
been implicated in regulating the correct folding of the ligand binding domain of
the receptor. In this study we have examined a potential role of the
hsp90-associated p23 protein in the activation process of the dioxin receptor to 
a DNA binding form. In an in vitro model we show that addition of ligand alone to
the dioxin receptor fails to induce release of hsp90 from the dioxin receptor. In
the presence of ligand, this release was, however, induced upon addition of
purified preparations of Arnt. Interestingly, p23 was also found to be associated
with the nonactivated form of the dioxin receptor. Following fractionation on
sucrose gradients p23 was dissociated from the receptor-hsp90 complex generating 
a receptor form, which showed ligand-independent release of hsp90 by Arnt and,
consequently, ligand-independent activation of the DNA binding activity of the
dioxin receptor. Ligand dependence was reconstituted in the presence of
molybdate, a transition metal ion known to stabilize the interaction between the 
molecular chaperone hsp90 and p23. Taken together these experiments suggest a
role of p23 in modulating ligand responsiveness in the activation process of the 
dioxin receptor.

PMID: 10224120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 7;274(19):13511-8.

Repression of dioxin signal transduction in fibroblasts. Identification Of a
putative repressor associated with Arnt.

Gradin K(1), Toftgârd R, Poellinger L, Berghard A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institute, S-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden. katarina.gradin@cmb.ki.se

Heterodimeric complexes of basic helix-loop-helix/PAS transcription factors are
involved in regulation of diverse physiological phenomena such as circadian
rhythms, reaction to low oxygen tension, and detoxification. In fibroblasts, the 
basic helix-loop-helix/PAS heterodimer consisting of the ligand-inducible dioxin 
receptor and Arnt shows DNA-binding activity, and the receptor and Arnt are able 
to activate transcription when fused to a heterologous DNA-binding domain.
However, fibroblasts are nonresponsive to dioxin with regard to induction
mediated by the DNA response element recognized by the receptor and Arnt. Here we
demonstrate that Arnt is associated with a fibroblast-specific factor, forming a 
complex that is capable of binding the dioxin response element. This factor may
function as a repressor since negative regulation of target gene induction
appears to be abolished by inhibition of histone deacetylase activity by
trichostatin A. Finally, the negative regulatory function of this factor appears 
to be restricted for dioxin signaling since Arnt was able to mediate, together
with hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha, transcriptional activation in hypoxic
cells. Taken together, these data suggest that fibroblast-specific inhibition of 
dioxin responsiveness involves recruitment by Arnt of a cell type- and signaling 
pathway-specific corepressor associated with a histone deacetylase.

PMID: 10224119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 30;274(18):12391-400.

Protein kinase C modulates aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
protein-mediated transactivation potential in a dimer context.

Long WP(1), Chen X, Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Toxicology, Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Protein kinase C (PKC)- and protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated modulation of the
transactivation potential of human aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(hARNT), a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS transcription factor, and the
bHLH-ZIP transcription factors USF-1 (for upstream regulatory factor 1) and c-Myc
were examined. An 81 nM dose of the PKC activator phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate
(PMA), shown here to specifically activate PKC in COS-1 cells, or a 1 nM dose of 
the PKA activator 8-bromoadenosine-3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (8-Br-cAMP) results
in 2. 6- and 1.9-fold enhancements, respectively, in hARNT-mediated
transactivation of the class B, E-box-driven reporter pMyc3E1bLuc relative to
identically transfected, carrier solvent-treated COS-1 cells. In contrast, 81 nM 
PMA and 1 nM 8-Br-cAMP did not enhance transactivation of pMyc3E1bLuc-driven by
USF-1 and c-Myc expression relative to identically transfected, carrier-treated
COS-1 cells. Co-transfection of pcDNA3/ARNT-474-Flag, expressing a hARNT
carboxyl-terminal transactivation domain deletion, and pMyc3E1bLuc does not
result in induction of reporter activity, suggesting PMA's effects do not involve
formation of unknown hARNT-protein heterodimers. Additionally, PMA had no effect 
on hARNT expression relative to Me2SO-treated cells. Metabolic 32P labeling of
hARNT in cells treated with carrier solvent or 81 nM PMA demonstrates that PMA
does not increase the overall phosphorylation level of hARNT. These results
demonstrate, for the first time, that the transactivation potential of ARNT in a 
dimer context can be specifically modulated by PKC or PKA stimulation and that
the bHLH-PAS and bHLH-ZIP transcription factors are differentially regulated by
these pathways in COS-1 cells.

PMID: 10212212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 23;274(17):12115-23.

Cross-talk between the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and hypoxia inducible factor
signaling pathways. Demonstration of competition and compensation.

Chan WK(1), Yao G, Gu YZ, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy and
Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, California 95211, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and the alpha-class hypoxia inducible factors
(HIF1alpha, HIF2alpha, and HIF3alpha) are basic helix-loop-helix PAS (bHLH-PAS)
proteins that heterodimerize with ARNT. In response to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, the AHR. ARNT complex binds to "dioxin
responsive enhancers" (DREs) and activates genes involved in the metabolism of
xenobiotics, e.g. cytochrome P4501A1 (Cyp1a1). The HIF1alpha.ARNT complex binds
to "hypoxia responsive enhancers" and activates the transcription of genes that
regulate adaptation to low oxygen, e.g. erythropoietin (Epo). We postulated that 
activation of one pathway would inhibit the other due to competition for ARNT or 
other limiting cellular factors. Using pathway specific reporters in transient
transfection assays, we observed that DRE driven transcription was markedly
inhibited by hypoxia and that hypoxia responsive enhancer driven transcription
was inhibited by AHR agonists. When we attempted to support this cross-talk model
using endogenous loci, we observed that activation of the hypoxia pathway
inhibited Cyp1a1 up-regulation, but that activation of the AHR actually enhanced 
the induction of Epo by hypoxia. To explain this unexpected additivity, we
examined the Epo gene and found that its promoter harbors DREs immediately
upstream of its transcriptional start site. These experiments outline conditions 
where inhibitory and additive cross-talk occur between the hypoxia and dioxin
signal transduction pathways and identify Epo as an AHR-regulated gene.

PMID: 10207038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Apr 13;257(2):259-63.

Expression of dioxin-responsive genes in human endometrial cells in culture.

Yang JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Catholic University of Taegu-Hyosung, Taegu, Republic of
Korea. yangjh@cuth.cataegu.ac.kr

To investigate expression of dioxin-responsive genes in human endometrial cells
with exposure to 2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), human endometrial
stromal cells immortalized with temperature-sensitive SV40 T antigen were used
for the experiments. Cells were treated with 0.1% DMSO or 0.1, 1, 10, or 100 nM
TCDD for 24 h. Induction of interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) and plasminogen
activator inhibitor-2 (PAI-2) mRNAs was analyzed by reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction. Expression of IL-1beta or PAI-2 mRNA in response to
TCDD was increased in a dose-dependent fashion. The maximum increases of PAI-2
and IL-1beta mRNAs were observed at 100 and 10 nM TCDD, respectively. While
cycloheximide treatment did not show a significant difference of PAI-2 mRNA
levels between control and TCDD-treated cells, mRNA stability assay using
actinomycin D showed that PAI-2 mRNA in TCDD-treated cells was about twofold more
stable than the control cells. While expression of CYP1A1 mRNA was not detected
and levels of ARNT mRNA were not altered by TCDD exposure, the amount of AhR mRNA
was decreased dose dependently. The present study represents an initial attempt
to determine the responses of dioxin-responsive genes in human endometrial cells 
following TCDD exposure. The results demonstrated that IL-1beta and PAI-2 genes
are induced dose dependently in human endometrial cells with exposure to TCDD and
expression of PAI-2 mRNA is controlled at the posttranscriptional level.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10198199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Genomics. 1999 Apr 15;57(2):189-200.

Molecular cloning and characterization of the human CLOCK gene: expression in the
suprachiasmatic nuclei.

Steeves TD(1), King DP, Zhao Y, Sangoram AM, Du F, Bowcock AM, Moore RY,
Takahashi JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Physiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Northwestern University, 2153 North Campus Drive, Evanston, Illinois, 60208-3520,
USA.

The Clock gene is an essential regulator of circadian rhythms. It encodes a
member of the basic helix-loop-helix/PER-ARNT-SIM family of transcription factors
known to play a central role in the control of diverse cellular events.
Previously we described the functional identification and molecular isolation of 
the Clock gene in the mouse, its interaction with the BMAL1 protein, and the role
of this complex as a transcriptional activator in the circadian pacemaker. Here, 
we report the cloning, exon organization, chromosomal location, and mRNA
expression of the human CLOCK gene. The coding sequence of human CLOCK extends
for 2538 bp and is 89% identical to its mouse ortholog; its deduced amino acid
sequence is 846 residues long and is 96% identical to mouse CLOCK. Radiation
hybrid mapping localized human CLOCK to the long arm of human chromosome 4
(4q12). Direct sequencing of a genomic CLOCK clone indicated that the coding
sequence of human CLOCK extends over 20 exons and that its intron/exon
organization is identical to that of the mouse ortholog. Northern blot analysis
indicated widespread expression of two major transcripts of 8 and 10 kb, and in
situ hybridization of human brain tissue revealed elevated expression of CLOCK
mRNA in the suprachiasmatic nuclei, the locus of circadian control in mammals,
and in the cerebellum. Comparison of cDNA clones revealed two single nucleotide
polymorphisms in noncoding sequence flanking the CLOCK open reading frame. The
central role of Clock in the organization of circadian rhythms suggests that it
will be a useful candidate gene for genetic analyses of disorders associated with
dysfunction of the circadian system.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10198158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 9;274(15):10113-8.

Long QT syndrome-associated mutations in the Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain of HERG
potassium channels accelerate channel deactivation.

Chen J(1), Zou A, Splawski I, Keating MT, Sanguinetti MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, Utah 84112, USA.

Mutations in the human ether-a-go-go-related gene (HERG) cause long QT syndrome, 
an inherited disorder of cardiac repolarization that predisposes affected
individuals to life-threatening arrhythmias. HERG encodes the cardiac rapid
delayed rectifier potassium channel that mediates repolarization of ventricular
action potentials. In this study, we used the oocyte expression system and
voltage clamp techniques to determine the functional consequences of eight long
QT syndrome-associated mutations located in the amino-terminal region of HERG
(F29L, N33T, G53R, R56Q, C66G, H70R, A78P, and L86R). Mutant subunits formed
functional channels with altered gating properties when expressed alone in
oocytes. Deactivation was accelerated by all mutations. Some mutants shifted the 
voltage dependence of channel availability to more positive potentials. Voltage
ramps indicated that fast deactivation of mutant channels would reduce outward
current during the repolarization phase of the cardiac action potential and cause
prolongation of the corrected QT interval, QTc. The amino-terminal region of HERG
was recently crystallized and shown to possess a Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain. The
location of these mutations suggests they may disrupt the PAS domain and
interfere with its interaction with the S4-S5 linker of the HERG channel.

PMID: 10187793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Apr;261(1):66-71.

Structural and mechanistic aspects of transcriptional induction of cytochrome
P450 1A1 by benzimidazole derivatives in rat hepatoma H4IIE cells.

Backlund M(1), Weidolf L, Ingelman-Sundberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Toxicology, Institute of Environmental Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. maria.backlund@imm.ki.se

The effect of several structurally different benzimidazole compounds on CYP1A1
expression at the transcriptional, mRNA and protein levels was investigated in
the rat hepatoma H4IIE cell line. Omeprazole, thiabendazole, carbendazim,
2-mercaptobenzimidazole and 2-mercapto-5-methoxybenzimidazole caused a
dose-dependent increase in CYP1A1 protein levels that reached maximum effect at
250 microm, as measured by Western blot. In addition, hydroxyomeprazole,
2-aminobenzimidazole and 2-mercapto-5-nitro-benzimidazole caused a notable
increase in CYP1A1 protein expression, whereas 5-O-desmethylomeprazole,
2-hydroxybenzimidazole, 2-benzimidazole propionic acid and 5-benzimidazole
carboxylic acid were ineffective. Thus, benzimidazole substituted with a thiol or
an amino group in the 2-position were active inducers. Northern blot analysis
confirmed an extensive increase of CYP1A1 mRNA induced by omeprazole and
2-mercapto-5-methoxybenzimidazole which was 32% and 49% of maximal induction by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) respectively, whereas thiabendazole
and carbendazim showed approximately 15% increase as compared to TCDD. Transient 
transfection of H4IIE cells, with a XRE-pGL3 reporter gene construct revealed a
2.3-4.3-fold induction by carbendazim, thiabendazole, and
2-mercapto-5-methoxybenzimidazole as compared to a 3.3- and 23-fold induction by 
omeprazole and TCDD, respectively. Thus, these data indicate that the
benzimidazoles utilize the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-arnt-XRE-mediated
signal-transduction pathway for induction of the CYP1A1 gene.

PMID: 10103034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mol Pharmacol. 1999 Apr;55(4):716-25.

Flavone antagonists bind competitively with 2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin 
(TCDD) to the aryl hydrocarbon receptor but inhibit nuclear uptake and
transformation.

Henry EC(1), Kende AS, Rucci G, Totleben MJ, Willey JJ, Dertinger SD, Pollenz RS,
Jones JP, Gasiewicz TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester, Rochester, New 
York 14642, USA. henrye@envmd.rochester.edu

Previous analyses suggested that potent aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
antagonists were planar, with a lateral electron-rich center. To further define
structural requirements and mechanism for antagonism, ten additional flavone
derivatives were synthesized. Based on their ability to 1) compete with 2,3,7,
8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) for binding to the AhR; 2) inhibit
TCDD-elicited binding of AhR to dioxin-responsive elements (DRE) in vitro; and 3)
inhibit TCDD-induced transcription of DRE-dependent luciferase in stably
transfected hepatoma cells, the most potent flavones contained a 3'-methoxy group
and a 4'-substituent having one or more terminal atoms of high electron density
(-N3, -NO2, or -NCS). Furthermore, these had low agonist activity as assessed by 
their inability to elicit AhR. DRE binding or to induce luciferase. Compounds
containing bulkier 3' or 4'-substituents, or a 3'-OH group were less potent
antagonists, and some were partial agonists. In rat liver cytosol,
3'-methoxy-4'-azido- and 3'-methoxy-4'-nitroflavones bound competitively (with
TCDD) to the AhR, indicating that they bind to the TCDD-binding site. When
hepatoma cells were exposed to these flavones, AhR complexes were primarily
immunoprecipitable from the cytosol and contained 90 kDa heat shock protein. In
contrast, AhR in TCDD-treated cells was primarily immunoprecipitated from nuclear
extracts and was associated with Arnt but not 90 kDa heat shock protein.
Immunocytofluorescence analysis in intact cells further indicated that the potent
antagonist inhibited nuclear uptake of AhR and blocked TCDD-dependent
down-regulation of AhR. Together, these data indicate that the most potent
antagonists bind the AhR with high affinity but cannot initiate receptor
transformation and nuclear localization.

PMID: 10101030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Cell Sci. 1999 Apr;112 ( Pt 8):1203-12.

Induction and nuclear translocation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1):
heterodimerization with ARNT is not necessary for nuclear accumulation of
HIF-1alpha.

Chilov D(1), Camenisch G, Kvietikova I, Ziegler U, Gassmann M, Wenger RH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology and Institute of Anatomy, University of Zürich-Irchel,
CH-8057 Zürich, Switzerland.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a master regulator of mammalian oxygen
homeostasis. HIF-1 consists of two subunits, HIF-1alpha and the aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT). Whereas hypoxia prevents proteasomal
degradation of HIF-1alpha, ARNT expression is thought to be oxygen-independent.
We and others previously showed that ARNT is indispensable for HIF-1 DNA-binding 
and transactivation function. Here, we have used ARNT-mutant mouse hepatoma and
embryonic stem cells to examine the requirement of ARNT for accumulation and
nuclear translocation of HIF-1alpha in hypoxia. As shown by immunofluorescence,
HIF-1alpha accumulation in the nucleus of hypoxic cells was independent of the
presence of ARNT, suggesting that nuclear translocation is intrinsic to
HIF-1alpha. Co-immunoprecipitation of HIF-1alpha together with ARNT could be
performed in nuclear extracts but not in cytosolic fractions, implying that
formation of the HIF-1 complex occurs in the nucleus. A proteasome inhibitor and 
a thiol-reducing agent could mimic hypoxia by inducing HIF-1alpha in the nucleus,
indicating that escape from proteolytic degradation is sufficient for
accumulation and nuclear translocation of HIF-1alpha. During biochemical
separation, both HIF-1alpha and ARNT tend to leak from the nuclei in the absence 
of either subunit, suggesting that heterodimerization is required for stable
association within the nuclear compartment. Nuclear stabilization of the
heterodimer might also explain the hypoxically increased total cellular ARNT
levels observed in some of the cell lines examined.

PMID: 10085255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 26;274(13):9038-44.

Inhibition of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 activation by carbon monoxide and nitric
oxide. Implications for oxygen sensing and signaling.

Huang LE(1), Willmore WG, Gu J, Goldberg MA, Bunn HF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

It has been proposed that cells sense hypoxia by a heme protein, which transmits 
a signal that activates the heterodimeric transcription factor hypoxia-inducible 
factor 1 (HIF-1), thereby inducing a number of physiologically relevant genes
such as erythropoietin (Epo). We have investigated the mechanism by which two
heme-binding ligands, carbon monoxide and nitric oxide, affect oxygen sensing and
signaling. Two concentrations of CO (10 and 80%) suppressed the activation of
HIF-1 and induction of Epo mRNA by hypoxia in a dose-dependent manner. In
contrast, CO had no effect on the induction of HIF-1 activity and Epo expression 
by either cobalt chloride or the iron chelator desferrioxamine. The affinity of
CO for the putative sensor was much lower than that of oxygen (Haldane
coefficient, approximately 0.5). Parallel experiments were done with 100 microM
sodium nitroprusside, a nitric oxide donor. Both NO and CO inhibited HIF-1 DNA
binding by abrogating hypoxia-induced accumulation of HIF-1alpha protein.
Moreover, both NO and CO specifically targeted the internal oxygen-dependent
degradation domain of HIF-1alpha, and also repressed the C-terminal
transactivation domain of HIF-1alpha. Thus, NO and CO act proximally, presumably 
as heme ligands binding to the oxygen sensor, whereas desferrioxamine and perhaps
cobalt appear to act at a site downstream.

PMID: 10085152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Mar 24;256(3):462-8.

Cross-talk between 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and testosterone signal
transduction pathways in LNCaP prostate cancer cells.

Jana NR(1), Sarkar S, Ishizuka M, Yonemoto J, Tohyama C, Sone H.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Environment Division, Environmental Health Sciences Division,
National Institute for Environmental Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305
0053, Japan.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related compounds modulate various
endocrine functions by enhancing ligand metabolism, altering hormone synthesis,
down regulating receptor levels, and interfering with gene transcription. In the 
present study, we investigated the effects of TCDD on testosterone signal
transduction pathways and vice versa in the androgen receptor (AR) positive LNCaP
prostate cancer cell line. TCDD induced CYP1A1 mRNA and related enzyme activity
in these cells, with dose and time-dependence. Both normal and
testosterone-stimulated cell growth was inhibited by TCDD. The expression levels 
of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (ARNT), and AR were not affected by exposure to TCDD at a dose of 10
nM for a 24 hr time period. Testosterone treatment dose-dependently inhibited the
TCDD-induced CYP1A1 mRNA accumulation and related enzyme activity. Reciprocally, 
TCDD also dose-dependently inhibited testosterone-dependent transcriptional
activity and testosterone-regulated prostate specific antigen (PSA) expression.
Taken together, these results demonstrate antiandrogenic functions of TCDD and a 
specific ligand-induced bilateral transcriptional interference between TCDD and
testosterone mediated signal transduction pathways.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10080920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Neuroscience. 1999 Mar;89(2):387-97.

Expression of basic helix-loop-helix/PAS genes in the mouse suprachiasmatic
nucleus.

Shearman LP(1), Zylka MJ, Reppert SM, Weaver DR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Chronobiology, Pediatric Service, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston 02114, USA.

The suprachiasmatic nuclei contain a circadian clock that drives rhythmicity in
physiology and behavior. In mice, mutation of the Clock gene produces abnormal
circadian behavior [Vitaterna M. H. et al. (1994) Science 264, 715-725]. The
Clock gene encodes a protein containing basic helix-loop-helix and PAS
(PER-ARNT-SIM) domains [King D. P. et al. (1997) Cell 89, 641-653]. The PAS
domain may be an important structural feature of a subset of genes involved in
photoreception and circadian rhythmicity. The expression and regulation of
messenger RNAs encoding eight members of the basic helix-loop-helix/PAS protein
superfamily were examined by in situ hybridization. Six of the genes studied
(aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear transporter, aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
transporter-2, Clock, endothelial PAS-containing protein, hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha and steroid receptor coactivator-1) were expressed in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus of adult and neonatal mice. No evidence for rhythmicity
of expression was observed when comparing brains collected early in the
subjective day (circadian time 3) with those collected early in subjective night 
(circadian time 15). Neuronal PAS-containing protein-1 messenger RNA was
expressed in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of adult (but not neonatal) mice, and a 
low-amplitude rhythm of neuronal PAS-containing protein-1 gene expression was
detected in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Neuronal PAS-containing protein-2
messenger RNA was not detected in adult or neonatal suprachiasmatic nucleus.
Exposure to light at night (30 or 180 min of light, beginning at circadian time
15) did not alter the expression of any of the genes studied. The expression of
multiple members of the basic helix-loop-helix/PAS family in the suprachiasmatic 
nucleus suggests a rich array of potential interactions relevant to the
regulation of the suprachiasmatic circadian clock.

PMID: 10077321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999 Mar 1;155(2):177-89.

Ah receptor and ARNT protein and mRNA concentrations in rat prostate: effects of 
stage of development and 2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin treatment.

Sommer RJ(1), Sojka KM, Pollenz RS, Cooke PS, Peterson RE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, 53706, USA.

Effects of stage of development and 2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)
exposure on aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT)
protein concentrations in reproductive organs of male rats were determined. AhR
protein levels in developing rat ventral and dorsolateral prostate decreased with
age, declining approximately 70% between Postnatal Days (PND) 1 and 21. ARNT
protein levels also decreased with age in dorsolateral, but not ventral prostate.
The developmental decreases in prostatic AhR and ARNT protein were associated
with decreases in AhR and ARNT mRNA. AhR and ARNT protein concentrations in fetal
urogenital sinus on Gestation Days (GD) 16, 18, and 20 were similar to levels in 
ventral prostate on PND 7. TCDD exposure of adult male rats (0.2, 1, 5, or 25
micrograms/kg po, 24 h) decreased AhR but not ARNT protein in ventral and
dorsolateral prostate, vas deferens, and epididymis. In utero and lactational
TCDD exposure (1.0 micrograms/kg dam po, GD 15) did not alter ARNT levels but
reduced prostatic AhR protein levels on PND 7 and delayed the developmental
decrease in AhR protein in ventral and dorsolateral prostate. Finally,
pretreatment of rat pups for 24 h with TCDD (5 micrograms/kg ip) down-regulated
prostatic AhR protein on PND 7, but not on PND 1. Thus, prostatic AhR and ARNT
protein and mRNA levels are regulated with age, whereas only AhR protein
concentration is altered by TCDD exposure. Because in utero and lactational TCDD 
exposure only decreased prostatic AhR on PND 7, it is unlikely that
down-regulation of AhR is the mechanism by which perinatal TCDD exposure impairs 
prostate development.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10053172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Percept Mot Skills. 1998 Dec;87(3 Pt 2):1239-45.

Do magnitude estimation and lexical decision tap similar processes?

Ferraro FR(1), Bohlman D, Whetham T, Arnt S, Anderson M, Westerlund A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks 58202, USA. 
FERRARO@BADLANDS.NODAK.EDU

Young adults (n = 54 for Exp. 1, n = 50 for Exp. 2) and elderly adults (the same 
n = 40 in each experiment) participated in studies that required nonspeeded
magnitude estimation scaling in response to words that varied in frequency and
number of meanings. Across both experiments and across both groups, subject and
item analyses indicated significant word frequency effects (low-frequency words
were judged more difficult to process than high-frequency words) and significant 
word meaning effects (unambiguous words were judged to be more difficult to
process than ambiguous words). Mean magnitude estimate values were significantly 
and positively correlated with mean lexical-decision task values obtained from
the same subjects on the same stimuli based on data from a previous experiment.
Results suggest that processes required for magnitude estimation are similar to
those measured with the lexical decision task in word-recognition studies
involving young and elderly adults.

PMID: 10052082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Pharmacol. 1999 Mar;55(3):594-604.

Regulation of cytochrome P-450 (CYP) 1B1 in mouse Hepa-1 variant cell lines: A
possible role for aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) as a
suppressor of CYP1B1 gene expression.

Eltom SE(1), Zhang L, Jefcoate CR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Toxicology and Department of Pharmacology, University
of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison 53706, USA. seeltom@facstaff.wisc.edu

Cytochrome P-450 (CYP) 1B1 expression in mouse hepatoma (Hepa-1) wild-type (WT)
cells was compared with responses in Hepa-1 variants LA1 and LA2, which,
respectively, exhibit low aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) level and defective AhR
nuclear translocator (ARNT) protein. 10T1/2 mouse embryo fibroblasts express
predominantly CYP1B1 and at a 100 times higher level than in Hepa-1 cells,
whereas they express about 300-fold lower CYP1A1 than Hepa-1 cells. The
expression of CYP1B1 in WT and LA1 variant, although at a much lower level,
follows that of CYP1A1, reflecting their common regulation through the AhR. The
LA2 (ARNT-defective) cells showed a major difference between CYP1B1 and CYP1A1
expression. Although CYP1A1 mRNA levels in LA2 were extremely low and
unresponsive to 2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), basal CYP1B1 mRNA
and protein were expressed at levels similar to those seen in TCDD-induced WT.
The elevated basal CYP1B1 mRNA in LA2 cells decreased by 50% after transient
transfection of ARNT cDNA, in parallel with substantial restoration of CYP1A1
induction. This implicates ARNT as a suppressor of CYP1B1 basal expression in
Hepa cells. In transient CYP1B1-luciferase constructs in LA2 cells, ARNT shows
stimulatory effects in the enhancer region but an inhibitory effect on the
proximal promoter. Two CYP1B1 enhancer elements [xenobiotic-responsive element
(XRE) 1/2 and XRE4] formed TCDD-unresponsive complexes of similar mobility to
TCDD-stimulated AhR-ARNT complex with XRE5. However, because these two complexes 
were formed to the same extent in LA2 as in WT cells, they cannot be due to ARNT 
or contribute to ARNT-regulated suppression.

PMID: 10051545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Toxicol Sci. 1999 Jan;47(1):76-85.

RT-PCR quantification of AHR, ARNT, GR, and CYP1A1 mRNA in craniofacial tissues
of embryonic mice exposed to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and
hydrocortisone.

Abbott BD(1), Schmid JE, Brown JG, Wood CR, White RD, Buckalew AR, Held GA.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Toxicology Division, National Health Effects and Environmental
Research Laboratory, Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park,
North Carolina 27711, USA.

C57BL/6N mouse embryos exposed to hydrocortisone (HC) or
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) develop cleft palate. An interaction
between these agents produces clefts at doses which alone are not teratogenic.
The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and dioxin receptor (AhR) mediated these
responses and their gene expression was altered by TCDD and/or HC in palates
examined on gestation day (GD) 14 by Northern blot analysis and in situ
hybridization. The present study quantifies AhR, AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT),
and GR mRNA at 4, 12, 24, and 48 h after exposure (time 0 = dose administration
at 8 A.M. on gestation day 12) on GD12 to TCDD (24 micrograms/kg), HC (100 mg/kg)
or HC (25 mg/kg) + TCDD (3 micrograms/kg). The induction of CYP1A1 mRNA was also 
quantified at 2, 4, 6, 12, 24, and 48 h for control and TCDD-exposed samples.
Total RNA was prepared from midfacial tissue of 4-6 embryos/litter at each time
and dose. An RNA internal standard (IS) for each gene was synthesized, which
included the gene's primer sequences separated by a pUC19 plasmid sequence.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed on total
RNA + IS using a range of 5-7 IS concentrations across a constant level of total 
RNA. PCR products were separated in gels (mRNA and IS-amplified sequences
differed by 30-50 bases), ethidium bromide-stained, imaged (Hamamatsu Photonics
Systems, Bridgewater, NJ), and quantified with NIH Image. CYP1A1 mRNA was
significantly induced in the TCDD-exposed samples at all time points examined (p 
= 0.005 at 2 h and 0.001 after 2 h). During palatal shelf outgrowth on GD12, AhR 
mRNA levels increased significantly and this was not affected by treatment with
TCDD or HC + TCDD. A significant increase in GR was detected at 24 h (p < 0.05)
and this was unaffected by any of the exposures. Expression of ARNT increased at 
12 h (p < 0.001); however, treatment with HC or HC + TCDD blocked this increase
(p < 0.05). At 24 h, the TCDD-treated embryos had significantly lower ARNT mRNA
compared with controls (p < 0.001). The relative overall expression level of the 
genes was AhR > ARNT > GR. Within individuals, expression of AhR and/or ARNT was 
highly correlated with GR level. In conclusion, CYP1A1 mRNA was expressed in
developing craniofacial tissue and was highly induced by TCDD exposure. AhR,
ARNT, and GR mRNA are upregulated in early palatogenesis, although not on the
same schedule. The TCDD-induced decrease in ARNT at 24 h after dosing and the HC 
and HC + TCDD-induced delay in upregulation of ARNT may affect the dynamics of
heterodimer formation between AhR and ARNT. The changes in ARNT mRNA level could 
also affect availability of this transcriptional regulator to interact with other
potential partners, and these effects, separately or in combination, may be
involved in disruption of normal embryonic development.

PMID: 10048155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Toxicol Sci. 1999 Jan;47(1):62-75.

AhR, ARNT, and CYP1A1 mRNA quantitation in cultured human embryonic palates
exposed to TCDD and comparison with mouse palate in vivo and in culture.

Abbott BD(1), Held GA, Wood CR, Buckalew AR, Brown JG, Schmid J.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Toxicology Division, National Health Effects and Environmental
Research Laboratory, Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park,
North Carolina 27711, USA.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is developmentally toxic in many
species and induces cleft palate in the C57BL/6N mouse embryo. Palatogenesis in
mouse and human embryos involves homologous processes at the morphological,
cellular, and molecular levels. In organ culture, mouse and human palates respond
similarly to TCDD. The present study quantitates the expression of AhR, ARNT, and
CYP1A1 mRNA in human embryonic palates in organ culture. Palatal tissues were
exposed to 1 x 10(-10), 1 x 10(-9), or 1 x 10(-8) M TCDD or control medium and
sampled at 0, 2, 4, and 6 hours for quantitative RT-PCR using a synthetic RNA
internal standard. Similar measurements of CYP1A1 gene expression were collected 
for mouse palates cultured in this model. In human palates, AhR expression
correlated with ARNT and CYP1A1 mRNA expression. TCDD induction of CYP1A1 was
time- and concentration-dependent. The expression of these genes presented a
uniform and continuous distribution across the group of embryos, with no subset
of either high or low expressors/responders. The ratio of AhR to ARNT was
approximately 4:1. AhR mRNA increased during the culture period in both treated
and control subjects; however, ARNT expression was relatively constant. TCDD did 
not alter either AhR or ARNT expression in a consistent dose- or time-related
manner. Comparison of human and mouse data showed a high correlation across
species for the induction of CYP1A1. Human embryos expressed approximately 350
times less AhR mRNA than the mouse, and in earlier studies it was shown that
human palates required 200 times more TCDD to produce the same effects. When the 
morphological, cellular, and molecular responses to TCDD between mouse and human 
are compared, it seems highly unlikely that human embryos could be exposed to
sufficient TCDD to achieve changes in palatal differentiation that would lead to 
cleft palate.

PMID: 10048154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 5;274(10):6519-25.

Regulation of the hypoxia-inducible transcription factor 1alpha by the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

Kallio PJ(1), Wilson WJ, O'Brien S, Makino Y, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska 
Institutet, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

HIF-1alpha (hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha) is a basic-helix-loop-helix PAS
(Per/Arnt/Sim) transcription factor that, under hypoxic conditions, dimerizes
with a partner factor, the basic-helix-loop-helix/PAS protein Arnt, to recognize 
hypoxia-responsive elements of target genes. It has recently been demonstrated
that HIF-1alpha protein but not mRNA levels are dramatically up-regulated in
response to hypoxia. Here we show that inhibitors of 26 S proteasome activity
produced a dramatic accumulation of endogenous as well as transfected HIF-1alpha 
protein under normoxic conditions, whereas the levels of Arnt protein were not
affected. HIF-1alpha was polyubiquitinated in vivo under normoxic conditions,
indicating rapid degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. This
degradation process appeared to target a region within the C terminus of
HIF-1alpha. Importantly, HIF-1alpha ubiquitination was drastically decreased
under hypoxic conditions. Up-regulation of HIF-1alpha protein by proteasome
inhibitors did not result in transcriptional activation of reporter genes,
indicating either the requirement of additional regulatory steps to induce
functional activity of HIF-1alpha or the inability of polyubiquitinated forms of 
HIF-1alpha to mediate hypoxic signal transduction. In support of both these
notions, we demonstrate that HIF-1alpha showed hypoxia-dependent translocation
from the cytoplasm to the nucleus and that this regulatory mechanism was severely
impaired in the presence of proteasome inhibitors. Taken together, these data
demonstrate that the mechanism of hypoxia-dependent activation of HIF-1alpha is a
complex multistep process and that stabilization of HIF-1alpha protein levels is 
not sufficient to generate a functional form.

PMID: 10037745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999 Feb 15;155(1):82-95.

Physicochemical differences in the AH receptors of the most TCDD-susceptible and 
the most TCDD-resistant rat strains.

Pohjanvirta R(1), Viluksela M, Tuomisto JT, Unkila M, Karasinska J, Franc MA,
Holowenko M, Giannone JV, Harper PA, Tuomisto J, Okey AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, National Public Health Institute,
Kuopio, FIN-70701, Finland.

Long-Evans rats (strain Turku AB; L-E) are at least 1000-fold more sensitive
(LD50 about 10 microg/kg) to the acute lethal effects of 2,
3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) than are Han/Wistar (Kuopio; H/W) rats
(LD50 > 9600 microg/kg). The AH receptor (AHR) is believed to mediate the toxic
effects of TCDD and related halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons. We compared the
AHRs of L-E and H/W rats to determine if there were any structural or functional 
receptor differences that might be related to the dramatic difference in the
sensitivity of these two strains to the lethal effects of TCDD. Cytosols from
liver and lung of the sensitive L-E rats contained about twofold higher levels of
specific binding sites for [3H]TCDD than occurred in H/W rats; the Kd for binding
of [3H]TCDD to AHR in hepatic cytosols was similar between the two strains.
Addition of the oxyanions, molybdate or tungstate (20 mM), had little effect upon
ligand binding to AHR in hepatic cytosols from L-E rats whereas in cytosols from 
H/W rats these agents substantially diminished or totally abolished TCDD binding.
The AHR in H/W cytosols also lost ligand-binding function when NaCl (20 to 400
mM) was added to the buffer whereas, in cytosols from L-E rats, the addition of
400 mM NaCl caused the receptor complex to shift from 9S to 6S during velocity
sedimentation but did not destroy ligand binding function. AHR from hepatic
cytosol of both the L-E and H/W rats could be transformed to the DNA-binding
state in the presence of TCDD or other dioxin congeners as assessed by gel
mobility shift assays. The most dramatic difference in AHR properties between L-E
and H/W rats is molecular mass. Immunoblotting of cytosolic proteins revealed
that the AHR in L-E rats has an apparent mass of approximately 106 kDa, similar
to the mass of the receptor previously reported in several other common
laboratory rat strains. In contrast, the mass of the AHR in H/W rats is
approximately 98 kDa, significantly smaller than the mass of receptor reported in
any other rat strains. F1 offspring of a cross between L-E and H/W rats expressed
both the 106- and the 98-kDa protein. There was no apparent difference in the
mass of the AHR nuclear translocator protein (ARNT) between the two strains, but 
the hepatic concentration of ARNT was about three times as high in L-E as in H/W 
rats. It will be interesting to find out how the altered structure of the AHR in 
H/W rats is related to their remarkable resistance to the lethal effects of TCDD.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10036221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Comp Biochem Physiol C Pharmacol Toxicol Endocrinol. 1998 Nov;121(1-3):23-53.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor: a comparative perspective.

Hahn ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, MA 02543-1049, USA. 
mhahn@whoi.edu

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Ah receptor or AHR) is a ligand-activated
transcription factor involved in the regulation of several genes, including those
for xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes such as cytochrome P450 1A and 1B forms.
Ligands for the AHR include a variety of aromatic hydrocarbons, including the
chlorinated dioxins and related halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons whose toxicity 
occurs through activation of the AHR. The AHR and its dimerization partner ARNT
are members of the emerging bHLH-PAS family of transcriptional regulatory
proteins. In this review, our current understanding of the AHR signal
transduction pathway in non-mammalian and other non-traditional species is
summarized, with an emphasis on similarities and differences in comparison to the
AHR pathway in rodents and humans. Evidence and prospects for the presence of a
functional AHR in early vertebrates and invertebrates are also examined. An
overview of the bHLH-PAS family is presented in relation to the diversity of
bHLH-PAS proteins and the functional and evolutionary relationships of the AHR
and ARNT to the other members of this family. Finally, some of the most promising
directions for future research on the comparative biochemistry and molecular
biology of the AHR and ARNT are discussed.

PMID: 9972449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Carcinogenesis. 1999 Jan;20(1):13-8.

A malignant transformation of human cells by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin 
exhibits altered expressions of growth regulatory factors.

Yang JH(1), Vogel C, Abel J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine, Catholic
University of Taegu-Hyosung, Korea. yangih@cuth.cataegu.ac.kr

The neoplastic transformation of human cells in culture with exposure to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) has recently been reported. In this
study, expressions of growth regulatory factors were analyzed to examine their
possible roles in TCDD-induced malignant transformation of human cells. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and immunoblot analysis were
performed to detect altered expressions of genes associated with dioxin
responses. The RT-PCR analysis showed that expressions of the growth regulatory
factors, such as transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1), plasminogen
activator inhibitor-2 (PAI-2) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), were
significantly changed in the transformed cells as compared with the parental
cells. Whereas parental cells showed a dose-dependent increase of PAI-2 mRNA
levels following TCDD exposure, the transformed cells did not show any
significant induction. In addition, constitutive levels of PAI-2 mRNA were 25
times lower in the transformed cells than in the parental cells. The mRNA
stability assay suggests that downregulation of PAI-2 mRNA in the transformed
cells may be associated with the posttranscriptional control. Expression of
TGF-beta1 mRNA in the transformed cells was also four times lower than the
parental cells. However, levels of TNF-alpha mRNA in the transformed cells were
increased 3-fold. These results suggest that dysregulation of growth regulatory
factors may be involved in TCDD-induced cellular transformation. Whereas plenty
of studies demonstrated a number of immediate toxic effects by TCDD, this study
revealed an initial evidence that altered expression of growth regulatory genes, 
such as PAI-2, TGF-beta1 or TNF-alpha, are some of the genetic events fixed in
the genome following the successive cell divisions of TCDD-damaged cells. It is
suggested that these changes may be associated with TCDD-induced malignant
transformation of human cells.

PMID: 9934844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 22;274(4):2502-10.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor regulation of ceramide-induced apoptosis in murine
hepatoma 1c1c7 cells. A function independent of aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator.

Reiners JJ Jr(1), Clift RE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Toxicology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan
48201, USA. john.reiners.jr@wayne.edu

The relationship between aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) content and
susceptibility to apoptosis was examined in the murine hepatoma 1c1c7 cell line
and a series of variants having different levels of AHR expression. Exposure of
1c1c7 cultures to N-acetylsphingosine (C2-ceramide) caused a
concentration-dependent inhibition of cell proliferation, loss of viability, and 
induction of apoptosis as monitored by analyses of DNA fragmentation and caspase 
activation. A variant cell line (Tao) having approximately 10% of the AHR content
of 1c1c7 cells also arrested following exposure to C2-ceramide, but did not
undergo apoptosis. Modulation of 1c1c7 and Tao AHR contents by transfection of
Ahr antisense and sense constructs, respectively, confirmed the relationship
between AHR content and susceptibility to C2-ceramide-induced apoptosis.
C2-ceramide also induced the apoptosis of an AHR-containing cell line lacking the
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator protein. AHR ligands (i.e.
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and alpha-naphthoflavone) neither induced
apoptosis nor modulated the development of apoptosis in C2-ceramide-treated 1c1c7
cultures. AHR content did not affect staurosporine- or doxorubicin-induced
apoptosis. These results suggest the AHR modulates aspects of ceramide signaling 
associated with the induction of apoptosis but not cell cycle arrest, and does so
by a mechanism that is independent of its interaction with aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator and exogenous AHR ligands.

PMID: 9891021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 22;274(4):2060-71.

Oxygen-regulated and transactivating domains in endothelial PAS protein 1:
comparison with hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha.

O'Rourke JF(1), Tian YM, Ratcliffe PJ, Pugh CW.

Author information: 
(1)Erythropoietin Group, Room 425, Institute of Molecular Medicine, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DS, United Kingdom.

Endothelial PAS protein 1 (EPAS1) is a basic helix-loop-helix Per-AHR-ARNT-Sim
transcription factor related to hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha). To 
analyze EPAS1 domains responsible for transactivation and oxygen-regulated
function, we constructed chimeric fusions of EPAS1 with a GAL4 DNA binding
domain, plus or minus the VP16 activation domain. Two transactivation domains
were defined in EPAS1; a C-terminal domain (amino acids 828-870), and a larger
internal domain (amino acids 517-682). These activation domains were interspersed
by functionally repressive sequences, several of which independently conveyed
oxygen-regulated activity. Two types of activity were defined. Sequences lying
N-terminal to and overlapping the internal transactivation domain conferred
regulated repression on the VP16 transactivator. Sequences lying C-terminal to
this internal domain conveyed repression and oxygen-regulated activity on the
native EPAS1 C-terminal activation domain, but not the Gal/VP16 fusion. Fusions
containing internal but not C-terminal regulatory domains manifested regulation
of fusion protein level. Comparison of EPAS1 with HIF-1alpha demonstrated a
similar organization for both proteins, and for the C terminus defined a
conserved RLL motif critical for inducibility. Overall, EPAS1 sequences were less
inducible than those of HIF-1alpha, and inducibility was strikingly reduced as
their expression level was increased. Despite these quantitative differences,
EPAS1 regulation appeared similar to HIF-1alpha, conforming to a model involving 
the modulation of both protein level and activity, through distinct internal and 
C-terminal domains.

PMID: 9890965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Genes Dev. 1999 Jan 1;13(1):20-5.

Identification of a novel mechanism of regulation of Ah (dioxin) receptor
function.

Mimura J(1), Ema M, Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University,
Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

Ah receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor that mediates
pleiotropic effects of environmental pollutants such as 2,3,
7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin on host animals. In addition to induction of
drug-metabolizing enzymes, the liganded AhR complex was found to activate gene
expression of a factor designated AhR repressor (AhRR), which inhibits AhR
function by competing with AhR for dimerizing with Arnt and binding to the XRE
sequence. Thus, AhR and AhRR form a regulatory circuit in the xenobiotic signal
transduction pathway and provide a novel mechanism of regulation of AhR function 
that may determine tissue-specific sensitivity to environmental pollutants.

PMCID: PMC316371
PMID: 9887096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Jan 15;361(2):223-30.

The same xenobiotic response element is required for constitutive and inducible
expression of the mammalian aldehyde dehydrogenase-3 gene.

Boesch JS(1), Miskimins R, Miskimins WK, Lindahl R.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Research Group, University of South Dakota 
School of Medicine, Vermillion, South Dakota, 57069, USA.

The mammalian aldehyde dehydrogenase-3 gene (ALDH3) exhibits several aspects of
tissue-specific expression. Certain normal tissues, such as the cornea,
constitutively express ALDH3 at very high levels. Other tissues, such as normal
liver, do not express ALDH3. In liver, ALDH3 is inducible by polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbon xenobiotics by an Ah-receptor (AhR)-mediated pathway in which a
liganded AhR complexes with nuclear ARNT protein, and the complex binds to a
xenobiotic response element (XRE) sequence located near -3.0 kb in the ALDH3 5'
flanking region and initiates transcription. We used our recently developed rat
corneal epithelium culture model (Boesch et al., J. Biol. Chem. 271, 5150-5157,
1996) to study the molecular basis of constitutive ALDH3 expression. Transient
transfection assays of corneal epithelium using a battery of ALDH3 5' flanking
region-CAT reporter gene constructs indicate that high constitutive ALDH3
expression involves the same cis-acting elements as xenobiotic-induced ALDH3
expression in liver. These elements include a strong basal promoter region and
the XRE located near -3.0 kb. Western analysis confirms the presence of AhR and
ARNT proteins in 3-methylcholanthrene-treated rat liver, as well as ARNT protein 
in rat corneal epithelium. No AhR protein is found in rat cornea. The -3.0-kb
ALDH3 XRE region contains multiple overlapping transcription factor binding
sequences, including consensus sites for AhR, ARNT, HNF1, HNF4, and C/ebp.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) indicate that constitutive
expression of ALDH3 in cornea involves binding of ARNT, HNF1, and HNF4 to the
ALDH3-XRE in an Ah-receptor-independent, ARNT-requiring manner. Transient
transfection of ALDH3-CAT reporter gene constructs possessing a mutation in
either the ARNT- or HNF4-DNA binding sites of the XRE confirms the functional
importance of these sequence motifs in constitutive ALDH3 expression.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9882450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Jan 1;361(1):156-63.

Functional diversity of vertebrate ARNT proteins: identification of ARNT2 as the 
predominant form of ARNT in the marine teleost, Fundulus heteroclitus.

Powell WH(1), Karchner SI, Bright R, Hahn ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole,
Massachusetts, 02543, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is a member of the
bHLH/PAS protein superfamily. ARNT dimerizes with several PAS superfamily
members, including the ligand-activated aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), forming 
a complex that alters transcription by binding specific elements within the
promoters of target genes. Two genes encode different forms of the protein in
rodents: ARNT1, which is widely expressed, and ARNT2, which is limited to the
brain and kidneys of adults and specific neural and branchial tissues of embryos.
In an effort to characterize aryl hydrocarbon signaling mechanisms in Fundulus
heteroclitus, a marine teleost that can develop heritable xenobiotic resistance, 
we have isolated a liver cDNA encoding an ARNT homolog. The protein exhibits
AHR-dependent DNA binding capability typical of other vertebrate ARNTs.
Unexpectedly, phylogenetic analysis reveals that the cDNA encodes an ARNT2. This 
is the only detectable ARNT sequence in Fundulus liver, gill, ovary, and brain,
suggesting that ARNT2 is the predominant form of ARNT in this species. Also
surprising is the relative lack of sequence identity with another fish ARNT
protein, rainbow trout ARNTb, which we show forms a distinct branch outside the
ARNT1 and ARNT2 clades in phylogenetic analyses. Functional diversity of ARNT
proteins in fish may have important implications for the assessment of aryl
hydrocarbon effects on natural populations. The increasing use of fish models in 
developmental and toxicological studies underscores the importance of identifying
taxon-specific roles of ARNT proteins and their potential dimeric partners in the
PAS superfamily.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9882441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cancer Res. 1998 Dec 15;58(24):5678-80.

Up-regulation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha is not sufficient for
hypoxic/anoxic p53 induction.

Wenger RH(1), Camenisch G, Desbaillets I, Chilov D, Gassmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Zürich-Irchel, Zürich, Switzerland.

Oxygen-deprived regions of a solid tumor can induce tumor suppressor p53
expression and hence select for p53-mutant tumor cells with diminished apoptotic 
potential. It has been proposed that the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) alpha
subunit binds to p53 and protects it from proteasomal degradation. However, we
found that hypoxic conditions that strongly induce HIF-1-dependent endogenous
gene expression as well as HIF-1alpha protein neither induce p53-dependent gene
expression nor p53 protein. The iron chelator deferoxamine induced both
HIF-1alpha and p53, but p53 up-regulation could still be detected in
HIF-1alpha-deficient cells, suggesting that mechanisms other than HIF-1alpha
activation contribute to oxygen-regulated p53 induction.

PMID: 9865721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1998 Dec;287(3):1113-8.

Lipopolysaccharide activation of murine splenocytes and splenic B cells increased
the expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator.

Marcus RS(1), Holsapple MP, Kaminski NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, Michigan, USA.

These studies characterized the profile of AhR and ARNT expression in primary
splenocytes and purified splenic B cells after cellular activation with
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). LPS treatment of mouse splenocytes markedly increased
the magnitude of both AhR and ARNT steady state mRNA expression. AhR mRNA
expression peaked at 8 hr post-LPS activation and was increased by approximately 
5-fold compared with freshly isolated splenocytes (i.e., time 0). ARNT mRNA
expression began to increase at 8 hr postactivation, peaked at approximately 48
hr and was increased by approximately 4-fold when compared with nonactivated
splenocytes at time 0. Western blotting also demonstrated an increase in the
relative magnitude of both the AhR and ARNT proteins in LPS activated
splenocytes. Likewise, the presence of the AhR, ARNT and cytochrome P450IA1
(CYP1A1) proteins were also detected in purified primary splenic B cells, and the
magnitude of protein expression was enhanced in LPS activated splenic B cells at 
12 and 24 hr relative to time matched controls for each of these proteins. In
summary, these findings suggest that on LPS activation the magnitude of AhR and
ARNT mRNA and protein increases in both splenocytes and purified primary splenic 
B cells. Moreover, because the increase in the relative magnitude of CYP1A1
protein in response to LPS occurred in the absence of exogenous AhR ligand, these
results suggest that B-cell activation is sufficient to induce AhR nuclear
translocation and binding to dioxin-responsive elements in the promoter region of
AhR-responsive genes.

PMID: 9864300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Drug Metab Dispos. 1998 Dec;26(12):1194-8.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor: studies using the AHR-null mice.

Gonzalez FJ(1), Fernandez-Salguero P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. fjgonz@helix.nih.gov

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is believed to mediate the toxic effects of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), polychlorinated biphenyls, and
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. AHR is a member of the Per, ARNT,
Sim/basic-helix-loop-helix superfamily of ligand-activated transcription factors 
that also harbors the transcription factors involved in the hypoxia response,
development of the central nervous system, and day-night adaptations. To
investigate the role of AHR in chemical toxicity and carcinogenesis and to
determine any possible function in mammalian development and physiological
homeostasis, AHR-null mice were developed. The AHR-null mice were resistant to
the acute toxicity of TCDD and had an altered teratogenic response to this
compound. These mice were found to have a number of abnormal phenotypes, thus
confirming that AHR plays an important developmental and physiological role.
Among the most consistent phenotypes was an altered liver pathology that was
associated with accelerated rates of apoptosis. Evidence suggests that this may
be related to an abnormal accumulation of levels of hepatic retinoic acid that
cause an activation of transforming growth factor beta, resulting in stimulation 
of apoptosis. AHR may directly or indirectly control levels of a cytochrome P450 
that is responsible for catabolizing retinoic acid.

PMID: 9860927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Gene Expr. 1998;7(3):205-13.

Molecular characterization and chromosomal localization of a third alpha-class
hypoxia inducible factor subunit, HIF3alpha.

Gu YZ(1), Moran SM, Hogenesch JB, Wartman L, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison 53706, USA.

Hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) are heterodimeric transcription factors that
regulate a number of adaptive responses to low oxygen tension. They are composed 
of alpha- and beta-subunits that belong to the basic helix-loop-helix-PAS
(bHLH-PAS) superfamily. In our efforts to identify new bHLH-PAS proteins, we
cloned a cDNA encoding a novel alpha-class hypoxia inducible factor, HIF3alpha.
The HIF3alpha open reading frame encodes a 662-amino acid protein with a
predicted molecular weight of 73 kDa and is expressed in adult thymus, lung,
brain, heart, and kidney. The N-terminal bHLH-PAS domain of this protein shares
amino acid sequence identity with that of HIF1alpha and HIF2alpha (57% and 53%
identity, respectively). The C-terminus of HIF3alpha contains a 36-amino acid
sequence that shares 61% identity with the hypoxia responsive domain-1 (HRD1) of 
HIF1alpha. In transient transfections, this domain confers hypoxia responsiveness
when linked to a heterologous transactivation domain. In vitro studies reveal
that HIF3alpha dimerizes with a prototype beta-class subunit, ARNT, and that the 
resultant heterodimer recognizes the hypoxia responsive element (HRE) core
sequence, TACGTG. Transient transfection experiments demonstrate that the
HIF3alpha-ARNT interaction can occur in vivo, and that the activity of HIF3alpha 
is upregulated in response to cobalt chloride or low oxygen tension.

PMID: 9840812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. EMBO J. 1998 Nov 16;17(22):6573-86.

Signal transduction in hypoxic cells: inducible nuclear translocation and
recruitment of the CBP/p300 coactivator by the hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha.

Kallio PJ(1), Okamoto K, O'Brien S, Carrero P, Makino Y, Tanaka H, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska 
Institutet, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

In response to decreased cellular oxygen concentrations the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/PAS (Per, Arnt, Sim) hypoxia-inducible transcription
factor, HIF-1alpha, mediates activation of networks of target genes involved in
angiogenesis, erythropoiesis and glycolysis. Here we demonstrate that the
mechanism of activation of HIF-1alpha is a multi-step process which includes
hypoxia-dependent nuclear import and activation (derepression) of the
transactivation domain, resulting in recruitment of the CREB-binding protein
(CBP)/p300 coactivator. Inducible nuclear accumulation was shown to be dependent 
on a nuclear localization signal (NLS) within the C-terminal end of HIF-1alpha
which also harbors the hypoxia-inducible transactivation domain. Nuclear import
of HIF-1alpha was inhibited by either deletion or a single amino acid
substitution within the NLS sequence motif and, within the context of the
full-length protein, these mutations also resulted in inhibition of the
transactivation activity of HIF-1alpha and recruitment of CBP. However, nuclear
localization per se was not sufficient for transcriptional activation, since
fusion of HIF-1alpha to the heterologous GAL4 DNA-binding domain generated a
protein which showed constitutive nuclear localization but required hypoxic
stimuli for function as a CBP-dependent transcription factor. Thus,
hypoxia-inducible nuclear import and transactivation by recruitment of CBP can be
functionally separated from one another and play critical roles in signal
transduction by HIF-1alpha.

PMCID: PMC1171004
PMID: 9822602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Nov 9;252(1):225-31.

Daily cycle of bHLH-PAS proteins, Ah receptor and Arnt, in multiple tissues of
female Sprague-Dawley rats.

Richardson VM(1), Santostefano MJ, Birnbaum LS.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, National Health & Environmental Effects 
Research Laboratory, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, 27711, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) shares a common PAS domain with a number of
genes that exhibit a pronounced circadian rhythm. Therefore, this study examined 
the daily cycle of AhR and AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt) protein expression in 
multiple tissues of female Sprague-Dawley rats. Rats were euthanized at 4, 7, and
11 am and 4, 7, and 11 pm after which whole tissue homogenates were made from
multiple tissues. Western blot analysis showed that the daily cycle of relative
AhR protein expression exhibits a similar oscillation pattern in the liver,
lungs, and thymus. The daily cycle of relative Arnt protein expression exhibits a
similar oscillation pattern in the liver and lungs. The apparent daily cycle of
AhR and Arnt protein expression in multiple tissues was not observed within the
spleen. This preliminary report is the first study to suggest that the PAS
proteins, AhR and Arnt, exhibit a daily oscillation pattern within multiple
target tissues which may give insight into the tissue-specific toxic and
biochemical responses mediated through this dimerization pair, as well as the
physiological function of these proteins.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9813174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Pharmacol. 1998 Nov;54(5):825-33.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor regulation of cytochrome P4501B1 in rat mammary
fibroblasts: evidence for transcriptional repression by glucocorticoids.

Brake PB(1), Zhang L, Jefcoate CR.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Toxicology Center, University of Wisconsin Medical School,
Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1), which actively metabolizes polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons, is regulated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) in primary
cultures of rat mammary fibroblasts (RMF) and rat embryo fibroblasts (REF).
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) induced the 5.2-kilobase CYP1B1 mRNA
in RMF (12-fold) and REF (14-fold) after a 6-hr treatment, with comparable
increases in the microsomal protein. The synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone
(DEX) suppresses TCDD-induced expression of CYP1B1 in RMF and REF. Suppression of
CYP1B1 mRNA in RMF (maximal suppression, 70%) was observed when DEX was added 2
hr before TCDD, but was not observed with co-administration. The concentration
dependence (EC50 approximately 10 nM) and reversal by the antagonist, RU486,
implicates the glucocorticoid receptor. DEX inhibition of TCDD-induced CYP1B1
protein needed more extensive preincubation (>6 hr). TCDD induction of
CYP1B1-luciferase constructs in RMF was mediated by a 265-base-pair upstream
region (-810 to -1075), which was similarly suppressed (50-70%) by a 2-hr
preincubation with 10(-7) M DEX via this enhancer region. Expression of the AhR
is suppressed by DEX (70% after 12 hr), but not after the 2-hr period that was
sufficient for suppression of transcription. The AhR nuclear translocator is not 
affected by this treatment. We conclude that glucocorticoid receptor rapidly
suppresses activity of the AhR/AhR nuclear translocator complex in the CYP1B1
enhancer region, even though lacking glucocorticoid responsive element(s). DEX
inhibits proliferation of RMF in this same concentration range (35%, EC50
approximately 5 nM), indicating additional effects on intracellular activity that
may link to this suppression.

PMID: 9804617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Toxicol Pathol. 1998 Sep-Oct;26(5):657-71.

Mechanisms of ligand-induced aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated biochemical and
toxic responses.

Wilson CL(1), Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station 77843-4466, USA.

Comment in
    Toxicol Pathol. 1998 Sep-Oct;26(5):672-3.

The ubiquitous environmental contaminant 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD, dioxin) is a member of a broad group of halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons 
(HAHs) that is known to induce a wide range of toxic and biochemical responses in
laboratory animals and humans. The effects of HAH exposure are mediated by
binding to the cytosolic aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), which is expressed in a
tissue- and cell type-specific manner. The AhR is a ligand-activated
transcription factor belonging to the basic helix-loop-helix/Per-AhR-Arnt-Sim
(bHLH/PAS) superfamily of proteins. The mechanism of induction of gene
transcription by TCDD involves ligand recognition and binding by the AhR, nuclear
translocation, and dimerization with the AhR cofactor, AhR nuclear translocator
(Arnt). The nuclear heterodimer interacts with cognate xenobiotic responsive
elements (XREs) in promoter/enhancer regions of multiple Ah-responsive genes.
Subsequent changes in chromatin structure and/or interaction of the AhR complex
with the basal transcriptional machinery play a significant role in AhR-mediated 
gene expression. Although Arnt is a necessary component of a functional nuclear
AhR complex, this protein also forms transcriptionally active heterodimers with
other bHLH/PAS factors, including those involved in the transcriptional response 
to hypoxia. Arnt is ubiquitously expressed in mammalian systems, and results from
transgenic mouse studies suggest that this protein plays a vital role in early
mammalian embryonic development. Similar experiments suggest that the AhR may be 
involved in development of various organ systems. Thus, molecular mechanistic
studies of TCDD action have contributed significantly to an improved
understanding of the role of at least 2 bHLH/PAS proteins, as well as organ- and 
tissue-specific biochemical and toxic responses to this class of environmental
toxins.

PMID: 9789953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Teratology. 1998 Aug;58(2):30-43.

AH receptor, ARNT, glucocorticoid receptor, EGF receptor, EGF, TGF alpha, TGF
beta 1, TGF beta 2, and TGF beta 3 expression in human embryonic palate, and
effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD).

Abbott BD(1), Probst MR, Perdew GH, Buckalew AR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Toxicology, National Health Effects and Environmental
Research Laboratory, Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park,
North Carolina 27711, USA.

Protein and mRNA for epidermal growth factor (EGF), transforming growth
factor-alpha (TGF alpha), EGF receptor, transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF
beta 1), TGF beta 2, TGF beta 3, glucocorticoid receptor (GR), the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), and the Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) were 
localized in gestational days (GD) 49-59 human embryonic secondary palates. The
response to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) was determined for
expression of these genes following palatal organ culture. Craniofacial tissues
were shipped in medium from the Human Embryology Laboratory, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA. Half of each specimen was cultured in control medium and
half in medium containing TCDD at either 1 x 10(-8) or 1 x 10(-10) M. After
fixation and paraffin-embedding, sections were examined either
immunohistochemically or by in situ hybridization. Expression patterns were
determined for each gene for the major stages of palatogenesis and in response to
TCDD and compared to previously determined patterns of expression in the same
developmental stages of palatogenesis for the mouse (GD49-59 in human
palatogenesis corresponds to GD12-16 in the mouse). Human and mouse palates were 
dissimilar in particular spatiotemporal patterns of expression of these genes.
Relative to patterns in mouse palatal development, human tissues demonstrated
expression of EGF at early palatal stages, expression of EGF receptor and TGF
alpha throughout fusion events, and uniform expression of TGF beta 3 in all
epithelial regions without specifically higher levels in the medial cells. The
responses to TCDD also differed in patterns of gene expression as well as in
concentration required to induce hyperplasia of the medial epithelium. In
summary, human palates expressed all of these regulatory genes, responses to TCDD
were detected, and comparison between mouse and human palates revealed
interspecies variation that may be a factor in each species' response to TCDD, as
well as other teratogenic exposures.

PMID: 9787404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochem Pharmacol. 1998 Sep 1;56(5):599-612.

Regulation of cytochrome P450 enzymes by aryl hydrocarbon receptor in human
cells: CYP1A2 expression in the LS180 colon carcinoma cell line after treatment
with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin or 3-methylcholanthrene.

Li W(1), Harper PA, Tang BK, Okey AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

It has been difficult to study the regulation of cytochrome P4501A2 (CYP1A2)
because expression of this enzyme is reported to be limited or absent in cell
culture. We found that CYP1A2 can be induced significantly by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), 3-methylcholanthrene (MC), or
benz[a]anthracene in the human colon carcinoma cell line LS180. TCDD and MC each 
caused a dramatic elevation of CYP1A2 mRNA, as assessed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction or by northern blot analysis. TCDD also
increased immunoreactive CYP1A2 protein and the activity of
phenacetin-O-deethylase, a diagnostic catalytic marker for CYP1A2. The induction 
of CYP1A2 at all levels (mRNA, protein, catalytic activity) was concentration-
and time-dependent: the EC50 for mRNA induction by TCDD = 0.5 nM, and by MC = 1.4
microM. Inducible CYP1A2 mRNA also was detected at lower levels in two other
human cell lines, the hepatoma cell line HepG2 and the breast carcinoma cell line
MCF-7. CYP1A1 and CYP1B1, additional CYP1 enzymes regulated by the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), also were inducible by TCDD and MC in LS180 cells;
their concentration-dependent induction was highly correlated with induction of
CYP1A2 at mRNA, protein, and catalytic levels. CYP1B1 was constitutively
expressed and inducible in the LS180, MCF-7, and HepG2 cell lines as well as in
the human choriocarcinoma cell line JEG-3 and the squamous cell carcinoma line
A431. CYP1A2 was neither constitutively expressed nor inducible in A431 or JEG-3 
cells. The expression of mRNAs encoding the regulators of CYP1 enzymes-the AHR
and its heterodimerization partner, the ARNT (AH receptor nuclear translocator)
protein-was not altered by treatment with TCDD or MC. However, the cytosolic
content of AHR protein and ARNT protein was depleted substantially following
treatment with TCDD. The LS180 cell line should constitute a good model for
further mechanistic studies on AHR-regulated CYP1A2 expression.

PMID: 9783729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1998 Sep;152(1):200-10.

Characterization of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran-dependent suppression and AH 
receptor pathway gene expression in the developing mouse mammary gland.

Hushka LJ(1), Williams JS, Greenlee WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Toxicology, University of
Massachusetts Medical Center, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

The AH receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor and member of a 
growing family of homologous proteins implicated in development. In this study we
have characterized the actions of 2,3, 7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran (TCDF), a
well-studied AHR ligand, and the expression of AHR and selected AHR signal
transduction pathway genes in the developing mouse mammary gland. High levels of 
AHR protein were observed in the mammary glands of C57Bl/6J (AHR +/+) mice during
estrous-stimulated growth and branching of terminal end buds (TEBs). Comparative 
analysis of mammary gland development in AHR -/- and +/+ littermates revealed a
50% reduction in TEBs and an increase in blunt-ended terminal ducts in the AHR
null animals. Treatment of mammary glands, removed from
estrogen/progesterone-primed C57Bl/6J mice and maintained in organ culture, with 
TCDF suppressed lobule development (greater than twofold decreases in lobule
number and size), with a concomitant suppression of DNA synthesis, as judged by a
35 to 45% decrease in [3H]thymidine incorporation in the TEBs.
Immunohistochemical staining patterns for AHR, aryl hydrocarbon nuclear
translocator (ARNT; the heterodimerization partner of AHR), and two AHR-regulated
genes, Cyp1A1 and Cyp1B1, were similar and not altered by treatment of mammary
glands in organ culture with TCDF. The observed differences in the development of
mammary glands from AHR +/+ and -/- mice, associated expression of the AHR
protein with hormone-dependent lobule development, and suppressive actions of
TCDF support the position that, in C57Bl/6J mice, development of the mammary
gland is at least in part AHR dependent. Development occurs in the absence of
exogenous AHR ligand, suggesting that the unoccupied receptor may function to
support the proliferative stages required for full lobule development.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9772216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 1998 Jun;17(2):187-94.

The molecular basis of the hypoxia response pathway: tumour hypoxia as a therapy 
target.

Blancher C(1), Harris AL.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund, Molecular Oncology Laboratory, University of
Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, UK.

Hypoxia induces a cascade of physiological responses that includes glycolysis,
erythropoiesis, angiogenesis, changes in adrenergic signal transduction and
vascular cellular proliferation. Hypoxia-inducible genes are relevant to growth
and behaviour of cancer as well as the adaptation and survival of normal tissues.
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a heterodimeric DNA binding complex
composed of two basic-helix-loop-helix PAS-proteins: HIF-1 beta/ARNT (aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator), which is constitutively expressed,
and HIF-1 alpha, which is not present in normoxic cells but induced under hypoxic
conditions. Recently another member of the bHLH-PAS family, EPAS-1 has been
reported and shares similar properties with HIF-1 alpha, although it is
considered endothelial specific. In addition, the presence of other DNA-binding
motifs in the promoter of hypoxia-inducible genes highlight the occurrence of
cross-talk between transcription factors in the modulation of hypoxic gene
expression. In this review, we present a survey of the hypoxia response pathway
and we discuss attempts to use gene therapy activated by the low oxygen
environment or by necrotic regions of tumours.

PMID: 9770115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Pharmacol. 1998 Oct;54(4):671-7.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacts with transcription factor IIB.

Swanson HI(1), Yang JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536,
USA. hswan@pop.uky.edu

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and its DNA binding partner, the AHR nuclear 
translocator (ARNT), are basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that
mediate many of the toxic and carcinogenic effects of polyhalogenated aromatic
hydrocarbons. The basic regions of the AHR and ARNT contact the GCGTG recognition
site, whereas both their helix-loop-helix domains and
periodicity-ARNT-single-minded domains participate in heterodimerization. To
delineate the transcription factors that may facilitate DNA binding and
transcriptional activation of the AHR/ARNT heterodimer, we questioned whether
transcription factor IIB (TFIIB) may interact with either the AHR or ARNT and
whether this interaction may affect the ability of the AHR/ARNT complex to bind
DNA. Coaffinity precipitation assays demonstrated that both the AHR and ARNT were
capable of interacting with TFIIB. Domain mapping experiments revealed that TFIIB
interacts with the periodicity-ARNT-single-minded and carboxyl-terminal regions
of the AHR. To determine whether the interaction between TFIIB and the AHR may
affect DNA binding of the AHR and ARNT complex, we performed gel shift
experiments in the absence and presence of TFIIB. The addition of TFIIB
significantly increased the formation of the AHR/ARNT DNA binding complex, but
only if TFIIB was first allowed to interact with the AHR before the addition of
ARNT. These results indicate that TFIIB interacts with the AHR and may stabilize 
the DNA binding form of the AHR and thereby augment the ability of the AHR/ARNT
complex to interact with its DNA recognition site.

PMID: 9765510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Prostate. 1998 Oct 1;37(2):98-108.

Expression of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) in fetal, benign hyperplastic, and malignant
prostate.

Kashani M(1), Steiner G, Haitel A, Schaufler K, Thalhammer T, Amann G, Kramer G, 
Marberger M, Schöller A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Androgen-dependent tissue has been reported to be affected by
chemical ligands of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a ligand-activated
transcription factor, which heterodimerizes with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator protein (ARNT).
METHODS: Fetal (n = 3), benign hyperplastic (BPH) (n = 10), and carcinomatous
(CaP) (n = 19) prostate tissues were analyzed using immunohistochemistry. Western
blot analysis was used to confirm the identity of the recognized proteins.
RESULTS: Immunoblotting of enriched prostatic epithelial cells (EC) and stromal
cells revealed constitutive expression of bands at around 110 kDa and 90 kDa,
using anti-AhR and anti-ARNT, respectively. Immunohistology of the fetal
specimens revealed heterogeneous cytoplasmic and nuclear AhR expression of
immature EC and mesenchymal cells. Constitutive expression of AhR (primarily
cytoplasmic) and ARNT (nuclear and cytoplasmic) by the majority of adult basal
and secretory EC, CaP, and smooth muscle cells was confirmed in situ. The most
intense anti-AhR/-ARNT reactivity was found on smooth muscle cells, followed by
EC and fibrocytes. Secretory BPH-EC revealed significantly decreased AhR
expression when compared to normal tissue segments. By contrast, anti-AhR
reactivity was frequently increased in the more dedifferentiated tumor areas.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that an undefined physiologic AhR ligand(s)
as well as environmental factors may exert effects on EC and smooth muscle cells 
in the prostate through binding to these receptors.

PMID: 9759704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Blood. 1998 Oct 1;92(7):2260-8.

Induction of endothelial PAS domain protein-1 by hypoxia: characterization and
comparison with hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha.

Wiesener MS(1), Turley H, Allen WE, Willam C, Eckardt KU, Talks KL, Wood SM,
Gatter KC, Harris AL, Pugh CW, Ratcliffe PJ, Maxwell PH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and the Department of Cellular Science, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

Hypoxia results in adaptive changes in the transcription of a range of genes
including erythropoietin. An important mediator is hypoxia-inducible factor-1
(HIF-1), a DNA binding complex shown to contain at least two basic
helix-loop-helix PAS-domain (bHLH-PAS) proteins, HIF-1alpha and aryl hydrocarbon 
nuclear receptor translocator (ARNT). In response to hypoxia, HIF-1alpha is
activated and accumulates rapidly in the cell. Endothelial PAS domain protein 1
(EPAS-1) is a recently identified bHLH-PAS protein with 48% identity to
HIF-1alpha, raising the question of its role in responses to hypoxia. We
developed specific antibodies and studied expression and regulation of EPAS-1
mRNA and protein across a range of human cell lines. EPAS-1 was widely expressed,
and strongly induced by hypoxia at the level of protein but not mRNA. Comparison 
of the effect of a range of activating and inhibitory stimuli showed striking
similarities in the EPAS-1 and HIF-1alpha responses. Although major differences
were observed in the abundance of EPAS-1 and HIF-1alpha in different cell types, 
differences in the inducible response were subtle with EPAS-1 protein being
slightly more evident in normoxic and mildly hypoxic cells. Functional studies in
a mutant cell line (Ka13) expressing neither HIF-1alpha nor EPAS-1 confirmed that
both proteins interact with hypoxically responsive targets, but suggest target
specificity with greater EPAS-1 transactivation (relative to HIF-1alpha
transactivation) of the VEGF promoter than the LDH-A promoter.

PMID: 9746763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Oct;18(10):6142-51.

Circadian regulation of a Drosophila homolog of the mammalian Clock gene: PER and
TIM function as positive regulators.

Bae K(1), Lee C, Sidote D, Chuang KY, Edery I.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Center for Advanced
Biotechnology and Medicine, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854,
USA.

The Clock gene plays an essential role in the manifestation of circadian rhythms 
(approximately 24 h) in mice and is a member of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) superfamily of transcription factors. Here we report the
characterization of a novel Drosophila bHLH-PAS protein that is highly homologous
to mammalian CLOCK. (Similar findings were recently described by Allada et al.
Cell 93:791-804, 1998, and Darlington et al., Science 280:1599-1603, 1998.)
Transcripts from this putative Clock ortholog (designated dClock) undergo daily
rhythms in abundance that are antiphase to the cycling observed for the RNA
products from the Drosophila melanogaster circadian clock genes period (per) and 
timeless (tim). Furthermore, dClock RNA cycling is abolished and the levels are
at trough values in the absence of either PER or TIM, suggesting that these two
proteins can function as transcriptional activators, a possibility which is in
stark contrast to their previously characterized role in transcriptional
autoinhibition. Finally, the temporal regulation of dClock expression is quickly 
perturbed by shifts in light-dark cycles, indicating that this molecular rhythm
is closely connected to the photic entrainment pathway. The isolation of a
Drosophila homolog of Clock together with the recent discovery of mammalian
homologs of per indicate that there is high structural conservation in the
integral components underlying circadian oscillators in Drosophila and mammals.
Nevertheless, because mammalian Clock mRNA is constitutively expressed, our
findings are a further example of striking differences in the regulation of
putative circadian clock orthologs in different species.

PMCID: PMC109200
PMID: 9742131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 18;273(38):24867-73.

Structure and expression of the mouse AhR nuclear translocator (mArnt) gene.

Wang F(1), Gao JX, Mimura J, Kobayashi A, Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-8578, Japan.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) nuclear translocator (Arnt) gene has been
isolated and characterized from a mouse genomic DNA library. The gene is about 60
kilobases long and split into 22 exons. An unusual exon/intron junctional
sequence was found in the 11th intron of the gene that begins with GC at its
5'-end. The exon/intron arrangement of mArnt gene differs greatly from those of
the other members of the same basic-helix-loop-helix/PAS family. The gene is
TATA-less and has several transcription start sites. The promoter region of the
mArnt gene is GC-rich and contains a number of putative regulatory DNA sequences 
such as two GC-boxes, a cAMP-responsive element, E-box, AP-1 site, and CAAT-box. 
Deletion experiments revealed that all these DNA elements made substantial
contributions to a high level of expression of the gene, except for the
cAMP-responsive element. Of all, two GC-boxes displayed the most dominant
enhancing effects. It was demonstrated that there exist specific factors binding 
to these DNA elements in the nuclear extracts of HeLa cells. Among them, Sp1 and 
Sp3, and CAAT-box binding factor-A were identified to bind the GC-boxes and
CAAT-box, respectively. Expression of MyoD in HeLa cells stimulated the Arnt
promoter activity by binding to the E-box.

PMID: 9733792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Aug 28;249(3):709-12.

Hypoxia exerts cell-type-specific effects on expression of the class 3 aldehyde
dehydrogenase gene.

Reisdorph R(1), Lindahl R.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Group, University of South Dakota School of
Medicine, Vermillion 57069, USA.

The Class 3 aldehyde dehydrogenase gene (ALDH3) is expressed differentially in a 
tissue-specific manner, occurring constitutively in some tissues and in others as
a result of xenobiotic induction via the Ah receptor/ARNT pathway. ARNT is also
involved in regulating gene expression in response to hypoxia. It dimerizes with 
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1 alpha) and enhances expression of
hypoxia-responsive genes. To determine if ARNT plays a role in regulating ALDH3
in response to low oxygen tension, we studied the effects of 1% oxygen and the
hypoxia mimic cobalt chloride on constitutive and inducible ALDH3 expression in
rat hepatoma cells and rat corneal epithelial cells. Hypoxia sharply
down-regulates constitutive ALDH3 expression in corneal epithelial cells.
Likewise, aromatic hydrocarbon-induced ALDH3 expression in H4-II-EC3 cells is
significantly reduced by hypoxia. In contrast, hypoxia has no effect on
constitutive or aromatic hydrocarbon-inducible ALDH3 expression in HTC cells. Our
data indicate that hypoxia exerts cell type-specific effects on both constitutive
and induced ALDH3 expression.

PMID: 9731202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 11;273(37):23837-43.

Hypoxia-inducible mammalian gene expression analyzed in vivo at a TATA-driven
promoter and at an initiator-driven promoter.

Okino ST(1), Chichester CH, Whitlock JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California 94305-5332, USA.

We have analyzed protein-DNA interactions in vivo at transcriptional control
elements for two hypoxia-inducible genes in mouse hepatoma cells. The promoter
for the phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK1) gene contains an initiator element, but 
no TATA sequence, whereas the promoter for the glucose transporter 1 (Glut1) gene
contains a TATA element but no initiator sequence. Our findings reveal
hypoxia-inducible, Arnt-dependent occupancy of DNA recognition sites for
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) upstream of both target genes. The conserved
recognition motif among the five recognition sites is 5'-CGTG-3'. The PGK1
promoter exhibits constitutive occupancy of a binding site for an unknown
protein(s); however, we detect no protein-DNA interaction at the initiator
element, in either uninduced or induced cells. The Glut1 promoter also exhibits
constitutive protein binding; in addition, the TATA element exhibits partial
occupancy in uninduced cells and increased occupancy under hypoxic conditions. We
find no evidence for hypoxia-induced changes in chromatin structure of either
gene. Time-course analyses of the Glut1 gene reveal a temporal relationship
between occupancy of HIF-1 sites and TATA element occupancy. Our findings suggest
that the promoters for both hypoxia-responsive genes constitutively maintain an
accessible chromatin configuration and that HIF-1 facilitates transcription by
recruiting and/or stabilizing a transcription factor(s), such as TFIID, at both
promoters.

PMID: 9726995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. EMBO J. 1998 Sep 1;17(17):5085-94.

Insulin induces transcription of target genes through the hypoxia-inducible
factor HIF-1alpha/ARNT.

Zelzer E(1), Levy Y, Kahana C, Shilo BZ, Rubinstein M, Cohen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, P.O. Box 26, 
Rehovot 76100, Israel.

Hypoxic stress induces the expression of genes associated with increased energy
flux, including the glucose transporters Glut1 and Glut3, several glycolytic
enzymes, nitric oxide synthase, tyrosine hydroxylase, erythropoietin and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Induction of these genes is mediated by a
common basic helix-loop-helix-PAS transcription complex, the hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha)/aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT). Insulin 
also induces some of these genes; however, the underlying mechanism is
unestablished. We report here that insulin shares with hypoxia the ability to
induce the HIF-1alpha/ARNT transcription complex in various cell types. This
induction was demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility shift of the hypoxia
response element (HRE), and abolished by specific antisera to HIF-1alpha and
ARNT, and by transcription activation of HRE reporter vectors. Furthermore, basal
and insulin-induced expression of Glut1, Glut3, aldolase A, phosphoglycerate
kinase and VEGF was reduced in cells having a defective ARNT. Similarly, the
insulin-induced activation of HRE reporter vectors and VEGF was impaired in these
cells and was rescued by re-introduction of ARNT. Finally, insulin-like growth
factor-I (IGF-I) also induced the HIF-1alpha/ARNT transcription complex. These
observations establish a novel signal transduction pathway of insulin and IGF-I
and broaden considerably the scope of activity of HIF-1alpha/ARNT.

PMCID: PMC1170836
PMID: 9724644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Genomics. 1998 Jul 15;51(2):223-32.

Physical localization of the mouse aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator-2 (Arnt2) gene within the c112K deletion.

Wines ME(1), Tiffany AM, Holdener BC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genetics, State University of New York at Stony Brook 11794-5215,
USA.

The albino deletions identify at least seven functional intervals essential for
pre- and postnatal development in the 6- to 10-cM region surrounding the albino
coat color (c = tyrosinase) locus on mouse chromosome 7. The c112K deletion
identifies a putative thymus functional region not removed by the overlapping c3H
deletion. Cloning the c3H proximal breakpoint provided a starting point for
construction of an 840-kb BAC contig spanning the c112K and c3H (D7Ssb3Hp)
proximal breakpoints. These breakpoints are separated by 320-350 kb. The aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-2 (Arnt2) is completely removed by the 
c112K deletion and spans 130-170 kb of the interval. Although Arnt2 is a
candidate for the thymus defects in c112K homozygotes, the possibility that other
as yet unidentified genes in the c112K deletion are responsible for the
abnormalities has not been ruled out. Arnt2 is a member of the bHLH-PAS (Per,
Ahr, Arnt, Sim) family of transcription factors and shares the highest similarity
with Arnt. The survival of c112K homozygotes markedly contrasts the embryonic
lethality observed in Arnt-deficient embryos and suggests distinct roles for
these related transcription factors during embryogenesis.

PMID: 9722945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Indian J Exp Biol. 1998 May;36(5):437-46.

Gene regulation of cytochrome P450--an overview.

Ramana KV(1), Kohli KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh, India.

Xenobiotics have played a role in elucidating the regulation of gene expression
of hepatic cytochrome P450 in the eukaryotes. The major regulation of P450 genes 
in the eukaryotes is at the transcriptional and post transcriptional level.
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons regulate the gene expression by binding the
cytosolic aryl hydrocarbon receptor and its translocation to the nucleus where it
forms a ternary complex with aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator. The ternary
complex PAH-AHR-ARNT acts as a transcription factor and binds aromatic
hydrocarbon responsive element to increase the expression of CYP1A1 gene.
Phenobarbitone and ethanol regulate the expression of respective P450s within
CYP2 gene family by different mechanisms but without the involvement of a
cytosolic receptor. PB uses phosphorylation as a switch to increase the affinity 
of the transcription factor(s) for the positive rather than negative PB
regulatory element within CYP2B1/2. This is one of the novel ways that nature has
designed for a protein to act as a negative as well as a positive acting
transcription factor. Ethanol regulates the expression of CYP2E1 by
posttranslational stabilization making it resistant to the proteolytic digestion.
Steroids regulate expression of CYP3A genes through a receptor mediated
mechanism. The binary complex of the steroid and its receptor increases the
transcription of CYP3 genes by binding glucocorticoid responsive element which is
already occupied by another protein. Peroxisome proliferators also follow a
receptor mediated mechanism in which a binary complex of PP activated receptor
and retinoid X receptor acts a transcription factor and increases the expression 
of CYP4A genes by binding peroxisome proliferator responsive element. These
studies demonstrate that PAH, glucocorticoids and PP follow a receptor mediated
whereas PB and ethanol follow a nonreceptor mediated mechanism for the regulation
of respective P450 genes in the eukaryotes.

PMID: 9717460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Aug 10;249(1):131-7.

Depletion of arylhydrocarbon receptor during adipose differentiation in 3T3-L1
cells.

Shimba S(1), Todoroki K, Aoyagi T, Tezuka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygienic Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University,
Chiba, Japan.

Arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is the receptor for
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related compounds. Although a
physiological ligand for AhR has yet to be identified, several lines of evidence 
suggest that AhR may play an important role not only in the regulation of
xenobiotic metabolism but also in the maintenance of homeostatic functions. When 
TCDD is administrated in vivo, this compound is primarily deposited in adipose
tissue. Therefore, it is critical to know the states of AhR in adipose cells for 
assessing the expression of toxicities of TCDD and related compounds in vivo. In 
this report, we examined the levels of AhR protein and its associated protein
(Arnt) during the adipose differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells. The level of AhR
protein was found to decrease with ongoing adipose differentiation in 3T3-L1
cells. The binding activity to the xenobiotic response element and the cellular
response to TCDD were also lowered as a result of adipose differentiation. These 
results indicate that the depletion of AhR is a novel event associated with
adipose differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells and that the magnitude of the depletion
of AhR is sufficient for 3T3-L1 cells to lose the functional response to
xenobiotics. We also found a population of 3T3-L1 cells which have an adipose
differentiation capability in the presence of high doses of TCDD. These cells
lack nuclear AhR but not cytoplasmic AhR, suggesting a possible negative role of 
liganded nuclear AhR in adipose differentiation. The level of the Arnt protein
also decreased as a result of the differentiation. However, the pattern of the
depletion of the Arnt protein was distinct from that of the AhR protein. The data
presented in this study will provide opportunities to carry out studies to better
understand the roles of AhR in adipose cells which are the primary targets of
TCDD.

PMID: 9705844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jul 30;248(3):789-94.

Transcriptionally active heterodimer formation of an Arnt-like PAS protein,
Arnt3, with HIF-1a, HLF, and clock.

Takahata S(1), Sogawa K, Kobayashi A, Ema M, Mimura J, Ozaki N, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University,
Sendai, Japan.

We isolated a cDNA clone encoding a polypeptide of 626 amino acids containing
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and PAS domains from a mouse cDNA library of P19
cells. This protein, termed Arnt3, showed the highest similarity to Arnt and
Arnt2 in the bHLH and PAS regions. Arnt3 mRNA was expressed in brain, skeletal
muscle, 13.5-day embryos, and P19 cells treated with retinoic acid. The partner
PAS proteins of Arnt3 were searched for by the two-hybrid system in yeast, and
HIF-1 alpha, HLF, and Clock among various bHLH/PAS proteins were found. Gel
mobility shift analysis using nuclear extracts from 293T cells cotransfected with
Arnt3 and HIF-1 alpha (or HLF) expression plasmids revealed that these complexes 
specifically bound the hypoxia-response element (HRE). Coexpression of Arnt3 and 
HIF-1 alpha (or HLF) in Arnt-deficient c4 cells enhanced transcription of a
reporter gene driven by the HRE sequences. We also showed that Arnt3 contained an
activation domain at the C-terminal region and a repression domain between the
PAS-A and PAS-B regions.

PMID: 9704006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jul 30;248(3):554-8.

Strain differences in cytochrome P4501A1 gene expression caused by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in the rat liver: role of the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor and its nuclear translocator.

Jana NR(1), Sarkar S, Yonemoto J, Tohyama C, Sone H.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Exposure and Health Effects Research Team, National Institute for
Environmental Studies, Ibaraki, Japan.

Rat strain variation in hepatic cytochrome P4501A1 (CYP1A1) gene expression
caused by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) was investigated along with 
possible underlying mechanism. TCDD at a single oral dose of 13.5 ng/kg body
weight significantly increased hepatic CYP1A1 mRNA expression in DRH, Long-Evans 
Cinamon (LEC), Long-Evans (LE), and Holtzman (HO) rats, but not in Sprague-Dawley
(SD), Wistar-Imamichi (WI), Lewis (LEW), and Fisher-344 (F344) strains. All
showed significant induction of CYP1A1 mRNA at a dose of 40 ng/kg, the relative
levels decreasing in the order DRH, LEC, HO, LE, F344, WI, LEW, and SD. A more
than 35-fold difference in the induction of CYP1A1 RNA was evident between the
DRH and SD strains. Based on CYP1A1 induction, classification into two distinctly
separate groups was possible, high responders (DRH, LEC, HO, and LE) and low
responders (SD, LEW, WI, and F344). The expression levels closely correlated with
the steady-state aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) mRNA expression, this being
approximately four-fold higher in the high than in the low responder group.
Analysis of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) showed the 
presence of a wild type as well as an alternately spliced variant in all strains,
with a 45-bp deletion whose sequence corresponded to part of 5' end of the basic 
region of the basic helix-loop-helix domain. Expressed levels of both products
were almost equal in all the strains except DRH, LEC and HO, where the wild form 
predominated. The results suggest that differential expression of both AhR and
ARNT are responsible for rat strain-specific differences in TCDD induced CYP1A1
expression.

PMID: 9703964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 1998 Mar;13 Suppl 3:S7-14.

Pharmacological differentiation of classical and novel antipsychotics.

Arnt J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychopharmacology, H. Lundbeck A/S, Valby, Denmark.

The symptoms of schizophrenia are treated through the blockade of mesolimbic and 
mesocortical dopamine activity. However, if dopamine activity in the
nigrostriatal region is also blocked, extrapyramidal syndromes (EPS) are induced,
and EPS are a major cause of noncompliance. It is therefore important for
antipsychotic drugs with selective pharmacological profiles to be developed.
Animal models for limbic selectivity and dose-response separation between
behavioural and pharmacological parameters, which are analogous to EPS and
antipsychotic effects, can now be used to differentiate between novel
antipsychotics with few or no EPS and classical antipsychotics. Schizophrenic
patients also often experience cognitive dysfunction, and it is important that
antipsychotic drugs are developed that do not exacerbate this. Again, animal
models can be used to give an indication of whether a compound has any effect on 
cognition. Both behavioural and electrophysiological rat models indicate that
novel antipsychotic drugs, such as sertindole, but not classical antipsychotic
drugs, such as haloperidol, demonstrate marked limbic selectivity. Nonhuman
primate models of EPS show that the novel antipsychotics have a much greater
separation between dose-response curves for antipsychotic effect and the
development of EPS. The Morris water maze confirmed that sertindole does not
adversely affect spatial learning or memory in rats. This paper reports on the
differentiation between classical and novel antipsychotics using animal models.

PMID: 9690964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1998 Jun;137(3):233-40.

In vivo muscarinic cholinergic mediated effects of Lu 25-109, a M1 agonist and
M2/M3 antagonist in vitro.

Sánchez C(1), Arnt J, Didriksen M, Dragsted N, Moltzen Lenz S, Matz J.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacological Research, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark.
cs@lundbeck.com

Lu 25-109 [5-(2-ethyl-2H-tetrazol-5-yl)-1,2,3,6-tetrahydro-1-methylpyridine] ,
has M agonistic and M2/M3 antagonistic effects at muscarinic receptors in vitro; 
a pharmacological profile that may be beneficial in treatment of Alzheimer's
disease. In the present study, we compare functional in vivo effects of Lu 25-109
and reference compounds in animal models of muscarinic cholinergic function. Lu
25-109 substituted completely for the discriminative stimulus effects of
(-)-7-methyl-3-(2-propynyloxy)-4,5,6,7-tetrahydroisothiazolo -[4, 5-c]pyridine
(Lu 26-046), a partial M1/M2 agonist, but only weakly for the effects of the
non-selective M1/M2/M3 agonist 3-methoxy-4,5,6,7-tetrahydro-isoxazolo[4, 5-c]
pyridine (O-Me-THPO). Lu 25-109 did not reverse O-Me-THPO-induced discriminative 
stimulus. Tacrine did not substitute for any of the training drugs. Lu 25-109 did
not substitute in (-)-nicotine trained rats. Lu 25-109 did not antagonize
oxotremorine-induced hypothermia, tremor and salivation in mice and antagonized
physostigmine-induced lethality with low potency. Unlike non-selective muscarinic
agonists and acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, Lu 25-109 did not induce
hypothermia, tremor or salivation in mice. Spontaneous locomotor activity and
motor co-ordination were inhibited only at high doses. Lu 25-109 had no effect on
mean blood pressure in anaesthetized rats. Lu 25-109 and O-Me-THPO produced a
significant increase in heart rate. The maximum increase was 37%. In
anaesthetized cats, increasing i.v. doses of Lu 25-109 were without effect on the
mean blood pressure, except for a short lasting (<2 min) depressor effect
following the IV injection. Furthermore, Lu 25-109 did not attenuate the reflex
mechanisms restoring blood pressure following orthostasis in cats. In conclusion,
the drug discrimination studies suggest a unique activity profile of Lu 25-109,
and the in vivo profile suggests none or a very low frequency of unwanted
cholinergic mediated effects.

PMID: 9683000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Aug 1;26(15):3577-83.

Assessment of aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex interactions using pBEVY
plasmids: expressionvectors with bi-directional promoters for use in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Miller CA 3rd(1), Martinat MA, Hyman LE.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Sciences Department and Tulane-Xavier Center for
Bioenvironmental Research,Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical 
Medicine, 1430 Tulane Avenue, New Orleans,LA 70112, USA.

The pBEVY (bi-directional expression vectors for yeast) plasmids were designed
with constitutive and galactose-induced bi-directional promoters to direct the
expression of multiple proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Using human
estrogen receptor as a test gene, relatively balanced expression levels from each
side of a bi-directional promoter were observed. Expression of a functional
heterodimeric transcription factor composed of human aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(Ahr) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) proteins was
accomplished using a single pBEVY plasmid. Previous studies suggest that
inhibitory cross-talk between the estrogen receptor and the Ahr/Arnt complex may 
occur and that Hsp90-Ahr complex formation is important for Ahr-mediated signal
transduction. Evidence for functional interaction among these proteins was
investigated using pBEVY plasmids in a yeast system. No inhibitory cross-talk was
observed in signaling assays performed with yeast that co-expressed Ahr, Arnt and
estrogen receptor. In contrast, Ahr/Arnt-mediated signal transduction was reduced
by 80% in a temperature-sensitive Hsp90 strain grown under non-permissive
conditions. We conclude that pBEVY plasmids facilitate the examination of
multiple protein interactions in yeast model systems.

PMCID: PMC147745
PMID: 9671822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1998 Jun;150(2):240-53.

In utero and lactational exposure of the male rat to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin impairs prostate development. 1. Effects on
gene expression.

Roman BL(1), Peterson RE.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Toxicology Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53706, USA.

In utero and lactational 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) exposure
decreases rat prostate weight without decreasing circulating androgen
concentrations. Because one mechanism by which TCDD is thought to cause toxicity 
is by aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-mediated alterations in gene transcription,
the goals of this study were to determine whether the developing prostate
expresses the AhR and its dimerization partner, the AhR nuclear translocator
(ARNT); to determine whether in utero and lactational TCDD exposure is capable of
directly activating gene transcription in the developing prostate; and to
identify prostatic mRNAs that exhibit altered abundance in response to in utero
and lactational TCDD exposure. Pregnant Holtzman rats were administered TCDD (1.0
microgram/kg po) or vehicle on Gestation Day (GD) 15, and male offspring were
euthanized between Postnatal Days (PNDs) 1 and 63. Using reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), mRNAs encoding the AhR and ARNT
were detected in both ventral and dorsolateral prostates from control animals
throughout postnatal development. ARNT protein was expressed in the majority of
stromal nuclei early in development, whereas ARNT expression in the prostate
epithelium was initially cytoplasmic but became nuclear as development
progressed. GD 15 TCDD exposure increased cytochrome P4501A1 (CYP1A1) mRNA and
protein in whole prostates between PNDs 7 and 21. In these TCDD-exposed animals, 
CYP1A1 protein was localized to the epithelium. In order to define other genes in
the developing prostate that might be regulated by TCDD at the level of mRNA, RNA
samples from PND 21 whole prostates from control and TCDD-exposed animals were
compared using mRNA differential display. Although no growth-regulatory
candidates were identified using this screening technique, a ventral
prostate-specific, androgen-regulated mRNA (20-kDa protein) was identified that
seemed to be downregulated by TCDD exposure. Northern blot analysis confirmed
this decrease at PND 21 and further showed that the downregulation was transient.
Similar results were obtained for four additional androgen-regulated prostatic
mRNAs (prostatic binding protein [PBP], Royal Winnipeg Ballet [RWB], probasin,
and dorsal protein-1 [DP-1]), all of which are markers of a differentiated ductal
epithelium. In contrast, TCDD exposure of adult male rats (25 micrograms TCDD/kg,
24 h) greatly induced CYP1A1 mRNA without affecting the abundance of
prostate-specific, androgen-regulated mRNAs. These results suggest that the
transient decreases in androgen-regulated prostatic mRNA abundance observed in
response to in utero and lactational TCDD exposure were probably not the result
of direct action of the activated AhR on these genes but instead were reflective 
of a TCDD-induced delay in prostate development.

PMID: 9653055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1998 Jun;150(2):228-39.

Responsiveness of the adult male rat reproductive tract to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin exposure: Ah receptor and ARNT expression,
CYP1A1 induction, and Ah receptor down-regulation.

Roman BL(1), Pollenz RS, Peterson RE.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Toxicology Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53706, USA.

Exposure to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) either in adulthood or
during late fetal and early postnatal development causes a variety of adverse
effects on the male rat reproductive system. It was therefore of interest to
identify male rat reproductive organs and cell types within these organs that
might be direct targets of TCDD exposure. Because TCDD toxicity could possibly be
the result of alterations in gene transcription mediated by the TCDD/aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)/AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT) complex, the presence 
of the AhR and ARNT in the various organs of the adult male reproductive tract
was examined using Western blotting. Both proteins were detectable in all organs 
examined (testis, epididymis, vas deferens, ventral prostate, dorsolateral
[combined dorsal and lateral] prostate, and seminal vesicle). Although technical 
difficulties precluded the immunohistochemical evaluation of AhR distribution in 
these organs, ARNT was localized in all organs in a variety of cell types,
including germ cells, epithelial cells, fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells, and
endothelial cells. Subcellular localization varied across organs and across cell 
types within these organs. In order to determine whether TCDD exposure could
alter gene expression in these organs, animals were dosed with TCDD (25
micrograms/kg po) or vehicle and euthanized at 24 h, and cytochrome P4501A1
(CYP1A1) expression was evaluated. By Western blotting, only the ventral and
dorsolateral prostates exhibited significant induction of CYP1A1.
Immunohistochemistry confirmed this induction and localized CYP1A1 expression to 
epithelial cells of the ventral and lateral lobes of the prostate.
Immunohistochemistry also revealed CYP1A1 induction in select epithelial cells in
the epididymis and seminal vesicle, as well as endothelial cells in the vas
deferens and seminal vesicle. No induction was observed in the testis. Finally,
AhR and ARNT expression in TCDD-exposed and control animals was evaluated by
Western blotting. Results revealed no effect of TCDD exposure on ARNT protein
expression, while AhR expression was decreased to 5-51% of control in all organs 
examined. In summary, both AhR and ARNT were expressed in all organs of the adult
male rat reproductive tract examined, and epithelial and/or endothelial cells
within each of these organs (with the exception of the testis) were responsive to
TCDD exposure in terms of CYP1A1 induction. In addition, all tissues exhibited
marked reductions in AhR protein content after TCDD exposure that did not
correlate with the magnitude of the CYP1A1 response.

PMID: 9653054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jun 18;247(2):383-6.

Silencing of CYP1A1 expression in rabbits by DNA methylation.

Takahashi Y(1), Suzuki C, Kamataki T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, N12W6, Kita-ku,
Hokkaido, Sapporo, 060-0812, Japan.

Unlike most experimental animals, treatment of adult rabbits with
3-methylcholanthrene (MC) does not induce the expression of the CYP1A1 gene. In
this study, we show that DNA methylation plays one of the key roles in the
suppression of CYP1A1 gene expression. S1 nuclease protection assay showed that
the induction of CYP1A1 mRNA by MC occurred in rabbit kidney RK13 cells but not
in rabbit lung R9ab cells, while aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and AhR nuclear 
translocator (Arnt) mRNAs were expressed in both cells at similar levels.
Interestingly, the treatment of R9ab cells with a DNA demethylating agent,
5-aza-2'-deoxycitidine, resulted in the induction of the expression of the CYP1A1
gene by MC. The results indicate that DNA methylation is one of the factors
involved in the loss of the MC-induced expression of the CYP1A1 gene. Thus, it
seemed that the binding of the AhR/Arnt complex to the xenobiotic-responsive
element (XRE) was inhibited by the hypermethylation of CpG dinucleotides within
an XRE core sequence (5'-CGTG-3'). To explore this possibility, we compared the
methylation status of XRE in R9ab cells with that in RK13 cells. A bisulfite
sequence analysis using genomic DNAs from R9ab cells showed that the CpG site
within XRE was highly methylated on both coding and non-coding strands. In
contrast to this result, the hypomethylation of XRE was seen in RK13 cells. To
examine whether or not the binding of the AhR/Arnt heterodimer to XRE is affected
by the methylation status of XRE, a gel shift assay using a methylated XRE as a
probe was carried out. As expected, the AhR/Arnt complex could not bind to the
methylated XRE. From these results, we conclude that the cell type-specific
transcription of the rabbit CYP1A1 gene is caused by DNA methylation.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9642136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. EMBO J. 1998 Jun 1;17(11):3005-15.

HIF-1 alpha is required for solid tumor formation and embryonic vascularization.

Ryan HE(1), Lo J, Johnson RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0366, USA.

The transcriptional response to lowered oxygen levels is mediated by the
hypoxia-inducible transcription factor (HIF-1), a heterodimer consisting of the
constitutively expressed aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)
and the hypoxic response factor HIF-1alpha. To study the role of the
transcriptional hypoxic response in vivo we have targeted the murine HIF-1alpha
gene. Loss of HIF-1alpha in embryonic stem (ES) cells dramatically retards solid 
tumor growth; this is correlated with a reduced capacity to release the
angiogenic factor vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) during hypoxia.
HIF-1alpha null mutant embryos exhibit clear morphological differences by
embryonic day (E) 8.0, and by E8.5 there is a complete lack of cephalic
vascularization, a reduction in the number of somites, abnormal neural fold
formation and a greatly increased degree of hypoxia (measured by the
nitroimidazole EF5). These data demonstrate the essential role of HIF-1alpha in
controlling both embryonic and tumorigenic responses to variations in
microenvironmental oxygenation.

PMCID: PMC1170640
PMID: 9606183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jul;18(7):4079-88.

Role of the PAS domain in regulation of dimerization and DNA binding specificity 
of the dioxin receptor.

Pongratz I(1), Antonsson C, Whitelaw ML, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, S-171-77
Stockholm, Sweden.

The dioxin receptor is a ligand-regulated transcription factor that mediates
signal transduction by dioxin and related environmental pollutants. The receptor 
belongs to the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) family of
factors, which, in addition to the bHLH motif, contain a PAS region of homology. 
Upon activation, the dioxin receptor dimerizes with the bHLH-PAS factor Arnt,
enabling the receptor to recognize xenobiotic response elements in the vicinity
of target genes. We have studied the role of the PAS domain in dimerization and
DNA binding specificity of the dioxin receptor and Arnt by monitoring the
abilities of the individual bHLH domains and different bHLH-PAS fragments to
dimerize and bind DNA in vitro and recognize target genes in vivo. The minimal
bHLH domain of the dioxin receptor formed homodimeric complexes, heterodimerized 
with full-length Arnt, and together with Arnt was sufficient for recognition of
target DNA in vitro and in vivo. In a similar fashion, only the bHLH domain of
Arnt was necessary for DNA binding specificity in the presence of the dioxin
receptor bHLH domain. Moreover, the bHLH domain of the dioxin receptor displayed 
a broad dimerization potential, as manifested by complex formation with, e.g. ,
the unrelated bHLH-Zip transcription factor USF. In contrast, a construct
spanning the dioxin receptor bHLH domain and an N-terminal portion of the PAS
domain failed to form homodimers and was capable of dimerizing only with Arnt.
Thus, the PAS domain is essential to confer dimerization specificity of the
dioxin receptor.

PMCID: PMC108992
PMID: 9632792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jun 19;273(25):15358-65.

A novel response to dioxin. Induction of ecto-ATPase gene expression.

Gao L(1), Dong L, Whitlock JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California 94305-5332, USA.

We used differential display to discover a new gene that the environmental
contaminant 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) regulates in mouse
hepatoma cells. Its predicted amino acid sequence suggests that the gene encodes 
an ecto-ATPase that contains multiple glycosylation sites, conserved cysteine
residues, and apyrase conserved regions. cDNA expression experiments in mouse
hepatoma cells confirm that the new gene encodes an ecto-ATPase. Wild-type mouse 
hepatoma cells contain both constitutive and TCDD-inducible ecto-ATPase activity.
Induction of ecto-ATPase gene expression by TCDD is direct and occurs at the
transcriptional level. Studies in mutant hepatoma cells indicate that induction
requires both the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and the AhR nuclear
translocator (Arnt). Furthermore, induction requires AhR's transactivation
domain, but not that of Arnt. Our findings reveal new aspects of dioxin's
biological effects and TCDD-dependent gene regulation.

PMID: 9624117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Histochem Cytochem. 1998 Jul;46(7):825-32.

Localization of xenobiotic-responsive element binding protein in rat hepatocyte
nuclei after methylcholanthrene administration as revealed by in situ
Southwestern hybridization.

Asaka Y(1), Watanabe J, Kanamura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kansai Medical University, Moriguchi, Osaka, Japan.

Xenobiotic-responsive element binding protein (XRE-BP), a heterodimer of aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and its nuclear translocator (Arnt), regulates the
transcription of cytochrome P-450 1A1 gene (CYP1A1) through XRE in response to
xenobiotic inducers. For a better understanding of the regulatory mechanism of
CYP1A1 through XRE, localization of XRE-BP was examined in liver sections or
isolated hepatocyte nuclei from control and 3-methylcholanthrene (MC)-treated
rats by in situ Southwestern hybridization, using synthetic XRE as a probe, and
was observed by confocal laser scanning microscopy and electron microscopy. Gel
mobility shift assay and competitive binding assay showed specificity of the
synthetic XRE probe. XRE-BP was exclusively localized in hepatocyte nuclei in
liver sections from animals 3 hr after MC injection, whereas the protein was
absent in hepatocyte cytoplasm in MC-treated animals and in hepatocyte nuclei and
cytoplasm in control animals. In isolated hepatocyte nuclei, XRE-BP began to
accumulate in the central region between 0.5 and 3 hr, showed a peak between 3
and 6 hr, decreased gradually between 6 and 72 hr, and disappeared at 72 hr after
MC injection. The protein was scarce in peripheral and nucleolar regions of the
nucleus. Therefore, XRE-BP is formed in the nuclei of hepatocytes after MC
stimulation. In addition, XRE-BP was found in isolated hepatocyte nuclei from
control animals after preincubation with cytoplasmic lysate from MC-treated
animals, although the protein was absent in the nuclei before the preincubation. 
These findings strongly suggest that AhR translocates from hepatocyte cytoplasm
to the nucleus and forms XRE-BP in the nucleus after MC stimulation.

PMID: 9632741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Cancer Res. 1998 Jun 1;58(11):2366-74.

Characterization of CYP1B1 and CYP1A1 expression in human mammary epithelial
cells: role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor in polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
metabolism.

Larsen MC(1), Angus WG, Brake PB, Eltom SE, Sukow KA, Jefcoate CR.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Toxicology Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53706, USA.

CYP1B1 and CYP1A1 expression and metabolism of 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene
(DMBA) have been characterized in early-passage human mammary epithelial cells
(HMECs) isolated from reduction mammoplasty tissue of seven individual donors.
The level of constitutive microsomal CYP1B1 protein expression was donor
dependent (<0.01-1.4 pmol/mg microsomal protein). CYP1B1 expression was
substantially induced by exposure of the cells to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) to levels ranging from 2.3 to 16.6
pmol/mg among the seven donors. Extremely low, reproducible levels of
constitutive CYP1A1 expression were detectable in three donors (0.03-0.16 pmol/mg
microsomal protein). TCDD inductions were larger for CYP1A1, as compared to
CYP1B1, demonstrating substantial variability in the induced levels among the
donors (0.8-16.5 pmol/mg). Northern and reverse transcriptase PCR analyses
corroborate the donor-dependent differences in protein expression, whereby CYP1B1
mRNA (5.2 kb) was constitutively expressed and was highly induced by TCDD
(33-fold). The contributions of CYP1B1 and CYP1A1 to the metabolism of DMBA were 
analyzed using recombinant human CYP1B1 and CYP1A1, as references, in conjunction
with antibody-specific inhibition analyses (anti-CYP1B1 and anti-CYP1A1).
Constitutive microsomal activity exhibited a profile of regioselective DMBA
metabolism that was characteristic of human CYP1B1 (increased proportions of 5,6-
and 10,11-DMBA-dihydrodiols), which was inhibited by anti-CYP1B1 (84%) but not by
anti-CYP1A1. TCDD-induced HMEC microsomal DMBA metabolism generated the
8,9-dihydrodiol of DMBA as the predominant metabolite, with a regioselectivity
similar to that of recombinant human CYP1A1, which was subsequently inhibited by 
anti-CYP1A1 (79%). A CYP1B1 contribution was indicated by the regioselectivity of
residual metabolism and by anti-CYP1B1 inhibition (25%). DMBA metabolism analyses
of one of three donors expressing measurable basal expression of CYP1A1 confirmed
DMBA metabolism levels equivalent to that from CYP1B1. The HMECs of all donors
expressed similar, very high levels of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and the aryl
hydrocarbon nuclear translocator protein, suggesting that aryl hydrocarbon
receptor and aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator protein expression are not
responsible for differences in cytochrome P450 expression. This study indicates
that CYP1B1 is an important activator of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in the 
mammary gland when environmental chemical exposures minimally induce CYP1A1.
Additionally, certain individuals express low levels of basal CYP1A1 in HMECs,
representing a potential risk factor of mammary carcinogenesis through enhanced
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon bioactivation.

PMID: 9622076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Jun 15;26(12):3044-52.

Functional and physical interactions between the estrogen receptor Sp1 and
nuclear aryl hydrocarbon receptor complexes.

Wang F(1), Hoivik D, Pollenz R, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA.

17beta-Estradiol (E2) induces cathepsin D gene expression in MCF-7 human breast
cancer cells and previous analyses of the proximal promoter region of this gene
identified two functional enhancer sequences; namely an
Sp1(N)23estrogen-responsive element (ERE) half-site (-199 to -165) and an
imperfect palindromic ERE (-119 to -107). A third region of the cathepsin D gene 
promoter (CD/L, -145 to -119) was also E2 responsive in transient transfection
assays. A GC-rich sequence which contains two overlapping Sp1 binding sites (-145
to -135) was responsible for ER-mediated transactivation and required formation
of an ER/Sp1 complex in which only the Sp1 protein bound DNA. E2 responsiveness
of the CD/L sequence was also dependent on an adjacent overlapping GCGTG motif
corresponding to the dioxin-responsive element (DRE) core binding sequence, which
is the cognate response element for the heterodimeric aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR)/AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT) transcription factor complex. The results
show that ER-mediated transactivation of CD/L was associated with the
Sp1(N)2-4DRE (core) motif and involved formation of a multiprotein
ER/Sp1-AhR/ARNT complex. These results illustrate a unique example of an
endogenous role for AhR/ARNT in the absence of added AhR agonist and indicate
that the cathepsin D gene proximal promoter region contains at least three
different functional motifs associated with ER-mediated transactivation.

PMCID: PMC147653
PMID: 9611253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mech Dev. 1998 Apr;73(1):117-23.

Expression of ARNT, ARNT2, HIF1 alpha, HIF2 alpha and Ah receptor mRNAs in the
developing mouse.

Jain S(1), Maltepe E, Lu MM, Simon C, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern
University Medical School, IL, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix-PAS (bHLH-PAS) protein ARNT is a dimeric partner of
the Ah receptor (AHR) and hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha(HIF1 alpha). These
dimers mediate biological responses to xenobiotic exposure and low oxygen
tension. The recent cloning of ARNT and HIF1(homologues (ARNT2 and HIF2 alpha)
indicates that at least six distinct bHLH-PAS heterodimeric combinations can
occur in response to a number of environmental stimuli. In an effort to
understand the biological relevance of this combinatorial complexity, we
characterized their relative expression at a number of developmental time points 
by parallel in situ hybridization of adjacent tissue sections. Our results reveal
that in general there is limited redundancy in the expression of these six
transcription factors and that each of these bHLH-PAS members displays a unique
pattern of developmental expression emerging as early as embryonic day 9.5.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 9545558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 May 12;95(10):5474-9.

The basic-helix-loop-helix-PAS orphan MOP3 forms transcriptionally active
complexes with circadian and hypoxia factors.

Hogenesch JB(1), Gu YZ, Jain S, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

We report that MOP3 is a general dimerization partner for a subset of the
basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) superfamily of transcriptional
regulators. We demonstrated that MOP3 interacts with MOP4, CLOCK,
hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF1alpha), and HIF2alpha. A DNA selection
protocol revealed that the MOP3-MOP4 heterodimer bound a CACGTGA-containing DNA
element. Transient transfection experiments demonstrated that the MOP3-MOP4 and
MOP3-CLOCK complexes bound this element in COS-1 cells and drove transcription
from a linked luciferase reporter gene. We also deduced the high-affinity DNA
binding sites for MOP3-HIF1alpha complex (TACGTGA) and used transient
transfection experiments to demonstrate that the MOP3-HIF1alpha and
MOP3-HIF2alpha heterodimers bound this element, drove transcription, and
responded to cellular hypoxia. Finally, we found that MOP3 mRNA expression
overlaps in a number of tissues with each of its four potential partner molecules
in vivo.

PMCID: PMC20401
PMID: 9576906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Toxicol Sci. 1998 Apr;42(2):117-28.

Female Sprague-Dawley rats exposed to a single oral dose of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin exhibit sustained depletion of aryl
hydrocarbon receptor protein in liver, spleen, thymus, and lung.

Pollenz RS(1), Santostefano MJ, Klett E, Richardson VM, Necela B, Birnbaum LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston 29425, USA.

There is currently little information concerning the time-dependent relationship 
between 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) exposure and aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor (AHR) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) protein 
concentration in vivo. Therefore, female Sprague-Dawley rats were given a single 
oral dose of TCDD (10 micrograms/kg), and the AHR and ARNT protein concentrations
in liver, spleen, thymus, and lung determined by Western blotting. In liver, the 
concentration of AHR protein was significantly reduced 8 and 24 h postdosing as
compared to time-matched controls. In spleen and lung, the concentration of AHR
protein was reduced 3, 8, 24, and 168 h posttreatment compared to time-matched
controls but returned to control levels by 336 h. In thymus, reductions in AHR
protein concentration were observed 8, 24, 168, and 336 h postdosing as compared 
to time-matched controls. Significant reductions in the concentration of ARNT
protein were not observed in any of the TCDD-exposed tissues. Functional studies 
in cell culture showed that exposure of a mouse hepatoma cell line (Hepa-1c1c7)
and a rat smooth muscle cell line (A-7) to TCDD (1 nM) for 12 days resulted in a 
50% reduction in TCDD-inducible reporter gene expression following subsequent
challenge by an additional dose of TCDD (1 nM). Collectively, these results show 
that (i) TCDD-mediated depletion of AHR occurs in vivo, (ii) AHR protein does not
rapidly recover to pretreatment levels even though the tissue concentration of
TCDD has fallen, and (iii) reduction in AHR protein concentration correlates with
reduction in TCDD-mediated reporter gene expression in mammalian culture cells.

PMID: 9579024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Pharmacol. 1998 Apr;53(4):691-700.

Protein kinase C activity is required for aryl hydrocarbon receptor
pathway-mediated signal transduction.

Long WP(1), Pray-Grant M, Tsai JC, Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biochemistry Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of
Veterinary Science, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park 16802,
USA.

The role of protein kinase C (PKC) in the human aryl hydrocarbon receptor (hAhR) 
signal transduction pathway was examined in cell lines stably transfected with
pGUDLUC6.1, in which luc+ is solely controlled by four dioxin-responsive elements
(DREs). These cell lines, P5A11 and HG40/6, were derived from HeLa and HepG2
cells respectively. Simultaneous treatment of these cells with 2,3,7,8,
-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA)
enhanced trans-activation of the reporter construct several-fold relative to
cells treated with TCDD alone. PKC inhibitors block the PMA effect and
hAhR-mediated signal transduction, demonstrating these processes require PKC
activity. Examination of other independently generated, HeLa-derived cell lines
stably transfected with pGUDLUC6.1 demonstrates the PMA effect in P5A11 cells is 
not a clonal artifact. Transient transfections indicate the PMA effect is not due
to a luciferase message/gene product stabilization mechanism or stimulation of
the basal transcription machinery. Examination of cytosolic preparations
demonstrates PKC stimulation or inhibition does not alter hAhR and hAhR nuclear
translocator protein levels or TCDD-induced down-regulation of hAhR levels.
Similarly, examination of nuclear extracts indicated PKC stimulation or
inhibition does not alter nuclear AhR levels or hAhR/hAhR nuclear translocator
protein heterodimer DRE-binding activity as assessed by electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay. These results demonstrate a PKC-mediated event is required for the
hAhR to form a functional transcriptional complex that leads to trans-activation 
and that the DRE is the minimal DNA element required for PMA to enhance
AhR-mediated trans-activation.

PMID: 9547360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Pharmacol. 1998 Apr;53(4):623-9.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-dependent suppression by 2,3,7,
8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin of IgM secretion in activated B cells.

Sulentic CE(1), Holsapple MP, Kaminski NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan State University, East
Lansing 48824, USA.

The immune system has been identified as a sensitive target for the toxic effects
produced by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Furthermore, the B cell
has been identified as a sensitive cellular target of TCDD by previous cell-type 
fractionation studies from this laboratory. The mechanism responsible for the
immunotoxic effects produced by TCDD is unclear; however, many of the biological 
effects of TCDD are thought to be mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR). Here, we describe two B cell lines that differ considerably in their
expression of the AhR and in their sensitivity to TCDD. Our results demonstrated 
a marked expression of the AhR protein in the CH12.LX B cell line but not in the 
BCL-1 B cell line. Transcripts for the AhR were not detected by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction in the BCL-1 cells. The AhR nuclear
translocator (ARNT) protein was highly expressed in both cell lines. In addition,
the AhR and ARNT are functional in CH12.LX cells as demonstrated by TCDD-induced 
CYP1A1 induction. TCDD did not induce CYP1A1 in BCL-1 cells. Furthermore, TCDD
treatment resulted in suppression of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced IgM
secretion in CH12.LX cells. Conversely, TCDD-induced inhibition of IgM secretion 
was not demonstrated in LPS-stimulated BCL-1 cells, implicating a role for the
AhR in the inhibition of B cell effector function. LPS-induced differentiation of
the CH12.LX cells also resulted in a marked induction of Ahr expression which was
not induced in LPS-stimulated BCL-1 cells. These studies have implicated the AhR 
as a critical factor in TCDD-induced inhibition of IgM secretion and have
demonstrated an induction of AhR gene and protein expression after B cell
activation.

PMID: 9547351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1998 Apr 1;352(1):9-18.

Expression of functional aromatic hydrocarbon receptor and aromatic hydrocarbon
nuclear translocator proteins in murine bone marrow stromal cells.

Lavin AL(1), Hahn DJ, Gasiewicz TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) acting through the aromatic
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and its dimerization partner, the AhR nuclear
translocator protein (arnt), elicits numerous toxicological effects including
immunosuppression and thymic atrophy. Previous work has shown that TCDD alters
bone marrow prothymocyte populations. These effects could be mediated at the
lymphocyte level directly and/or through effects on bone marrow stromal cells, a 
population important in the support of lymphopoiesis. The purpose of this study
was to characterize AhR and arnt expression in three murine bone marrow stromal
cell lines (S17, M2-10B4, and BMS2) and in primary stromal cell cultures.
Immunoblot analysis detected AhR protein in M2-10B4 and BMS2 cells. AhR protein
was also detected in the primary cultures. Arnt protein could be detected in all 
cell cultures. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays detected TCDD-dependent
dioxin-responsive element (DRE) binding in all three cell lines. DNA binding was 
sequence-specific and dependent on AhR, as demonstrated by the addition of
unlabeled DRE DNA or of anti-AhR antibody. Results obtained with the primary
cultures paralleled those seen with the stromal cell lines. The ED50 for
induction of TCDD-dependent DRE binding in M2-10B4 cells was 0.21 nM. TCDD
treatment did not induce stromal P4501A1 mRNA expression but did increase P4501B1
mRNA levels in all three cell lines and in the primary cultures. These results
indicate that murine bone marrow stromal cells express AhR and arnt proteins.
Furthermore, these proteins are functional in terms of their DRE-binding ability 
and potential to regulate mRNA levels in a gene-specific fashion.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9521805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Cancer Lett. 1997 Nov 25;120(1):53-63.

Inhibition of 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene-induced rat mammary tumor growth by 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonists.

McDougal A(1), Wilson C, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station 77843-4466, USA.

The antitumorigenic activities of 6-methyl-1,3,8-trichlorodibenzofuran (6-MCDF), 
8-methyl-1,3,6-trichlorodibenzofuran (8-MCDF) and
6-cyclohexyl-1,3,8-trichlorodibenzofuran (6-CHDF) were investigated in the
7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA) rat mammary tumor model. At doses of 5, 10 
or 25 mg/kg/week, both 6-MCDF and 8-MCDF significantly inhibited mammary tumor
growth and at the 5 mg/kg/week dose >50% growth inhibition was observed. In
contrast, 6-CHDF was inactive at the 5 mg/kg/week dose and the
structure-antitumorigenicity relationships (6-MCDF/8-MCDF > 6-CHDF) correlated
with structure-antiestrogenicity (rat uterus) studies and the relative binding
affinities of these compounds for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). The
antitumorigenic activity of 6-MCDF or 8-MCDF in the mammary was not accompanied
by any significant changes in liver/body weight ratios, liver morphology or
induction of hepatic CYP1A1-dependent activity which is one of the most sensitive
indicators of exposure to AhR agonists. RT-PCR and Western blot analysis of
mammary tumor mRNA and protein extracts, respectively, confirmed the presence of 
AhR suggesting that AhR-mediated signaling pathways are functional in rat mammary
tumors. These results define a relatively non-toxic group of AhR agonists which
exhibit potent antitumorigenic activity in the DMBA-induced rat mammary tumor
model (<1 mg/kg/day), and therefore represent a new class of indirect-acting
antiestrogens which have potential for clinical treatment of mammary cancer.

PMID: 9570386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 17;95(6):2844-9.

Caenorhabditis elegans orthologs of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and its
heterodimerization partner the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator.

Powell-Coffman JA(1), Bradfield CA, Wood WB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0347, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor,
until now described only in vertebrates, that mediates many of the carcinogenic
and teratogenic effects of certain environmental pollutants. Here, we describe
orthologs of AHR and its dimerization partner AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) in 
the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, encoded by the genes ahr-1 and aha-1,
respectively. The corresponding proteins, AHR-1 and AHA-1, share biochemical
properties with their mammalian cognates. Specifically, AHR-1 forms a tight
association with HSP90, and AHR-1 and AHA-1 interact to bind DNA fragments
containing the mammalian xenobiotic response element with sequence specificity.
Yeast expression studies indicate that C. elegans AHR-1, like vertebrate AHR,
requires some form of post-translational activation. Moreover, this requirement
depends on the presence of the domains predicted to mediate binding of HSP90 and 
ligand. Preliminary experiments suggest that if AHR-1 is ligand-activated, its
spectrum of ligands is different from that of the mammalian receptor: C. elegans 
AHR-1 is not photoaffinity labeled by a dioxin analog, and it is not activated by
beta-naphthoflavone in the yeast system. The discovery of these genes in a
simple, genetically tractable invertebrate should allow elucidation of AHR-1
function and identification of its endogenous regulators.

PMCID: PMC19657
PMID: 9501178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Biochem Pharmacol. 1998 Feb 15;55(4):489-97.

Prolonged depletion of AH receptor without alteration of receptor mRNA levels
after treatment of cells in culture with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Giannone JV(1), Li W, Probst M, Okey AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Previous experiments have shown that the total cellular content of the AH
receptor (AHR) drops rapidly after exposure of mouse hepatoma cells (Hepa-1) to
the potent AHR ligand 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD); within 6 hr
after treatment, less than 20% of the original cell content of AHR can be
detected by radioligand binding or by immunoblotting. The goals of our current
study were to determine the duration of receptor depletion following treatment
with ligand and to determine if depletion is due to decreased expression of the
Ahr gene that encodes the AHR. We found that depletion of AHR persisted for at
least 72 hr after exposure to TCDD. Treatment with 3-methylcholanthrene caused a 
transient drop in total cell AHR, but the AHR levels returned to near
pretreatment levels within 72 hr after the first exposure. TCDD treatment did not
alter the levels of AHR mRNA as assessed by reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction or slot blot assays. Thus, the decrease in AHR protein cannot be
attributed to depression of transcription of the Ahr gene by TCDD. TCDD treatment
did not alter the levels of the dimerization partner of the AHR, the AH receptor 
nuclear translocator protein (ARNT), or ARNT mRNA. In the presence of TCDD, both 
the AHR and the ARNT protein can be maintained at high levels in the nucleus if
transcription is inhibited with actinomycin-D. In the absence of actinomycin-D,
the AHR protein was lost rapidly, but the ARNT protein level in the cell was
maintained. Together, these results suggest that the AHR protein is degraded
through a selective mechanism that spares the ARNT protein and that the
degradation pathway involves a protein that itself has a short half-life.

PMID: 9514084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Biochem. 1997 Dec;122(6):1075-9.

Ah receptor, a novel ligand-activated transcription factor.

Sogawa K(1), Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University,
Sendai. sogawa@mail.cc.tohoku.ac.jp

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is widely distributed in vertebrates and is
known to be involved in metabolism of xenobiotics including man-made chemicals,
most of which act as a ligand for the receptor, although no endogenous ligand has
yet been known. Upon binding a ligand, the receptor is activated to translocate
to the nuclei, and during the nuclear translocation process, it is dissociated
from the 90 kDa heat shock protein (Hsp90) to form a heterodimer with Arnt (Ah
receptor nuclear translocator). The heterodimer complex binds a DNA response
element termed xenobiotic responsive element (XRE) localized upstream of the
target genes of many drug-metabolizing enzymes including cytochrome P4501A1 and
glutathione S-transferase to activate their transcription. Recent cDNA cloning
has revealed that the AhR, like Arnt, possesses characteristic structural motifs 
of basic helix-loop-helix and PAS domains responsible for DNA recognition,
heterodimerization, and ligand binding, and functions as a novel receptor-type
transcription factor.

PMID: 9498548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 1998 Jan;25(1):1-9.

Transcriptional activation of cytochrome P450 genes by different classes of
chemical inducers.

Dogra SC(1), Whitelaw ML, May BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Adelaide, South Australia.

1. We review here the molecular mechanisms underlying the xenobiotic induction of
genes encoding cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes in the liver and other tissues. We
will focus on four major families of CYP genes. 2. Members of the CYP1 gene
family are induced by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and this process is
mediated by the basic helix-loop-helix proteins: the Ah receptor and its
heterodimeric partner Arnt. Considerable progress has been made in elucidating
the molecular details of this induction process. 3. CYP4 genes are activated by
peroxisomal proliferators, a group of structurally diverse chemicals that also
induce peroxisome proliferation. The transcriptional response is dependent on the
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor and its partner RXR, both members of
the nuclear receptor superfamily; their role in the induction process has been
well characterized at the molecular level. 4. In contrast, the mechanism of gene 
induction of CYP2 genes by phenobarbital and other structurally diverse inducers 
is not well understood and a specific phenobarbital-responsive receptor has not
been identified. 5. Induction of the CYP3 gene family by the glucocorticoid
dexamethasone appears to involve the glucocorticoid receptor, but this receptor
is not apparently required for induction by metapyrone and a complete molecular
understanding of the induction processes is lacking at present.

PMID: 9493551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1998 Feb 1;350(1):72-8.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-inducible or constitutive expression of human UDP
glucuronosyltransferase UGT1A6.

Münzel PA(1), Lehmköster T, Brück M, Ritter JK, Bock KW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, University of Tübingen, Germany.

Transcriptional regulation of human UGT1A6, a UDP glucuronosyltransferase isoform
conjugating a wide variety of planar phenols, has been studied using transfection
experiments with plasmids containing its 3-kb 5' upstream region and
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase as reporter gene. Previously, two modes of
expression of the isoform have been described: in colon carcinoma Caco-2 cells
UGT1A6 was found to be TCDD-inducible, whereas in lung carcinoma A549 cells it
was constitutively expressed. Therefore functional analysis of UGT1A6 regulation 
was carried out using these two cell lines. In the upstream region of human
UGT1A6 one xenobiotic-responsive element (XRE) was found between-1498 and -1502
bp. In Caco-2 cells the reporter gene activity of the entire plasmid and of
deletion mutants containing the XRE were TCDD-inducible, in contrast to
experiments with a deletion mutant which did not contain the XRE. TCDD induction 
was marginal in transfection studies with A549 cells. Gel mobility shift analysis
indicated that the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and its partner Arnt bind to the
XRE. Furthermore, primer extension studies suggest cell-specific use of multiple 
TATA boxes. Hence, regulation of human UGT1A6 appears to be cell-specific
including both constitutive and aryl hydrocarbon receptor-controlled expression.

PMID: 9466822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1997 Dec;283(3):1323-32.

The selective sigma2-ligand Lu 28-179 has potent anxiolytic-like effects in
rodents.

Sánchez C(1), Arnt J, Costall B, Kelly ME, Meier E, Naylor RJ, Perregaard J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Departments, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

Erratum in
    J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1998 May;285(2):929.

The anxiolytic potential of the selective sigma2 ligand
1-[4-[1-(4-Fluorophenyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]-1-butyl]spiro[isobenzofuran-1(3H),4-piper
idine] [corrected] (Lu 28-179) was assessed in various animal models of anxiety
in rodents. Lu 28-179 facilitated the exploratory behavior of mice and rats in
the black and white two-compartment box over a large dose range. In the rat, the 
minimal effective dose (MED) was 0.18 nmol/kg (0.1 microg/kg), and in the mouse, 
the MED was 0.00018 nmol/kg (0.1 ng/kg). The anxiolytic-like effect was
maintained after treatment with 1 microg/kg/day for up to 14 days, and no
anxiogenic-like effects were seen upon withdrawal from repeated treatment. Lu
28-179 increased the time that pairs of rats spent in active social interaction
(unfamiliar high-light conditions), MED = 0.1 ng/kg. Daily treatment with Lu
28-179 (1.8 nmol/kg = 1 microg/kg/day) for up to 4 weeks increased the social
interaction time significantly compared with controls, and no anxiogenic-like
effects were seen upon withdrawal. Furthermore, Lu 28-179 reversed shock-induced 
suppression of drinking in the rat (MED = 18,000 nmol/kg = 10 mg/kg). Lu 28-179
did not inhibit footshock-induced ultrasonic vocalization in the rat or
isolation-induced aggressive behavior in the mouse. Lu 28-179 was over 100 times 
more potent than diazepam in the rat and mouse black and white test box and the
rat social interaction test, whereas the potency of Lu 28-179 was comparable to
that of lorazepam in reversal of shock-induced suppression of drinking. Lu 28-179
neither induced sedation nor impaired motor coordination, even at high doses
(70,000 nmol/kg = 40 mg/kg). In conclusion, Lu 28-179 exerts potent and
long-lasting anxiolytic-like effects in rodents without inducing sedation and
withdrawal anxiogenesis.

PMID: 9400007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 12;272(50):31845-54.

A mutation in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) in a cultured mammalian cell
line identifies a novel region of AHR that affects DNA binding.

Sun W(1), Zhang J, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UCLA Jonsson Comprehensive
Cancer Center, and Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los
Angeles, California 90095-1732, USA.

Introduction of a retroviral expression vector for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
(AHR) restores CYP1A1 inducibility to a mutant derivative of the Hepa-1 cell line
that is defective in induction of CYP1A1 by ligands for the receptor. An AHR
protein with normal ligand binding activity is expressed in the mutant but ligand
treatment of mutant cell extract fails to induce binding of the AHR. ARNT (aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator) dimer to the xenobiotic responsive
element (XRE). AHR cDNAs derived from the mutant encode a protein that is
unimpaired in ligand-dependent dimerization with ARNT, but the AHR.ARNT dimer so 
formed is severely impaired in XRE binding activity. The mutant cDNAs contain a C
to G mutation at base 648, causing a cysteine to tryptophan alteration at amino
acid 216, located between the PER-ARNT-SIM homology region (PAS) A and PAS B
repeats. Introduction of the same mutation in the wild-type AHR sequence by
site-directed mutagenesis similarity impaired XRE binding activity. Substitution 
with the conservative amino acid, serine, had no effect on XRE binding. The
tryptophan mutation, but not the wild-type allele, was detectable in genomic DNA 
of the mutant. The implication that an amino acid within the PAS region may be
involved in DNA binding indicates that the DNA binding behavior of AHR may be
more anomalous than previously suspected.

PMID: 9395531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 12;272(50):31755-63.

Signal transduction-mediated activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor in rat
hepatoma H4IIE cells.

Backlund M(1), Johansson I, Mkrtchian S, Ingelman-Sundberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Toxicology, Institute of Environmental Medicine and
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, S-171
77 Stockholm, Sweden.

We have investigated mechanisms of omeprazole (OME)-mediated induction of CYP1A1 
and CYP3A, using the rat hepatoma H4IIE cell line, in comparison with mechanisms 
exerted by traditional aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) ligands such as
benso(a)pyrene (B(a)P) and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). OME did
not bind specifically to AhR, and it could not activate the AhR complex in rat
cytosol to a xenobiotic-responsive element (XRE)-binding form in vitro.
Genistein, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, and daidzein, an inhibitor of casein
kinase II, efficiently inhibited OME-mediated but not B(a)P- or TCDD-mediated
induction of CYP1A1, as monitored at the transcriptional, mRNA, and protein
levels as well as by analysis of activation of XRE-luciferase reporter constructs
transfected into H4IIE cells. The protease inhibitor Nalpha-p-tosyl-L-lysine
chloromethyl ketone (TLCK) and lavendustin A also had similar OME-specific
effects. In addition, insulin pretreatment caused an almost complete inhibition
of OME-dependent CYP1A1 induction but only partially affected TCDD and
B(a)P-mediated induction of CYP1A1. Staurosporine, an inhibitor of protein kinase
C, impaired the induction by both B(a)P and OME. OME caused an approximately
2-fold increase in the level of CYP3A expression, but all inhibitors used were
ineffective in preventing this induction. Gel shift analysis with radiolabeled
XRE and specific peptide antibodies toward AhR and aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator protein (Arnt) revealed an OME-mediated translocation of the
AhR.Arnt complex into the nuclei. Genistein inhibited the specific nuclear XRE
binding caused by OME, but it potentiated the formation of the TCDD-induced
XRE.AhR complex. Although daidzein was able to effectively inhibit the
OME-stimulated CYP1A1 gene transcription, it did not influence the OME-dependent 
AhR.XRE complex formation. The data are consistent with a mechanism for
OME-mediated induction of CYP1A1 that involves activation of the AhR complex via 
intracellular signal transduction systems and that is distinct from induction
mediated by AhR ligands.

PMID: 9395520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Dec 9;94(25):13743-8.

Molecular evolution of two vertebrate aryl hydrocarbon (dioxin) receptors (AHR1
and AHR2) and the PAS family.

Hahn ME(1), Karchner SI, Shapiro MA, Perera SA.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA
02543, USA. mhahn@whoi.edu

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
through which halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons such as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) cause altered gene expression and
toxicity. The AHR belongs to the basic helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-Sim (bHLH-PAS)
family of transcriptional regulatory proteins, whose members play key roles in
development, circadian rhythmicity, and environmental homeostasis; however, the
normal cellular function of the AHR is not yet known. As part of a phylogenetic
approach to understanding the function and evolutionary origin of the AHR, we
sequenced the PAS homology domain of AHRs from several species of early
vertebrates and performed phylogenetic analyses of these AHR amino acid sequences
in relation to mammalian AHRs and 24 other members of the PAS family. AHR
sequences were identified in a teleost (the killifish Fundulus heteroclitus), two
elasmobranch species (the skate Raja erinacea and the dogfish Mustelus canis),
and a jawless fish (the lamprey Petromyzon marinus). Two putative AHR genes,
designated AHR1 and AHR2, were found both in Fundulus and Mustelus. Phylogenetic 
analyses indicate that the AHR2 genes in these two species are orthologous,
suggesting that an AHR gene duplication occurred early in vertebrate evolution
and that multiple AHR genes may be present in other vertebrates. Database
searches and phylogenetic analyses identified four putative PAS proteins in the
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, including possible AHR and ARNT homologs.
Phylogenetic analysis of the PAS gene family reveals distinct clades containing
both invertebrate and vertebrate PAS family members; the latter include
paralogous sequences that we propose have arisen by gene duplication early in
vertebrate evolution. Overall, our analyses indicate that the AHR is a
phylogenetically ancient protein present in all living vertebrate groups (with a 
possible invertebrate homolog), thus providing an evolutionary perspective to the
study of dioxin toxicity and AHR function.

PMCID: PMC28377
PMID: 9391097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 26;272(52):32824-9.

Expression of the human aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex in yeast. Activation of
transcription by indole compounds.

Miller CA 3rd(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences and Center for Bioenvironmental
Research, Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, New
Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA. rellim@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu

The human aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator protein (ARNT) were coexpressed in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae to create a system for the study of this heterodimeric transcription
factor. Specific transcriptional activation mediated by AHR/ARNT heterodimer,
which is a functional indicator of receptor expression, was assessed by
beta-galactosidase activity produced from a reporter plasmid. Yeast expressing
AHR and ARNT displayed constitutive transcriptional activity that was not
augmented by addition of AHR agonists in strains that required exogenous
tryptophan for viability. In contrast, strains with an intact pathway for
tryptophan biosynthesis responded to AHR agonists and had lower levels of
background beta-galactosidase activity. Hexachlorobenzene, benzo(a)pyrene, and
beta-naphthoflavone were effective AHR agonists in the yeast system, and had EC50
values of 200, 40, and 20 nM, respectively, for beta-galactosidase activity
induction. Tryptophan, indole, indole acetic acid, and tryptamine activated
transcription in yeast coexpressing AHR and ARNT (EC50 values approximately 300
microM). Indole-3-carbinol was an exceptionally potent AHR agonist (EC50
approximately 10 microM) in yeast. This yeast system is useful for the study of
AHR/ARNT protein complexes, and may be generally applicable to the investigation 
of other multiprotein complexes.

PMID: 9407059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Neuropsychopharmacology. 1998 Feb;18(2):63-101.

Do novel antipsychotics have similar pharmacological characteristics? A review of
the evidence.

Arnt J(1), Skarsfeldt T.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

The pharmacological properties of the novel antipsychotic drugs (APDs)
risperidone, sertindole, olanzapine, quetiapine, ziprasidone, remoxipride, and
amperozide are reviewed and compared with haloperidol and clozapine. Focus is
made on their receptor profiles, their effects in animal models used for
evaluation of antipsychotic activity, and extrapyramidal side effects (EPS). In
addition, the contrasting actions of these compounds on animal models of
cognition, anxiety, and depression are briefly reviewed. The available evidence
indicates that novel APDs and clozapine can be differentiated from haloperidol,
particularly in models of EPS and cognitive side effects. However, among the
group of novel APDs there are many individual differences in models reflecting
limbic versus striatal inhibition of dopamine function: clozapine and sertindole 
show the largest limbic selectivity, followed by quetiapine, ziprasidone,
olanzapine and remoxipride, whereas risperidone in many respects has a profile
that resembles haloperidol. To date, the results of clinical studies have
confirmed the predictions of lower incidence or absence of EPS after
administration of novel APDs in doses which demonstrate antipsychotic efficacy.

PMID: 9430133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Pharmacol. 1997 Dec;52(6):921-7.

Leukocyte activation induces aryl hydrocarbon receptor up-regulation, DNA
binding, and increased Cyp1a1 expression in the absence of exogenous ligand.

Crawford RB(1), Holsapple MP, Kaminski NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan State University, East
Lansing 48824, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) functions as a transcription factor after
ligand binding by halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons.
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), the most toxic halogenated aromatic
hydrocarbon, is dependent on binding to the AhR to mediate a broad range of toxic
effects. Immune suppression is one of the most sensitive sequela associated with 
TCDD exposure, yet, paradoxically, resting leukocytes express a relatively low
amount of AhR. Here we report that activation of leukocytes produced a 6-fold
increase in AhR steady state mRNA levels and a concordant increase in AhR protein
expression. Furthermore, leukocyte activation induced AhR translocation, DNA
binding to a dioxin response element, and CYP1A1 transcription in the absence of 
TCDD. Activated leukocytes exhibited an even greater enhancement of dioxin
response element binding by the AhR in the presence of TCDD than in the absence
of TCDD. These studies suggest that the mechanism responsible for the sensitivity
of immunocompetent cells to TCDD may be directly associated with a marked
increase in AhR expression, which accompanies leukocyte activation.

PMID: 9415701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Drug Metab Rev. 1997 Nov;29(4):1107-27.

Induction of drug-metabolizing enzymes by dioxin.

Whitlock JP Jr(1), Chichester CH, Bedgood RM, Okino ST, Ko HP, Ma Q, Dong L, Li
H, Clarke-Katzenberg R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
California 94305-5332, USA.

PMID: 9421687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jan;18(1):525-35.

Constitutive activation of the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor.

Chang CY(1), Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati Medical Center,
Ohio 45267-0056, USA.

The ligand-activated aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) dimerizes with the AHR
nuclear translocator (ARNT) to form a functional complex that transactivates
expression of the cytochrome P-450 CYP1A1 gene and other genes in the
dioxin-inducible [Ah] gene battery. Previous work from this laboratory has shown 
that the activity of the CYP1A1 enzyme negatively regulates this process. To
study the relationship between CYP1A1 activity and Ah receptor activation we used
CYP1A1-deficient mouse hepatoma c37 cells and CYP1A1- and AHR-deficient African
green monkey kidney CV-1 cells. Using gel mobility shift and luciferase reporter 
gene expression assays, we found that c37 cells that had not been exposed to
exogenous Ah receptor ligands already contained transcriptionally active AHR-ARNT
complexes, a finding that we also observed in wild-type Hepa-1 cells treated with
Ellipticine, a CYP1A1 inhibitor. In CV-1 cells, transient expression of AHR and
ARNT leads to high levels of AHR-ARNT-dependent luciferase gene expression even
in the absence of an agonist. Using a green fluorescent protein-tagged AHR, we
showed that elevated reporter gene expression correlates with constitutive
nuclear localization of the AHR. Transcriptional activation of the luciferase
reporter gene observed in CV-1 cells is significantly decreased by (i) expression
of a functional CYP1A1 enzyme, (ii) competition with chimeric or truncated AHR
proteins containing the AHR ligand-binding domain, and (iii) treatment with the
AHR antagonist alpha-naphthoflavone. These results suggest that a CYP1A1
substrate, which accumulates in cells lacking CYP1A1 enzymatic activity, is an
AHR ligand responsible for endogenous activation of the Ah receptor.

PMCID: PMC121520
PMID: 9418899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 1997 Nov 21;272(47):29614-9.

Down-regulation of major histocompatibility complex Q1b gene expression by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Dong L(1), Ma Q, Whitlock JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California 94305-5332, USA.

We analyzed mouse hepatoma cells using differential display to discover new genes
that respond to the environmental contaminant 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD). We identified a class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) gene,
which we designated as MHC Q1b, whose expression decreases in the presence of
TCDD. TCDD-induced down-regulation of MHC Q1b requires both the aromatic
hydrocarbon receptor and the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator, 
transcription factors that up-regulate other genes in response to TCDD.
Down-regulation of MHC Q1b by TCDD appears to involve both transcriptional and
post-transcriptional regulatory events; the post-transcriptional destabilization 
of MHC Q1b mRNA is probably a secondary response to TCDD. Our findings reveal new
mechanistic aspects of gene regulation by TCDD. In addition, our observations
suggest a mechanism that might account for some of TCDD's immunotoxic effects.

PMID: 9368027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1997 Nov 15;347(2):163-73.

Differentiation status of cultured murine keratinocytes modulates induction of
genes responsive to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Jones CL(1), Reiners JJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Toxicology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan
48201, USA.

Primary murine keratinocytes were cultured in a chemically defined, serum-free
medium which facilitated manipulation of their differentiation status. Exposure
of basal cell and differentiating cultures to >/= 0.1 nM
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) preferentially elevated
7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase specific activities in differentiating cultures
(28-fold versus 4-fold increases after 36 h of exposure). Semiquantitative
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analyses demonstrated
the presence of constitutive mRNA transcripts corresponding to four known
TCDD-inducible genes (e.g., Cyp1a1, Cyp1b1, Ahd4, and Nmo1) in both
differentiating and proliferating cultures of murine keratinocytes. All four
genes were induced in differentiating cultures following exposure to TCDD. No
induction occurred in comparably treated basal cell cultures. Indirect
immunofluorescence analyses demonstrated the presence of aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) proteins
in both basal and differentiating keratinocytes. Both proteins appeared to be
associated with the nucleus and their nuclear association was independent of
prior exposure to TCDD. These studies suggest that AHR activation in murine skin 
is regulated as a function of the keratinocyte differentiation program.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9367521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Development. 1997 Nov;124(22):4571-82.

The Drosophila tango gene encodes a bHLH-PAS protein that is orthologous to
mammalian Arnt and controls CNS midline and tracheal development.

Sonnenfeld M(1), Ward M, Nystrom G, Mosher J, Stahl S, Crews S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, The University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, 27599-7260, USA.

The Drosophila single-minded and trachealess bHLH-PAS genes control transcription
and development of the CNS midline cell lineage and tracheal tubules,
respectively. We show that Single-minded and Trachealess activate transcription
by forming dimers with the Drosophila Tango protein that is an orthologue of the 
mammalian Arnt protein. Both cell culture and in vivo studies show that a DNA
enhancer element acts as a binding site for both Single-minded::Tango and
Trachealess::Tango heterodimers and functions in controlling CNS midline and
tracheal transcription. Isolation and analysis of tango mutants reveal CNS
midline and tracheal defects, and gene dosage studies demonstrate in vivo
interactions between single-minded::tango and trachealess::tango. These
experiments support the existence of an evolutionarily conserved, functionally
diverse bHLH-PAS protein regulatory system.

PMID: 9409674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Biol Chem. 1997 Nov 28;272(48):30025-31.

Inhibition of the transcription of CYP1A1 gene by the upstream stimulatory factor
1 in rabbits. Competitive binding of USF1 with AhR.Arnt complex.

Takahashi Y(1), Nakayama K, Itoh S, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Kamataki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Drug Metabolism, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido
University, N12W6, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060, Japan.
kamataki@pharm.hokudai.ac.jp

A xenobiotic-responsive element (XRE)-binding factor(s) other than the AhR.Arnt
complex was found to inhibit the transcription of CYP1A1 gene in the liver from
adult rabbits, known to be nonresponsive to CYP1A1 inducers. The constitutive
factor(s) in liver nuclear extracts bound to the core sequence of XRE. The
binding was eliminated by the presence of an excess amount of the AhR.Arnt
complex synthesized in vitro. To identify the constitutive factor(s), a sequence 
similar to rabbit XRE was sought. It was found that the sequence of rabbit XRE
overlapped with that of the upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1)-binding site in 
the mouse metallothionein I promoter. In fact, a super shift assay using a
specific antibody against human USF1 indicated that USF1 was capable of binding
to rabbit XRE. Additionally, the AhR.Arnt-mediated activation of XRE-TK/Luc
reporter gene in RK13 cells was blocked by the transfection with a USF1
expression vector with the amounts of the expression vector transfected. These
results indicate that the XRE of the rabbit CYP1A1 gene is recognized by the
basic helix-loop-helix proteins to regulate the expression of CYP1A1 in both an
agonistic (AhR.Arnt) and an antagonistic (USF1) manner.

PMID: 9374477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biochem. 1997 Oct;122(4):703-10.

CBP/p300 functions as a possible transcriptional coactivator of Ah receptor
nuclear translocator (Arnt).

Kobayashi A(1), Numayama-Tsuruta K, Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University,
Sendai.

A heterodimer of AhR (aryl hydrocarbon receptor) and Arnt (AhR nuclear
translocator) conveys a transactivation signal of aromatic hydrocarbons such as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and 3-methylcholanthrene to the genes for a
group of drug-metabolizing enzymes. This inducible expression of the genes is
inhibited by adenovirus E1A, suggesting that CBP/p300 is somehow involved in the 
transactivation of the genes by the AhR and Arnt heterodimer. Yeast and mammalian
two hybrid systems revealed that CBP/p300 interacted with the transactivation
domain of Arnt, but not with that of AhR, via the CREB-binding domain. The pull
down assay using GST-Arnt hybrid protein confirmed the interaction between Arnt
and CBP/p300. Considering these results and that Arnt or Arnt2 functions as a
common partner in the formation of transcriptional regulators with other bHLH/PAS
proteins such as AhR, HLF, and HIF-1alpha, the possibility arises that CBP/p300
is extensively involved as a coactivator in the transactivation process by
bHLH/PAS (a conserved sequence motif among Per, Arnt, and Sim) heterodimer
transcription factors through interaction with Arnt or Arnt2.

PMID: 9399571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Dev Biol. 1997 Nov 15;191(2):297-305.

ARNT-deficient mice and placental differentiation.

Kozak KR(1), Abbott B, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of California Los Angeles 90095-1732, USA.

We used homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells to generate mice
heterozygous for an aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (ARNT) null mutation.
These mice were intercrossed, but no live homozygous Arnt-/- knockout mice were
produced among 64 newborns. Homozygotes die in utero between 9.5 and 10.5 days of
gestation. Abnormalities included neural tube closure defects, forebrain
hypoplasia, delayed rotation of the embryo, placental hemorrhaging, and visceral 
arch abnormalities. However, the primary cause of lethality appears to be failure
of the embryonic component of the placenta to vascularize and form the
labyrinthine spongiotrophoblast. This may be related to ARNT's known role in
hypoxic induction of angiogenesis. We found no defects in yolk sac circulation.

PMID: 9398442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Nov 17;240(2):293-7.

Upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) suppresses induction of CYP1A1 mRNA by
3-methylcholanthrene (MC) in HepG2 cells.

Takahashi Y(1), Nakayama K, Itoh S, Kamataki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Drug Metabolism, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido
University, Japan.

In this study, an endogenous factor(s) involved in the suppression of the
induction of CYP1A1 was studied. Analyzing the sequences, we found that the
sequence of xenobiotic responsive element (XRE) in the upstream region of the
human CYP1A1 gene was overlapped with that of the upstream stimulatory factor 1
(USF1)-binding site in mouse metallothionein I promoter. In fact, a gel shift
assay using a specific competitor or mutant probes showed that the core sequence 
of human XRE was specifically recognized by USF1. The amount of USF1 in the
nuclear extracts from HepG2 cells was smaller than that from rat and rabbit
livers as assayed by the binding to XRE. To determine whether or not USF1 could
inhibit the interaction of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)/AhR nuclear
translocator (Arnt) complex with XRE, we transfected USF1-SR alpha expression
vector into HepG2 cells. The results showed that no interaction of AhR/Arnt
complex with XRE occurred even when the cells were treated with
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran (TCDF). Furthermore, the S1 nuclease protection
assay showed that the induction of CYP1A1 mRNA by 3-methylcholanthrene (MC) was
depressed by the transfection of USF1-SR alpha into HepG2 cells. Thus, it is
highly possible that USF1 negatively regulates the induction of CYP1A1 in humans.

PMID: 9388470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Development. 1997 Oct;124(20):3975-86.

Transcriptional regulation of breathless FGF receptor gene by binding of
TRACHEALESS/dARNT heterodimers to three central midline elements in Drosophila
developing trachea.

Ohshiro T(1), Saigo K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science,
University of Tokyo, Hongo, Japan.

The development of Drosophila trachea is under the control of spatially and/or
quantitatively regulated activity of BREATHLESS FGF receptor, which is also
essential for midline glial migration. Here, we identified the minimum enhancer
region of breathless, cloned the Drosophila ARNT gene (dARNT), and showed
biochemical and genetic evidence that breathless expression in developing trachea
is regulated by direct interactions between TRACHEALESS/dARNT heterodimers and
three central midline elements (TACGTGs) situated in the minimum enhancer region.
Our results also showed that SINGLE-MINDED/dARNT heterodimers, which are
essential for breathless expression in midline precursor cells, share DNA targets
in common with TRACHEALESS/dARNT, indicating that two different basic
helix-loop-helix-PAS protein complexes act through the same target sites in vivo.

PMID: 9374395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1997 Oct 1;346(1):65-73.

Aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) nonresponsiveness in estrogen receptor-negative MDA-MB-231 
cells is associated with expression of a variant arnt protein.

Wilson CL(1), Thomsen J, Hoivik DJ, Wormke MT, Stanker L, Holtzapple C, Safe SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station 77843-4466, USA.

Several studies have reported a correlation between expression of the estrogen
receptor (ER) and aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) responsiveness in human breast cancer
cell lines. MDA-MB-231 cells are ER-negative and Ah-nonresponsive; however,
initial studies showed that 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin induced CYP1A1
mRNA levels (5.8-fold) and chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity (2.6-fold) 
in high passage (Hp, >50 passages) cells transiently transfected with an
Ah-responsive plasmid. In contrast, no induction responses were observed in low
passage (Lp, <20 passages) cells. The Ah responsiveness of Hp compared to Lp
MDA-MB-231 cells was associated with a >2-fold increased expression of the Ah
receptor in Hp cells. Further analysis revealed that the apparent molecular
weight of the Ah receptor mRNA transcript and immunoreactive protein were
comparable in Lp MDA-MB-231 and Ah-responsive human HepG2 cells. In contrast,
RT-PCR analysis of the Ah receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) protein showed
that HepG2 cells expressed the expected 2.6-kb transcript, whereas a 1.3-kb
transcript was the major product in MDA-MB-231 cells. Western blot analysis
confirmed that HepG2 cells primarily expressed a 97-kDa wild-type form of Arnt,
whereas a dominant 36-kDa variant was expressed in MDA-MB-231 cells. Complete
sequence analysis of the variant form of Arnt revealed a major deletion of the
C-terminal region of the protein (aa 330 to 789). Like HepG2 cells, the wild-type
2.6-kb transcript was detected in ER-positive (Ah-responsive) MCF-7 cells,
whereas the low-molecular-weight variant Arnt was dominant in ER-negative
MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-435, and Adriamycin-resistant MCF-7 cells. These results
suggest that expression of this protein may be useful as a prognostic factor in
breast cancer.

PMID: 9328285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Pharmacol. 1997 Oct;52(4):590-9.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-dependent induction of cyp1a1 by bilirubin in mouse
hepatoma hepa 1c1c7 cells.

Sinal CJ(1), Bend JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Western Ontario,
London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5C1.

Heme metabolism normally involves enzymatic conversion to biliverdin and
subsequently to bilirubin, catalyzed by heme oxygenase and biliverdin reductase, 
respectively. We examined the ability of exogenously added hemin, biliverdin, or 
bilirubin to regulate Cyp1a1, an enzyme that may be active in bilirubin
elimination. A substantial dose-dependent increase in Cyp1a1 mRNA occurred after 
treatment of Hepa 1c1c7 cells with either of the three compounds. This increase
was readily apparent 1 hr after treatment with biliverdin or bilirubin but
required >/=2 hr with hemin. Treatment of Hepa 1c1c7 cells with these compounds
also caused a dose-dependent increase in Cyp1a1-dependent
7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) activity. Of the three compounds, bilirubin
produced the greatest maximal increase in Cyp1a1 mRNA and EROD (5.5-, 10.5-, and 
15-fold for 100 microM hemin, biliverdin, and bilirubin, respectively) activity. 
The RNA polymerase inhibitor actinomycin D completely blocked Cyp1a1 induction by
these compounds, indicating a requirement for de novo RNA synthesis via
transcriptional activation. The protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide did not
affect Cyp1a1 mRNA induction, indicating a lack of requirement for labile protein
factors. In contrast, EROD induction by hemin, biliverdin, or bilirubin was
completely blocked by cycloheximide treatment, indicating that the increase in
enzyme activity is dependent on increased Cyp1a1 apoprotein synthesis. Aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)- and AHR nuclear translocator-deficient mutant Hepa
1c1c7 cells did not exhibit increased Cyp1a1 mRNA or EROD activity after
treatment with these compounds, indicating the requirement for a functional AHR
for this response. Consistent with this, hemin, biliverdin, and bilirubin were
able to induce expression of the dioxin-response element/luciferase reporter
plasmid pGudLuc1.1 after transient transfection into wild-type Hepa 1c1c7 cells. 
Gel retardation assays demonstrated that bilirubin, but not hemin or biliverdin, 
was able to transform the AHR to a form capable of specifically binding to a
32P-labeled oligonucleotide containing a dioxin-response element sequence. These 
data indicate that bilirubin induces Cyp1a1 gene transcription through direct
interaction with the AHR. In contrast, hemin and biliverdin seem to induce Cyp1a1
indirectly by serving as precursors to the endogenous formation of bilirubin via 
normal heme metabolism pathways. This is the first direct demonstration that the 
endogenous heme metabolite bilirubin can directly regulate Cyp1a1 gene expression
and enzymatic activity in an AHR-dependent manner.

PMID: 9380021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Biol Chem. 1997 Sep 5;272(36):22642-7.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) protein is rapidly degraded by the
ubiquitin-proteasome system under normoxic conditions. Its stabilization by
hypoxia depends on redox-induced changes.

Salceda S(1), Caro J.

Author information: 
(1)Cardeza Foundation for Hematologic Research, Department of Medicine, Jefferson
Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19107-5099, USA.

The hypoxia-inducible factor 1 transcriptional activator complex (HIF-1) is
involved in the activation of the erythropoietin and several other
hypoxia-responsive genes. The HIF-1 complex is composed of two protein subunits: 
HIF-1beta/ARNT (aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator), which is
constitutively expressed, and HIF-1alpha, which is not present in normal cells
but induced under hypoxic conditions. The HIF-1alpha subunit is continuously
synthesized and degraded under normoxic conditions, while it accumulates rapidly 
following exposure to low oxygen tensions. The involvement of the
ubiquitin-proteasome system in the proteolytic destruction of HIF-1 in normoxia
was studied by the use of specific inhibitors of the proteasome system.
Lactacystin and MG-132 were found to protect the degradation of the HIF-1 complex
in cells transferred from hypoxia to normoxia. The same inhibitors were able to
induce HIF-1 complex formation when added to normoxic cells. Final confirmation
of the involvement of the ubiquitin-proteasome system in the regulated
degradation of HIF-1alpha was obtained by the use of ts20TGR cells, which contain
a temperature-sensitive mutant of E1, the ubiquitin-activating enzyme. Exposure
of ts20 cells, under normoxic conditions, to the non-permissive temperature
induced a rapid and progressive accumulation of HIF-1. The effect of proteasome
inhibitors on the normoxic induction of HIF-1 binding activity was mimicked by
the thiol reducing agent N-(2-mercaptopropionyl)-glycine and by the oxygen
radical scavenger 2-acetamidoacrylic acid. Furthermore,
N-(2-mercaptopropionyl)-glycine induced gene expression as measured by the
stimulation of a HIF-1-luciferase expression vector and by the induction of
erythropoietin mRNA in normoxic Hep 3B cells. These last findings strongly
suggest that the hypoxia induced changes in HIF-1alpha stability and subsequent
gene activation are mediated by redox-induced changes.

PMID: 9278421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):4933-47.

The murine Sim-2 gene product inhibits transcription by active repression and
functional interference.

Moffett P(1), Reece M, Pelletier J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The Drosophila single-minded (Dsim) gene encodes a master regulatory protein
involved in cell fate determination during midline development. This protein is a
member of a rapidly expanding family of gene products possessing basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and hydrophobic PAS (designated a conserved region among 
PER, ARNT [aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator] and SIM) protein
association domains. Members of this family function as central transcriptional
regulators in cellular differentiation and in the response to environmental
stimuli such as xenobiotics and hypoxia. We have previously identified a murine
member of this family, called mSim-2, showing sequence homology to the bHLH and
PAS domains of Dsim. Immunoprecipitation experiments with recombinant proteins
indicate that mSIM-2 associates with the arnt gene product. In the present work, 
by using fine-structure mapping we found that the HLH and PAS motifs of both
proteins are required for optimal association. Forced expression of GAL4/mSIM-2
fusion constructs in mammalian cells demonstrated the presence of two separable
repression domains within the carboxy terminus of mSIM-2. We found that mSIM-2 is
capable of repressing ARNT-mediated transcriptional activation in a mammalian
two-hybrid system. This effect (i) is dependent on the ability of mSIM-2 and ARNT
to heterodimerize, (ii) is dependent on the presence of the mSIM-2
carboxy-terminal repression domain, and (iii) is not specific to the ARNT
activation domain. These results suggest that mSIM-2 repression activity can
dominantly override the activation potential of adjacent transcription factors.
We also demonstrated that mSIM-2 can functionally interfere with
hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha)/ARNT transcription complexes,
providing a second mechanism by which mSIM-2 may inhibit transcription.

PMCID: PMC232345
PMID: 9271372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Genes Dev. 1997 Aug 15;11(16):2079-89.

The PAS domain confers target gene specificity of Drosophila bHLH/PAS proteins.

Zelzer E(1), Wappner P, Shilo BZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

Trachealess (Trh) and Single-minded (Sim) are highly similar Drosophila bHLH/PAS 
transcription factors. They activate nonoverlapping target genes and induce
diverse cell fates. A single Drosophila gene encoding a bHLH/PAS protein
homologous to the vertebrate ARNT protein was isolated and may serve as a partner
for both Trh and Sim. We show that Trh and Sim complexes recognize similar
DNA-binding sites in the embryo. To examine the basis for their distinct target
gene specificity, the activity of Trh-Sim chimeric proteins was monitored in
embryos. Replacement of the Trh PAS domain by the analogous region of Sim was
sufficient to convert it into a functional Sim protein. The PAS domain thus
mediates all the features conferring specificity and the distinct recognition of 
target genes. The normal expression pattern of additional proteins essential for 
the activity of the Trh or Sim complexes can be inferred from the induction
pattern of target genes and binding-site reporters, triggered by ubiquitous
expression of Trh or Sim. We postulate that the capacity of bHLH/PAS heterodimers
to associate, through the PAS domain, with additional distinct proteins that bind
target-gene DNA, is essential to confer specificity.

PMCID: PMC316449
PMID: 9284047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 8;272(32):20055-62.

Oxygen-regulated transferrin expression is mediated by hypoxia-inducible
factor-1.

Rolfs A(1), Kvietikova I, Gassmann M, Wenger RH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Zürich-Irchel, CH-8057 Zürich,
Switzerland.

Transferrin (Tf) is a liver-derived iron transport protein whose plasma
concentration increases following exposure to hypoxia. Here, we present a cell
culture model capable of expressing Tf mRNA in an oxygen-dependent manner. A
4-kilobase pair Tf promoter/enhancer fragment as well as the 300-base pair
liver-specific Tf enhancer alone conveyed hypoxia responsiveness to a
heterologous reporter gene construct in hepatoma but not HeLa cells. Within this 
enhancer, a 32-base pair hypoxia-responsive element was identified, which
contained two hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) binding sites (HBSs). Mutation
analysis showed that both HBSs function as oxygen-regulated enhancers in
Tf-expressing as well as in non-Tf-expressing cell lines. Mutation of both HBSs
was necessary to completely abolish hypoxic reporter gene activation. Transient
co-expression of the two HIF-1 subunits HIF-1alpha and aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
nuclear translocator (ARNT)/HIF-1beta resulted in enhanced reporter gene
expression even under normoxic conditions. Overexpression of a dominant-negative 
ARNT/HIF-1beta mutant reduced hypoxic activation. DNA binding studies using
nuclear extracts from the mouse hepatoma cell line Hepa1 and the
ARNT/HIF-1beta-deficient subline Hepa1C4, as well as antibodies raised against
HIF-1alpha and ARNT/HIF-1beta confirmed that HIF-1 binds the Tf HBSs. Mutation
analysis and competition experiments suggested that the 5' HBS was more efficient
in binding HIF-1 than the 3' HBS. Finally, hypoxic induction of endogenous Tf
mRNA was abrogated in Hepa1C4 cells, confirming that HIF-1 confers oxygen
regulation of Tf gene expression by binding to the two HBSs present in the Tf
enhancer.

PMID: 9242677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Pharmacol. 1997 Aug;52(2):202-11.

Determination of aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator protein
concentration and subcellular localization in hepatic and nonhepatic cell culture
lines: development of quantitative Western blotting protocols for calculation of 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
protein in total cell lysates.

Holmes JL(1), Pollenz RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, 29425, USA.

Western blot analysis was used to determine the concentration of the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) protein and aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR) in 11 mammalian cell culture lines derived from hepatic and
nonhepatic tissues. The strategy was to first use Western blot analysis to
determine the expression of ARNT or AHR in each cell line relative to its
concentration in murine wild-type Hepa-1c1c7 (Hepa-1) cells. Actual ARNT and AHR 
concentrations in known amounts of total cell lysates were then determined by
generating a standard curve with defined amounts of a highly purified ARNT or AHR
protein and performing regression analysis. The results show that the level of
ARNT expression in each of the cell lines is similar and represents approximately
0.001-0.002% of total cellular protein. The range of expression was only
approximately 3-fold with wild-type Hepa-1 cells expressing the highest level of 
ARNT (33,000/cell) and canine kidney cells (MDCK line) expressing 14,000 ARNT
molecules/cell. In contrast, the concentration of AHR varied by 65-fold over the 
different cell lines with the wild-type Hepa-1 expressing 323,000 AHR/cell and
rat hepatoma cells (H4IIE) expressing 4700. The ratio of AHR to ARNT ranged from 
0.3 in H4IIE cells to 10 in the Hepa-1 line with the majority of cells expressing
1-5 times more AHR than ARNT protein. Immunocytochemical staining of each cell
line showed that ARNT was exclusively localized to the nuclear compartment and
that a conserved nuclear localization signal mapped to the NH-terminal portion of
the protein.

PMID: 9271342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biochemistry. 1997 Jul 22;36(29):9066-72.

Ah receptor nuclear translocator protein heterogeneity is altered after
heterodimerization with the Ah receptor.

Tsai JC(1), Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

The Ah receptor (AhR) and the Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) are capable
of forming a transcriptionally active heterodimeric complex. The biochemical
events that are required for dimerization and transactivation are not fully
understood. The purpose of this study was to determine whether covalent
modifications of ARNT occur between ARNT existing in the monomeric form and after
heterodimerization with the AhR and subsequent binding to DNA. Mouse hepatoma
cell line 1c1c7 (Hepa 1) cytosol and ARNT immunoprecipitations were subjected to 
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. ARNT was visualized with two antibodies,
with distinct epitope specificity, and each detected a considerable level of
charge heterogeneity. The pI range observed was 5.7-6.4, with the predominant
form at a pI of 6.2. The AhR/ARNT heterodimer was immunoprecipitated from
high-salt nuclear extract obtained from Hepa 1 cells treated with
beta-naphthoflavone using an anti-AhR polyclonal antibody. This immunoprecipitate
was subjected to two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, and coimmunoprecipitated
ARNT was visualized. The results indicated that ARNT complexed with the AhR in
the nucleus has an isoform pattern shifted toward the basic end, with the
predominant isoform having a pI of 6.8. Thus, a significant shift in pI occurs
during the dimerization and/or after binding to DNA. In vitro transformation of
the AhR with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in cytosol leads to
heterodimerization with ARNT. Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis of ARNT
coimmunoprecipitated with the AhR revealed the same isoform pattern as seen in
cytosol. This would indicate that each isoform of ARNT is capable of
heterodimerizing with the AhRin vitro. ARNT is a phosphoprotein, and the more
acidic isoforms appear to have a higher level of phosphorylation.

PMID: 9220996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jul 11;272(28):17640-7.

A nuclear localization signal of human aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator/hypoxia-inducible factor 1beta is a novel bipartite type recognized 
by the two components of nuclear pore-targeting complex.

Eguchi H(1), Ikuta T, Tachibana T, Yoneda Y, Kawajiri K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Cancer Center Research Institute, 818
Komuro, Ina-machi, Kitaadachi-gun, Saitama 362, Japan.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is a component of the
transcription factors, aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and hypoxia-inducible
factor 1, which transactivate their target genes, such as CYP1A1 and
erythropoietin, in response to xenobiotic aromatic hydrocarbons and to low O2
concentration, respectively. Since ARNT was isolated as a factor required for the
nuclear translocation of AhR from the cytoplasm in response to xenobiotics, the
subcellular localization of ARNT has been of great interest. In this
investigation, we analyzed the subcellular distribution of ARNT using transient
expression of a fusion gene with beta-galactosidase and microinjection of
recombinant proteins containing various fragments of ARNT in the linker region of
glutathione S-transferase/green fluorescent protein. We found a clear nuclear
localization of ARNT in the absence of exogenous ligands to AhR, and identified
the nuclear localization signal (NLS) of amino acid residues 39-61. The
characterized NLS consists of 23 amino acids, and can be classified as a novel
variant of the bipartite type on the basis of having two separate regions
responsible for efficient nuclear translocation activity, but considerable
deviation of the sequence from the consensus of the classical bipartite type
NLSs. Like the well characterized NLS of the SV40 T-antigen, this variant
bipartite type of ARNT NLS was also mediated by the two components of nuclear
pore targeting complex, PTAC58 and PTAC97, to target to the nuclear rim in an in 
vitro nuclear transport assay.

PMID: 9211913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 1997 Jul;3(3):211-20.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) causes an Ah receptor-dependent and
ARNT-independent increase in membrane levels and activity of p60(Src).

Blankenship A(1), Matsumura F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology and the Center for Environmental Health
Sciences, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is known to affect various cellular
activities including growth factor signal transduction, hormone responses, and
cell differentiation. The purpose of this study was to examine more closely the
very early effects of TCDD on protein tyrosine kinase activity, specifically
p60(Src). We found that TCDD causes rapid changes in the plasma-microsomal
membrane levels and activity of p60(Src) in Hepa 1c1c7, Hepa c4 cells, and SR3Y1 
cells, a p60(v-Src) overexpressing cell line. Such cellular changes occur within 
30 minutes after 10 nM TCDD treatment, as measured by Western blot analysis.
TCDD's ability to increase p60(Src) levels was found to be: (1) dose-dependent,
with an estimated EC(50) between 10(-10) and 10(-11) M TCDD; (2) Ah receptor
(AhR)-dependent, since TCDD's effect was blocked by co-administration with 1 µM
a-naphthoflavone, an AhR antagonist; and interestingly (3) ARNT-independent,
since TCDD's effect was observed in Hepa c4 cells, an ARNT(-) mutant cell line.
Since ARNT is a heterodimerization partner of the AhR required for binding of the
ligand-activated AhR to dioxin-responsive elements on DNA in the nucleus to
transactivate genes controlled by the AhR, an alternative mechanism for TCDD's
action is discussed which does not require ARNT. Along with increased membrane
levels of p60(Src), we observed a corresponding increase in the activity of a 60 
kDa protein tyrosine kinase using two different kinase detection assays. This
effect of TCDD was also found to be AhR-dependent, ARNT-independent, and
independent of de novo protein synthesis since cycloheximide was unable to
completely abolish TCDD's effect. The present findings provide a potentially
important mechanism by which TCDD can alter cell growth and differentiation.

PMID: 21781780  [PubMed]


92. Biol Chem. 1997 Jul;378(7):609-16.

Oxygen(es) and the hypoxia-inducible factor-1.

Wenger RH(1), Gassmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Zürich-Irchel, Switzerland.

The hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
heterodimeric transcription factor activated by reductions in oxygen
concentration (hypoxia). Activated HIF-1 upregulates expression of genes involved
in the adaptation of higher organisms to hypoxic conditions, caused by e.g. high 
altitude, anemia, wound healing or during development. Examples of these
oxy-genes include erythropoietin, a hormone regulating erythropoiesis and hence
the oxygen transport capacity, and vascular endothelial growth factor, a potent
inducer of angiogenesis leading to increased blood capillary density. The HIF-1
heterodimer is composed of a HIF-1alpha and an ARNT subunit, both belonging to
the explosively growing PAS subfamily of bHLH transcription factors. Closely
related, but differentially expressed, factors have recently been cloned, at
least one of which can also be activated by hypoxia. In this review, we present a
survey of the bH LH-PAS family as well as of the genes regulated by HIF-1, and we
summarize our current knowledge on the oxygen-dependent activation of this
fascinating transcription factor.

PMID: 9278140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mol Pharmacol. 1997 Jul;52(1):30-7.

Cytokine gene expression during ontogeny in murine thymus on activation of the
aryl hydrocarbon receptor by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Lai ZW(1), Hundeiker C, Gleichmann E, Esser C.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Institute of Environmental Hygiene, Heinrich-Heine-University of
Düsseldorf, Germany.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) binds and activates the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (Ah-R), an endogenous transcription factor that is expressed
in the thymus. TCDD exposure leads, among other effects, to thymus atrophy and
immunosuppression. We previously analyzed the interference of TCDD with
differentiation processes in fetal thymus organ cultures and found that in the
presence of TCDD, the proliferation rate of immature (CD4- CD8- and CD4- CD8+
HSA+) thymocytes is inhibited, whereas the maturation along the CD4/CD8 path is
accelerated. Moreover, the differentiation of thymocytes is skewed by TCDD at <
or = 40% (compared with approximately 15% without TCDD) of the CD8
single-positive subset of future cytotoxic T cells, and apparently more cells
audition for and pass positive selection. The fetal murine thymus expresses
functional Ah-R mRNA, as shown by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
and TCDD-inducible CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 expression. Because the differentiation of
thymocytes is to a considerable extent controlled by cytokines and many cytokine 
genes are potential targets of the Ah-R due to Ah-R-binding elements (xenobiotic 
response elements) in their promoters, we analyzed the cytokine expression in
fetal thymus organ culture exposed to TCDD. Fetal thymi were cultured from
gestation day 15 for < or = 8 days, thus covering ex vivo the period after
population of the thymus anlage until birth. We show with semiquantitative
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction that more interleukin (IL)-1beta,
IL-2, IL-6, tumor growth factor (TGF)-beta3, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha are 
produced in TCDD-exposed thymi, whereas other cytokines (e.g., TGF-beta1, PAI-2, 
or IL-4) are only slightly up- and down-modulated during the culture period or
not modulated at all (e.g., IL-1beta, IL-7, interferon-gamma, and TGF-beta2).

PMID: 9224809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jul;17(7):3497-507.

Transactivation domains facilitate promoter occupancy for the dioxin-inducible
CYP1A1 gene in vivo.

Ko HP(1), Okino ST, Ma Q, Whitlock JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
California 94306-5332, USA.

We have studied the transcriptional regulation of the dioxin-inducible mouse
CYP1A1 gene in its native chromosomal setting. We analyzed the ability of
aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) mutants and AhR chimeras to restore dioxin
responsiveness to the CYP1A1 gene in AhR-defective mouse hepatoma cells. Our data
reveal that transactivation domains in AhR's C-terminal half mediate occupancy of
the nuclear factor 1 site and TATA box for the CYP1A1 promoter in vivo.
Transactivation domains of VP16 and AhR nuclear translocator, but not Sp1, can
substitute for AhR's C-terminal half in facilitating protein binding at the
promoter. Our data also reveal an apparent linear relationship between promoter
occupancy and CYP1A1 gene expression in chromatin. These findings provide new
insights into the in vivo mechanism of transcriptional activation for an
interesting mammalian gene.

PMCID: PMC232203
PMID: 9199285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Jun 1;246(2):486-95.

A point mutation responsible for defective function of the
aryl-hydrocarbon-receptor nuclear translocator in mutant Hepa-1c1c7 cells.

Numayama-Tsuruta K(1), Kobayashi A, Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University,
Sendai, Japan.

A 3,4-benzopyrene-resistant mutant clone (c4) of the mouse hepatoma Hepa-1c1c7
cell line was examined for the mutation that causes the defective function of
aryl-hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) nuclear translocator (Arnt). Arnt dimerizes with 
AHR and mediates the induction signal of aryl-hydrocarbon hydroxylase activity.
The Arnt cDNAs of c4 cells were cloned by reverse-transcription/PCR to compare
the sequences with that of wild-type Arnt cDNA. The Arnt cDNA of c4 cells was
found to have a single point mutation, leading to replacement of Gly326 with Asp 
between two internal repeats in the highly conserved Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain,
PAS A and PAS B. The inability of [Asp326]Arnt/AHR heterodimers to enhance
reporter gene transcription under the control of the CYP1A1 gene promoter and
enhancer confirmed that the G326-->D substitution was a causative mutation. While
fluorescence microscopy and coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that this
mutant form of Arnt was not changed from wild-type Arnt in terms of nuclear
localization or heterodimer formation with AHR, the binding activity of the
[Asp326]Arnt x AHR heterodimer to the xenobiotic-responsive element was reduced
markedly. Determination of the turnover rate in COS-7 cells transfected with
expression plasmids for mutant Arnt or normal Arnt showed that the mutant protein
turned over with an accelerated rate compared with that of the normal. Moreover, 
the mutant protein displayed increased proteolytic digestibility in vitro with
various proteases.

PMID: 9208942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 May 27;94(11):5667-72.

Activation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha: posttranscriptional regulation and
conformational change by recruitment of the Arnt transcription factor.

Kallio PJ(1), Pongratz I, Gradin K, McGuire J, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska 
Institutet, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

In response to hypoxia the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) mediates
transcriptional activation of a network of genes encoding erythropoietin,
vascular endothelial growth factor, and several glycolytic enzymes. HIF-1
consists of a heterodimer of two basic helix-loop-helix PAS (Per/Arnt/Sim)
proteins, HIF-1alpha and Arnt. HIF-1alpha and Arnt mRNAs are constitutively
expressed and were not altered upon exposure of HeLa or HepG2 cells to hypoxia,
suggesting that the activity of the HIF-1alpha-Arnt complex may be regulated by
some as yet unknown posttranscriptional mechanism. In support of this model, we
demonstrate here that Arnt protein levels were not increased under conditions
that induce an hypoxic response in HeLa and HepG2 cells. However, under identical
conditions, HIF-1alpha protein levels were rapidly and dramatically up-regulated,
as assessed by immunoblot analysis. In addition, HIF-1alpha acquired a new
conformational state upon dimerization with Arnt, rendering HIF-1alpha more
resistant to proteolytic digestion in vitro. Dimerization as such was not
sufficient to elicit the conformational change in HIF-1alpha, since truncated
forms of Arnt that are capable of dimerizing with HIF-1alpha did not induce this 
effect. Moreover, the high affinity DNA binding form of the HIF-1alpha-Arnt
complex was only generated by forms of Arnt capable of eliciting the allosteric
change in conformation. In conclusion, the combination of enhanced protein levels
and allosteric change by dimerization defines a novel mechanism for modulation of
transcription factor activity.

PMCID: PMC20836
PMID: 9159130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Teratology. 1997 May;55(5):326-37.

Effects of TCDD on Ah receptor, ARNT, EGF, and TGF-alpha expression in embryonic 
mouse urinary tract.

Bryant PL(1), Clark GC, Probst MR, Abbott BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, North Carolina Central University, Durham 27707, USA.

Prenatal exposure to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) induces
hydronephrosis in C57BL/6N mice. The etiology of this response involves
TCDD-induced hyperplasia of ureteric epithelium, which occludes the ureteric
lumen, blocking the flow of urine. The present study localizes and examines the
effects of TCDD on the expression of the Ah receptor (AhR), the Ah receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT), epidermal growth factor (EGF), and transforming
growth factor-alpha (TGF-alpha) in the epithelial cells of the developing urinary
tract, particularly the ureteric bud derivatives (ureter and tubules). Pregnant
C57BL/6N mice were dosed on gestation day (GD) 10 with either corn oil or TCDD at
12 micrograms/kg; a dose of 24 micrograms/kg is expected to induce 100%
hydronephrosis. The metanephric urinary tract is morphologically detectable as
early as GD 12; thus, embryos were removed on GD 12, 13, and 14, and the lower
dorsal torso was prepared for immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridization.
Regardless of treatment, the expression of both AhR and ARNT increased in
epithelial cells of the ureter and AhR increased in the metanephric tubules from 
GD 12-14. In situ hybridization localized the expression of AhR and ARNT mRNAs to
these derivatives of the ureteric bud and levels of mRNA increased throughout the
developmental period examined. There were no significant effects of TCDD
treatment on expression of AhR, while TCDD significantly decreased levels of ARNT
in tubules on GD 14. The epithelial cells of the ureter and tubules expressed
TGF-alpha and EGF. EGF increased from GD 12 to 13 in the tubules and ureter, but 
there was no difference from GD 13 to 14. Treatment with TCDD reduced TGF-alpha
significantly only in tubules on GD 13. TCDD exposure significantly decreased EGF
in ureter and tubule cells on both GD 13 and 14. In summary, the epithelial cells
of the embryonic mouse urinary tract expressed AhR, ARNT, EGF, and TGF-alpha in
developmentally dependent patterns. These proteins are involved in the regulation
of embryonic cell proliferation during normal urinary tract development and are
probably involved in the hyperplastic response to TCDD.

PMID: 9261927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Carcinogenesis. 1997 May;18(5):925-33.

Mechanism of inhibition of MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cell growth by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Wang WL(1), Porter W, Burghardt R, Safe SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, Texas A&M University, College Station
77843-4466, USA.

Treatment of estrogen receptor (ER)-negative MDA-MB-468 human breast cancer cells
with 10 nM 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) induced formation of a
nuclear aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor complex as determined by ligand-binding
and gel electrophoretic mobility shift assays. TCDD also induced CYP1A1-dependent
activity in MDA-MB-468 cells, which represents the first ER-negative Ah
receptor-positive human breast cancer cell line that has been identified.
Treatment of this cell line with TCDD and related compounds also caused a 50%
inhibition of cell growth, which resembled the growth inhibitory effects
previously reported for epidermal growth factor (EGF). However, EGF expression is
minimal in this cell line and is not induced by TCDD; moreover, EGF and TCDD
induced a different pattern of oncogene expression and apoptosis in MDA-MB-468
cells. In contrast, TCDD caused a rapid and sustained induction of transforming
growth factor alpha (TGF alpha) gene expression and secreted protein (nearly
2-fold); moreover, the growth-inhibitory effects of TCDD could be blocked by
antibodies to the EGF receptor. In a separate experiment, it was shown that TGF
alpha also inhibited growth of MDA-MB-468 cells. The results of this study
indicate that the mechanism of growth inhibition of MDA-MB-468 cells by TCDD is
due to induction of TGF alpha, which is a potent antimitogen in this cell breast 
cancer line.

PMID: 9163677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Mol Pharmacol. 1997 May;51(5):703-10.

Effect of transforming growth factor-beta1 on expression of aryl hydrocarbon
receptor and genes of Ah gene battery: clues for independent down-regulation in
A549 cells.

Döhr O(1), Sinning R, Vogel C, Münzel P, Abel J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Institute of Environmental Hygiene, Heinrich-Heine-University of
Düsseldorf, Department of Toxicology, Germany.

An inhibitory effect on both constitutive and inducible expression of cytochrome 
P450 isoenzymes has been shown for different cytokines and growth factors. We
previously described an inhibition of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD)-induced CYP1A1 mRNA and enzyme activity by transforming growth
factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) in human lung cancer A549 cells. In the present study,
we report that not only TCDD-induced expression of CYP1A1 but also basal mRNA
expression of CYP1A1, CYP1B1, and aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) was
down-regulated by TGF-beta1 in cells not treated with TCDD. In contrast, mRNA
expression of the AHR partner protein Arnt (aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator) was not influenced. Furthermore, TCDD-induced expression of CYP1B1 
and NMO-1 was inhibited, and the IC50 values of 5-10 pM TGF-beta1 were in the
same range as observed for inhibition of CYP1A1 and AHR mRNA expression.
Transfection studies with a plasmid containing a luciferase reporter gene under
control of two dioxin-responsive elements indicate an effect on AHR protein
expression. Results of time-course studies revealed a parallel inhibition of AHR 
and CYP1 mRNA expression, indicating that TGF-beta1 is a direct negative
regulator of transcription of these genes. The treatment of cells with
cycloheximide led to a superinduction of TCDD-induced CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 mRNA
expression and abolished the inhibitory effect of TGF-beta1 on basal as well as
TCDD-induced CYP1 and AHR mRNA expression. TGF-beta1 seems not to influence the
stability of AHR mRNA. The results suggest that TGF-beta1 induces rapid
transcription and translation of an as-yet-unknown negative regulatory factor or 
factors that may directly regulate expression of AHR and genes of Ah gene
battery.

PMID: 9145908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Apr 29;94(9):4273-8.

A novel bHLH-PAS factor with close sequence similarity to hypoxia-inducible
factor 1alpha regulates the VEGF expression and is potentially involved in lung
and vascular development.

Ema M(1), Taya S, Yokotani N, Sogawa K, Matsuda Y, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-77, Japan.

We have isolated and characterized a cDNA for a novel Per-Arnt/AhR-Sim basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH-PAS) factor that interacts with the Ah receptor nuclear
translocator (Arnt), and its predicted amino acid sequence exhibits significant
similarity to the hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF1alpha) and Drosophila
trachealess (dTrh) gene product. The HIF1alpha-like factor (HLF) encoded by the
isolated cDNA bound the hypoxia-response element (HRE) found in enhancers of
genes for erythropoietin, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and various 
glycolytic enzymes, and activated transcription of a reporter gene harboring the 
HRE. Although transcription-activating properties of HLF were very similar to
those reported for HIF1alpha, their expression patterns were quite different
between the two factors; HLF mRNA was most abundantly expressed in lung, followed
by heart, liver, and other various organs under normoxic conditions, whereas
HIF1alpha mRNA was ubiquitously expressed at much lower levels. In lung
development around parturition, HLF mRNA expression was markedly enhanced,
whereas that of HIF1alpha mRNA remained apparently unchanged at a much lower
level. Moreover, HLF mRNA expression was closely correlated with that of VEGF
mRNA. Whole mount in situ hybridization experiments demonstrated that HLF mRNA
was expressed in vascular endothelial cells at the middle stages (9.5 and 10.5
days postcoitus) of mouse embryo development, where HIF1alpha mRNA was almost
undetectable. The high expression level of HLF mRNA in the O2 delivery system of 
developing embryos and adult organs suggests that in a normoxic state, HLF
regulates gene expression of VEGF, various glycolytic enzymes, and others driven 
by the HRE sequence, and may be involved in development of blood vessels and the 
tubular system of lung.

PMCID: PMC20712
PMID: 9113979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 25;272(17):11452-6.

Ligand-dependent interaction of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor with a novel
immunophilin homolog in vivo.

Carver LA(1), Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706-1599, USA.

In an effort to identify regulators of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) signaling,
we have employed the yeast two-hybrid system to screen for human proteins that
interact in a ligand-dependent manner with the AHR. After screening 1.4 x 10(6)
clones from a human B cell library, two distinct clones were identified that
associated specifically with the liganded receptor. No clones were identified
that interacted preferentially with the unliganded AHR. One of the
ligand-dependent clones, ARA9, encodes a novel 330-amino acid protein with
regions of amino acid sequence similarity to the 52-kDa FK506-binding protein
known to be associated with the glucocorticoid receptor. Yeast two-hybrid
experiments with ARA9 demonstrated a strong interaction with the AHR that is
enhanced 11-fold in the presence of the ligand beta-naphthoflavone. In vitro
experiments using proteins generated in reticulocyte lysates confirmed this
interaction and indicated that ARA9 can be co-immunoprecipitated with the AHR
using antisera raised specifically for either the AHR or the 90-kDa heat shock
protein. The observation that ARA9 has a high affinity for both the 90-kDa heat
shock protein-associated and ligand-activated forms of the AHR suggests that ARA9
is a component of the AHR-signaling pathway in vivo.

PMID: 9111057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 25;272(17):11205-14.

Activation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1; definition of regulatory domains within
the alpha subunit.

Pugh CW(1), O'Rourke JF, Nagao M, Gleadle JM, Ratcliffe PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Erythropoietin Group, Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, United Kingdom. cwpugh@molbiol.ox.ac.uk

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), a heterodimeric DNA binding complex composed 
of two basic-helix-loop-helix Per-AHR-ARNT-Sim proteins (HIF-1alpha and -1beta), 
is a key component of a widely operative transcriptional response activated by
hypoxia, cobaltous ions, and iron chelation. To identify regions of HIF-1
subunits responsible for oxygen-regulated activity, we constructed chimeric genes
in which portions of coding sequence from HIF-1 genes were either linked to a
heterologous DNA binding domain or encoded between such a DNA binding domain and 
a constitutive activation domain. Sequences from HIF-1alpha but not HIF-1beta
conferred oxygen-regulated activity. Two minimal domains within HIF-1alpha (amino
acids 549-582 and amino acids 775-826) were defined by deletional analysis, each 
of which could act independently to convey inducible responses. Both these
regions confer transcriptional activation, and in both cases adjacent sequences
appeared functionally repressive in transactivation assays. The inducible
operation of the first domain, but not the second, involved major changes in the 
level of the activator fusion protein in transfected cells, inclusion of this
sequence being associated with a marked reduction of expressed protein level in
normoxic cells, which was relieved by stimulation with hypoxia, cobaltous ions,
or iron chelation. These results lead us to propose a dual mechanism of
activation in which the operation of an inducible activation domain is amplified 
by regulation of transcription factor abundance, most likely occurring through
changes in protein stability.

PMID: 9111021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Apr 7;233(1):258-64.

cDNA cloning and tissue-specific expression of a novel basic helix-loop-helix/PAS
protein (BMAL1) and identification of alternatively spliced variants with
alternative translation initiation site usage.

Ikeda M(1), Nomura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Saitama Medical School, Moroyama, Japan.
mikeda@saitama-med.ac.jp

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/PAS proteins, such as Sim, act as transcriptional
factors, playing a critical role in the control of central nervous system (CNS)
development. To isolate novel bHLH/PAS factors in the CNS an iterative search of 
a database for expressed sequence tags (ESTs) resulted in the location of several
bHLH/PAS protein-like sequences. The rapid amplification of cDNA end (RACE)
method was applied to isolate full-length cDNAs of these ESTs. Several 5' and 3' 
terminal sequences were isolated using primers derived from an EST from the human
brain cDNA library. The predicted novel factor polypeptide had bHLH and PAS
domains that were highly homologous with those of Ah receptor nuclear
translocator (Arnt) and Arnt2. Combination of the isolated cDNA fragments
revealed the existence of several alternatively spliced variants. The
distribution of the novel bHLH/PAS factor message was analyzed by Northern blot
hybridization. This detected only one transcript, which was 2.9 kb in size.
Strong hybridization was found in the brain, skeletal muscle and heart.
Expression of the novel bHLH/PAS factor, brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1
(BMAL1), was different from that of Arnt and Arnt2, suggesting that BMAL1 has a
different function in the CNS and muscle than Arnt and Arnt2.

PMID: 9144434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1997 Apr;143(2):407-19.

Expression of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and AhR nuclear translocator
during chick cardiogenesis is consistent with
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-induced heart defects.

Walker MK(1), Pollenz RS, Smith SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53706,
USA.

We examined cardiotoxicity induced by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) 
in the chick embryo and the cardiac expression of transcription factors, the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) which binds TCDD, and its dimer partner, the AhR
nuclear translocator (Arnt). Chicken eggs were injected with control (triolein)
or 1.0 pmol TCDD/g egg prior to incubation and collected on Day 10 when
cardiomorphogenesis is complete. Relative to controls, TCDD increased heart wet
weight (27.2 +/- 0.5 versus 36.6 +/- 1.3 mg, p < 0.001) and dry weight (2.7 +/-
0.1 versus 3.1 +/- 0.1 mg, p < 0.01), and tended to increase heart myosin content
(3.5 +/- 0.6 versus 6.3 +/- 2.5 microg, p < 0.07), suggesting an increase in
cardiac muscle mass and edema. Histologic and morphometric analyses revealed that
10/13 TCDD-exposed hearts exhibited enlarged right and left ventricles, thickened
ventricular septum, and a thinner left ventricular wall with increased
trabeculation, and 4/13 exhibited ventricular septal defects compared to controls
(0/23). To evaluate AhR and Arnt expression, untreated chick embryos were
collected on Days 2.2, 3, 4, 5, and 8 of incubation, preserved in Bouin's
fixative, sectioned, and stained with AhR and Arnt antibodies. The AhR was
expressed ubiquitously in cardiac myocytes, while Arnt expression was restricted 
to myocytes overlying developing septa: atrioventricular canal, outflow tract,
and atrial and ventricular septa. Both proteins were absent from endocardium and 
endocardial-derived mesenchyme. In addition, cardiac expression of an AhR/Arnt
target, cytochrome P4501A1, was restricted to myocardium coexpressing AhR and
Arnt. Thus, the spatial and temporal expression of AhR and Arnt suggests that the
developing myocardium and cardiac septa are potential targets of TCDD-induced
teratogenicity, and such targets are also consistent with cardiac hypertrophy and
septal defects observed following TCDD exposure.

PMID: 9144457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1997 Apr 1;340(1):73-82.

Inhibitors of serine/threonine-specific protein phosphatases stimulate
transcription by the Ah receptor/Arnt dimer by affecting a step subsequent to XRE
binding.

Li SY(1), Dougherty JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Roger Williams Hospital, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Brown University Medical School, Providence, Rhode Island 02908, USA.

The Ah receptor binds aryl hydrocarbons such as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) with high affinity. After binding aryl
hydrocarbons, the receptor releases the 90-kDa heat shock protein and forms a
dimer with the Arnt protein capable of binding at xenobiotic-responsive elements 
(XREs) and stimulating the transcription of genes involved in the metabolism of
aryl hydrocarbons. The activity of the Ah receptor/ Arnt dimer can be decreased
by treatments causing the down-regulation of protein kinase C and decreasing the 
nuclear accumulation of the receptor. Incubation with acid phosphatase or with
alkaline phosphatase has been reported to block XRE binding. Thus the literature 
suggests that phosphorylation regulates Ah receptor activity by affecting DNA
binding and/or nuclear transport. A reporter plasmid containing two XREs was used
to investigate the effects of phosphatase inhibitors on TCDD-dependent
transcription by the Hepa-1 mouse liver cell line. The inhibitors calyculin A and
okadaic acid caused two- to threefold increases in TCDD-dependent transcription
at concentrations capable of selectively inhibiting protein phosphatase 1 and
protein phosphatase 2A. The inhibitor cyclosporin A doubled TCDD-dependent
transcription at a concentration capable of selectively inhibiting protein
phosphatase 2B. All three of the phosphatase inhibitors increased TCDD-dependent 
transcription without affecting transcription in the absence of TCDD. Nuclear
extracts were prepared from cells treated with concentrations of okadaic acid or 
cyclosporin A which substantially stimulated TCDD-dependent transcription.
Neither of the inhibitors significantly increased the level of TCDD-dependent XRE
binding in the extracts. GAL4-Arnt fusion proteins were used to further
investigate whether the phosphatase inhibitors affected a step other than DNA
binding. Okadaic acid treatment specifically increased the ability of a GAL4
fusion protein containing the Arnt PAS and transactivation domains to stimulate
transcription. These results suggest that serine/threonine-specific protein
phosphatases can act at a level subsequent to XRE binding to inhibit the ability 
of the Ah receptor/Arnt dimer to stimulate transcription.

PMID: 9126279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8581-93.

Characterization of a subset of the basic-helix-loop-helix-PAS superfamily that
interacts with components of the dioxin signaling pathway.

Hogenesch JB(1), Chan WK, Jackiw VH, Brown RC, Gu YZ, Pray-Grant M, Perdew GH,
Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

In an effort to better understand the mechanism of toxicity of 2,3,7,
8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, we employed an iterative search of human expressed
sequence tags to identify novel basic-helix-loop-helix-PAS (bHLH-PAS) proteins
that interact with either the Ah receptor (AHR) or the Ah receptor nuclear
translocator (ARNT). We characterized five new "members of the PAS superfamily," 
or MOPs 1-5, that are similar in size and structural organization to the AHR and 
ARNT. MOPs 1-4 have N-terminal bHLH and PAS domains and C-terminal variable
regions. MOP5 contained the characteristic PAS domain and a variable C terminus; 
it is possible that the cDNA contains a bHLH domain, but the entire open reading 
frame has yet to be completed. Coimmunoprecipitation studies, yeast two-hybrid
analysis, and transient transfection experiments demonstrated that MOP1 and MOP2 
dimerize with ARNT and that these complexes are transcriptionally active at
defined DNA enhancer sequences in vivo. MOP3 was found to associate with the AHR 
in vitro but not in vivo. This observation, coupled with the fact that MOP3
formed tighter associations with the 90-kDa heat shock protein than the human
AHR, suggests that MOP3 may be a conditionally active bHLH-PAS protein that
requires activation by an unknown ligand. The expression profiles of the AHR,
MOP1, and MOP2 mRNAs, coupled with the observation that they all share ARNT as a 
common dimeric partner, suggests that the cellular pathways mediated by MOP1 and 
MOP2 may influence or respond to the dioxin signaling pathway.

PMID: 9079689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Nature. 1997 Mar 27;386(6623):403-7.

Abnormal angiogenesis and responses to glucose and oxygen deprivation in mice
lacking the protein ARNT.

Maltepe E(1), Schmidt JV, Baunoch D, Bradfield CA, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The arylhydrocarbon-receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is a member of the
basic-helix-loop-helix-PAS family of heterodimeric transcription factors which
includes the arylhydrocarbon receptor (AHR), hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
(HIF-1alpha) and the Drosophila single-minded protein (Sim). ARNT forms
heterodimeric complexes with the arylhydrocarbon receptor, HIF-1alpha, Sim and
the PAS protein Per. In response to environmental pollutants, AHR-ARNT
heterodimers regulate genes involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics, whereas
ARNT-HIF-1alpha heterodimers probably regulate those involved in the response to 
oxygen deprivation. By generating a targeted disruption of the Arnt locus in the 
mouse, we show here that Arnt-/- embryonic stem cells fail to activate genes that
normally respond to low oxygen tension. Arnt-/- ES cells also failed to respond
to a decrease in glucose concentration, indicating that ARNT is crucial in the
response to hypoxia and to hypoglycaemia. Arnt-/- embryos were not viable past
embryonic day 10.5 and showed defective angiogenesis of the yolk sac and
branchial arches, stunted development and embryo wasting. The defect in blood
vessel formation in Arnt-/- yolk sacs is similar to the angiogenic abnormalities 
reported for mice deficient in vascular endothelial growth factor or tissue
factor. On the basis of these findings, we propose a model in which increasing
tissue mass during organogenesis leads to the formation of
hypoxic/nutrient-deprived cells, the subsequent activation of ARNT, and a
concomitant increase in the expression of genes (including that encoding vascular
endothelial growth factor) that promote vascularization of the developing yolk
sac and solid tissues.

PMID: 9121557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1997 Mar 15;339(2):305-14.

DNA binding and transcriptional enhancement by purified TCDD.Ah receptor complex.

Henry EC(1), Kent TA, Gasiewicz TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester School of
Medicine, Rochester, New York, 14642, USA. henrye@envmed.rochester.edu

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcriptional
enhancer which mediates the biochemical and toxic effects of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and structurally related chemicals and
which may have a role in the normal development of some tissues. We have
previously reported the purification of the transformed TCDD.receptor complex
from rat liver cytosol based on binding to its dioxin-responsive enhancer
sequence (DRE) and that it comprises the AhR ligand-binding monomer and its
dimerization partner, ARNT. The present studies were designed to compare the
DRE-binding characteristics of the purified receptor with the cruder preparations
that are commonly used and ultimately to determine whether the purified receptor 
complex itself (in the absence of additional cytosolic or nuclear factors) is
capable of enhancing transcription in an in vitro system. The purified AhR
retained in vitro DRE binding activity in the presence of carrier protein and
dithiothreitol, and its affinity for the DRE oligonucleotide was equivalent to
that of the other receptor preparations (crude and partially purified cytosolic
and crude nuclear). When the ligand.receptor complex was bound to a DRE
oligonucleotide containing BrdU and then UV-irradiated, two proteins in each of
the receptor preparations were found to crosslink to BrdU-DRE, and we concluded
that they are the AhR monomer and ARNT protein. All receptor preparations also
gave a similar footprint of interaction with G-residues within the DRE consensus 
sequence, as assessed by methylation interference. Furthermore, purified and
partially purified receptors were able to stimulate transcription from a
DRE-containing template in a cell-free system in the presence of HeLa cell
nuclear extract. Transcriptional enhancement was receptor dose-dependent,
TCDD-dependent, and specific for the DRE sequence upstream of the promotor in our
template construct. These data document for the first time that a purified
TCDD.Ah receptor complex retains both specific DNA binding and transcriptional
activities. This observation constitutes an important step toward understanding
the mechanism of gene regulation by TCDD since it implies that the transformed
receptor.ligand complex itself is competent as a transcriptional enhancer without
a requirement for other factors.

PMID: 9056263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Crit Rev Toxicol. 1997 Mar;27(2):109-34.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated signal transduction.

Rowlands JC(1), Gustafsson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, Karolinska Institute, NOVUM, Huddinge, Sweden.

The aryl hydrocarbon (or dioxin) receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein that heterodimerizes with the bHLH protein ARNT
(aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator) forming a complex that binds to
xenobiotic regulatory elements in target gene enhancers. Genetic, biochemical,
and molecular biology studies have revealed that the AhR mediates the toxic and
biological effects of environmentally persistent dioxins and related compounds.
Cloning of the receptor and its DNA-binding partner, ARNT, has facilitated
detailed efforts to understand the mechanisms of AhR-mediated signal
transduction. These studies have determined that this unique receptor consists of
several functional domains and belongs to a subfamily of bHLH proteins that share
a conserved motif termed the PAS domain. In addition, recent genetic studies have
revealed that expression of the AhR is a requirement for proper embryonal
development, which appears to be a common function shared by many other bHLH
proteins. This review is a summary of recent molecular studies of AhR-mediated
gene regulation.

PMID: 9099515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Biol Chem. 1997 Feb 14;272(7):4451-7.

Two murine homologs of the Drosophila single-minded protein that interact with
the mouse aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator protein.

Probst MR(1), Fan CM, Tessier-Lavigne M, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles,
California 90095, USA.

Drosophila single-minded, which acts as a positive master gene regulator in
central nervous system midline formation in Drosophila, its two mouse homologs
SIM1 and SIM2, and the mammalian aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) proteins are members of the
basic-helix-loop-helix.PAS family of transcription factors. In the yeast
two-hybrid system, we demonstrate strong constitutive interaction of ARNT with
SIM1 and SIM2 and fully ligand-dependent interaction of ARNT with AHR. Both the
helix-loop-helix and the PAS regions of SIM1 and of ARNT are required for
efficient heterodimerization. SIM1 and SIM2 do not form homodimers, and they do
not interact with AHR. We also failed to detect homodimerization of ARNT. The
interaction of ARNT with SIM1 was confirmed with in vitro synthesized proteins.
Like AHR, in vitro synthesized SIM1 associates with the 90-kDa heat shock
protein. SIM1 inhibits binding of the AHR.ARNT dimer to the xenobiotic response
element in vitro. Introduction of SIM1 into hepatoma cells inhibits
transcriptional transactivation by the endogenous AHR.ARNT dimer. The mouse SIM1.
ARNT dimer binds only weakly to a proposed DNA target for the Drosophila SIM.ARNT
dimer. In adult mice mRNA for SIM1 was expressed in lung, skeletal muscle, and
kidney, whereas the mRNA for SIM2 was found in the latter two. ARNT is also
expressed in these organs. Thus mouse SIM1 and SIM2 are novel heterodimerization 
partners for ARNT in vitro, and they may function both as positive and negative
transcriptional regulators in vivo, during embryogenesis and in the adult
organism.

PMID: 9020169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 1997 Feb;12 Suppl 1:S9-17.

Differentiation of classical and novel antipsychotics using animal models.

Arnt J(1), Skarsfeldt T, Hyttel J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychopharmacology, H. Lundbeck A/S, Valby, Denmark.

The criteria that have been used to differentiate classical and atypical
antipsychotics include measures of neurological and cognitive side effects and
therapeutic effects. Novel antipsychotic compounds with few or no extrapyramidal 
syndromes (EPS) can be differentiated from classical neuroleptics by a number of 
animal models for limbic selectivity and dose-response separation between
behavioral and pharmacological parameters analogous to EPS and antipsychotic
effects. The results obtained using these models seem to be concordant with
clinical findings. Moreover, animal models expand our understanding of the
pharmacological mechanisms responsible for EPS and for the therapeutic effects of
antipsychotics, and they allow an examination of the possible effects of new
compounds on cognition. Here we review a number of key reports on the
differentiation of classical and novel antipsychotics using animal models.

PMID: 9179639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Carcinogenesis. 1997 Feb;18(2):391-7.

Expression of CYP1B1 in human adult and fetal tissues and differential
inducibility of CYP1B1 and CYP1A1 by Ah receptor ligands in human placenta and
cultured cells.

Hakkola J(1), Pasanen M, Pelkonen O, Hukkanen J, Evisalmi S, Anttila S, Rane A,
Mäntylä M, Purkunen R, Saarikoski S, Tooming M, Raunio H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Oulu, Finland.

Expression of the Ah receptor-regulated cytochrome P4501B1 (CYP1B1) gene was
studied in human adult and fetal tissues and cells in culture by reverse
transcriptase-coupled polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). In adults, CYP1B1 mRNA 
was detected in liver, lymphocytes, cells of bronchoalveolar lavage samples and
uterine endometrium, but not in lung. The level of expression was very low in
adult liver and only three out of six fetal livers expressed CYP1B1. Extrahepatic
fetal tissues, especially brains and kidneys, expressed high levels of CYP1B1.
CYP1B1 mRNA was constitutively detected at a low level in first trimester and
full-term placental samples. A competitive RT-PCR assay was developed to assess
the regulation of CYP1B1. CYP1B1 mRNA was not induced in placenta by maternal
cigarette smoking. Inducibility of CYP1B1 in cells in culture by the Ah receptor 
ligand 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin was studied in primary fibroblasts and
chorion carcinoma cell line JEG-3 having different CYP1A1 induction properties.
Inducibility of CYP1B1 was found to be regulated independently from CYP1A1. In
JEG-3 cells CYP1A1 mRNA was induced up to 9000-fold, while the expression of
CYP1B1 was not affected. Expression of Ah receptor and Ah receptor nuclear
translocator (regulators of the CYP1 family) was determined in human placenta and
in the JEG-3 cell line. Expression of these transcription factors was found
neither to be co-regulated nor affected by Ah receptor ligands. This study
provides evidence that in addition to the Ah receptor complex, other
cell-specific factors modulate the response of CYP1B1 and CYP1A1 to Ah receptor
ligands.

PMID: 9054634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Kidney Int. 1997 Feb;51(2):567-74.

Oxygen- and dioxin-regulated gene expression in mouse hepatoma cells.

Gassmann M(1), Kvietikova I, Rolfs A, Wenger RH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Zürich-Irchel, Switzerland.

The discovery that the oxygen-regulated transcription factor HIF-1 alpha and the 
dioxin receptor AhR share the common heterodimerization partner ARNT (HIF-1 beta)
raised the question whether a cross-talk between oxygen and dioxin signal
transduction pathways exists. To answer this question we investigated an
ARNT-deficient mutant cell line (Hepa1C4), which has lost its capability of
responding to dioxin. The results demonstrate that the presence of ARNT is
indispensable for hypoxia-inducible HIF-1 DNA binding as well as for
oxygen-regulated reporter gene activity mediated by the EPO 3' hypoxia response
element (HRE). Hypoxic induction of the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
gene, however, was only partially abrogated in Hepa1C4 cells, suggesting that
HIF-1-independent oxygen signaling pathways might exist. We further studied HIF-1
and AhR/ARNT DNA binding activity as well as the regulation of oxygen- and
xenobiotic-responsive genes by treating mouse Hepa1 hepatoma cells with hypoxia
and/or the dioxin analogue ICZ. Hypoxia-inducible VEGF expression was found to be
independent of ICZ-treatment, whereas ICZ-inducible cytochrome P-450IA1
expression was slightly reduced by hypoxic treatment of the cells. Interestingly,
the enhancer function of a xenobiotic response element (XRE) linked to a reporter
gene was induced by hypoxia, but expression of a HRE-containing reporter gene was
not affected by ICZ treatment.

PMID: 9027741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Kidney Int. 1997 Feb;51(2):556-9.

Complex role of protein phosphorylation in gene activation by hypoxia.

Salceda S(1), Beck I, Srinivas V, Caro J.

Author information: 
(1)Cardeza Foundation for Hematologic Research, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

PMID: 9027738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Kidney Int. 1997 Feb;51(2):553-5.

Structural and functional analysis of hypoxia-inducible factor 1.

Semenza GL(1), Agani F, Booth G, Forsythe J, Iyer N, Jiang BH, Leung S, Roe R,
Wiener C, Yu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a basic helix-loop-helix protein that
activates transcription of hypoxia-inducible genes, including those encoding:
erythropoietin, vascular endothelial growth factor, heme oxygenase-1, inducible
nitric oxide synthase, and the glycolytic enzymes aldolase A, enolase 1, lactate 
dehydrogenase A, phosphofructokinase I, and phosphoglycerate kinase 1. Hypoxia
response elements from these genes consist of a HIF-1 binding site (that contains
the core sequence 5'-CGTG-3') as well as additional DNA sequences that are
required for function, which in some elements include a second HIF-1 binding
site. HIF-1 is a heterodimer. The HIF-1 alpha subunit is unique to HIF-1, whereas
HIF-1 beta (ARNT) can dimerize with other bHLH-PAS proteins. Structural analysis 
of HIF-1 alpha revealed that dimerization with HIF-1 beta (ARNT) requires the HLH
and PAS domains, DNA binding is mediated by the basic domain, and that HIF-1
alpha contains a carboxyl-terminal transactivation domain. Co-transfection of
HIF-1 alpha and HIF-1 beta (ARNT) expression vectors and a reporter gene
containing a wild-type hypoxia response element resulted in increased
transcription in non-hypoxic cells and a superinduction of transcription in
hypoxic cells, whereas HIF-1 expression vectors had no effect on the
transcription of reporter genes containing a mutation in the HIF-1 binding site. 
HIF-1 alpha and HIF-1 beta (ARNT) protein levels were induced by hypoxia in all
primary and transformed cell lines examined. In HeLa cells, the levels of HIF-1
alpha and HIF-1 beta protein and HIF-1 DNA-binding activity increased
exponentially as cellular oxygen tension decreased, with maximum values at 0.5%
oxygen and half-maximal values at 1.5 to 2% oxygen. HIF-1 alpha and HIF-1 beta
(ARNT) mRNAs were detected in all human, mouse, and rat organs assayed and mRNA
expression was modestly induced in rodents subjected to hypoxia. HIF-1 alpha
protein levels were induced in vivo when animals were subjected to anemia or
hypoxia. The HIF1A gene was mapped to human chromosome 14q21-q24 and mouse
chromosome 12.

PMID: 9027737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Gene Expr. 1997;6(5):287-99.

Molecular characterization of the murine Hif-1 alpha locus.

Luo G(1), Gu YZ, Jain S, Chan WK, Carr KM, Hogenesch JB, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern
University Medical School, Madison, WI, USA.

Hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1 alpha) is a basic helix-loop-helix-PAS
(bHLH-PAS) transcription factor that mediates certain cellular responses to low
oxygen tension, iron chelators, Co2+, Ni2+, Mg2+, and low intracellular glucose
concentration. Upon exposure to the above conditions, HIF-1 alpha is upregulated 
and heterodimerizes with the Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT, also known
as HIF-1 beta), the heterodimeric complex binds TACGTG-containing genomic
enhancer elements, and activates transcription of target genes. As a first step
in developing genetic models to study the biology related to cellular hypoxia, we
have cloned the murine HIF-1 alpha cDNA, determined the tissue-specific
expression of its mRNA, functionally analyzed its protein product, and
characterized its promoter and its genomic structure. A comparison between the
murine and human HIF-1 alpha protein sequence reveals 95%, 99%, and 83% identity 
in the bHLH, PAS, and variable domains, respectively. RNAse protection assays
demonstrate that in adult mice, the mHIF-1 alpha mRNA is expressed at high levels
in kidney, heart, brain, thymus, and placenta, with moderate expression in liver,
spleen, testis, and lung and much lower expression in skeletal muscle testis.
Northern blot analysis indicates that the mRNA of the murine HIF-1 alpha is
transcribed in two forms, a major 4-kb species and a minor 5-kb species; both are
present in all tissues examined. The Hif-1 alpha promoter is GC rich, does not
have a TATA element near its transcriptional start site, and does not respond to 
hypoxia or Co2+. The mHIF-1 alpha structural gene is composed of 15 exons. The
splice junction sites within the bHLH and the PAS domains of HIF-1 alpha gene are
highly conserved with respect to a number of previously characterized members of 
the bHLH-PAS superfamily. However, unlike other bHLH-PAS genes, where the
variable domain is encoded by 2 exons, the variable region of the mHIF-1 alpha
gene is encoded by 7 exons. Furthermore, most of these splice junction sites in
the variable region are conserved with that of HIF-2 alpha, a recently cloned
hypoxia-responsive bHLH-PAS protein (also known as MOP2, EPAS1, and HLF). These
data suggest that HIF-1 alpha, along with HIF-2 alpha, represents a new subclass 
of the bHLH-PAS superfamily.

PMID: 9368100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Genes Dev. 1997 Jan 1;11(1):72-82.

Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1), a transcription factor selectively
expressed in endothelial cells.

Tian H(1), McKnight SL, Russell DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas 75235, USA.

Here we describe the cloning and characterization of a PAS domain transcription
factor termed endothelial PAS-1 (EPAS1). This protein shares 48% sequence
identity with hypoxia inducible factor (HIF-1alpha) and lesser similarity with
other members of the basic helix-loop-helix/PAS domain family of transcription
factors. Like HIF-1alpha, EPAS1 binds to and activates transcription from a DNA
element originally isolated from the erythropoietin gene and containing the
sequence 5'-GCCCTACGTGCTGTCTCA-3'. Activation by both HIF-1alpha and EPAS1 is
stimulated by hypoxic conditions. EPAS1 forms a heterodimeric complex with the
aryl hydrocarbon nuclear transporter prior to transcriptional activation of
target genes. EPAS1 expression is limited to the endothelium of mouse embryos
and, in agreement with its cell type-specific expression pattern, is capable of
specifically activating the transcription of the endothelial tyrosine kinase gene
Tie-2. These observations raise the possibility that EPAS1 may represent an
important regulator of vascularization, perhaps involving the regulation of
endothelial cell gene expression in response to hypoxia.

PMID: 9000051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1997 Jan;280(1):506-11.

Selective centrilobular expression of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor in rat liver.

Lindros KO(1), Oinonen T, Johansson I, Ingelman-Sundberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Alcohol Research, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki,
Finland.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a transcriptional activator of genes
encoding a group of drug-metabolizing enzymes, including cytochrome P450 1A1
(CYP1A1), glutathione S-transferase, tumor-associated aldehyde dehydrogenase and 
quinone reductase. Both the constitutive and inducible expression of these genes 
in the liver is zonated, i.e., dominant in hepatocytes of the centrilobular
region, a poorly understood position-dependent phenomenon. By comparing cell
lysates obtained from opposite acinar regions we observed that immunoreactive AHR
protein was almost exclusively confined to centrilobular cells. The AHR mRNA, as 
analyzed from cell lysates by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction,
exhibited a similar, although somewhat less pronounced zonation. By contrast,
only slight zonation of the AHR nuclear translocator mRNA was observed. Treatment
of rats with omeprazole, an atypical nonligand activator of the AHR, caused a
zone-specific induction of CYP1A1 in the centrilobular region similar to that
seen after pretreatment with the AHR ligand 3-methylcholanthrene. Our results
suggest that the zone-restricted expression of AHR protein will allow the
constitutive and inducible expression of AHR-regulated genes in the centrilobular
region, but will limit their expression in the periportal region.

PMID: 8996235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Dec 15;242(3):512-8.

Expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (Arnt) in adult rabbits known to be non-responsive to
cytochrome P-450 1A1 (CYP1A1) inducers.

Takahashi Y(1), Nakayama K, Shimojima T, Itoh S, Kamataki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Drug Metabolism, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido
University, Japan.

Induction of aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase by aryl hydrocarbons occurs only in
neonatal rabbits and not in adult rabbits [Kahl, G. F., Friederich, D. E.,
Bigelow, S. W., Okey, A. B. & Nebert, D. W. (1980) Dev. Pharmacol. Ther.
1,137-162]. In the present study, we isolated cDNA clones encoding aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(Arnt) from adult rabbits. The deduced amino acid sequences of rabbit AhR and
Arnt showed 80% and 94% identities with those of human AhR and Arnt,
respectively. Rabbit AhR mRNA was predominantly expressed in the lung and liver. 
In contrast, rabbit Arnt mRNA was expressed at almost the same level in all
tissues except for the heart, liver, and small intestine. Gel shift analysis
showed that the AhR. Arnt complex could bind to the consensus
xenobiotic-responsive element, which indicates that AhR expressed in adult rabbit
liyers possessed binding activity to the consensus xenobiotic-responsive element 
in vitro, although aryl hydrocarbons did not induce the activity of AHH in adult 
rabbits. We propose that the incapability of adult rabbits to induce cytochrome
P-450 1A1 (CYP1A1) is caused by factors other than AhR and Arnt.

PMID: 9022676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1996 Dec 15;336(2):297-308.

Characterization of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex in human B lymphocytes:
evidence for a distinct nuclear DNA-binding form.

Masten SA(1), Shiverick KT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, 32610, USA. Kshiverick@qm.server.ufl.edu

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) suppresses B lymphocyte proliferation 
and immunoglobulin production. We previously reported that the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) complex, composed of the AhR ligand binding subunit and the Ah
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), was constitutively present in nuclear
extracts from two human B lymphocyte cell lines (Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
212, 27-34, 1995). The present study compared the AhR complex in the IM-9 and
PJS-91 human B lymphocyte and HepG2 human hepatoma cell lines. AhR mRNA levels in
the two lymphocyte cell lines were substantially lower than those in HepG2 cells,
as was immunoreactive AhR protein. In contrast, ARNT mRNA and protein were
expressed at a high level in all three cell lines. TCDD induction of cytochrome
P450 1A1 mRNA and protein was detected in only the PJS-91 lymphocyte cell line,
and at a markedly lower level than that in HepG2 cells. In gel shift assays, the 
cytosolic DNA-binding AhR complex in IM-9 and PJS-91 cells was indistinguishable 
from that in HepG2 cells. In contrast, the nuclear DNA-binding AhR complex in
IM-9 and PJS-91 cells consisted of several closely migrating species, one being
recognized by an AhR antibody, while an ARNT antibody reacted with all species.
Protein:DNA cross-linking analysis revealed the presence of a novel Mr 100,000
DNA-binding protein in nuclear extracts from IM-9 and PJS-91, but not HepG2,
cells that was not recognized by either AhR or ARNT antibodies. These results
show that IM-9 and PJS-91 human B cells constitutively express a distinct nuclear
DNA-binding form of the AhR complex that may result from the presence of an
additional protein or a structural variant of the AhR.

PMID: 8954578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 6;271(49):31657-65.

Mapping the protein/DNA contact sites of the Ah receptor and Ah receptor nuclear 
translocator.

Swanson HI(1), Yang Jh.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Kentucky, University of Kentucky
Medical Center, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA. hswan@pop.uky.edu

The Ah receptor (AHR) and its DNA binding partner, the Ah receptor nuclear
translocator (ARNT), are basic helix-loop-helix proteins distinguished by their
PER, AHR, ARNT, and SIM (PAS) homology regions. To identify the amino acids of
the AHR.ARNT heterodimer that contact the TNGCGTG recognition sequence, we have
performed deletion mapping and amino acid substitutions within the N termini of
both the AHR and ARNT. The ability of the variant AHR and ARNT proteins to bind
DNA and activate gene transcription was determined by the gel shift analysis and 
transient transfection assays. We have found that the amino acids of ARNT that
contact DNA are similar to those of other basic/helix-loop-helix proteins and
include glutamic acid residue 83 and arginine residues 86 and 87. Although our
initial experiments indicated that DNA binding of the AHR may involve two regions
that are bordered by amino acids 9-17 and amino acids 34-42, further analysis
demonstrated that only amino acids 34-39 are critical for the AHR.TNGC
interaction. These experiments indicate that while the structural features of the
ARNT.GTG complex may closely resemble that deduced for proteins such as Max, E47,
and USF, the AHR.TNGC complex may represent a unique DNA binding form of
basic/helix-loop-helix proteins.

PMID: 8940186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Pharmacol. 1996 Dec;50(6):1454-62.

Basis for the loss of aryl hydrocarbon receptor gene expression in clones of a
mouse hepatoma cell line.

Zhang J(1), Watson AJ, Probst MR, Minehart E, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)UCLA Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los
Angeles 90095-1732, USA.

Rare benzo[a]pyrene-resistant clones were previously isolated from the mouse
hepatoma cell line, Hepa-1 (Hepa1c1c7), and shown to be deficient in induction of
CYP1A1 mRNA by ligands for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR). Clones belonging 
to complementation group B were shown to have reduced levels of ligand binding to
AHR. It is shown here that all 15 independently derived B clones analyzed had
much reduced levels of AHR mRNA, but in each case, the mRNA was normal in size.
Infection of B clones with a retroviral expression vector for AHR restores CYP1A1
inducibility (although viral AHR expression is progressively silenced and CYP1A1 
expression progressively diminishes as the cells are maintained in culture).
Treatment of the B clones with the histone deacetylase inhibitors sodium butyrate
or trichostatin A restores AHR expression and also restores CYP1A1 inducibility
to nearly 100% of the cells in the treated cultures. Fusion of a representative B
clone with a rat hepatoma cell line restores expression to the mouse AHR gene
encoded by the B clone's genome. These results demonstrate that the loss of
CYP1A1 inducibility in B clones is probably totally ascribable to their reduced
levels of AHR and that the clones are most probably not mutated in the AHR gene
but are deficient in its expression. The evidence suggests that the reduction in 
expression of mRNA encoded by the endogenous AHR gene in the B clones is not due 
to an epigenetic alteration in chromatin structure but that the clones are
probably defective either in a transcription factor for the AHR gene or in a
protein required for generating an open chromatin configuration over the gene.

PMID: 8967965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Biol Chem. 1996 Nov 29;271(48):30886-96.

Isolation and expression of cDNAs from rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) that
encode two novel basic helix-loop-Helix/PER-ARNT-SIM (bHLH/PAS) proteins with
distinct functions in the presence of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Evidence for
alternative mRNA splicing and dominant negative activity in the bHLH/PAS family.

Pollenz RS(1), Sullivan HR, Holmes J, Necela B, Peterson RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA. pollenzr@musc.edu

cDNAs encoding two distinct basic helix-loop-helix/PER-ARNT-SIM (bHLH/PAS)
proteins with similarity to the mammalian aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator
(ARNT) protein were isolated from RTG-2 rainbow trout gonad cells. The deduced
proteins, termed rtARNTa and rtARNTb, are identical over the first 533 amino
acids and contain a basic helix-loop-helix domain that is 100% identical to human
ARNT. rtARNTa and rtARNTb differ in their COOH-terminal domains due to the
presence of an additional 373 base pairs of sequence that have the
characteristics of an alternatively spliced exon. The presence of the 373-base
pair region causes a shift in the reading frame. rtARNTa lacks the sequence and
has a COOH-terminal domain of 104 residues rich in proline, serine, and
threonine. rtARNTb contains the sequence and has a COOH-terminal domain of 190
residues rich in glutamine and asparagine. mRNAs for both rtARNT splice variants 
were detected in RTG-2 gonad cells, trout liver, and gonad tissue. rtARNTa and
rtARNb protein were identified in cell lysates from RTG-2 cells. Transfection of 
rtARNT expression vectors into murine Hepa-1 cells that are defective in ARNT
function (type II) result in rtARNT protein expression localized to the nucleus. 
Treatment of these cells with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin results in a
20-fold greater induction of endogenous P4501A1 protein in cells expressing
rtARNTb when compared with rtARNTa, even though both proteins effectively
dimerize with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. The decreased function of rtARNTa
appears to be due to inefficient binding of rtARNTa.AHR complexes to DNA. In
addition, the presence of rtARNTa can reduce the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor-dependent function of rtARNTb in vivo and in vitro.

PMID: 8940073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Eur J Pharmacol. 1996 Nov 21;315(3):245-54.

Assessment of relative efficacies of 5-HT1A receptor ligands by means of in vivo 
animal models.

Sánchez C(1), Arnt J, Moltzen E.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

We have evaluated the effects of ligands with varying efficacies at
beta-adrenoceptors and 5-HT1A receptors in three in vivo models reflecting pre-
and/or postsynaptic 5-HT1A receptor activation. Forepaw treading in rats is
mediated by postsynaptic 5-HT1A receptors, 8-OH-DPAT
(8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamin)tetralin)-induced discriminative stimulus is
predominantly mediated by postsynaptic, but presynaptic 5-HT1A receptors might
also be involved, and footshock-induced ultrasonic vocalization involves
predominantly presynaptic 5-HT1A receptors. In vitro receptor binding studies
demonstrated high beta-adrenoceptor and 5-HT1A receptor affinity of
(-)-penbutolol, high beta-adrenoceptor and 60 times lower 5-HT1A receptor
affinity of (+)-penbutolol, high beta-adrenoceptor affinity and about 100 times
lower 5-HT1A receptor affinity of pindolol and (-)-tertatolol, only affinity for 
beta-adrenoceptors of metoprolol and ICI 118,551
(erythro-D,L-1-(7-methylindan-4-yloxy)-3-isopropylamine-b utan-2-ol, and only
affinity for 5-HT1A receptors of WAY 100.635 ((N-[2-[4-
(2-methoxyphenyl)-1-piperazinyl]ethyl]-N-(2-pyridinyl) cyclo-hexane-carboxamide).
(-)-Penbutolol, (-)-tertatolol, pindolol and WAY 100.635 antagonized
5-MeODMT-induced (5-methoxy-N, N-dimethyltryptamine) forepaw treading in rats,
and (+)-penbutolol, ICI 118,551 and metoprolol were inactive. (-)-Penbutolol, WAY
100.635 and (-)-tertatolol antagonized 8-OH-DPAT-induced discriminative stimulus 
in rats, pindolol and metoprolol showed a mixed antagonistic and agonistic
profile. Pindolol antagonized footshock-induced ultrasonic vocalization in rats, 
tertatolol inhibited maximum 36% and WAY 100.635, (-)-penbutolol, (+)-penbutolol,
metroprolol and ICI 118,551 were inactive. (-)-Penbutolol and WAY 100.635
reversed 8-OH-DPAT-induced inhibition of ultrasonic vocalization completely,
(-)-tertatolol reversed maximum 52% and (+)-penbutolol and pindolol were
inactive. It is concluded, that efficacies at 5-HT1A receptors can be estimated
by applying a battery of in vivo test models that involve post- and presynaptic
receptors to a variable degree. The in vivo ranking order of efficacy at 5-HT1A
receptors was: WAY 100.635 = (-)-penbutolol < (-)-tertatolol < pindolol.

PMID: 8982661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996 Nov 15;1317(2):105-11.

Retinoic acid affects the expression rate of the differentiation-related genes
aryl hydrocarbon receptor, ARNT and keratin 4 in proliferative keratinocytes
only.

Wanner R(1), Panteleyev A, Henz BM, Rosenbach T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Virchow-Clinic, Humboldt University, Berlin,
Germany. rw@zedat.fu-berlin.de

The environmental contaminant dioxin exerts most of its effects by activating the
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). The AhR is considered to play not only a role in
the regulation of xenobiotic metabolism, but also for development, growth, and
differentiation. The transcript levels of the AhR and its associated translocator
protein (ARNT) were found to increase with ongoing differentiation in the human
keratinocyte cell line HaCaT. Correspondingly, in situ hybridization studies in
normal human skin revealed an absence of AhR-expression in proliferating basal
cells and increasing transcript levels in upper cell layers, in dependence of
keratinocyte differentiation. AhR expression in differentiation-deficient
hyperproliferative psoriatic skin was markedly decreased. When keratinocytes were
continuously treated with 1 microM retinoic acid (RA), the upregulation of AhR-
and ARNT-mRNA levels was inhibited as was keratin 4-expression, a marker of
HaCaT-keratinocyte differentiation. In contrast, treatment of already
differentiated cells with RA did not down-regulate these transcript levels. The
mRNA levels of the prevalent retinoic acid receptors in keratinocytes, RAR gamma 
and RXR alpha, were not influenced by the process of differentiation or by
addition of RA. Our data suggest that the regulation of AhR-, ARNT- and keratin
4-expression by RA is indirect and mediated by a yet to be identified factor.

PMID: 8950195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Pediatr (Rio J). 1996 Nov-Dec;72(6):369-73.

[Risk factors for low birth weight in a rural community in southern Brazil].

[Article in Portuguese]

Halpern R(1), Schaefer ES, Pereira Ada S, Arnt EM, Bezerra JP, Pinto Ldos S.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento Materna-Infantil, Universidade Federal de Pelotas, RS, Brazil.

Comment in
    J Pediatr (Rio J). 1996 Nov-Dec;72(6):360-1.

This paper reports a study assessing risk factors for low birth weight (LBW),
preterm and intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) in a sample of 936 mothers who
delivered babies in the Canguçu Hospital, a rural area of southern Brazil.
Traditional risk factors for delivering LBW, preterm and IUGR were examined. The 
relative importance of the risk factors was studied through risk calculation and 
logistic regression analysis. Some risk factors for LBW such as low maternal
education and number of prenatal consultations were not associated with the risk 
of delivering babies in any of the three risk groups. Hospitalization during
pregnancy and maternal age less than 20 years were confirmed as risk factors for 
LBW. In the preterm group, low maternal weight and hospitalization during
pregnancy showed significant association after control for confounders. The
results suggest that there are specific targets for intervention in each of the
three groups, and some traditional risk factors must be redefined according to
the characteristics of each population.

PMID: 14688902  [PubMed]


127. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1996 Nov;141(1):238-47.

Dioxin induces transcription of fos and jun genes by Ah receptor-dependent and
-independent pathways.

Hoffer A(1), Chang CY, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Genetics, University of Cincinnati Medical Center,
Ohio 45267-0056, USA.

Halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons, such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD; dioxin), and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, such as benzo[a]pyrene, are
environmental contaminants that cause many apparently unrelated toxic effects. In
a previous study, we have shown that treatment of mouse hepatoma cells with TCDD 
or B(a)P results in an increase in mRNA levels of the immediate-early
protooncogenes c-fos, c-jun, junB, and junD, and the concomitant increase of the 
DNA-binding activity of the transcription factor AP-1, a dimer of FOS and JUN
proteins. To analyze the mechanism of fos/jun activation by TCDD we have used
electrophoretic mobility shift and transient expression assays of reporter gene
constructs containing response elements for 12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate
(TRE), serum (SRE), cAMP (CRE), and aromatic hydrocarbons (AhRE) from the fos and
jun genes fused to the firefly luciferase gene under the control of the SV40
minimal promoter. In mouse hepatoma Hepa-1 cells, which have Ah receptor (AHR)
and Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) proteins, inclusion of TRE, SRE, and 
the AhRE motifs from c-jun and junD, but not CRE or the AhREs from c-fos, fosB,
and junB, causes a large TCDD-dependent increase in luciferase expression. In
agreement with these results, c-jun and junD, but not c-fos, fosB, and junB
AhREs, competed with a canonical Cyp1A1 AhRE for binding to the AHR ARNT
heterodimeric complex. In African Green Monkey CV-1 cells, which lack AHR,
expression plasmids with AhRE motifs require coexpression of AHR and ARNT for
TCDD to stimulate luciferase expression. In contrast, SRE-containing expression
plasmids respond equally well to TCDD whether or not AHR and ARNT are
coexpressed. These results suggest that TCDD induces expression of the
immediate-early response genes fos and jun by activation of possibly three
separate signal transduction pathways, at least one of which does not require a
functional Ah receptor complex.

PMID: 8917696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1996 Nov;141(1):76-83.

Ah-receptor-dependent modulation of gene expression by aged and diluted
sidestream cigarette smoke.

Gebremichael A(1), Tullis K, Denison MS, Cheek JM, Pinkerton KE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Environmental Health, University of California,
Davis 95616, USA.

Cigarette smoke is known to induce cytochrome P4501A1 expression and activity in 
a variety of species. Although the elevation of this isozyme is assumed to be
associated with the activation of the CYP1A1 gene through a ligand-mediated
mechanism involving the Ah-receptor (AhR), this has not been determined. In this 
study we have examined the mechanism by which an ambient level of aged and
diluted sidestream cigarette smoke (ADSS) induces cytochrome P4501A1. Effects of 
ADSS on C57BL/6N and DBA/ 2N mice were examined. Induction of P4501A1-associated 
ethoxyresorufin-O-dealkylase (EROD) activity was observed in the lungs of
C57BL/6N mice, while there was no induction in DBA/ 2N mice. ADSS also induced
EROD in wild-type mouse hepatoma (Hepa1c1c7) cells (hepa1), but not in variant
hepa1 cells defective in the AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT) protein. ADSS
exposure of recombinant hepa1 cells, stably transfected with a reporter plasmid
containing the luciferase gene under control of several dioxin responsive
enhancers (DREs), resulted in a time- and exposure-dependent induction of
luciferase activity. ADSS-mediated induction of luciferase activity was inhibited
by alpha-naphthoflavone (alpha NF), an Ah-receptor antagonist. Gel retardation
analysis demonstrated that exposure to ADSS induced transformation and DNA
binding of the AhR complex. In summary, our results not only indicate a role for 
the AhR in mediating the induction of P4501A1 by ADSS, but also demonstrate that 
environmentally relevant levels of ADSS must contain AhR ligands at sufficient
concentrations to activate gene expression in an AhR-dependent manner.

PMID: 8917678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 18;271(42):26261-6.

Protein kinase C modulates regulation of the CYP1A1 gene by the aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor.

Chen YH(1), Tukey RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and UCSD Cancer Center, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0636, USA.

Transcriptional activation of the human CYP1A1 gene by halogenated and polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons is mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) complex,
a ligand-dependent transcription factor. A competent AhR comprises at least two
components following nuclear translocation and DNA binding, the AhR and the AhR
nuclear translocator (Arnt) protein, whose combined action on human CYP1A1 gene
transcription is shown to be dependent upon functional protein kinase C (PKC). In
the present study, we examined the effects of phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, a 
potent PKC activator, on the ligand-induced transcriptional activation of the
CYP1A1 gene and cellular function of the AhR in human HepG2 101L cells. The 101L 
cells carry a stable transgene consisting of 1800 bases of 5'-flanking DNA and
the promoter of the human CYP1A1 gene linked to the firefly luciferase structural
gene (Postlind, H., Vu, T. P., Tukey, R. H. & Quattrochi, L. C. (1993) Toxicol.
Appl. Pharmacol. 118, 255-262). Pretreatment of cells with 12-myristate
13-acetate enhanced ligand-induced CYP1A1 gene expression 2-3-fold. Inhibition of
PKC activity blocked directly the transcriptional activation and the
transactivation of the CYP1A1 gene, indicating a role for PKC in the AhR-mediated
transcriptional activation process. However, the DNA binding activities of the in
vitro activated and the induced nuclear AhR as measured by electrophoretic
mobility shift analysis were not affected when CYP1A1 transcription was
inhibited, indicating the actions of PKC to be a nuclear event that works in
concert with or precedes AhR binding to the gene. These results illustrate that
PKC is absolutely essential for the cellular and molecular events that control
induction of CYP1A1 gene transcription.

PMID: 8824276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1996 Oct 15;334(2):389-94.

Absolute requirement of aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator protein
for gene activation by hypoxia.

Salceda S(1), Beck I, Caro J.

Author information: 
(1)Cardeza Foundation for Hematologic Research, Department of Medicine, Jefferson
Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107,
USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a DNA-binding heterodimeric protein complex
originally described in the transcriptional activation of the erythropoietin gene
by hypoxia. This protein complex is composed of two subunits, HIF-1alpha and
-1beta (aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator, ARNT). In this study, we 
used ARNT-deficient cells, derived from the mouse hepatoma cell line Hepa1c1c7,
to further characterize HIF-1 complex formation and its relationship with gene
activation by hypoxia and desferrioxamine (Df). Gel shift assays revealed that
ARNT is absolutely required for the formation of the HIF-1 DNA-binding complex.
Results from RNase protection assays and Northern blots showed that the lack of
functional HIF-1 complex completely abrogated the response to hypoxia of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and the glycolytic enzymes aldolase A (ALDA) and
phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK-1), genes known to be upregulated by low oxygen
tension. Desferrioxamine induction of VEGF and PGK-1 genes was reduced in the
ARNT-deficient cells, but at difference with hypoxia, it was not completely
suppressed. These results suggest that Df is able to activate gene transcription 
through HIF-1-independent mechanisms. Exposure to hypoxia or Df did not induce
any changes in HIF-1alpha and -1beta mRNA levels, suggesting that
posttranscriptional mechanisms are involved in HIF-1 complex activation.

PMID: 8900415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;16(10):5865-75.

Two new members of the murine Sim gene family are transcriptional repressors and 
show different expression patterns during mouse embryogenesis.

Ema M(1), Morita M, Ikawa S, Tanaka M, Matsuda Y, Gotoh O, Saijoh Y, Fujii H,
Hamada H, Kikuchi Y, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University,
Sendai, Japan.

From a cDNA library of mouse skeletal muscle, we have isolated mouse Sim1 (mSim1)
cDNA encoding a polypeptide of 765 amino acids with striking amino acid identify 
in basic helix-loop-helix (89% identify) and PAS (89 % identify) domains to
previously identified mSim2, although the carboxy-terminal third of the molecule 
did not show any similarity to mSim2 or Drosophila Sim (dSim). Yeast two-hybrid
analysis and coimmunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that both of the mSim
gene products interacted with Arnt even more efficiently than AhR, a natural
partner of Arnt, suggesting a functional cooperativity with Arnt. In sharp
contrast with dSim having transcriptional-enhancing activity in the
carboxy-terminal region, the two mSims possessed a repressive activity toward
Arnt in the heterodimer complex. This is the first example of bHLH-PAS proteins
with transrepressor activity, although some genetic data suggest that dSim plays 
a repressive role in gene expression (Z. Chang, D. Price, S. Bockheim, M. J.
Boedigheimer, R. Smith, and A. Laughon, Dev. Biol. 160:315-322, 1993; D. M.
Mellerick and M. Nirenberg, Dev. Biol. 171:306-316, 1995). Whole-mount in situ
hybridization showed restricted and characteristic expression patterns of the two
mSim mRNAs in various tissues and organs during embryogenesis, such as those for 
the somite, the nephrogenic cord, and the mesencephalon (for mSim1) and those for
the diencephalon, branchial arches, and limbs (for mSim2). From sequence
similarity and chromosomal localization, it is concluded that mSim2 is an
ortholog of hSim2, which is proposed to be a candidate gene responsible for
Down's syndrome. The sites of mSim2 expression showed an overlap with the
affected regions of the syndrome, further strengthening involvement of mSim2 in
Down's syndrome.

PMCID: PMC231588
PMID: 8927054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;16(10):5221-31.

Functional interference between hypoxia and dioxin signal transduction pathways: 
competition for recruitment of the Arnt transcription factor.

Gradin K(1), McGuire J, Wenger RH, Kvietikova I, fhitelaw ML, Toftgård R, Tora L,
Gassmann M, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinksa Institute, Huddinge, Sweden.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1 alpha) and the intracellular dioxin
receptor mediate hypoxia and dioxin signalling, respectively. Both proteins are
conditionally regulated basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors that,
in addition to the bHLH motif, share a Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) region of homology and 
form heterodimeric complexes with the common bHLH/PAS partner factor Arnt. Here
we demonstrate that HIF-1 alpha required Arnt for DNA binding in vitro and
functional activity in vivo. Both the bHLH and PAS motifs of Arnt were critical
for dimerization with HIF-1 alpha. Strikingly, HIF-1 alpha exhibited very high
affinity for Arnt in coimmunoprecipitation assays in vitro, resulting in
competition with the ligand-activated dioxin receptor for recruitment of Arnt.
Consistent with these observations, activation of HIF-1 alpha function in vivo or
overexpression of HIF-1 alpha inhibited ligand-dependent induction of DNA binding
activity by the dioxin receptor and dioxin receptor function on minimal reporter 
gene constructs. However, HIF-1 alpha- and dioxin receptor-mediated signalling
pathways were not mutually exclusive, since activation of dioxin receptor
function did not impair HIF-1 alpha-dependent induction of target gene
expression. Both HIF-1 alpha and Arnt mRNAs were expressed constitutively in a
large number of human tissues and cell lines, and these steady-state expression
levels were not affected by exposure to hypoxia. Thus, HIF-1 alpha may be
conditionally regulated by a mechanism that is distinct from induced expression
levels, the prevalent model of activation of HIF-1 alpha function. Interestingly,
we observed that HIF-1 alpha was associated with the molecular chaperone hsp90.
Given the critical role of hsp90 for ligand binding activity and activation of
the dioxin receptor, it is therefore possible that HIF-1 alpha is regulated by a 
similar mechanism, possibly by binding an as yet unknown class of ligands.

PMCID: PMC231522
PMID: 8816435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Biochem Pharmacol. 1996 Sep 13;52(5):771-80.

Identification of functional aryl hydrocarbon receptor and aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator in murine splenocytes.

Williams CE(1), Crawford RB, Holsapple MP, Kaminski NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Michigan State University, East
Lansing 48824, USA.

The objective of the present studies was to determine whether the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT) protein are
present and functional in B6C3F1 (C57BL/6 x C3H) mouse splenocytes. Northern
analysis of poly(A) RNA isolated from splenocytes revealed transcripts of
approximately 6.6 kb which hybridized to the AhR complementary DNA (cDNA) probe. 
Anti-AhR antibodies identified two major cytosolic forms of the AhR in
splenocytes, approximately 95 and 104 kDa, corresponding to the codominately
expressed Ahrb alleles in the B6C3F1 mice. Northern analysis utilizing an
oligomer probe for ARNT identified three messenger RNA (mRNA) transcripts,
approximately 5.6, 2.0, and 1.1 kb, in spleen which was consistent with the
banding pattern observed in the B6C3F1 mouse liver. Western blotting confirmed
the presence of the approximately 87 kDa ARNT protein in splenocytes. Protein
quantitation by slot blot analysis demonstrated approximately 2.0-fold more AhR
in liver than in splenocytes. Interestingly, ARNT was approximately 2.4-fold more
abundant in splenocytes than in liver. Consistent with these results, comparison 
by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis of AhR
and ARNT transcripts in liver and splenocytes demonstrated approximately 2.3-fold
more AhR transcripts in liver than in splenocytes and approximately 3.2-fold more
ARNT transcripts in splenocytes than in liver. In addition, comparisons between
AhR and ARNT transcripts isolated from the liver and splenocytes indicated a
greater number of ARNT transcripts as compared with AhR in both preparations.
TCDD treatment of splenocytes induced binding of the AhR nuclear complex to the
dioxin-responsive enhancer (DRE) as detected by the electrophoretic mobility
shift assay. These findings confirm that the AhR and ARNT are present in mouse
splenocytes and are capable of binding to the DRE.

PMID: 8765475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Pharmacol. 1996 Sep;50(3):538-48.

Trans-activation by the human aryl hydrocarbon receptor and aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator proteins: direct interactions with basal
transcription factors.

Rowlands JC(1), McEwan IJ, Gustafsson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Karolinska Institute, NOVUM, Huddinge, Sweden.

The aryl hydrocarbon (or dioxin) receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein that heterodimerizes with the bHLH protein AhR
nuclear translocator (ARNT) to form a complex that binds to xenobiotic regulatory
elements in the enhancers of target genes. We used a series of fusion proteins,
with a heterologous DNA-binding domain, to study independently the
trans-activating function of the human AhR and ARNT proteins in yeast. The
results confirm that both the human AhR and ARNT contain carboxyl-terminal
trans-activation domains. The AhR has a complex trans-activation domain that is
composed of multiple segments that function independently and exhibit varying
levels of activation. Furthermore, these regions within the AhR cooperate when
linked together, resulting in a synergistic activation of transcription. Fusion
proteins of the AhR and ARNT trans-activation domains with the LexA DNA-binding
domain, expressed in bacteria and purified to near-homogeneity, stimulated
transcription of a minimal promoter in vitro in yeast nuclear extracts. Using
this in vitro transcription assay, it was also possible to demonstrate that the
AhR and ARNT trans-activation domains, in the absence of a DNA-binding domain,
inhibited activated and basal transcription. Furthermore, in vitro the receptor
bound selectively to the basal transcription factors, the TATA-binding protein
and TFIIF, whereas ARNT bound preferentially to TFIIF. Taken together, these
results suggest that AhR and ARNT activate target gene expression, at least in
part, through direct interactions with basal transcription factors.

PMID: 8794892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Sep;16(9):4604-13.

Activation of vascular endothelial growth factor gene transcription by
hypoxia-inducible factor 1.

Forsythe JA(1), Jiang BH, Iyer NV, Agani F, Leung SW, Koos RD, Semenza GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, 21201, USA.

Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is induced in cells
exposed to hypoxia or ischemia. Neovascularization stimulated by VEGF occurs in
several important clinical contexts, including myocardial ischemia, retinal
disease, and tumor growth. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a heterodimeric 
basic helix-loop-helix protein that activates transcription of the human
erythropoietin gene in hypoxic cells. Here we demonstrate the involvement of
HIF-1 in the activation of VEGF transcription. VEGF 5'-flanking sequences
mediated transcriptional activation of reporter gene expression in hypoxic Hep3B 
cells. A 47-bp sequence located 985 to 939 bp 5' to the VEGF transcription
initiation site mediated hypoxia-inducible reporter gene expression directed by a
simian virus 40 promoter element that was otherwise minimally responsive to
hypoxia. When reporters containing VEGF sequences, in the context of the native
VEGF or heterologous simian virus 40 promoter, were cotransfected with expression
vectors encoding HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta (ARNT [aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator]), reporter gene transcription was much greater in both
hypoxic and nonhypoxic cells than in cells transfected with the reporter alone. A
HIF-1 binding site was demonstrated in the 47-bp hypoxia response element, and a 
3-bp substitution eliminated the ability of the element to bind HIF-1 and to
activate transcription in response to hypoxia and/or recombinant HIF-1.
Cotransfection of cells with an expression vector encoding a dominant negative
form of HIF-1alpha inhibited the activation of reporter transcription in hypoxic 
cells in a dose-dependent manner. VEGF mRNA was not induced by hypoxia in mutant 
cells that do not express the HIF-1beta (ARNT) subunit. These findings implicate 
HIF-1 in the activation of VEGF transcription in hypoxic cells.

PMCID: PMC231459
PMID: 8756616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Biol Chem. 1996 Aug 30;271(35):21262-7.

Induction of phosphoglycerate kinase 1 gene expression by hypoxia. Roles of Arnt 
and HIF1alpha.

Li H(1), Ko HP, Whitlock JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California 94305-5332, USA.

To identify new dimerization partners for the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (Arnt), we used its N-terminal region (amino acids 1-470) as
a target in a two-hybrid screening procedure, and we cloned the murine form of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF1alpha). Sequence comparisons reveal
substantial identity between mouse and human HIF1alpha. Hypoxia induces a 10-fold
accumulation of phosphoglycerate kinase 1 mRNA in wild type mouse hepatoma (Hepa 
1c1c7) cells; the induction mechanism is Arnt dependent because induction does
not occur in Arnt-defective cells. Furthermore, induction of phosphoglycerate
kinase 1 mRNA requires Arnt's N-terminal region, which mediates DNA binding and
heterodimerization; in contrast, induction does not require Arnt's C-terminal
region, which mediates transactivation. We also show that a GAL4-HIF1alpha fusion
protein transactivates a GAL4-dependent gene in the absence of Arnt, that
HIF1alpha's transactivation capability is inducible by hypoxia, and that both
hypoxia responsiveness and transactivation capability reside within the
C-terminal 83 amino acids of HIF1alpha. Our findings generate new insights into
the mechanism by which Arnt and HIF1alpha induce transcription in response to
hypoxia.

PMID: 8702901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Aug 14;225(2):485-8.

In vivo expression of mRNAs encoding hypoxia-inducible factor 1.

Wiener CM(1), Booth G, Semenza GL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a heterodimeric basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor that regulates genes whose products play key roles in
maintaining O2 homeostasis. We have previously demonstrated that HIF-1 mRNA,
protein, and DNA-binding activity are induced when mammalian tissue culture cells
are subjected to hypoxia. In this paper, we report our analysis of HIF-1 mRNA
expression in vivo. We demonstrate expression of HIF-1 alpha and HIF-1 beta
(ARNT) mRNA in all human, rat, and mouse organs assayed and show for the first
time that HIF-1 mRNA expression was induced in brain, kidney, and lung when rats 
or mice were exposed to reduced ambient O2 concentrations for 30 to 60 min. The
ubiquitous in vivo expression of HIF-1 alpha and HIF-1 beta (ARNT) mRNA is
consistent with the proposed role of HIF-1 in coordinating adaptive
transcriptional responses to hypoxia.

PMID: 8753788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Aug 14;225(2):333-9.

Cloning and selective expression in brain and kidney of ARNT2 homologous to the
Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT).

Drutel G(1), Kathmann M, Heron A, Schwartz JC, Arrang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Neurobiologie et Pharmacologie (U.109) de l'INSERM, Centre Paul
Broca, Paris, France.

Arnt2, a new member of the basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factor family,
was cloned from rat brain cDNAs. Its deduced 712 amino acid sequence displays 63%
identity with that of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt1) 
that was completely established. Whereas Arnt2 gene expression, established by
Northern blotting and in situ hybridization histochemistry, occurred selectively 
in brain and kidney, that of Arnt1 was ubiquitous, suggesting that the two
proteins play distinct roles, presumably via dimerization and DNA binding with
different partners.

PMID: 8753765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1996 Aug;139(2):272-80.

Identification of a cell-specific transcription activation domain within the
human Ah receptor nuclear translocator.

Corton JC(1), Moreno ES, Hovis SM, Leonard LS, Gaido KW, Joyce MM, Kennett SB.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Industry Institute of Toxicology, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina 27709, USA.

In the presence of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related
chemicals, the Ah receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) forms a heterodimeric
complex with the ligand-bound Ah receptor, leading to recognition of
dioxin-responsive elements within the enhancer of the CYP1A1 gene and
transcription activation by an unknown mechanism. To understand the role of Arnt 
in transcription activation by the Ah receptor-Arnt heterodimer, we performed a
deletion analysis of Arnt to locate domains that are directly involved in
transcription activation. We showed that the C-terminal 34 amino acids of Arnt
encode a transcription activation domain (TAD) that functions independently of
other sequences in the Ah receptor complex when attached to the heterologous Gal4
DNA binding domain. Deletion of the C-terminal acidic-rich 14 amino acids
completely abolishes activity. Sequences important in Arnt TAD function were
independent of the glutamine-rich region which is an important structural feature
in the TAD of other transcription factors. The strength of the Arnt TAD when
compared with the strong TAD from the herpes simplex virus VP16 protein was
cell-type specific. Both the Arnt and VP16 TAD were equally strong in COS-1
cells, but the Arnt TAD had weak activity in an Arnt-deficient mouse hepatoma
cell line and was not needed for restoration of CYP1A1 activation. These results 
imply that for CYP1A1 activation the Ah receptor provides the dominant activation
function for the heterodimer in hepatoma cells. The potential of the Arnt TAD to 
contribute to activation by the Ah receptor complex is likely determined by
availability or activity of cell-specific factors with which the TAD interacts.

PMID: 8806843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jul 26;271(30):17771-8.

Dimerization, DNA binding, and transactivation properties of hypoxia-inducible
factor 1.

Jiang BH(1), Rue E, Wang GL, Roe R, Semenza GL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287-3914, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a heterodimeric basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor that regulates hypoxia-inducible genes including the human
erythropoietin (EPO) gene. In this study, we report structural features of the
HIF-1alpha subunit that are required for heterodimerization, DNA binding, and
transactivation. The HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta (ARNT; aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator) subunits were coimmunoprecipitated from nuclear extracts,
indicating that these proteins heterodimerize in the absence of DNA. In
vitro-translated HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta generated a HIF-1/DNA complex with
similar electrophoretic mobility and sequence specificity as HIF-1 present in
nuclear extracts from hypoxic cells. Compared to 826-amino acid, full-length
HIF-1alpha, amino acids 1-166 mediated heterodimerization with HIF-1beta (ARNT), 
but amino acids 1-390 were required for optimal DNA binding. A deletion involving
the basic domain of HIF-1alpha eliminated DNA binding without affecting
heterodimerization. In cotransfection assays, forced expression of recombinant
HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta (ARNT) activated transcription of reporter genes
containing EPO enhancer sequences with intact, but not mutant, HIF-1 binding
sites. Deletion of the carboxy terminus of HIF-1alpha (amino acids 391-826)
markedly decreased the ability of recombinant HIF-1 to activate transcription.
Overexpression of a HIF-1alpha construct with deletions of the basic domain and
carboxy terminus blocked reporter gene activation by endogenous HIF-1 in hypoxic 
cells.

PMID: 8663540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Exp Cell Res. 1996 Jul 10;226(1):154-63.

Complementation of Ah receptor deficiency in hepatoma cells: negative feedback
regulation and cell cycle control by the Ah receptor.

Weiss C(1), Kolluri SK, Kiefer F, Göttlicher M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center Karlsruhe, Institute of Genetics, Karlsruhe, D-76021, Germany.

The Ah receptor (AhR) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor subunit that
heterodimerizes with the AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt) and mediates the
predominant biological effects of 2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD).
TCDD activates target genes in xenobiotica metabolism in many cell lines and,
more specifically, delays G1-S progression of 5L hepatoma cells. Here we describe
transient and stable AhR-expression analysis in AhR-deficient subclones of the
TCDD-sensitive 5L cells. We tested the integrity of the AhR-signaling system
beyond the lack of the receptor in the variant subclone and analyzed the role of 
AhR in cell cycle regulation. Transiently expressed AhR has a high basal activity
on promoters containing AhR-binding sites, so-called XREs, when transfected into 
receptor-deficient variant cells compared to wild-type cells. Single- and
double-hybrid analysis dissociates AhR ligand responsiveness, transactivation,
and heterodimerization with Arnt from receptor binding to an XRE. Hybrid
receptors also show the high basal activity in the absence of exogenous TCDD in
AhR-deficient variant cells, indicating that the endogenous AhR-activating signal
acts directly on the receptor rather than XRE-dependent promoters or DNA binding 
of the receptor. Stable expression of AhR in variant cell clones by retroviral
infection fully reconstitutes TCDD responsiveness, including target-gene
induction and delay of cell cycle progression. These AhR-reconstituted cells,
like AhR-containing wild-type cells, show low basal activity of the transiently
expressed AhR hybrid. Thus, the increased basal activity in AhR-deficient cells
suggests a negative feedback control of AhR activity. In vitro ligand-binding
assays are compatible with the idea that the increased basal activity is due to
the accumulation of an AhR-binding endogenous ligand. In conclusion, AhR is
causally responsible for TCDD-dependent cell cycle regulation and feedback
control of AhR activity.

PMID: 8660951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Genomics. 1996 Jul 1;35(1):136-43.

The mammalian single-minded (SIM) gene: mouse cDNA structure and diencephalic
expression indicate a candidate gene for Down syndrome.

Yamaki A(1), Noda S, Kudoh J, Shindoh N, Maeda H, Minoshima S, Kawasaki K,
Shimizu Y, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, 160, Japan.

We have recently isolated a human homolog (hSIM) of the Drosophila single-minded 
(sim) gene from the Down syndrome critical region of chromosome 21 using the exon
trapping method. The Drosophila sim gene encodes a transcription factor that
regulates the development of the central nervous system midline cell lineage. To 
elucidate the structure of the mammalian SIM protein, we have isolated cDNA
clones from a mouse embryo cDNA library. The cDNA clones encode a polypeptide of 
657 amino acids with a bHLH (basic-helix-loop-helix) domain, characteristic of a 
large family of transcription factors, and a PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) domain in the
amino-terminal half region. Both of these domains have striking sequence homology
with human SIM and Drosophila SIM proteins. In contrast, the carboxy-terminal
half of the mouse SIM protein consists of a proline-rich region with no sequence 
homology to the Drosophila SIM protein. A similar proline-rich domain is known
for the activator domain of a number of transcription factors. Whole-mount embryo
in situ hybridization experiments revealed that the SIM mRNA is expressed
prominently in the diencephalon of mouse embryos at 8-9.5 days postcoitum. The
structural characteristics of the mouse SIM protein and its expression in the
diencephalon during embryogenesis strongly suggest that the newly isolated
mammalian SIM homolog may play a critical role in the development of the
mammalian central nervous system. We propose that the human SIM gene may be one
of the pathogenic genes of Down syndrome.

PMID: 8661114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jun 21;271(25):15117-23.

The role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) in hypoxic 
induction of gene expression. Studies in ARNT-deficient cells.

Wood SM(1), Gleadle JM, Pugh CW, Hankinson O, Ratcliffe PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Erythropoietin Group, Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, United Kingdom.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), a DNA-binding complex implicated in the
regulation of gene expression by oxygen, has been shown to consist of a
heterodimer of two basic helix-loop-helix Per-AHR-ARNT-Sim (PAS) proteins,
HIF-1alpha, and HIF-1beta. One partner, HIF-1beta, had been recognized previously
as the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), an essential
component of the xenobiotic response. In the present work, ARNT-deficient mutant 
cells, originally derived from the mouse hepatoma line Hepa1c1c7, have been used 
to analyze the role of ARNT/HIF-1beta in oxygen-regulated gene expression. Two
stimuli were examined: hypoxia itself and desferrioxamine, an iron-chelating
agent that also activates HIF-1. Induction of the DNA binding and transcriptional
activity of HIF-1 was absent in the mutant cells, indicating an essential role
for ARNT/HIF-1beta. Analysis of deleted ARNT/HIF-1beta genes indicated that the
basic, helix-loop-helix, and PAS domains, but not the amino or carboxyl termini, 
were necessary for function in the response to hypoxia. Comparison of gene
expression in wild type and mutant cells demonstrated the critical importance of 
ARNT/HIF-1beta in the hypoxic induction of a wide variety of genes. Nevertheless,
for some genes a reduced response to hypoxia and desferrioxamine persisted in
these mutant cells, clearly distinguishing ARNT/HIF-1beta-dependent and
ARNT/HIF-1beta-independent mechanisms of gene activation by both these stimuli.

PMID: 8662957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Genomics. 1996 Jun 15;34(3):437-9.

Assignment of the hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha gene to a region of conserved
synteny on mouse chromosome 12 and human chromosome 14q.

Semenza GL(1), Rue EA, Iyer NV, Pang MG, Kearns WG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, 21287, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor that mediates homeostatic responses to hypoxia. HIF-1 is a heterodimer
consisting of HIF-1alpha, which is encoded by the HIF1A gene, complexed with
HIF-1beta, which is encoded by the ARNT gene. In this paper we report the
assignment of Hif1a and HIF1A to mouse chromosome 12 and human chromosome 14,
respectively. HIF1A was assigned to human chromosome 14q21-q24 by analysis of
somatic cell hybrids and by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Hif1a was
localized by interspecific backcross analysis within a region of mouse chromosome
12 encompassing >30 cM that demonstrates conservation of synteny with a region of
human chromosome 14 extending from PAX9 at 14q12-q13 to IGHC at 14q32.33.

PMID: 8786149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1996 Jun;39(3):589-93.

Mapping the 90 kDa heat shock protein binding region of the Ah receptor.

Perdew GH(1), Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, Pennsylvania State University, University
Park 16802, USA. ghp2@psu.edu

Expression of a series of Ah receptor (AhR) deletion mutants in an in vitro
translation system has been previously used to map several functional domains of 
the murine AhR (Dolwick et al. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90, 8566-8570). 
In this report, quantitative immunoprecipitation of 90-kDa heat shock protein
(hsp90) from reticulocyte lysate allowed us to measure the level of the AhR and
AhR deletion mutants complexed with hsp90. After translation of a series of
deletion mutants it was determined that there are two distinct domains important 
in forming a stable AhR/hsp90 complex, corresponding to amino acid sequences
1-166 and 289-347 of the AhR. Neither ARNT, nor Per were able to stably interact 
with hsp90. Thus, the AhR appears to be a unique member of the PAS domain family 
of proteins that binds a known ligand and stably interacts with hsp90.

PMID: 8828811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 1996 Jun;41(8 Suppl):1288-96.

[Structure and function of PAS proteins: Ah receptor, Arnt, and others].

[Article in Japanese]

Sogawa K(1), Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University,
Sendai, Japan.

PMID: 8741651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. FASEB J. 1996 Jun;10(8):809-18.

Cytochromes P450 5: induction of cytochrome P4501A1: a model for analyzing
mammalian gene transcription.

Whitlock JP Jr(1), Okino ST, Dong L, Ko HP, Clarke-Katzenberg R, Ma Q, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University of Medicine,
California 94305-5332, USA.

The induction of microsomal cytochrome P4501A1 by polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons represents an interesting response by which mammalian cells adapt to
xenobiotic exposure. Enzyme induction reflects increased transcription of the
corresponding CYP1A1 gene. Analyses of the induction mechanism using genetic,
biochemical, and molecular biological approaches have revealed a novel
transcriptional regulatory pathway that involves ligand-dependent
heterodimerization between two basic helix-loop-helix proteins (the Ah receptor
and Arnt), interaction of the heterodimer with a xenobiotic-responsive enhancer, 
transmission of the induction signal from the enhancer to the CYP1A1 promoter,
and alterations in chromatin structure. Current techniques permit examination of 
the induction mechanism in intact cells and analyses of the CYP1A1 gene in its
native chromosomal configuration. Such experiments generate new insights into the
control of mammalian transcription that are of relatively broad interest.

PMID: 8666157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 24;271(21):12310-6.

Cooperative interaction between AhR.Arnt and Sp1 for the drug-inducible
expression of CYP1A1 gene.

Kobayashi A(1), Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Expression of CYP1A1 gene is regulated in a substrate-inducible manner through at
least two kinds of regulatory DNA elements in addition to the TATA sequence, XRE 
(xenobiotic responsive element), and BTE (basic transcription element), a GC box 
sequence. The trans-acting factor on the XRE is a heterodimer consisting of
arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt), while Sp1
acts as a regulatory factor on the BTE. We have investigated how these factors
interact with one another to induce expression of the CYP1A1 gene. Both in vivo
transfection assays using Drosophila Schneider line 2 (SL2) cells, which is
devoid of endogenous Sp1, AhR, and Arnt, and in vitro transcription assays using 
baculovirus-expressed AhR, Arnt, and Sp1 proteins revealed that these factors
enhanced synergistically expression of the reporter genes driven by a model
CYP1A1 promoter, consisting of four repeated XRE sequences and a BTE sequence, in
agreement with previous observation (Yanagida, A., Sogawa, K., Yasumoto, K., and 
Fujii-Kuriyama, Y. (1990) Mol. Cell. Biol. 10, 1470-1475). We have proved by
coimmunoprecipitation assays and DNase I footprinting that both AhR and Arnt
interact with the zinc finger domain of Sp1 via their basic HLH/PAS domains. When
either the AhR.Arnt heterodimer of Sp1 was bound to its cognate DNA element, DNA 
binding of the second factor was facilitated. Survey of DNA sequences in the
promoter region shows that the XRE and GC box elements are commonly found in the 
genes whose expressions are induced by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons,
suggesting that the two regulatory DNA elements and their cognate trans-acting
factors constitute a common mechanism for induction of a group of
drug-metabolizing enzymes.

PMID: 8647831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1996 May 1;329(1):47-55.

Characterization of the activated form of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor in the
nucleus of HeLa cells in the absence of exogenous ligand.

Singh SS(1), Hord NG, Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, Pennsylvania State University, University
Park 16802, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is known to mediate
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-induced toxic effects.
Immunocytochemical studies revealed that AhR in HeLa cells is localized
throughout the cell. Upon TCDD treatment most of the cytoplasmic receptor is
translocated into the nucleus in a time-dependent manner. A significant amount of
AhR was found to be tightly associated with the nuclear fraction of untreated
HeLa cells. The level of receptor in the nuclear fraction was approximately 16%
of the total cellular receptor pool. Further characterization of AhR
heterocomplex from the HeLa nuclear fraction by sucrose density gradient analysis
revealed that the AhR was present in the 6 S form, and that the nuclear AhR could
be coimmunoprecipitated using anti-Arnt mAb. The ability of the AhR to
specifically interact with dioxin-responsive elements (DRE) was demonstrated
utilizing wild-type and two mutant DREs in gel shift assays. These results would 
suggest that, in HeLa cells, the AhR-Arnt heterodimer is associated with the
nuclear fraction under normal culture conditions. Therefore, HeLa cells can be
used as a model system to study the biochemical and molecular function of the Ah 
receptor and the process that leads to activation of the AhR in the absence of
exogenous ligand.

PMID: 8619634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 12;271(15):8843-50.

Functional characterization of DNA-binding domains of the subunits of the
heterodimeric aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex imputing novel and canonical
basic helix-loop-helix protein-DNA interactions.

Bacsi SG(1), Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and the Jonsson Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Medical School, University of California, Los Angeles California
90095-1781, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (ARNT) belong to a novel subclass of basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors. The AHR.ARNT heterodimer binds to the xenobiotic
responsive element (XRE). Substitution of each of four amino acids in the basic
region of ARNT with alanine severely diminishes or abolishes XRE binding,
intimating that these amino acids contact DNA bases. Three of these amino acids
are conserved among basic helix-loop-helix proteins, and the corresponding amino 
acids of Max and USF are known to contact DNA bases. Alanine scanning mutagenesis
of the basic domain of AHR and substitution with conservative amino acids at
particular positions in this domain and in a more amino-proximal AHR segment
previously shown to be required for XRE binding (Fukunaga, B. N., and Hankinson, 
O. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. 271, 3743-3749) demonstrate that the most
carboxyl-proximal amino acid position of the basic domain and a position within
the amino-proximal segment are intolerant to amino acid substitution with regard 
to XRE binding, suggesting that these two amino acids make base contacts. Amino
acid positions in these AHR regions and in the ARNT basic region less adversely
affected by substitution are also identified. The amino acids at these positions 
may contact the phosphodiester backbone. The apparent bipartite nature of the DNA
binding region of AHR and the identity of those of its amino acids that
apparently make DNA contacts impute a novel protein-DNA binding behavior for AHR.

PMID: 8621524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 5;271(14):7942-8.

DNA binding by the heterodimeric Ah receptor. Relationship to dioxin-induced
CYP1A1 transcription in vivo.

Dong L(1), Ma Q, Whitlock JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California 94305-5332, USA.

The environmental contaminant 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin induces the
microsomal enzyme cytochrome P4501A1 by increasing the transcription rate of the 
CYP1A1 gene. Induction requires two basic helix-loop-helix proteins, the
ligand-binding aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and its heterodimerization
partner, the AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt). The AhR/Arnt heterodimer induces
transcription by binding to dioxin-responsive elements (DREs) within an enhancer 
upstream of the CYP1A1 gene. The basic regions of AhR and Arnt are crucial for
DRE binding. We have mutated these regions in order to analyze the relationship
between DRE binding (determined in vitro using an electrophoretic mobility shift 
assay) and induction of CYP1A1 transcription (determined in vivo by genetic
complementation of AhR-defective and Arnt-defective mouse hepatoma cells, using
an RNase protection assay to measure mRNA accumulation). Our findings reveal the 
amino acids in the basic regions of AhR/Arnt that are important for both DRE
binding and induction of transcription. This information provides biological
background for the interpretation of structural (e.g. crystallographic) studies
of the interactions between AhR/Arnt and the DRE. Our findings also indicate that
the in vitro behavior of the mutants does not consistently predict their
functional activity in vivo. Thus, genetic complementation constitutes an
important and stringent test for analyzing the effects of mutations on AhR/Arnt
function.

PMID: 8626473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1706-13.

cDNA cloning and tissue-specific expression of a novel basic helix-loop-helix/PAS
factor (Arnt2) with close sequence similarity to the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (Arnt).

Hirose K(1), Morita M, Ema M, Mimura J, Hamada H, Fujii H, Saijo Y, Gotoh O,
Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University Sendai,
Japan.

We isolated mouse cDNA clones (Arnt2) that are highly similar to but distinct
from the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) nuclear translocator (Arnt). The
composite cDNA covered a 2,443-bp sequence consisting of a putative 2,136-bp open
reading frame encoding a polypeptide of 712 amino acids. The predicted Arnt2
polypeptide carries a characteristic basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/PAS motif in
its N-terminal region with close similarity (81% identity) to that of mouse Arnt 
and has an overall sequence identity of 57% with Arnt. Biochemical properties and
interaction of Arnt2 with other bHLH/PAS proteins were investigated by
coimmunoprecipitation assays, gel mobility shift assays, and the yeast two-hybrid
system. Arnt2 interacted with AhR and mouse Sim as efficiently as Arnt, and the
Arnt2-AhR complex recognized and bound specifically the xenobiotic responsive
element (XRE) sequence. Expression of Arnt2 successfully rescued XRE-driven
reporter gene activity in the Arnt-defective c4 mutant of Hepa-1 cells. RNA blot 
analysis revealed that expression of Arnt2 mRNA was restricted to the brains and 
kidneys of adult mice, while Arnt mRNA was expressed ubiquitously. In addition,
whole-mount in situ hybridization of 9.5-day mouse embryos showed that Arnt2 mRNA
was expressed in the dorsal neural tube and branchial arch 1, while Arnt
transcripts were detected broadly in various tissues of mesodermal and endodermal
origins. These results suggest that Arnt2 may play different roles from Arnt both
in adult mice and in developing embryos. Finally, sequence comparison of the
currently known bHLH/PAS proteins indicates a division into two phylogenetic
groups: the Arnt group, containing Arnt, Arnt2, and Per, and the AhR group,
consisting of AhR, Sim, and Hif-1alpha.

PMCID: PMC231157
PMID: 8657146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1996 Mar;124(1-2):117-25.

Inhibitory effects on the discriminative stimulus properties of D-amphetamine by 
classical and newer antipsychotics do not correlate with antipsychotic activity. 
Relation to effects on the reward system?

Arnt J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacological Research, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

Classical antipsychotics exemplified by haloperidol (0.30), fluphenazine (0.070) 
and cis(Z)-flupentixol (0.088; ED50 values in mumol/kg are given in parentheses
for all compounds) potently block the discriminative stimulus properties of
D-amphetamine (1.0 mg/kg, IP) in rats. Newer antipsychotics have very different
profiles: clozapine (7.2) and olanzapine (5.9) induce dose-dependent inhibition, 
while risperidone (> 6.1) and remoxipride (> 47) show weak inhibitory effects and
sertindole (> 23), seroquel (> 20), amperozide (> 2.9) and the putative
antipsychotic MDL 100151 (> 13; racemate with MDL 100907 as the active
enantiomer) are ineffective. Antagonists of alpha 1-adrenoceptors (prazosin; >
6.0), 5-HT2A/2C (ritanserin; > 2.6) and histamine H1 receptors (mepyramine; > 50)
are ineffective. Sertindole (0.076), risperidone (0.23), clozapine (0.39),
olanzapine (0.088), MDL 100151 (0.0082), fluphenazine (0.13) and ritanserin
(0.12) are potent inhibitors of the discriminative stimulus induced by the
5-HT2A/2C agonist DOI (0.63 mg/kg, IP), while haloperidol (approximately 0.4),
cis(Z)-flupentixol (approximately 0.04), amperozide (approximately 0.5) and
prazosin (> 12) show partial inhibition and remoxipride (> 23) and mepyramine (> 
25) are ineffective. The results indicate that inhibition of D-amphetamine
discrimination does not correlate with antipsychotic activity of newer
antipsychotics, as has previously been suggested in the literature. Furthermore, 
the inhibitory potencies against D-amphetamine-induced discrimination (present
study) and hypermotility (previous study in the same strain of rats) do not
correlate either for several of the newer antipsychotics (e.g. for sertindole,
risperidone, seroquel and remoxipride). The discrepancies cannot solely be
explained by additional pharmacological effects of these compounds, e.g. 5-HT2
receptor blockade. The D-amphetamine discrimination is documented to depend on
increased limbic dopamine function which in humans is associated with increased
euphoria. Based on these results, it is hypothesized that D-amphetamine
discrimination rather than a model for antipsychotic activity may reflect
dysphoric or anhedonic activity.

PMID: 8935806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mol Pharmacol. 1996 Mar;49(3):391-8.

The aryl-hydrocarbon receptor, but not the aryl-hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator protein, is rapidly depleted in hepatic and nonhepatic culture cells
exposed to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Pollenz RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, 29425, USA.

Western blot analysis and indirect immunofluorescence microscopy were used to
evaluate the fate of the aryl-hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and aryl-hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) protein in culture cell models exposed to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). In wild-type (WT) murine Hepa-1c1c7
cells, AhR protein was depleted by 85% after 4 hr of TCDD treatment as measured
in total cell lysates. In contrast, the concentration of Arnt protein was
unaffected by TCDD treatment in WT cells. Analysis of the AhR with
immunofluorescence microscopy revealed that nuclear translocation of the liganded
AhR preceded its depletion from cells. AhR protein was depleted from Hepa-1 type 
I variants (that contain a concentration of AhR that is 10% of WT) with a similar
time course and to the same maximal level observed in WT cells (85%). The EC50
for AhR depletion in Hepa-1 cells was 39 pm TCDD and correspond to the EC50 for
induction of P4501A1 protein. Murine embryonic fibroblasts (NIH-3T3), rat aortic 
smooth muscle cells (A7), and murine skeletal muscle cells (C2C12) all exhibited 
>90% depletion of the AhR after 2-4 hr of TCDD treatment. Arnt concentration was 
not affected by TCDD in these cell lines. These results indicate that the
liganded AhR is rapidly depleted within the nuclear compartment of hepatic and
nonhepatic cells in a manner independent of the Arnt protein.

PMID: 8643077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. DNA Cell Biol. 1996 Mar;15(3):235-45.

Mouse microsomal Class 3 aldehyde dehydrogenase: AHD3 cDNA sequence, inducibility
by dioxin and clofibrate, and genetic mapping.

Vasiliou V(1), Kozak CA, Lindahl R, Nebert DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati Medical Center,
Ohio 45267-0056, USA.

We have cloned and sequenced the mouse AHD3 cDNA, which codes for the Class 3
microsomal aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH3m). The cDNA is 2,997 bp in length
excluding the poly(A)+ tail, and has 5' and 3' non-translated regions of 113 bp
and 1,429 bp, respectively. The deduced amino acid sequence consists of 484 amino
acids, including the first methionine (Mr = 53,942), and contains a hydrophobic
segment at the carboxyl terminus which is the putative membrane anchor. The mouse
AHD3 protein was found to be: 95% similar to the rat microsomal ALDH3m protein,
65% identical to the mouse, rat and human cytosolic ALDH3c protein, and <28%
similar to the rat Class 1 and Class 2 ALDH and methylmalonate-semialdehyde
dehydrogenase proteins. Southern hybridization analysis of mouse cDNA probed with
the full-length AHD3 cDNA revealed that the Ahd3 gene likely spans less than a
total of 25 kb. The mouse Ahd3 gene is very tightly linked to the Ahd4 gene on
chromosome 11. Mouse AHD3 mRNA levels are increased by dioxin in mouse Hepa-1c1c7
hepatoma wild-type (wt) cells but not in the Ah receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT)-defective (c4) mutant line, indicating that the induction process is
mediated by the Ah (aromatic hydrocarbon) dioxin-binding receptor. AHD3 mRNA
levels are also inducible by clofibrate in both the wt and c4 lines. AHD3 mRNA
levels are not elevated in the CYP1A1 metabolism-deficient c37 mutant line or as 
part of the oxidative stress response found in the untreated 14CoS/14CoS mouse
cell line. These data indicate that, although inducible by dioxin, the Ahd3 gene 
does not qualify as a member of the aromatic hydrocarbon [Ah] gene battery.

PMID: 8634152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Carcinogenesis. 1996 Mar;17(3):443-9.

TCDD-inducible plasminogen activator inhibitor type 2 (PAI-2) in human
hepatocytes, HepG2 and monocytic U937 cells.

Gohl G(1), Lehmköster T, Münzel PA, Schrenk D, Viebahn R, Bock KW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, University of Tübingen, Germany.

Induction of PAI-2 by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) has been studied
in human primary hepatocytes, hepatoma HepG2 cells and monocytic U937 cells,
extending recent findings in human keratinocytes. PAI-2 represents a serpine-type
protease inhibitor with wide-ranging implications in fibrinolysis, extracellular 
matrix proteolysis, growth factor activation and carcinogenesis. PAI-2 was
induced by >10(-9) M TCDD in hepatocytes and HepG2 cells and by >10(-10) M TCDD
in U937 cells. In the latter cell line, PAI-2 induction by TCDD and by
12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate (TPA) has been compared. TCDD appeared to
be less efficient than TPA as an inducer of PAI-2. In contrast to induction by
TPA, PAI-2 induction by TCDD was found to be biphasic, with an early peak of mRNA
at 1-3 h and a late peak at 12-24 h. A biphasic response was also seen at the
protein level although production of PAI-2 protein lagged behind the
corresponding mRNA. PAI-2 is known to contain AP-1 sites, i.e. Jun/Fos
protein-binding sites, in its promotor region. Hence, PAI-2 induction by TCDD has
originally been conceived to be due to an indirect response, secondary to the
induction of Jun/Fos proteins. Therefore, expression of jun/fos genes and their
AP-1 activity were studied at the early phase of PAI-2 induction by TCDD. TCDD
did not increase mRNA of c-fos, c-jun, junB or junD (in contrast to TPA which
markedly increased the expression of c-fos and junB), nor did TCDD increase AP-1 
activity. In conclusion, the findings suggest that PAI-2 induction by TCDD is not
restricted to human keratinocytes but includes liver cells and monocytic U937
cells. The induction mechanism is complex but the early phase does not appear to 
involve Jun/Fos proteins.

PMID: 8631129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Carcinogenesis. 1996 Mar;17(3):435-41.

Autoregulation of human CYP1A1 gene promotor activity in HepG2 and MCF-7 cells.

Jørgensen EC(1), Autrup H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Medicine, University of Aarhus,
Denmark.

Cytochrome CYP1A1 gene expression, induced by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
and dioxins, eg. 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), is regulated mainly 
at the level of transcription. Inducible activation of the CYP1A1 promotor is
mediated by a ligand-dependent transcription factor dimer complex including the
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and the AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) proteins.
Additional factors seem to be involved in tissue- and cell-specific modification 
of the induction process. In the present study HepG2 and MCF-7 cell lines were
used to examine a possible cell-specific autoregulation of CYP1A1 promotor
function. Chimeric CYP1A1-CAT reporter constructs and a human CYP1A1 cDNA
expression plasmid were used in transient co-expression experiments. In HepG2
cells co-expression of increasing amounts of CYP1A1 cDNA significantly
down-regulated constitutive as well as the TCDD-induced CYP1A1 promotor driven
CAT activity. In contrast, co-transfection of MCF-7 cells with a 3-fold molar
excess of CYP1A1 cDNA relative to the CYP1A1-CAT reporter construct caused an
approximately 2-fold increase in the TCDD-induced CAT activity, whereas no effect
was observed on constitutive promotor activity. This autoregulatory mechanism(s) 
of the human CYP1A1 gene product was independent of specific 5' flanking promotor
segments tested. RT-PCR analyses did not indicate any changes in mRNA level of
AHR and ARNT in the co-transfection studies. Thus these studies show that the
human CYP1A1 gene is exposed to cell-specific autoregulation, probably achieved
via different functions of trans-acting factors.

PMID: 8631128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Biol Chem. 1996 Feb 16;271(7):3743-9.

Identification of a novel domain in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor required for
DNA binding.

Fukunaga BN(1), Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical School, University of
California, Los Angeles, 90095, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that binds DNA in the form of a heterodimer with the AHR nuclear translocator
protein (ARNT). Both proteins possess basic helix-loop-helix motifs. ARNT binds
to the side of the xenobiotic responsive element (XRE) that resembles an E-box
(the sequence recognized by the majority of other basic helix-loop-helix
proteins), whereas AHR binds to the side of the XRE that does not conform to the 
E-box sequence. The basic region of ARNT closely resembles those of other
E-box-binding proteins, whereas the "nominal basic region" of AHR (amino acids 27
39), although required for XRE binding, deviates from this consensus. By
extensive mutational analysis it is shown here that an additional block of amino 
acids of AHR (from tyrosine 9 to lysine 20) that contains a highly basic segment 
is required for XRE binding and transcriptional activation. Deletion of the first
nine amino acids negates XRE binding. Substitution of either tyrosine 9 or
arginine 14 with alanine eliminates XRE binding, whereas alanine substitutions at
certain other sites within the block reduce but do not eliminate binding. The
reported absence of the first nine amino acids in the purified protein may
therefore be artifactual. These results suggest that the amino acids of AHR
involved in binding to the XRE constitute a novel DNA-binding domain, comprising 
amino acids located within and amino-terminal to the nominal basic region.

PMID: 8631989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Eur J Pharmacol. 1996 Feb 15;297(1-2):1-8.

The antiaggressive potency of (-)-penbutolol involves both 5-HT1A and 5-HT1B
receptors and beta-adrenoceptors.

Sánchez C(1), Arnt J, Moltzen EK.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacological Research, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

The relative importance of 5-HT1A and beta-adrenergic activities in the
antiaggressive effects of (-)-penbutolol was studied in male mice. (-)-Penbutolol
had high affinity for 5-HT1A receptors and beta-adrenoceptors, and antagonized
the 5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine (5-MeODMT)-induced 5-HT syndrome and the
8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamin)tetralin (8-OH-DPAT)-induced discriminatory stimulus
in rats. (-)-Penbutolol abolished aggressive behaviour (ED50 = 56 mumol/kg), and 
reversed the antiaggressive effects of 8-OH-DPAT and
1-(3-trifluoromethylphenyl)piperazine (TFMPP) (ED50 = 8.1 and 2.1 mumol/kg,
respectively). (N-[2-[4-(2-Methoxyphenyl)-1-piperazinyl]ethyl-N-(2-pyridinyl)
cyclohexanecarboxamide (WAY 100635) reversed the antiaggressive effects of
8-OH-DPAT (ED50 = 0.012 mumol/kg), but did not affect the antiaggressive effects 
of TFMPP. The antiaggressive effect of a submaximal dose of 8-OH-DPAT was
markedly potentiated by beta-adrenoceptor antagonists without 5-HT1A receptor
affinity, whereas (-)-penbutolol was effective at only one dose (4.5 mumol/kg).
In conclusion, the 5-HT1A receptor antagonistic potency of (-)-penbutolol in
aggressive mice is attenuated by beta-adrenoceptor-induced facilitation of
serotonergic neurotransmission.

PMID: 8851159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Br J Cancer. 1996 Feb;73(3):316-22.

Effect of transient expression of the oestrogen receptor on constitutive and
inducible CYP1A1 in Hs578T human breast cancer cells.

Wang WL(1), Thomsen JS, Porter W, Moore M, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, College Station 
77843-4466, USA.

Hs578T human breast cancer cells are an oestrogen receptor (ER)-negative cell
line. Treatment of these cells with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)
resulted in formation of a 6.9 S nuclear aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor complex, 
which bound to a [32P]dioxin-responsive element in a gel electrophoretic mobility
shift assay. However, TCDD does not induce CYP1A1 gene expression or
chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) activity in cells transiently
transfected with pRNH11c or pMCAT5.12, which are Ah-responsive plasmids derived
from the 5'-flanking region of the human and murine CYP1A1 genes respectively.
Restoration of Ah responsiveness was investigated by co-transfecting Hs578T cells
with pRNH11c or pMCAT5.12 and plasmids that express the ER (hER), Ah receptor
(AhR) and AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt) proteins. ER expression resulted in
significantly increased basal CAT activity; however, TCDD did not induce CAT
activity in the transiently transfected cells. Expression of the AhR or Arnt
proteins did not alter basal or inducible CAT activity. Expression of N- or
C-terminal truncated ER in Hs578T resulted in differential regulation of Ah
responsiveness. In Hs578T cells transiently expressing the ER, which contains
C-terminal deletions (amino acids 282-595), basal CAT activity was also
increased; however, Ah responsiveness was not restored. In contrast, transient
expression of N-terminal-deleted (amino acids 1-178) ER resulted in a marked
decrease in basal CAT activity but a restoration of Ah responsiveness. These
results suggest that basal and inducible CAT activity in Hs578T cells transiently
transfected with pRNH11c is modulated differentially by ER domains that are
present in the N- and C-terminal regions of the ER.

PMCID: PMC2074440
PMID: 8562336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Jan 17;218(2):588-94.

cDNA cloning of a murine homologue of Drosophila single-minded, its mRNA
expression in mouse development, and chromosome localization.

Ema M(1), Suzuki M, Morita M, Hirose K, Sogawa K, Matsuda Y, Gotoh O, Saijoh Y,
Fujii H, Hamada H, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

A combination of the RT-PCR method and subsequent screening of the cDNA library
of mouse skeletal muscle with the cDNA isolated by RT-PCR used as a probe led to 
isolation of cDNAs encoding a polypeptide (mSim) with bHLH and PAS domains which 
show high similarity to the corresponding regions of Drosophila Sim, a master
regulator in neurogenesis. Experiments using a GST-fusion protein demonstrated
that mSim heterodimerizes with Arnt (Ah receptor nuclear translocator), even more
efficiently than AhR (Ah receptor) does with Arnt. RNA blot analysis using RNAs
from various tissues of mice indicated that mSim transcript is expressed in
several limited tissues such as muscle, kidney and lung of adult animals.
Distribution of mSim mRNA was always accompanied with that of Arnt. All the
results suggest a regulatory role of mSim in partnership with Arnt. Chromosomal
location of the mSim gene was determined by fluorescent in situ hybridization to 
be localized on the C3.3-C4 band of mouse chromosome 16 which is syntenic with
the human chromosome 21q22 carrying the Down syndrome critical region, where a
gene highly homologous to the Drosophila sim was localized. Whole mount in situ
hybridization using a unique part of mSim cDNA sequence showed that mSim mRNA was
expressed in the ventral diencephalon, branchial arches and limbs. These findings
will provide an approach to the cause of the Down syndrome as well as the
elucidation of the functional roles of mSim in animal development.

PMID: 8561800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 12;271(2):918-24.

Structure and expression of the mouse necdin gene. Identification of a
postmitotic neuron-restrictive core promoter.

Uetsuki T(1), Takagi K, Sugiura H, Yoshikawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute for
Neuroscience, Japan.

Necdin is a 325 amino acid residue protein encoded by a cDNA clone isolated from 
neurally differentiated embryonal carcinoma cells. In situ hybridization
histochemistry revealed that necdin mRNA-containing cells in vivo coincided with 
postmitotic neurons in the mouse brain from early periods of neurogenesis until
adulthood. To study the regulation of necdin gene expression, we have isolated
and characterized the necdin gene from a mouse genomic DNA library. The necdin
gene contains no intron, and its upstream region lacks canonical TATA and CAAT
boxes. To assess promoter activity, the 5'-flanking sequence (844 base pairs) of 
the necdin gene was fused to the LacZ reporter gene and transiently transfected
into retinoic acid-treated P19 embryonal carcinoma cells. Most of the
transfectants expressing high levels of LacZ immunoreactivity were postmitotic
neurons differentiated from P19 cells. Deletion analysis using luciferase
reporter genes demonstrated that a neuron-restrictive core promoter is localized 
to positions -80 to -35, in which a G+C-rich domain and a putative binding site
for transcription factors with PAS (per, arnt, and single-minded) dimerization
domain are comprised. These results suggest that postmitotic neuron-restrictive
expression of the necdin gene is mediated by the specific cis-acting elements and
that this promoter is applicable to postmitotic neuron-targeted expression of
various transgenic systems.

PMID: 8557705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jan;16(1):430-6.

Dioxin-induced CYP1A1 transcription in vivo: the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor
mediates transactivation, enhancer-promoter communication, and changes in
chromatin structure.

Ko HP(1), Okino ST, Ma Q, Whitlock JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
California 94305-5332, USA.

We have analyzed the dioxin-inducible transcriptional control mechanism for the
mouse CYP1A1 gene in its native chromosomal context. Our genetic and biochemical 
studies indicate that a C-terminal segment of the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR) contains latent transactivation capability and communicates the induction
signal from enhancer to promoter. Thus, transactivation and enhancer-promoter
communication may be congruent functions of AhR. Both functions require
heterodimerization between AhR and the AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt). Our
findings also indicate that heterodimerization activates AhR's latent
transactivation function and silences that of Arnt. Furthermore, removal of
Arnt's transactivation domain does not affect dioxin-induced CYP1A1 transcription
in vivo. In addition, our studies demonstrate that dioxin-induced changes in
chromatin structure occur by different mechanisms at the CYP1A1 enhancer and
promoter and that events at an enhancer can be experimentally dissociated from
events at the cognate promoter during mechanistic analyses of mammalian
transcription in vivo.

PMCID: PMC231019
PMID: 8524325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 29;270(52):31353-7.

The basic helix-loop-helix/PAS factor Sim is associated with hsp90. Implications 
for regulation by interaction with partner factors.

McGuire J(1), Coumailleau P, Whitelaw ML, Gustafsson JA, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge, Sweden.

Sim is a Drosophila developmental basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factor containing a Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) region of homology. Here we demonstrate
that Sim, in analogy to the structurally related bHLH/PAS dioxin receptor, was
stably associated with the molecular chaperone hsp90. In the case of the dioxin
receptor, release of hsp90 and derepression of receptor function appear to be
regulated by ligand binding and dimerization with Arnt, a non-hsp90-associated
bHLH/PAS factor. Dimerization with Arnt very efficiently disrupted Sim-hsp90
interaction, a process that required both the bHLH and PAS dimerization motifs of
Arnt. Moreover, hsp90 was also released upon dimerization of Sim with the
Drosophila PAS factor Per, whereas the hsp90-associated dioxin receptor failed to
interact with Sim. These results indicate that hsp90 may play a role in
conditional regulation of Sim function, and that Per and possibly bHLH/PAS
partner factors may activate Sim by inducing release of hsp90 during the
dimerization process.

PMID: 8537407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Neuroreport. 1995 Dec 15;6(18):2557-60.

The dioxin receptor and its nuclear translocator (Arnt) in the rat brain.

Kainu T(1), Gustafsson JA, Pelto-Huikko M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Tampere University Medical School, Finland.

Dioxins are environmental pollutants, whose detrimental effects on health are the
cause of wide public concern due to their accumulation in the food chain and
resistance to metabolism. The most well known dioxin is
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Dioxins exert their effects through a
ligand activated transcription factor termed the dioxin or aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (Ahr), which acts in concert with another structurally related protein: 
the aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (Arnt). In the present study, we have
employed in situ hybridization to study the localization of the mRNAs for these
two proteins in the rat brain. We found mRNAs for both Ahr and Arnt predominantly
in the same neuronal populations: in the olfactory bulb, the hippocampus, and the
cerebral and cerebellar cortices. Arnt, however, had a more widespread expression
than Ahr in the brain. The present results demonstrate that dioxins may act
directly in the brain and that the effects of dioxin may occur in discrete
neuronal populations. However, in some parts of the brain, e.g. the hypothalamus,
that are thought to be targets of the toxic effects of dioxins, we did not
observe detectable levels of Ahr mRNA. Furthermore, it appears that Arnt may have
additional functions in the brain, apart from being the heterodimerization
partner of Ahr, possibly through heterodimerizing with other transcription
factors.

PMID: 8741762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 8;270(49):29270-8.

Identification of functional domains of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor.

Fukunaga BN(1), Probst MR, Reisz-Porszasz S, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California, Los
Angeles 90095-1786, USA.

Functional domains of the mouse aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Ahr) were investigated
by deletion analysis. Ligand binding was localized to a region encompassing the
PAS B repeat. The ligand-mediated dissociation of Ahr from the 90-kDa heat shock 
protein (HSP90) does not require the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (Arnt), but it is slightly enhanced by this protein. One HSP90
molecule appears to bind within the PAS region. The other molecule of HSP90
appears to require interaction at two sites: one over the basic helix-loop-helix 
region, and the other located within the PAS region. Each mutant was analyzed for
dimerization with full-length mouse Arnt and subsequent binding of the dimer to
the xenobiotic responsive element (XRE). In order to minimize any artificial
steric hindrances to dimerization and XRE binding, each Ahr mutant was also
tested with an equivalently deleted Arnt mutant. The basic region of Ahr is
required for XRE binding but not for dimerization. Both the first and second
helices of the basic helix-loop-helix motif and the PAS region are required for
dimerization. These last results are analogous to those previously obtained for
Arnt (Reisz-Porszasz, S., Probst, M.R., Fukunaga, B. N., and Hankinson, O. (1994)
Mol. Cell. Biol. 14, 6075-6086) compatible with the notion that equivalent
regions of Ahr and Arnt associate with each other. Deletion of the
carboxyl-terminal half of Ahr does not affect dimerization or XRE binding but, in
contrast to an equivalent deletion of Arnt, eliminates biological activity as
assessed by an in vivo transcriptional activation assay, suggesting that this
region of Ahr plays a more prominent role in transcriptional activation of the
cyp1a1 gene than the corresponding region of Arnt.

PMID: 7493958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Nov 13;216(2):669-75.

Effect of protein kinase and phosphatase inhibitors on expression of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1.

Wang GL(1), Jiang BH, Semenza GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21287-3914, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a heterodimeric bHLH-PAS protein essential 
for erythropoietin gene transcription in hypoxic cells. Here we show that both
2-aminopurine and sodium fluoride, inhibitors of serine/threonine kinases and
phosphatases, respectively, interfered with the hypoxic induction of HIF-1
DNA-binding activity and expression of HIF-1 alpha and HIF-1 beta(ARNT) subunits.
Genistein, an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases, completely blocked the synthesis of 
both HIF-1 subunits as well as HIF-1 DNA-binding activity. Sodium orthovanadate, 
an inhibitor of tyrosine phosphatases increased the basal level of HIF-1 proteins
and HIF-1 activity. These data suggest that protein phosphorylation events play
an important role in the hypoxia signal-transduction pathway that leads to
synthesis of HIF-1 alpha and HIF-1 beta proteins and the induction of HIF-1
DNA-binding activity.

PMID: 7488163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Biol Chem. 1995 Nov 3;270(44):26292-302.

DNA binding specificities and pairing rules of the Ah receptor, ARNT, and SIM
proteins.

Swanson HI(1), Chan WK, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The Ah receptor (AHR), the Ah receptor nuclear translocator protein (ARNT), and
single-minded protein (SIM) are members of the basic helix-loop-helix-PAS
(bHLH-PAS) family of regulatory proteins. In this study, we examine the DNA
half-site recognition and pairing rules for these proteins using oligonucleotide 
selection-amplification and coprecipitation protocols. Oligonucleotide
selection-amplification revealed that a variety of bHLH-PAS protein combinations 
could interact, with each generating a unique DNA binding specificity. To
validate the selection-amplification protocol, we demonstrated the preference of 
the AHR.ARNT complex for the sequence commonly found in dioxin-responsive
enhancers in vivo (TNGCGTG). We then demonstrated that the ARNT protein is
capable of forming a homodimer with a binding preference for the palindromic
E-box sequence, CACGTG. Further examination indicated that ARNT may have a
relaxed partner specificity, since it was also capable of forming a heterodimer
with SIM and recognizing the sequence GT(G/A)CGTG. Coprecipitation experiments
using various PAS proteins and ARNT were consistent with the idea that the ARNT
protein has a broad range of interactions among the bHLH-PAS proteins, while the 
other members appear more restricted in their interactions. Comparison of this in
vitro data with sites known to be bound in vivo suggests that the high affinity
half-site recognition sequences for the AHR, SIM, and ARNT are T(C/T)GC, GT(G/A)C
(5'-half-sites), and GTG (3'-half-sites), respectively.

PMID: 7592839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Seikagaku. 1995 Nov;67(11):1283-7.

[Structure and function of PAS proteins].

[Article in Japanese]

Sogawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

PMID: 8618066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Med Chem. 1995 Oct 27;38(22):4380-92.

Enhanced D1 affinity in a series of piperazine ring substituted
1-piperazino-3-arylindans with potential atypical antipsychotic activity.

Bøgesø KP(1), Arnt J, Frederiksen K, Hansen HO, Hyttel J, Pedersen H.

Author information: 
(1)Research & Development, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen, Valby, Denmark.

A study of the effect of aromatic substitution on D1 and D2 affinity in a series 
of previously reported trans-1-piperazino-3-phenylindans shows similar
structure-activity relationships for the two receptor sites. 6-Substituted
derivatives have affinity for both receptors, and 6-chloro-or
6-fluoro-substituted derivatives show preference for D1 receptors. D1 affinity
and selectivity are significantly increased in a series of new piperazine ring
substituted derivatives. Potent D1 and D2 antagonism in vivo are confined to
derivatives with relatively small substituents in the 2-position of the
piperazine ring (e.g. 2-methyl,2,2-dimethyl, 2-spirocyclobutyl or
2-spirocyclopentyl). Consequently, the effect of aromatic substitution is
examined in a series of 1-(2,2-dimethylpiperazino)-3-arylindans. All these
compounds except the 4-, 5-, 7- and 4'-chloro-substituted derivatives have potent
D1 affinity (IC50's below 10 nM) and the majority of the compounds antagonize
SK&F 38393-induced circling in 6-OHDA-lesioned rats with ED50 values about 1
mumol/kg. In vitro all compounds show preference for D1 receptors, but in vivo
they are equally effective as D1 and D2 antagonists. The compounds have high
affinity for 5-HT2 receptors and selected compounds show high affinity for alpha 
1 adrenoceptors. Furthermore, a subgroup consisting of (-)-38, (-)-39, (-)-41,
and (-)-54 does not induce catalepsy in rats. These compounds have the potential 
of being "atypical" antipsychotics and have consequently been selected for
further studies. The non-receptor-blocking enantiomers are shown to be inhibitors
of DA and NE uptake in accordance with previous observations in compounds
unsubstituted in the piperazine ring. Two compounds, (+)-38 and (+)-40, block DA 
uptake with IC50 values below 10 nM. Finally, the observed structure-activity
relationships are discussed in relation to previously published pharmacophore
models for D2 and 5-HT2 receptors. It is concluded that the piperazine
substituents might induce a different binding mode at the dopamine receptor
sites, perhaps only at the D1 receptor site.

PMID: 7473566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Eur J Pharmacol. 1995 Oct 24;285(3):289-97.

Differentiation of in vivo effects of AMPA and NMDA receptor ligands using drug
discrimination methods and convulsant/anticonvulsant activity.

Arnt J(1), Sánchez C, Lenz SM, Madsen U, Krogsgaard-Larsen P.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

The discriminative stimulus properties of the AMPA
((RS)-2-amino-3-(3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazol-4-yl)propionic acid) receptor agonist
ATPA ((RS)-2-amino-3-(3-hydroxy-5-tert-butylisoxazol-4-yl)propionic acid) and
NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartic acid) in rats have been characterized. It is suggested 
that the cues are mediated by separate mechanisms in the central nervous system. 
The ATPA cue is not mimicked by NMDA or an NMDA receptor agonist, and is
inhibited by the AMPA receptor antagonist (R)-APPA
((R)-2-amino-3-(3-hydroxy-5-phenylisoxazol-4-yl)propionic acid) but not the AMPA 
receptor antagonist ATOA
((RS)-2-amino-3-(3-carboxymethoxy-5-tert-butylisoxazol-4-yl)propio nic acid) or
the NMDA receptor antagonist CPP
((RS)-3-(2-carboxypiperazin-4-yl)propyl)phosphonic acid). The ATPA cue is not
mimicked by AMPA which is believed not to penetrate the blood-brain barrier. In
contrast, ATPA does not generalize to the NMDA cue, which is mimicked by some
NMDA receptor agonists (tetrazol-5-yl-glycine and AMAA
((RS)-2-amino-2-(3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazol-4-yl)acetic acid)) and is inhibited
by the NMDA receptor antagonist CPP. Highly potent convulsant activity was
demonstrated in mice with all AMPA and NMDA receptor agonists after
intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) injection, whereas weaker or no effects were
found after subcutaneous (s.c.) or intravenous injection. Only
(RS)-tetrazol-5-yl-glycine had a potent effect after s.c. administration. I.c.v. 
ATOA and CPP inhibited convulsions induced by i.c.v. injection of AMPA or NMDA,
while (R)-APPA was ineffective. These results indicate that there are differences
in the structure-activity relations in the drug discrimination and
convulsant/anticonvulsant models, even when effects after i.c.v. and s.c.
injection are taken into consideration. The convulsion models are rapid tests
which can give an indication of central nervous system penetration, but are less 
pharmacologically specific with respect to differentiation between AMPA and NMDA 
ligands where cue models demonstrate clear differences in effects of ligands with
selectivity for receptor subtypes.

PMID: 8575516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 20;270(42):25291-300.

Definition of a minimal domain of the dioxin receptor that is associated with
Hsp90 and maintains wild type ligand binding affinity and specificity.

Coumailleau P(1), Poellinger L, Gustafsson JA, Whitelaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge University
Hospital F-60, Sweden.

The dioxin receptor is a cytoplasmic basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim homology
(bHLH/PAS) protein known to bind planar polycyclic ligands including polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons, benzoflavones, heterocyclic amines, and halogenated
aromatic hydrocarbons, e.g. dioxins. Ligand-induced activation of the dioxin
receptor initiates a process whereby the receptor is transformed into a nuclear
transcription factor complex with a specific bHLH/PAS partner protein, Arnt. In
analogy to the glucocorticoid receptor, the latent dioxin receptor is found
associated with the molecular chaperone hsp90. We have defined and isolated a
minimal ligand binding domain of the dioxin receptor from the central PAS region,
comprising of amino acids 230 to 421, and found this domain to interact with
hsp90 in vitro. Expression of the minimal ligand binding domain in wheat germ
lysates or bacteria, systems which harbor hsp90 homologs unable to interact with 
the glucocorticoid or dioxin receptors, resulted in non-ligand binding forms of
this minimal 230 to 421 fragment. Importantly, affinity of the minimal ligand
binding domain for dioxin was similar to the affinity inherent in the full-length
dioxin receptor, and a profile of ligand structures which specifically bound the 
minimal ligand binding domain was found to be conserved between this domain and
the native receptor. These experiments show that the minimal ligand binding
domain maintains the quantitative and qualitative aspects of ligand binding
exhibited by the full-length receptor, implying that the central ligand binding
pocket may exist to accommodate all classes of specific dioxin receptor ligands, 
and that this pocket is critically dependent upon hsp90 for its ligand binding
conformation.

PMID: 7559670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Biochem Pharmacol. 1995 Oct 12;50(8):1295-302.

Functional analysis of aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
interactions with aryl hydrocarbon receptor in the yeast two-hybrid system.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Kuo MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) mediates dioxin
(2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin)-induced transcriptional activation of a
battery of genes by interaction with a cofactor, called aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (ARNT) protein. Both AHR and ARNT belong to a family of
proteins that includes the Drosophila circadian-rhythm protein and
"single-minded" protein. These proteins share a domain called the PAS domain. In 
addition to the PAS domain, both AHR and ARNT contain basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) and glutamine (Q)-rich domains. The roles of these domains in the
receptor-mediated transcriptional activation are not understood completely. By
using the yeast two-hybrid system with the N-terminal half of AHR as a probe,
which contains the bHLH and PAS regions, to screen cDNA libraries prepared from
human lymphocytes and C57BL mouse liver for clones encoding proteins capable of
binding to these regions, we isolated a partial ARNT cDNA clone. These results
demonstrated that the N-terminal half of AHR is capable of interacting with ARNT 
in yeast (probably through the bHLH motif). A fusion protein containing the GAL4 
DNA binding domain (DB) linked to the full-length AHR was not capable of
activating expression of a reporter gene containing the GAL4 DNA binding site,
suggesting that ligand-free AHR alone has no transactivating properties in yeast.
However, the C-terminal portion (amino acid residues 580-797) of the AHR,
including the Q-rich domain, could confer transactivation of the reporter gene
expression in the same system, suggesting that the N-terminal portion of the AHR 
contains transcription repression properties. In contrast, GAL4(DB)-ARNT fusion
protein was able to activate expression of the same reporter gene. Deletion
analysis of ARNT revealed that the C-terminal 75 amino acids, including the
Q-rich domain, exhibited full transactivation function in yeast and mammalian
cells. These results revealed different structural organizations for the
transactivation properties between AHR and ARNT, although both contained
transactivation domains at the C-termini.

PMID: 7488247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Dev Dyn. 1995 Oct;204(2):144-55.

Developmental expression of two members of a new class of transcription factors: 
II. Expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator in the C57BL/6N 
mouse embryo.

Abbott BD(1), Probst MR.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Toxicology Division, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27711, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and the AhR nuclear translocator protein
(ARNT) are basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins involved in transcriptional
regulation. The AhR is a ligand-activated partner of the ARNT protein. Both
proteins are required to transcriptionally regulate gene expression. ARNT must be
complexed to AhR to permit binding to the regulatory DNA sequence. The AhR-ligand
complex is known to mediate a range of biological responses, such as
developmental toxicity, induction of cleft palate, and hydronephrosis. AhR and
ARNT are expressed in human embryonic palatal cells and AhR was recently shown to
have a specific developmental pattern of expression in the mouse embryo. In the
present study, expression of ARNT is characterized in C57Bl/6N mouse embryos from
gestation day (GD) 10-16 using immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization. Af
affinity purified antibody against human ARNT (1.1 micrograms/ml) was detected
with an avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex. ARNT mRNA was localized with a 35S-RNA 
probe from pBM5/NEO-M1-1. Specific spatial and temporal patterns of ARNT
expression emerged and mRNA and protein expression correlated. The GD 10-11
embryos showed highest levels of ARNT in neuroepithelial cells of the neural
tube, visceral arches, otic and optic placodes, and preganglionic complexes. The 
heart also had significant expression of ARNT with strong nuclear localization.
After GD11, expression in heart and brain declined. In GD 12-13 embryos
expression was highest in the liver where expression increased from GD 12-16. At 
GD 15-16 the highest levels of ARNT occurred in adrenal gland and liver, although
ARNT was also detected in submandibular gland, ectoderm, tongue, bone, and
muscle. In all of these tissues ARNT was cytoplasmic as well as nuclear, except
in some of the cortical adrenal cells in which ARNT was strongly cytoplasmic with
little or no nuclear localization. These specific patterns of ARNT expression,
which differ in certain tissues from the expression of AhR, suggest that ARNT may
have additional roles in normal embryonic development.

PMID: 8589438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Eur J Pharmacol. 1995 Sep 5;283(1-3):55-62.

Differential effects of classical and newer antipsychotics on the hypermotility
induced by two dose levels of D-amphetamine.

Arnt J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacological Research, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

The inhibitory effects of a variety of established and putative antipsychotic
compounds on the hypermotility induced by D-amphetamine at two dose levels (0.5
and 2.0 mg/kg) have been studied. Classical antipsychotics (haloperidol,
fluphenazine and cis(Z)-flupentixol) and the selective dopamine D2 receptor
antagonist remoxipride inhibit hypermotility in the two conditions with similar
potencies, whereas sertindole, clozapine, risperidone, ziprasidone and olanzapine
preferentially inhibit the effect of the low dose of D-amphetamine (selectivity
ratios between 6.5 and 18). Seroquel, amperozide and the selective 5-HT2A
receptor antagonist MDL 100.151
((+/-)-alpha-(2,3-dimethoxyphenyl)-1-[2-(4-fluorophenylethyl)]-4-p iperidine -
methanol) have no effect on D-amphetamine 2.0 mg/kg, but inhibit the response to 
D-amphetamine 0.5 mg/kg. The alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonist prazosin inhibits
the motility response to D-amphetamine 0.5 mg/kg with slightly higher potency
than that to D-amphetamine 2.0 mg/kg, whereas the 5-HT2A/2C receptor antagonist
ritanserin selectively inhibits the effect of D-amphetamine 0.5 mg/kg. The
histamine H1 receptor antagonist mepyramine is ineffective in both models. All
compounds, except remoxipride, MDL 100.151 and ritanserin (which are ineffective)
inhibit spontaneous locomotor activity at dose levels close to those inhibiting
the response to D-amphetamine 2.0 mg/kg. Prazosin has partial inhibitory effect. 
In conclusion, dopamine antagonism has similar inhibitory effect on hyperactivity
induced by low and high D-amphetamine dosages, alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonism
also contributes to both effects, whereas 5-HT2 receptor antagonism selectively
interacts with the low D-amphetamine dose. This indicates that the responses to
D-amphetamine 0.5 and 2.0 mg/kg are differently modulated by these
neurotransmitters.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7498321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. EMBO J. 1995 Jul 17;14(14):3528-39.

Protein-protein interaction via PAS domains: role of the PAS domain in positive
and negative regulation of the bHLH/PAS dioxin receptor-Arnt transcription factor
complex.

Lindebro MC(1), Poellinger L, Whitelaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge University
Hospital, Sweden.

Gene regulation by dioxins is mediated by the dioxin receptor-Arnt heterodimer, a
ligand generated complex of two basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) 
transcription factors. By using dioxin receptor chimeras where the dimerization
and DNA binding bHLH motif has been replaced by a heterologous DNA binding
domain, we have detected an ability of Arnt to interact with the dioxin receptor 
via the PAS domain in a mammalian 'hybrid interaction' system. By
coimmunoprecipitation assays, we have confirmed the ability of PAS domains of the
dioxin receptor and Arnt to mediate independent heterodimerization in vitro.
Selectivity for PAS dimerization was noted in our hybrid interaction system, as
dioxin receptor or Arnt PAS-mediated homodimers were not detected. Surprisingly, 
however, the PAS domain of Per could dimerize with both the dioxin receptor and
Arnt subunits in vitro, and disrupt the ability of these subunits to form a DNA
binding heterodimer. Moreover, ectopic expression of Per blocked dioxin
signalling in mammalian cells. The PAS domains of the dioxin receptor and Arnt
are therefore novel dimerizing regions critical in formation of a functional
dioxin receptor-Arnt complex, while the PerPAS domain is a potential negative
regulator of bHLH/PAS factor function.

PMCID: PMC394421
PMID: 7628454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Jul 6;212(1):144-50.

Identification of a 120-kDa protein associated with aromatic hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator.

Hossain A(1), Kikuchi H, Ikawa S, Sagami I, Watanabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

The aromatic hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is a basic
helix-loop-helix-PAS protein which forms a heterodimer with aromatic hydrocarbon 
receptor (AHR), this heterodimer mediating the signal transduction in response to
the various xenobiotics such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and directly 
interacting with target genes by binding to xenobiotic responsive elements. An
anti-ARNT antibody was raised in rabbits against the bacterially expressed ARNT
of amino acids 21-328 from the N-terminal. Using this antibody, besides ARNT
itself, we detected at least one protein, 120 kDa, in the immunoprecipitate of
anti-ARNT antibodies in HepG2 cells as well as in Hepa-1 cells. However, this
protein is not present in the immunoprecipitate of the anti-AHR antisera nor in
that of the preimmune sera of the rabbits used for the immunization.

PMID: 7611998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jul;15(7):3714-21.

Dioxin induces localized, graded changes in chromatin structure: implications for
Cyp1A1 gene transcription.

Okino ST(1), Whitlock JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
California 94305-5332, USA.

In mouse hepatoma cells, the environmental contaminant
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD, or dioxin) induces Cyp1A1 gene
transcription, a process that requires two basic helix-loop-helix regulatory
proteins, the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and the aromatic hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt). We have used a ligation-mediated PCR
technique to analyze dioxin-induced changes in protein-DNA interactions and
chromatin structure of the Cyp1A1 enhancer-promoter in its native chromosomal
setting. Dioxin-induced binding of the AhR/Arnt heteromer to enhancer chromatin
is associated with a localized (about 200 bp) alteration in chromatin structure
that is manifested by increased accessibility of the DNA; these changes probably 
reflect direct disruption of a nucleosome by AhR/Arnt. Dioxin induces analogous
AhR/Arnt-dependent changes in chromatin structure and accessibility at the Cyp1A1
promoter. However, the changes at the promoter must occur by a different, more
indirect mechanism, because they are induced from a distance and do not reflect a
local effect of AhR/Arnt binding. Dose-response experiments indicate that the
changes in chromatin structure at the enhancer and promoter are graded and mirror
the graded induction of Cyp1A1 transcription by dioxin. We discuss these results 
in terms of a TCDD-induced shift in an equilibrium between nucleosomal and
nonnucleosomal chromatin configurations.

PMCID: PMC230609
PMID: 7791778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jun 9;270(23):13968-72.

Constitutive function of the basic helix-loop-helix/PAS factor Arnt. Regulation
of target promoters via the E box motif.

Antonsson C(1), Arulampalam V, Whitelaw ML, Pettersson S, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Novum, Huddinge,
Sweden.

Arnt is a nuclear basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor that,
contiguous with the bHLH motif, contains a region of homology (PAS) with the
Drosophila factors Per and Sim. Arnt dimerizes in a ligand-dependent manner with 
the bHLH dioxin receptor, a process that enables the
dioxin-(2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin)-activated Arnt-dioxin receptor
complex to recognize dioxin response elements of target promoters. In the absence
of dioxin, Arnt does not bind to this target sequence motif. The constitutive
function of Arnt is presently not understood. Here we demonstrate that Arnt
constitutively bound the E box motif CACGTG that is also recognized by a number
of distinct bHLH factors, including USF and Max. Importantly, amino acids that
have been identified to be critical for E box recognition by Max and USF are
conserved in Arnt. Consistent with these observations, full-length Arnt, but not 
an Arnt deletion mutant lacking its potent C-terminal transactivation domain,
constitutively activated CACGTG E box-driven reporter genes in vivo. These
results indicate a role of Arnt in regulation of a network of target genes that
is distinct from that regulated by the Arnt-dioxin receptor complex in
dioxin-stimulated cells.

PMID: 7775458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jun 6;92(12):5510-4.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 is a basic-helix-loop-helix-PAS heterodimer regulated 
by cellular O2 tension.

Wang GL(1), Jiang BH, Rue EA, Semenza GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21287-3914, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is found in mammalian cells cultured under
reduced O2 tension and is necessary for transcriptional activation mediated by
the erythropoietin gene enhancer in hypoxic cells. We show that both HIF-1
subunits are basic-helix-loop-helix proteins containing a PAS domain, defined by 
its presence in the Drosophila Per and Sim proteins and in the mammalian ARNT and
AHR proteins. HIF-1 alpha is most closely related to Sim. HIF-1 beta is a series 
of ARNT gene products, which can thus heterodimerize with either HIF-1 alpha or
AHR. HIF-1 alpha and HIF-1 beta (ARNT) RNA and protein levels were induced in
cells exposed to 1% O2 and decayed rapidly upon return of the cells to 20% O2,
consistent with the role of HIF-1 as a mediator of transcriptional responses to
hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC41725
PMID: 7539918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Carcinogenesis. 1995 Jun;16(6):1403-9.

Expression of Ah receptor (TCDD receptor) during human monocytic differentiation.

Hayashi S(1), Okabe-Kado J, Honma Y, Kawajiri K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Cancer Center Research Institute, Japan.

We have previously found a high expression of human Ah receptor (TCDD receptor)
mRNA in peripheral blood cells of individuals. In this paper, the expression of
this gene in blood cells was first investigated in fractions of nucleated cells, 
revealing predominant expression of the Ah receptor gene in the monocyte
fraction. Then the expression levels of AhR mRNA in various hematopoietic cell
lines were examined together with those of Arnt and P450IA1. AhR was expressed at
high levels in monocytoid U937, THP1, and HEL/S cells, and at moderate levels in 
promyelocytic HL60 cells and erythroblastic HEL cells. However, it was not
detected in lymphoid cells MOLT4 (T cell) and BALL1 (B cell), nor in K562
erythroblasts. Furthermore, a specific induction of AhR during monocytic
differentiation was investigated in HL60 and HEL cells. HL60 cells were induced
to differentiate toward monocytes-macrophages by incubation with phorbol ester,
showing a 5- to 2-fold increase of AhR mRNA. The incubation with transforming
growth factor beta 1 and 1 alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 resulted in a 5- to
7-fold increase of AhR mRNA. The HEL cells also exhibited a similar elevation of 
AhR mRNA level, when they had differentiated toward monocyte-macrophage cells by 
these combined inducers, but little change in the mRNA level was observed when
the cells were induced to differentiate into other cell types. Treatment of the
differentiated HL60 cells with 3-methylcholanthrene, a ligand of AhR, induced the
expression of the P450IA1 gene. These results indicated that expression of AhR
mRNA was significantly induced during monocytic differentiation and that the
differentiated cells were responsive to xenobiotics. Our results suggest that AhR
may play an important role in the function of monocytes and also in the eventual 
activation of environmental carcinogens.

PMID: 7788861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1995 Jun 1;319(2):470-80.

The DNA binding of purified Ah receptor heterodimer is regulated by redox
conditions.

Ireland RC(1), Li SY, Dougherty JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Roger Williams Hospital, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Brown University Medical School, Providence, Rhode Island 02908, USA.

The Ah receptor from rat liver has been purified, using a specific
oligonucleotide affinity column, in order to characterize the components of the
receptor and to investigate features that modulate its DNA-binding activity. The 
purified DNA-binding form of rat Ah receptor contains three major components,
with estimated molecular masses of 108, 98, and 96 kDa. Antibodies to two
peptides from the mouse Ah receptor bind the 108-kDa protein, but not the 98-kDa 
protein, and bind weakly at the position of the 96-kDa protein. The sequences of 
four peptides from samples containing both the 96- and 98-kDa proteins are all
highly similar to segments of the human Ah receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt)
protein. Antibodies to a peptide from the human Arnt protein bind the 96- and
98-kDa proteins, but not the 108-kDa protein. These data show that the Ah
receptor itself and two forms of the Arnt protein are the major components of the
purified DNA-binding form of receptor. In gel shift assays the purified receptor 
forms two specifically bound complexes with a xenobiotic responsive element
(XRE), which may correspond to Ah receptor heterodimers with either of the two
forms of Arnt protein. The DNA binding of the purified heterodimer is
substantially decreased under oxidizing conditions. Oxidation inhibits receptor
DNA binding without greatly altering the size of the purified heterodimer. This
sediments at 5.9S in its reduced form and at 6.5S in its oxidized form.
Dithiothreitol restores the XRE binding of oxidized receptor, with similar
effects on both of the receptor-XRE complexes. In the presence of nuclear
extract, reduced thioredoxin also restores the XRE binding of oxidized receptor.

PMID: 7786030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Biol Chem. 1995 May 26;270(21):12697-703.

Transcriptional activation by the mouse Ah receptor. Interplay between multiple
stimulatory and inhibitory functions.

Ma Q(1), Dong L, Whitlock JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
California 94305-5332, USA.

The aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-dependent transcription
factor that mediates cellular responses to the environmental contaminant
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). We cloned AhR cDNA from C57BL/6 mouse
liver and verified by transfection that it encodes a functional protein. Analyses
of deletion mutants indicate that the carboxyl half of AhR contains several types
of transactivation domain, which function independently of domains that mediate
TCDD recognition, DNA binding, and heterodimerization with the Ah receptor
nuclear translocator (Arnt) protein. The transactivation domains function
independently of each other, display different levels of activity, and act
synergistically when linked. In addition, AhR contains an 82-amino acid domain
that inhibits transactivation. The inhibitory domain displays specificity, in
that it blocks the transactivating functions of AhR and Arnt, but not that of the
herpes simplex protein VP16. The inhibitory activity depends upon the cell type
in which AhR is expressed, implying that a cell-specific protein mediates the
effect.

PMID: 7759522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 May 9;92(10):4437-41.

Heat shock protein hsp90 regulates dioxin receptor function in vivo.

Whitelaw ML(1), McGuire J, Picard D, Gustafsson JA, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Novum, Huddinge,
Sweden.

The dioxin (aryl hydrocarbon) receptor is a ligand-dependent basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factor that binds to xenobiotic response elements of
target promoters upon heterodimerization with the bHLH partner factor Arnt. Here 
we have replaced the bHLH motif of the dioxin receptor with a heterologous
DNA-binding domain to create fusion proteins that mediate ligand-dependent
transcriptional enhancement in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae). Previously, our 
experiments indicated that the ligand-free dioxin receptor is stably associated
with the 90-kDa heat shock protein, hsp90. To investigate the role of hsp90 in
dioxin signaling we have studied receptor function in a yeast strain where hsp90 
expression can be down-regulated to about 5% relative to wild-type levels. At low
levels of hsp90, ligand-dependent activation of the chimeric dioxin receptor
construct was almost completely inhibited, whereas the activity of a similar
chimeric construct containing the structurally related Arnt factor was not
affected. Moreover, a chimeric dioxin receptor construct lacking the central
ligand- and hsp90-binding region of the receptor showed constitutive
transcriptional activity in yeast that was not impaired upon down-regulation of
hsp90 expression levels. Thus, these data suggest that hsp90 is a critical
determinant of conditional regulation of dioxin receptor function in vivo via the
ligand-binding domain.

PMCID: PMC41959
PMID: 7753824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1995 Apr 1;318(1):166-74.

Ah receptor phosphorylation: localization of phosphorylation sites to the
C-terminal half of the protein.

Mahon MJ(1), Gasiewicz TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester School of
Medicine, New York 14642, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a transcriptional enhancer activated by
the binding of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related
xenobiotics. Ligand binding initiates a series of poorly understood molecular
events which confers recognition of cis-acting elements located in regulatory
regions of particular structural genes, such as CYP1A1. Several studies have
suggested that AhR phosphorylation may be instrumental in activating the AhR to a
DNA-binding state. In agreement with previous investigations, treatment of the
AhR with acid phosphatase resulted in the loss of DNA-binding activity. To
further evaluate the functional role of AhR phosphorylation we determined whether
TCDD binding altered total AhR phosphorylation, and identified phosphorylated
regions by the examination of chemical cleavage patterns. The AhR was isolated by
immunoprecipitation from [32P]-orthophosphate-labeled Hepa 1 cells grown in the
presence or absence of TCDD. Examination of the amount of 32P associated with the
AhR indicated that the total level of AhR phosphorylation was not affected by
ligand binding. Chemical cleavage with hydroxylamine and cyanogen bromide also
revealed a similar pattern for liganded and unliganded AhR. The shortest regions 
of overlap determined by the chemical cleavage patterns localized phosphorylation
sites to two regions in the C-terminal half of the AhR. One region is centrally
located between amino acids 368 and 605 and within or adjacent to a DNA binding
repressor domain. The other region is located at the glutamine-rich carboxyl
terminus between amino acids 636 and 759. These data coupled with previous
observations imply that total AhR phosphorylation is not altered by the
ligand-elicited transformation to a DNA-binding form, but that phosphorylation
nevertheless plays an important role in the ability of an active AhR-Arnt complex
to associate with cis-acting regulatory elements.

PMID: 7726558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Mar 14;92(6):1936-40.

Possible function of Ah receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) homodimer in
transcriptional regulation.

Sogawa K(1), Nakano R, Kobayashi A, Kikuchi Y, Ohe N, Matsushita N,
Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Arnt (Ah receptor nuclear translocator) is a member of a transcription factor
family having characteristic motifs designated bHLH (basic helix-loop-helix) and 
PAS and was originally found as a factor forming a complex with Ah receptor (AhR)
to bind the specific xenobiotic responsive element (XRE) sequence for induction
of drug-metabolizing P4501A1. We have examined interaction of Arnt with other PAS
proteins--Drosophila Per, Sim, and AhR--by the coimmunoprecipitation method. Arnt
formed a homodimer with itself as well as heterodimers with the others by means
of the PAS and HLH domains in a cooperative way. The Arnt homodimer binds the
sequence of adenovirus major late promoter (MLP) with the E box core sequence
CACGTG, suggesting that the CAC half of the XRE, CACGCN(A/T), recognized by the
AhR-Arnt heterodimer is a target for Arnt. Cotransfection experiments using CV-1 
cells with an Arnt expression plasmid and a MLP chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
(CAT) reporter plasmid revealed that Arnt markedly activated CAT expression,
indicative of a newly discovered regulatory role of Arnt.

PMCID: PMC42397
PMID: 7892203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Mol Pharmacol. 1995 Mar;47(3):432-8.

Orientation of the heterodimeric aryl hydrocarbon (dioxin) receptor complex on
its asymmetric DNA recognition sequence.

Bacsi SG(1), Reisz-Porszasz S, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural Biology and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles 90024.

The 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-transformed aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AHR) complex binds to xenobiotic-responsive element (XRE) sequences in the 5'
flanking region of the CYP1A1 gene, resulting in initiation of transcription.
Both components of the transformed AHR complex [the ligand-binding AHR monomer
and the AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT)] directly contact the XRE. These proteins
belong to a novel subclass of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors. The
binding sites of AHR and ARNT on the asymmetric XRE were determined using nuclear
extracts of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-treated Hepa-1c1c7 cells and a
panel of double-stranded oligonucleotides containing XRE1 of the CYP1A1 gene
(5'-TTGCGTGAGAA-3'), in which all combinations of three, two, or one of the
thymines indicated were substituted by the photoreactive thymine analog
5-bromodeoxyuracil. Covalent cross-linking analysis and immunoprecipitation with 
antibodies specific for AHR or ARNT demonstrated that ARNT directly contacts the 
3'-most thymine position, that AHR directly contacts the second thymine position,
and that neither protein contacts the 5'-most thymine position. The thymine
position contacted by ARNT lies within a three-nucleotide sequence (5'-GTG-3')
identical to a half-site of an E-box element (5'-CACGTG-3') that is recognized by
a number of other basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors. AHR binds to a
portion of the XRE that does not resemble an E-box. Additional experiments
demonstrated that neither protein loops over to contact residues located beyond
the other's binding site.

PMID: 7700240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Chem Biol Interact. 1995 Feb;94(2):121-34.

Comparison of expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase 3 and CYP1A1 in dominant and
recessive aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase-deficient mutant mouse hepatoma cells.

Korkalainen MK(1), Törrönen AR, Kärenlampi SO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Kuopio, Finland.

The mouse hepatoma cell line Hepa-1 is inducible by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) for both CYP1A1 (aryl hydrocarbon
hydroxylase, AHH) and class 3 aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH3) enzymes. To test the
hypothesis of a common regulatory mechanism, several AHH deficient mutants of
Hepa-1 were studied for their ALDH3 activities and specific mRNA levels before
and after TCDD treatment. The recessive (with respect to the wild-type Hepa-1)
mutants have defects in Cypla-1 structural gene (mutant c1) or in the Ah (aryl
hydrocarbon) receptor (mutants c2 and c6 with decreased levels of Ah receptor;
mutant c4 defective in the DNA binding of the Ah receptor). The results with
these mutants suggested that Ah receptor nuclear translocator protein, ARNT, is
needed for ALDH3 expression. Two dominant mutants, one of which is characterized 
by preventing the binding of the Ah receptor complex to DNA, were also studied.
Surprisingly, these mutants possessed elevated levels of ALDH3 mRNA and enzyme
activities which were also inducible by TCDD. The binding of Ah receptor-ligand
complex to DNA was thus not needed for the expression of ALDH3. A dominant
repressor for Cypla-1 gene transcription did not prevent the derepression or
induction of ALDH3. The results thus suggest that Aldh-3 gene is regulated by a
mechanism independent of the Ah receptor.

PMID: 7828219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Feb;15(2):756-65.

Distinct roles of the molecular chaperone hsp90 in modulating dioxin receptor
function via the basic helix-loop-helix and PAS domains.

Antonsson C(1), Whitelaw ML, McGuire J, Gustafsson JA, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge University
Hospital, Novum, Sweden.

The intracellular dioxin receptor mediates signal transduction by dioxin and
functions as a ligand-activated transcription factor. It contains a basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) motif contiguous with a Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) homology
region. In extracts from nonstimulated cells the receptor is recovered in an
inducible cytoplasmic form associated with the 90-kDa heat shock protein (hsp90),
a molecular chaperone. We have reconstituted ligand-dependent activation of the
receptor to a DNA-binding form by using the dioxin receptor and its bHLH-PAS
partner factor Arnt expressed by in vitro translation in reticulocyte lysate.
Deletion of the PAS domain of the receptor resulted in constitutive dimerization 
with Arnt. In contrast, this receptor mutant showed low levels of xenobiotic
response element-binding activity, indicating that the PAS domain may be
important for DNA-binding affinity and/or specificity of the receptor. It was not
possible to reconstitute dioxin receptor function with proteins expressed in
wheat germ lysate. In line with these observations, reticulocyte lysate but not
wheat germ lysate promoted the association of de novo synthesized dioxin receptor
with hsp90. At least two distinct domains of the receptor mediated interaction
with hsp90: the ligand-binding domain located within the PAS region and,
surprisingly, the bHLH domain. Whereas ligand-binding activity correlated with
association with hsp90, bHLH-hsp90 interaction appeared to be important for
DNA-binding activity but not for dimerization of the receptor. Several distinct
roles for hsp90 in modulating dioxin receptor function are therefore likely:
correct folding of the ligand-binding domain, interference with Arnt
heterodimerization, and folding of a DNA-binding conformation of the bHLH domain.
Thus, the dioxin receptor system provides a complex and interesting model of the 
regulation of transcription factors by hsp90.

PMCID: PMC231944
PMID: 7823943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Biochem Pharmacol. 1995 Jan 18;49(2):249-61.

Evidence for a second pathway in the action mechanism of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Significance of Ah-receptor mediated 
activation of protein kinase under cell-free conditions.

Enan E(1), Matsumura F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis
95616-8588.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) when administered directly to a
nuclear-free subcellular homogenate of guinea pig adipose tissue, caused a
significant rise in protein kinase activities within 1-10 min. Such a rapid
response was not expected, based on the classic transcriptional mechanism of
action for TCDD, i.e. TCDD first binds with its cytosolic Ah-receptor,
translocates into the nucleus, dimerizes with "arnt" (a nuclear transcription
factor), and activates genes containing "xenobiotic-responsive element" (XRE).
The above actions of TCDD on protein kinases were clearly blocked by two specific
Ah-receptor blockers, even under cell- and nucleus-free conditions. TCDD-induced 
increases in protein phosphorylation occurred mainly in cytosolic preparations
(i.e. 100,000 g supernatant) devoid of nucleus, microsomes and plasma membranes
and were still observed in the presence of inhibitors of protein phosphatases.
Furthermore, TCDD caused a rise in protein tyrosine kinase activity in a purified
Ah-receptor preparation, as well as in an isolated heat shock protein 90 complex 
preparation containing the Ah-receptor. This activation took place in the
presence of actinomycin D and cycloheximide, indicating a portion of TCDD's
action that is unrelated to de novo protein synthesis in this process. We have
also obtained evidence indicating that this action of TCDD triggers the protein
kinase mediated growth factor signal transduction pathway, such as stimulation of
mitogen activated protein kinase 2 and tyrosine kinase activity. These results
clearly support the view that the basic action pathway for such a TCDD-induced
activation of protein kinases is distinctly different from its conventional
action pathway involving changes in gene transcription in the nucleus.

PMID: 7840803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Neural Transm Gen Sect. 1995;100(2):123-35.

Turning behavior in rats with unilateral lesions of the subthalamic nucleus:
synergism between D1 and D2 receptors.

Murer MG(1), Sinay V, Pazo JH.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiología, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Rats with unilateral kainic acid lesion of the subthalamic nucleus showed a dose 
dependent rotational response to the lesioned side (ipsilateral) after systemic
administration of the non-selective dopaminergic agonist apomorphine. Both D2 and
D1 selective antagonists ((-)sulpiride and SCH23390) inhibited the response to
apomorphine in these rats. Selective D2 and D1 agonists (quinpirole and SKF38393)
were unable to induce turning behavior. However, an ipsilateral circling response
was obtained after the simultaneous application of both agonists. The interaction
mechanism between dopaminergic receptor subtypes seems to be similar to that of
other normosensitive models of turning previously studied (Barone et al., 1986;
Robertson and Robertson, 1986; Arnt and Perregard, 1987; Asim et al., 1990; Pazo 
et al., 1993). It is proposed that the ipsilateral turning response to
dopaminergic agonists in rats with subthalamic nucleus lesion results from an
impaired behavioral expression of the action of dopaminergic agonists on one
side, leading the rats to turn away from the intact hemisphere.

PMID: 8962682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Arch Toxicol Suppl. 1995;17:99-115.

Cellular and molecular biology of aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor-mediated gene
expression.

Safe S(1), Krishnan V.

Author information: 
(1)Texas A&M University, College Station 77843-4466, USA.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related compounds elicit diverse
toxic and biochemical responses in laboratory animals and mammalian cells in
culture. TCDD induces CYP1A1 gene expression and results of extensive research
have delineated the molecular mechanism of this response. In target cells, TCDD
initially binds to the aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor which accumulates in the
nucleus as an Ah-receptor:aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator (Arnt) protein
heterodimeric complex. The nuclear Ah receptor complex acts as a ligand-induced
transcription factor which binds to transacting genomic dioxin/xenobiotic
responsive elements (DREs/XREs) located in the 5'-regulatory region upstream from
the initiation start site and this interaction results in transactivation of gene
transcription. DREs have been identified in several other genes which are induced
by TCDD, including CYP1A2, aldehyde-3-dehydrogenase, NAD(P)H quinone
oxidoreductase, and glutathione S transferase Ya and similar induction response
pathways have been observed or proposed. However, TCDD and other Ah receptor
agonists also inhibit expression of several genes and research in this laboratory
has investigated inhibition of estrogen (E2)-induced genes including uterine
epidermal growth factor, c-fos protooncogene, and the progesterone receptor,
estrogen receptor (ER) and cathepsin D genes in human breast cancer cell lines.
In MCF-7 human breast cancer cells, E2 induces cathepsin D gene expression and
this is associated with formation of an ER/Sp1 complex at the sequence in the
promoter region (-199/-165) of this gene. Within 30 min TCDD causes a rapid
inhibition of E2-induced cathepsin D gene expression in MCF-7 cells. Moreover,
using a series of synthetic oligonucleotides which include the wild-type ER/Sp1
and various mutants, it was shown by gel electromobility shift and transient
transfection assays that the nuclear Ah receptor complex binds to an imperfect
DRE located between the ER and Sp1 binding sequences. This interaction results in
disruption of the ER/Sp1 complex and inhibition of E2-induced gene expression.
These results illustrate that the nuclear Ah receptor complex also exhibits
activity as a negative transcription factor via a mechanism which is similar to
that reported for Ah receptor-mediated induction of gene expression.

PMID: 7786196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Occup Environ Med. 1995 Jan;37(1):25-36.

Genetic polymorphism of cytochromes P450 1A1, 2D6 and 2E1: regulation and
toxicological significance.

Rannug A(1), Alexandrie AK, Persson I, Ingelman-Sundberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, National Institute of Occupational Health, Solna,
Sweden.

Because of important roles of cytochromes P450 in the metabolic activation of
many precarcinogens, extensive research in the past has focused on the
relationship between the distribution of polymorphic variants of different
isozymes of P450 and cancer susceptibility. In this respect three isozymes in
particular have been studied, CYP1A1, CYP2D6, and CYP2E1. Both CYP1A1 and CYP2E1 
participate in the metabolism of many suspected as well as established
carcinogens, whereas essentially only one carcinogenic substrate has been
identified for CYP2D6. Polymorphic sites for the three CYP genes have been
identified both in the open reading frame as well as in introns and the
regulatory 5' region. In the present contribution we summarize the molecular
epidemiological research relating CYP polymorphism to cancer susceptibility and
in some cases to toxicity. An interesting polymorphism has been described on the 
phenotypic level for the inducibility of CYP1A1, a polymorphism that in some
studies has been related to a mutation in the 3' flanking region of the CYP1A1
gene. However, the genetic basis for this polymorphism might be inherited in the 
genes coding for proteins responsible for the induction of CYP1A1, ie, the Ah
receptor or the ARNT protein. Data on lung cancer and CYP1A1 gene polymorphism
indicate that carriers of genotypes associated with CYP1A1 inducibility are at
higher risk for cancer, but that, at least for Caucasians, the recognized
mutations probably identify only a fraction of the inducible individuals. The
amount of DNA adducts correlates well in some studies to the individual activity 
registered for CYP1A1. CYP2D6 phenotype and genotype have mainly been related to 
the incidence of lung cancer, but results from 13 different studies now show an
absence of any significant correlation between these parameters. In the case of
CYP2E1, some studies indicate a relationship between lung cancer and the
occurrence of a rare allele, although future research is needed in order to
establish a significant relationship. It is concluded that, at the present stage,
none of the polymorphic sites determined in the CYP genes can yet be used as
markers for increased lung cancer risk. Future research in this field might be
focused on the establishment of new polymorphic sites in the CYP genes, affecting
inducibility or function, and on the molecular basis for the interesting
differences in CYP1A1 inducibility.

PMID: 7620940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 1995;35:307-40.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex.

Hankinson O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, Los Angeles 90024, USA.

The heteromeric unliganded aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex (AHRC) contains the 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor monomer (AHR). Binding of polycyclic or halogenated
aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH and HAH) ligand causes release of AHR, which then
associates with the AHR nuclear translocator protein (ARNT) to generate the
heterodimeric "transformed" AHRC. AHR and ARNT belong to a novel subclass of
basic helix-loop-helix-containing transcription factors. The transformed AHRC
binds xenobiotic responsive elements in responsive genes and turns on their
transcription. Certain of these genes encode enzymes involved in the metabolic
activation of PAHs to mutagenic derivatives. HAHs are not genotoxic: Their
pathogenicity depends on the AHRC but not on their metabolism. Current research
includes investigations directed towards delineating the pathways of HAH
pathogenesis, ascertaining whether AHR can mediate signal transduction
independently of DNA binding, understanding the mechanism of transcriptional
activation, and investigating the potential roles of AHR and ARNT in development.

PMID: 7598497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Pharmacogenetics. 1995;5 Spec No:S70-3.

Genetic polymorphisms of drug-metabolizing enzymes and lung cancer
susceptibility.

Kawajiri K(1), Watanabe J, Eguchi H, Hayashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Cancer Center Research Institute, Japan.

A close association of smoking-associated lung cancer incidence with the Msp 1
and 1le-Val polymorphisms of CYP1A1 gene was found in a Japanese population in
terms of genotype frequency comparison and cigarette dose response. A synergistic
increase in susceptibility to lung cancer was observed when the susceptible
genotypes of CYP1A1 were combined with a deficient GSTM1 genotype. Individual
difference in expression levels of Ahr and Arnt mRNAs was observed, and the
expression levels of CYP1A1 appeared to associate with those of transcriptional
factors. The Ahr protein has two different structures, ascribed to one amino acid
replacement at codon 554 of Arg by Lys. However, this germ line polymorphism did 
not show a significant association with AHH inducibility nor lung cancer
incidence. The p53 gene alterations in lung cancer tissues were more frequently
observed among the patients with a susceptible allele of CYP1A1 gene.

PMID: 7581493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Pharmacogenetics. 1995;5 Spec No:S149-53.

Polymorphic forms of the Ah receptor and induction of the CYP1A1 gene.

Fujii-Kuriyama Y(1), Ema M, Mimura J, Matsushita N, Sogawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Induction of cytochrome P4501A1 (CYP1A1) by certain xenobiotics is mediated by
the Ah receptor/Arnt complex. The present knowledge about the molecular process
of induction is summarized with special attention to our recent work on
characterization of the polymorphic forms of the Ah receptor.

PMID: 7581486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 1995;121(9-10):612-20.

Transcriptional activation domains of the Ah receptor and Ah receptor nuclear
translocator.

Sogawa K(1), Iwabuchi K, Abe H, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

The Ah receptor (AhR) and Ah receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) heterodimer
bind the xenobiotic-responsive element (XRE) sequence in the upstream region of
the genes for some drug-metabolizing enzymes, such as P4501A1 and glutathione
S-transferase Ya, to activate their transcription. This paper describes
transcriptional activation domains of the AhR and Arnt as examined in vivo by DNA
transfection experiments using GAL4-AhR or GAL4-Arnt chimeric plasmids and a
reporter plasmid containing five GAL4 DNA binding sites. The major activation
domain of Arnt was localized in a short segment of the C-terminal 34 amino acids,
while the glutamine-rich domain of Arnt showed no transcriptional activity. This 
activation domain of Arnt could be further divided into two subdomains with some 
sequence similarity. Point mutation analysis of one of the subdomains revealed
that bulky hydrophobic amino acids and neighboring acidic amino acids were
necessary for the transcription-enhancing activity of Arnt. The C-terminal half
of the AhR showed a strong transcription-stimulating activity, apparently five
times as strong as that of Arnt. Further analysis of the activity revealed that
the C-terminal transcriptional activity was distributed in several activation
domains, one of which is rich in glutamine residues. These results indicate that 
the glutamine-rich domains of the AhR and Arnt function differently in the
heterodimer regulatory complex. Previously, we showed that the enhancer activity 
of XRE was repressed by E1A proteins, especially the 12S form of E1A.
Cotransfection experiments using an E1A12S expression plasmid and a GAL4-AhR or
GAL4-Arnt expression plasmid demonstrated that E1A protein rather predominantly
inhibited the transcriptional activity of Arnt.

PMID: 7559746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 16;269(50):31518-24.

Potent transactivation domains of the Ah receptor and the Ah receptor nuclear
translocator map to their carboxyl termini.

Jain S(1), Dolwick KM, Schmidt JV, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611.

The Ah receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor that is
structurally related to its dimerization partner, the Ah receptor nuclear
translocator (ARNT), and two Drosophila proteins, SIM and PER. All four proteins 
contain a region of homology now referred to as a PAS homology domain. In
addition, the AHR, ARNT, and SIM harbor a basic region helix-loop-helix motif in 
their N termini, whereas PER does not. Previous mapping studies of the AHR have
demonstrated that the PAS domain contains sequences required for ligand
recognition, dimerization, and interaction with the 90-kDa heat shock protein.
They also have confirmed that the basic region helix-loop-helix domain plays a
role in both dimerization and sequence-specific DNA binding. To identify domains 
involved in transactivation of target genes, we generated chimeras of AHR/ARNT
deletion mutants with the DNA binding region of the yeast Gal4 protein,
transiently expressed these in COS-1 cells, and monitored their capacity to
activate the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene under the control of
a minimal promoter driven by enhancer elements recognized by Gal4. Extensive
analysis of these fusions revealed that the AHR and ARNT harbor potent
transactivation domains within their C termini. Importantly, the amino-terminal
halves of both the AHR and ARNT were found to be devoid of transactivation
activity.

PMID: 7989319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 16;269(50):31505-9.

Suspension-mediated induction of Hepa 1c1c7 Cyp1a-1 expression is dependent on
the Ah receptor signal transduction pathway.

Sadek CM(1), Allen-Hoffmann BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53706.

We have recently demonstrated that release of normal human epithelial cells from 
cell-substratum and/or cell-cell adhesion generates cellular signals that induce 
the expression of CYP1A1 in the absence of xenobiotic polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (Sadek, C. M., and Allen-Hoffmann, B. L. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 169, 
16067-16074). To directly test the involvement of the Ah receptor signal
transduction pathway in CYP1A1 induction following suspension of epithelial
cells, we analyzed wild-type Hepa 1c1c7 cells, a subclone of the Hepa-1c1 mouse
hepatoma line, and two mutant Hepa 1c1c7 lines, Class I and Class II. Suspension 
of wild-type Hepa 1c1c7 cells for 4 h led to an induction of steady state levels 
of CYP1A1 mRNA, similar to that obtained following treatment of adherent cells
with 10(-9) M 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Mutants of the Hepa 1c1c7
cells defective in different aspects of the Ah receptor signal transduction
pathway exhibited negligible (Class I) or no (Class II) suspension-mediated
induction of CYP1A1 mRNA. Gel mobility shift analysis of nuclear extracts from
suspended or 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-treated wild-type cells showed
that both treatments produced identical shifts in the mobility of an
XRE-containing probe. Antibody supershift experiments confirmed that the Ah
receptor was a component of the DNA-protein complex from suspended wild-type Hepa
1c1c7 cells. These data directly demonstrate that suspension of wild-type Hepa
1c1c7 cells leads to nuclear localization and activation of the Ah receptor to a 
DNA-binding form.

PMID: 7989317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 2;269(48):30109-12.

The 90-kDa heat shock protein is essential for Ah receptor signaling in a yeast
expression system.

Carver LA(1), Jackiw V, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611.

In an effort to provide a more powerful system to study the Ah receptor (AHR)
signaling pathway, we expressed the AHR, its dimerization partner ARNT, and a
beta-galactosidase (lacZ) reporter gene, driven by two dioxin-responsive
enhancers, in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In this system, the agonists
beta-naphthoflavone and alpha-naphthoflavone induced transcription of the lacZ
gene, with EC50 values of 7.9 x 10(-8) and 3.0 x 10(-7) M, respectively, while
the nonagonist dexamethasone was without effect. As a first application of this
system, we examined the relationship between the 90-kDa heat shock protein
(hsp90) and AHR function. To accomplish this in a manner that was independent of 
the ARNT protein, we constructed a chimeric receptor in which the DNA binding and
primary dimerization domains of the AHR were swapped with analogous domains from 
the LexA protein. Coexpression of this AHR-LexA chimera and a lacZ reporter gene 
driven by eight LexA operator sites in a yeast strain with regulatable levels of 
hsp90, yielded pharmacology that closely mirrored that of the
AHR/ARNT/dioxin-responsive enhancer system described above, but only when hsp90
levels were held near their wild type levels. When hsp90 levels were reduced to
approximately 5% of normal, AHR signaling in response to agonist was completely
blocked despite normal cell growth. These results provide the first genetic
evidence for the role of hsp90 in AHR signaling and provide the basis for a
powerful new system in which to study this pathway.

PMID: 7982913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1994 Dec;315(2):285-92.

Development of an in vitro model for investigating the formation of the nuclear
Ah receptor complex in mouse Hepa 1c1c7 cells.

Wang X(1), Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station 77843-4466.

An in vitro assay for investigating factors which modulate formation of the
nuclear aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor complex was developed using 9S cytosolic
Ah receptor isolated from wild-type Hepa 1c1c7 cells treated with
2,3,7,8-[3H]tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) at 4 degrees C and nuclei from
Ah-responsive and -nonresponsive wild-type and mutant Hepa 1c1c7 cells.
Incubation of the radiolabeled ([3H]TCDD) 9S cytosolic Ah receptor with nuclei
from untreated wild-type Ah-responsive mouse Hepa 1c1c7 cells resulted in a time-
and temperature-dependent formation of the nuclear Ah receptor complex as
determined by either velocity sedimentation analysis or gel mobility shift assays
using a consensus 32P-labeled dioxin-responsive element. Maximal levels of the
nuclear Ah receptor formed within 30 min at 37 degrees C and significantly lower 
levels were observed after incubation at 4, 15, or 25 degrees C. Complementation 
studies using nuclei from untreated wild-type and Ah-nonresponsive class II
mutant (translocation-deficient) cells and radiolabeled 9S cytosolic receptor
(bound with [3H]TCDD) from both wild-type and mutant cell lines were also carried
out. The results indicated that nuclear translocation was primarily inhibited
using cytosol from mutant cells confirming the requirement for the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator protein for formation of the nuclear Ah
receptor complex. The effects of a series of Ah receptor antagonists, ATP,
vanadate apyrase, phosphatases, and lectin WGA, on formation of the nuclear Ah
receptor complex were also investigated in the in vitro model using radiolabeled 
cytosolic Ah receptor and nuclei from untreated wild-type Hepa 1c1c7
cells.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7986070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Dec;14(12):8343-55.

Identification of transactivation and repression functions of the dioxin receptor
and its basic helix-loop-helix/PAS partner factor Arnt: inducible versus
constitutive modes of regulation.

Whitelaw ML(1), Gustafsson JA, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge University Hospital,
Sweden.

Gene regulation by dioxins is mediated via the dioxin receptor, a
ligand-dependent basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/PAS transcription factor. The
latent dioxin receptor responds to dioxin signalling by forming an activated
heterodimeric complex with a specific bHLH partner, Arnt, an essential process
for target DNA recognition. We have analyzed the transactivating potential within
this heterodimeric complex by dissecting it into individual subunits, replacing
the dimerization and DNA-binding bHLH motifs with heterologous zinc finger
DNA-binding domains. The uncoupled Arnt chimera, maintaining 84% of Arnt
residues, forms a potent and constitutive transcription factor. Chimeric proteins
show that the dioxin receptor also harbors a strong transactivation domain in the
C terminus, although this activity was silenced by inclusion of 82 amino acids
from the central ligand-binding portion of the dioxin receptor. This central
repression region conferred binding of the molecular chaperone hsp90 upon
otherwise constitutive chimeras in vitro, indicating that hsp90 has the ability
to mediate a cis-repressive function on distant transactivation domains.
Importantly, when the ligand-binding domain of the dioxin receptor remained
intact, the ability of this hsp90-binding activity to confer repression became
conditional rather than irreversible. Our data are consistent with a model in
which crucial activities of the dioxin receptor, such as dimerization with Arnt
and transactivation, are conditionally repressed by the central ligand-
and-hsp90-binding region of the receptor. In contrast, the Arnt protein appears
to be free from any repressive activity. Moreover, within the context of the
dioxin response element (xenobiotic response element), the C terminus of Arnt
conferred a potent, dominating transactivation function onto the native bHLH
heterodimeric complex. Finally, the relative transactivation potencies of the
individual dioxin receptor and Arnt chimeras varied with cell type and promoter
architecture, indicating that the mechanisms for transcriptional activation may
differ between these two subunits and that in the native complex the
transactivation pathway may be dependent upon cell-specific and promoter
contexts.

PMCID: PMC359373
PMID: 7969169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Biol Chem. 1994 Nov 11;269(45):28098-105.

Transcriptional activation function of the mouse Ah receptor nuclear
translocator.

Li H(1), Dong L, Whitlock JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
California 94305-5332.

We cloned from mouse hepatoma cells a cDNA which encodes the Ah receptor nuclear 
translocator (Arnt). Sequence comparisons reveal 89% nucleotide and 92% amino
acid identity between mouse and human Arnt. Transfection of the cDNA into
Arnt-defective mouse hepatoma cells fully restores their responsiveness to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), indicating that the cDNA encodes a
functional Arnt protein. Transfection of the cDNA into wild type mouse hepatoma
cells increases the magnitude, but not the sensitivity, of the transcriptional
response to TCDD. Analyses of mutants indicate that Arnt has a modular
organization. The unit that mediates both heterodimerization with the liganded Ah
receptor and DNA recognition is functionally distinct from the unit that mediates
transcriptional activation. A 96-amino acid, C-terminal domain of Arnt, which
includes a glutamine-rich region, confers transcriptional activation capability
upon the protein.

PMID: 7961746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Biochem Pharmacol. 1994 Nov 1;48(9):1767-78.

Interaction of the regulatory domains of the murine Cyp1a1 gene with two
DNA-binding proteins in addition to the Ah receptor and the Ah receptor nuclear
translocator (ARNT).

Carrier F(1), Chang CY, Duh JL, Nebert DW, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

The aromatic hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor complex is a ligand-activated
transcriptional activator consisting of at least two protein components. The
ligand-binding component is the AhR protein, a cytosolic receptor encoded by the 
Ahr gene, which, upon ligand binding, translocates to the nucleus in a
heterodimeric complex with the ARNT (Ah receptor nuclear translocator) component.
The complex binds to several discrete DNA domains containing aromatic hydrocarbon
responsive elements (AhRE) present in the regulatory region of the murine
cytochrome P(1)450 Cyp1a1 gene and of the other genes in the [Ah] gene battery.
As a consequence of binding, a transcriptional complex is formed that activates
the expression of these genes by as yet unidentified mechanisms. We have analyzed
DNA-protein interactions in four of these domains, specifically, the AhREs
located between -1085 and -482 (sites A, C, E, and D) of the upstream regulatory 
region of the murine Cyp1a1 gene. We found that two DNA-binding proteins, present
in cytosolic and nuclear extracts of mouse Hepa-1 cells, showed overlapping
DNA-binding specificities to those of the Ah receptor. One of these proteins had 
an apparent molecular mass of 35-40 kDa, bound only to AhRE3 (site D), and has
been identified tentatively as a member of the C/EBP family of transcription
factors. The second protein, purified by DNA-affinity chromatography, had an
apparent molecular mass of 95 kDa and bound to a larger DNA motif that included
the AhRE sequence, in AhRE3 and AhRE5 (sites D and A), but not in AhRE1 or AhRE2 
(sites C and E). This protein was not AhR nor was it ARNT, since it was found in 
receptorless (Ahr-) and in nuclear translocation-defective (Arnt-) cells, as well
as in cells that had not been exposed to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD; dioxin), a potent inducer of Cyp1a1 expression. Evidence from in vivo
methylation protection indicated that two G residues flanking AhRE3, one of which
is required for binding of the 95-kDa protein, may be protected from methylation 
in uninduced cells and become exposed upon dioxin treatment, suggesting that the 
95-kDa protein may be constitutively bound to AhRE3, and be displaced by binding 
of the Ah receptor complex. These results lend support to the concept that the
transcriptional regulation of the [Ah] battery genes could be modulated by
combinatorial interactions of the Ah receptor complex with other transcription
factors.

PMID: 7980646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Teratology. 1994 Nov;50(5):361-6.

Immunohistochemical double-staining for Ah receptor and ARNT in human embryonic
palatal shelves.

Abbott BD(1), Probst MR, Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Toxicology Division, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27711, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and the AhR nuclear translocator protein
(ARNT) are basic-helix-loop-helix-PAS (HLH) proteins involved in transcriptional 
regulation. Polycyclic aromatic halogenated chemicals, of which
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is the most potent, bind to the AhR.
In the cellular cytoplasm, the AhR exists as a complex with the heat shock
protein HSP90 and other small peptides. This complex dissociates following ligand
binding and then the ligand-bound AhR binds ARNT. The ligand-AhR-ARNT complex
interacts with a specific, nuclear DNA sequence, the dioxin response element
(DRE), altering transcription of a regulated gene. Studies in hepatoma cell lines
indicate that both proteins are required for regulation of transcription. In this
study, AhR and ARNT were localized immunohistochemically in human embryonic
palatal cells and specific patterns of expression were seen for each protein. A
double-staining protocol revealed that epithelial cells expressed both AhR and
ARNT, but in mesenchyme and nasal spine cartilage individual cells were
identified which expressed either AhR or ARNT. This heterogeneous pattern may be 
a means of suppressing transcriptional regulation and also suggests the existence
of other, unidentified basic-helix-loop-helix partner(s). The heterogeneous
expression pattern may also reflect a complex role for these HLH proteins as
transcriptional regulators of embryonic development.

PMID: 7716743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Biol Chem. 1994 Oct 21;269(42):26464-71.

Baculovirus expression of the Ah receptor and Ah receptor nuclear translocater.
Evidence for additional dioxin responsive element-binding species and factors
required for signaling.

Chan WK(1), Chu R, Jain S, Reddy JK, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611.

In an effort to facilitate the structural and biochemical analyses of the Ah
receptor (AHR) and the Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), a baculovirus
system was developed to express microgram-milligram quantities of the human
version of these proteins. To simplify purification, a polyhistidine tag was
cloned at their C termini so that the recombinant proteins could be specifically 
adsorbed to nickel-nitriloacetic acid-Sepharose. Expression studies revealed that
approximately 23% of the overexpressed AHR was recovered in cell extracts with
the remaining 77% forming insoluble aggregates. ARNT was found to be more
soluble, with 90% recovery from cell extracts and only 10% aggregation.
Photoaffinity labeling and gel shift assays demonstrated that the recombinant
proteins bound ligand, heterodimerized, and recognized their cognate "dioxin
response element" (DRE) in a manner similar to their native counterparts.
Coexpression of the AHR and ARNT in Sf9 cells resulted in the in vivo generation 
of heterodimers that bound the DRE in the absence of ligand. Studies with the
nickel-nitriloacetic acid-purified recombinant proteins demonstrated that the AHR
and ARNT could bind DRE only when reconstituted with a heat-sensitive factor(s)
present in soluble extracts from a variety of cell types. Use of these proteins
also demonstrated the existence of at least three AHR-dependent DRE-binding
species, suggesting that the AHR can bind to DRE in at least three distinct
conformations.

PMID: 7929368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Carcinogenesis. 1994 Oct;15(10):2347-52.

Regulation of [Ah] gene battery enzymes and glutathione levels by
5,10-dihydroindeno[1,2-b]indole in mouse hepatoma cell lines.

Liu RM(1), Vasiliou V, Zhu H, Duh JL, Tabor MW, Puga A, Nebert DW, Sainsbury M,
Shertzer HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati Medical Center,
OH 45267-0056.

The murine aromatic hydrocarbon ([Ah]) gene battery consists of at least six
genes that code for two functionalizing (Phase I) enzymes and four
non-functionalizing (Phase II) enzymes. These enzymes are induced by compounds
such as aromatic hydrocarbons and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) that
bind to the cytosolic Ah receptor protein. Studies in rodents indicate that
certain enzymes of this battery, namely cytochrome P4501A1 (CYP1A1),
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1*06) and NAD(P)H: quinone acceptor
oxidoreductase (NMO1) are induced by the synthetic antioxidant
5,10-dihydroindeno[1,2-b]indole (DHII). The induction of [Ah] gene battery
enzymes and the levels of reduced glutathione (GSH) were examined in mouse
Hepa-1c1c7 hepatoma wild-type cells (wt), a CYP1A1 metabolism-deficient mutant
(c37) and an Ah receptor nuclear translocation-defective mutant (c4). DHII and
TCDD increased the activities of ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase, an indicator of
CYP1A1 activity, as well as NMO1, UGT1*06, cytosolic aldehyde dehydrogenase class
3 and glutathione S-transferase form A1 in wt cells, but had little or no
induction effect in c37 or c4 cells. DHII and TCDD differed in their effects on
GSH levels; while DHII increased GSH levels 3-fold in wt, but not at all in c37
or c4 cells, TCDD had no effect on GSH levels in any cell type. However, GSH
levels were enhanced in both wt and c4 cells by tert-butyl hydroquinone (TBHQ).
L-Buthionine S,R-sulfoximine, an inhibitor of gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase, 
prevented DHII-induced increases in wt cell GSH. The increase in GSH levels
occurred after 8 h, while the induction of enzymes occurred within 4 h. The
induction of the higher GSH levels in wt cells by DHII and TBHQ correlated with
increases in intracellular levels of the GSH precursor thiol cysteine, as well as
with increased activities of gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase, the rate-limiting
enzyme of GSH synthesis. However, TBHQ-mediated GSH increases in c4 cells were
accompanied by increased gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase activity with no
change in intracellular cysteine concentration. The results suggest that DHII
induction of [Ah] gene battery enzymes requires a functional Ah receptor, but not
the functional gene product CYP1A1. Furthermore, metabolism, possibly via CYP1A1,
appears to be required for DHII to enhance intracellular levels of cysteine and
GCS activity that result in higher GSH levels.

PMID: 7955076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Biochem. 1994 Oct;116(4):845-51.

Human arylhydrocarbon receptor: functional expression and chromosomal assignment 
to 7p21.

Ema M(1), Matsushita N, Sogawa K, Ariyama T, Inazawa J, Nemoto T, Ota M, Oshimura
M, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai.

We isolated the human arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) cDNA from a human lung cDNA 
library, by using mouse AhR cDNA as a labeled probe. The nucleotide sequence of
cloned human AhR cDNA is identical to the previously reported human AhR sequence 
[Dolwick et al. (1993), Mol. Pharmacol. 44, 911-917] from cell line HepG2. The
overall amino acid identity with mouse AhR from cell line Hepa-1 is 72.5%. The
human AhR expressed either in COS-7 cells or in a reticulocyte lysate in vitro
translation system showed specific dioxin-binding activity and Arnt-dependent
DNA-binding activity. Chromosomal localization of the AhR gene was determined to 
be chromosome 7p21 by fluorescent in situ hybridization and DNA blot
hybridization using 23 human x mouse or Chinese hamster hybrid cell DNAs.

PMID: 7883760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Mol Pharmacol. 1994 Oct;46(4):618-26.

Physicochemical and immunocytochemical analysis of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
nuclear translocator: characterization of two monoclonal antibodies to the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator.

Hord NG(1), Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Foods and Nutrition, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 
47904.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) is a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor that heterodimerizes with the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor to mediate signal transduction pathways inducible by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and other planar aromatic hydrocarbons.
Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) have been raised against a carboxyl-terminal
19-amino acid peptide hapten (MAb 2B10) and against a carboxyl-terminal 378-amino
acid polypeptide-staphylococcal Protein A fusion protein (MAb 4G9) of Arnt and
their characterization is described. Western blot experiments show that both MAbs
specifically cross-react with an approximately 85-kDa band in cytosol prepared
from COS-7 cells transfected with the full length human Arnt cDNA pBMSNeo-D24-1
and in Hepa 1c1c7 cytosol but not in Arnt-deficient Hepa 1-C4 mutant cytosol.
Velocity sedimentation of Hepa 1c1c7 cytosol on sucrose gradients and Superose 6 
gel permeation chromatography were used to estimate the sedimentation
coefficient. Stokes radius, and relative molecular mass of Arnt as approximately 
3.6-4.1 S, 6.8 nm, and 101-115 kDa, respectively. These results indicate that
Arnt probably exists in monomeric form in Hepa 1c1c7 cytosolic extracts. Laser
scanning confocal microscopy and indirect immunofluorescence microscopy revealed 
Arnt to be distributed throughout the non-nucleolar portion of the nucleus of
Hepa 1c1c7, VT(2) (Hepa 1-C4T mutant cell line deficient in Arnt function and
stably transfected with pBMSNeo D24-1, expressing the full length human Arnt
cDNA), and HeLa cells. The establishment of the nuclear localization of Arnt in
human and murine cell lines shown here indicates that its nuclear localization
may be conserved across species. Immunofluorescence analysis of Arnt in three
cell lines using two MAbs (to distinct epitopes) provides evidence that suggests 
that the aryl hydrocarbon receptor heterodimerizes with Arnt in the nucleus.

PMID: 7526149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 23;269(38):23800-7.

A tyrosine kinase-dependent pathway regulates ligand-dependent activation of the 
dioxin receptor in human keratinocytes.

Gradin K(1), Whitelaw ML, Toftgård R, Poellinger L, Berghard A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Nutrition and Toxicology, Karolinska Institute, Novum, Huddinge,
Sweden.

Signal transduction by dioxin is mediated by the intracellular basic
helix-loop-helix dioxin receptor which, in its ligand-activated state, binds to
target DNA as a heteromeric complex with the partner factor Arnt. In contrast,
the repressed form of the receptor is a complex with hsp90 which appears to
maintain the receptor in an inducible conformation. In human keratinocytes dioxin
receptor activation has previously been shown to depend on phosphorylation
processes. To further dissect mechanisms regulating dioxin receptor function the 
importance of tyrosine phosphorylation was investigated by the use of specific
tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Here we report that the inhibitor genistein inhibited
dioxin-dependent induction of expression of the target gene cytochrome P-450IA1. 
This effect was rapid and reversible and did not lead to altered levels of dioxin
receptor protein. Analyses of dioxin receptor or Arnt fusion proteins that
function independently of one another showed that the target for genistein action
was the dioxin receptor, and, more specifically, a region of the receptor
harboring its ligand-binding domain. In addition, function of an unrelated
transactivator, the glucocorticoid receptor, was inhibited by genistein while a
truncated form lacking the ligand-binding domain was not. A common denominator
between the ligand-binding domains of both receptors is their ability to interact
with hsp90. Importantly, co-immunoprecipitation experiments showed that genistein
inhibited ligand-induced release of hsp90 from the glucocorticoid receptor. Thus,
the interaction of these transactivators with hsp90 may be regulated by a
tyrosine kinase-dependent pathway.

PMID: 8089152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Sep;14(9):6075-86.

Identification of functional domains of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator protein (ARNT).

Reisz-Porszasz S(1), Probst MR, Fukunaga BN, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural Biology and Molecular Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles 90024-1786.

The activated aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and the AHR nuclear translocator
(ARNT) bind DNA as a heterodimer. Both proteins represent a novel class of basic 
helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-containing transcription factors in that (i) activation
of AHR requires the binding of ligand (e.g., 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin 
[TCDD]), (ii) the xenobiotic responsive element (XRE) recognized by the AHR/ARNT 
heterodimer differs from the recognition sequence for nearly all other bHLH
proteins, and (iii) both proteins contain a PAS homology region, which in the
Drosophila PER and SIM proteins functions as a dimerization domain. A cDNA for
mouse ARNT has been cloned, and potential functional domains of ARNT were
investigated by deletion analysis. A mutant lacking all regions of ARNT other
than the bHLH and PAS regions is unimpaired in TCDD-dependent dimerization and
subsequent XRE binding and only modestly reduced in ability to complement an
ARNT-deficient mutant cell line, c4, in vivo. Both the first and second alpha
helices of the bHLH region are required for dimerization. The basic region is
required for XRE binding but not for dimerization. Deletion of either the A or B 
segments of the PAS region slightly affects TCDD-induced heterodimerization,
while deletion of the complete PAS region severely affects (but does not
eliminate) dimerization. Thus, ARNT possesses multiple domains required for
maximal heterodimerization. Mutants deleted for PAS A, PAS B, and the complete
PAS region all retain some degree of XRE binding, yet none can rescue the c4
mutant. Therefore, both the PAS A and PAS B segments, besides contributing to
dimerization, apparently fulfill additional, unknown functions required for
biological activity of ARNT.

PMCID: PMC359134
PMID: 8065341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Aug 11;22(15):3038-44.

Tissue specific expression of the rat Ah-receptor and ARNT mRNAs.

Carver LA(1), Hogenesch JB, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, IL 60611.

The Ah-receptor (AHR) is a ligand activated transcription factor that mediates
the biological effects of agonists such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.
Upon binding agonists, the AHR dimerizes with a structurally related protein
known as ARNT and this heterodimer then binds cognate enhancer elements and
activates the expression of target genes. In this report we describe the cloning 
of the rat AHR cDNA and a fragment of the rat ARNT cDNA for use as probes in
ribonuclease protection analysis. Ribonuclease protection analysis indicated that
the rat AHR mRNA is expressed at the highest levels in the lung > thymus > kidney
> liver while lower levels were expressed in heart and spleen. The rat AHR and
ARNT mRNAs were expressed in a largely coordinate manner across the eight tissues
examined with the exception of the placenta where AHR levels were relatively low 
compared to ARNT. In these experiments, a rare splice variant of the AHR was
cloned that encoded a protein with a deletion in the ligand binding domain. In
vitro expression studies demonstrated that in contrast to the full length AHR,
the splice variant did not bind ligand nor did it bind to a cognate enhancer
element in the presence of ARNT.

PMCID: PMC310273
PMID: 8065918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 1994 Aug;5(6):240-4.

The role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator protein in aryl
hydrocarbon receptor action.

Hankinson O(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, and Laboratory of
Structural Biology and Molecular Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles,
CA 90024-1786, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon (AH, or dioxin) receptor mediates carcinogenesis by a wide
variety of compounds. It acts as a ligand-dependent transcription factor. Many
investigators expected that the AH receptor would prove to be a member of the
steroid/thyroid/retinoic acid receptor superfamily of proteins. However, recent
cloning of the two subunits of the DNA-binding form of the AH receptor has shown 
that this is not the case. These subunits, the AH receptor nuclear translocator
protein (ARNT) and the ligand-binding AH receptor monomer, do not contain zinc
finger DNA-binding domains, nor do they have any other sequence similarities with
members of the above family. Instead, they both contain basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) motifs and also another segment of sequence similarity, the "PAS" region. 
bHLH motifs in other transcription factors are known to function as dimerization 
and DNA-binding domains. Present experiments are directed toward understanding
the mechanisms of action and the roles of the two subunits.

PMID: 18407214  [PubMed]


214. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jul 22;269(29):19028-33.

Agonistic and antagonistic effects of alpha-naphthoflavone on dioxin receptor
function. Role of the basic region helix-loop-helix dioxin receptor partner
factor Arnt.

Wilhelmsson A(1), Whitelaw ML, Gustafsson JA, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge University
Hospital, Sweden.

The dioxin receptor is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that binds to
target DNA sequences (xenobiotic responsive elements, XREs) following
ligand-dependent dimerization with its partner factor, Arnt (aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator). Both factors contain an N-terminal basic region
helix-loop-helix motif mediating dimerization and subsequent DNA binding. In this
study we investigate the possible role of Arnt in agonistic and antagonistic
effects of the dioxin receptor ligand alpha-naphthoflavone (ANF). Using specific 
antisera for the ligand binding dioxin receptor and Arnt, respectively, we show
that exposure of the dioxin receptor to ANF in vitro induced recruitment of Arnt,
thus stimulating binding of the heteromeric complex to XRE. In transient
transfection assays, ANF at high concentrations stimulated expression of an
XRE-driven reporter gene. This agonistic effect of ANF is, therefore, most likely
attributable to ANF stimulation of dioxin receptor-Arnt heterodimerization and
subsequent binding of the complex to XRE. Using a minimal XRE-driven reporter
gene construct, we could further confirm earlier studies showing that ANF
antagonizes the effect of a dioxin receptor agonist,
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Next we employed chimeric receptor
constructs containing amino acids 1-500 of the human glucocorticoid receptor
fused to dioxin receptor fragments lacking the very N-terminal basic region
helix-loop-helix dimerization and DNA binding motif. These chimeric receptor
constructs show dioxin responsiveness upon transient transfection into mutant
Arnt-deficient hepatoma cells and are, thus, functionally uncoupled from Arnt.
Importantly, dioxin-dependent activation of the chimeric receptors was inhibited 
in the presence of ANF, demonstrating that dimerization of dioxin receptor with
Arnt was not necessary for manifestation of the antagonistic effect of ANF.
Rather, dioxin receptor sequences, which confer dioxin regulation upon a
heterologous DNA binding and transactivating domain, also mediated the
antagonistic effects of ANF.

PMID: 8034660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Cancer Res. 1994 May 15;54(10):2707-13.

Antiestrogenic effect of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin on 17
beta-estradiol-induced pS2 expression.

Zacharewski TR(1), Bondy KL, McDonell P, Wu ZF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Western Ontario,
London, Canada.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) exhibits a broad spectrum of
antiestrogenic activities in rodents and mammalian cells in culture. The effects 
of TCDD on 17 beta-estradiol (E2)-induction of pS2, a prognostic marker for
breast cancer, were investigated in MCF-7, ZR-75, HeLa, and Hepa 1c1c7 wild-type 
and mutant cells. These effects were compared to the suppressive activities of
the congener, 2,8-dichlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, and the established antiestrogens,
ICI 164,384 and tamoxifen, in order to determine the relative potency of TCDD and
to distinguish the mechanism of action of Ah receptor-mediated antiestrogens.
Treatment of MCF-7 cells with 10 nM TCDD decreased E2-induced secreted pS2
protein levels by 50% and the induction of the transiently transfected -1100 to
-86 pS2 promoter-regulated reporter gene (pS2-LUC) by 57%. Comparable effects on 
PS2-LUC activity were observed in HeLa and ZR-75 cells. In contrast, TCDD had
minimal effects on pS2ERE(-405 to -393)-LUC induction, whereas treatment with 10 
nM ICI 164,384 caused a 60% decrease in luciferase activity. In Hepa 1c1c7
wild-type and clone 1 (C1) mutant cells, TCDD also reduced E2 induction of
pS2-LUC activity but had little effect in clone 4 (C4) or clone 12 (C12) mutant
cells. However, suppression was reestablished following transfection of the human
Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) complementary DNA expression vector into 
C4 cells and the mouse Ah receptor (AhR) complementary DNA expression vector into
C12 cells. Induction of pS2-LUC activity by the ligand-dependent and -independent
chimeric estrogen receptors (HE15, HE19, ERcVP16, and ERGR) were also used to
examine the role of E2 metabolism and the mechanism of TCDD-mediated
antiestrogenic activity. Induction by HE15 and ERcVP16 was suppressed by 57 and
74%, respectively, following treatment with TCDD, whereas ICI 164,384 was
significantly less effective (38 and 20%, respectively). These results
demonstrate a role for the Ah receptor in TCDD-mediated suppression of E2-induced
pS2 expression. Data is presented demonstrating that the effect requires
sequences within the pS2 promoter other than the estrogen response element and is
independent of E2 oxidative metabolism.

PMID: 8168101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Carcinogenesis. 1994 May;15(5):801-6.

Interindividual difference in expression of human Ah receptor and related P450
genes.

Hayashi S(1), Watanabe J, Nakachi K, Eguchi H, Gotoh O, Kawajiri K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Cancer Center Research Institute, Japan.

The genomic clones of human aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Ahr) and Ahr nuclear
translocator (Arnt) were isolated, and the structures of exon-intron junctions of
these genes were partially determined. Based on the sequence information, a
quantitative RT-PCR analysis was developed, and the expression of these genes was
studied in various human tissues. mRNAs for Ahr and Arnt were widely expressed in
human tissues and abundantly in lung. Individual difference in expression levels 
of Ahr and Arnt mRNA was observed in liver, lung and blood. In order to examine
whether expression levels of Ahr and Arnt were associated with those of CYP1A1,
we studied the expression of these mRNAs in blood among 20 healthy subjects,
taking account of individuals' cigarette smoking habits. We found that the
expression levels of CYP1A1 appeared to associate with those of Ahr and Arnt
mRNAs (P < 0.06), and also that the expression of Ahr and Arnt was influenced by 
cigarette smoking. The expression of human Ahr and Arnt is reported here for the 
first time, providing a quantitative RT-PCR analysis as a useful tool for further
studies.

PMID: 7515333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Behav Pharmacol. 1994 Apr;5(2):119-124.

The effects of the new antipsychotic, sertindole, on latent inhibition in rats.

Weiner I(1), Kidron R, Tarrasch R, Arnt J, Feldon J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv, Tel-Aviv, Israel
69978.

Latent inhibition (LI) is a measure of retarded conditioning to a previously
presented non-reinforced stimulus, that is impaired in schizophrenic patients and
in rats treated with amphetamine. Neuroleptic drugs are known to produce two
effects in this paradigm: to antagonize amphetamine-induced disruption of LI, and
to facilitate the development of LI when administered on their own. The present
experiments tested the effects on LI of the new neuroleptic, sertindole. The
experiments used a conditioned emotional response procedure in rats licking for
water, consisting of three stages: pre-exposure, in which the to-be-conditioned
stimulus (a tone) was repeatedly presented without being followed by
reinforcement; conditioning, in which the pre-exposed stimulus was paired with
reinforcement (a foot shock); and test, in which LI was indexed by degree of
suppression of licking during tone presentation. In Experiment 1 the effects of
0.31, 1.3 and 5.0mg/kg sertindole were assessed following pre-exposure to 40
non-reinforced tones. Experiment 2 tested the effects of 5mg/kg on LI following
pre-exposure to 10 non-reinforced tones. Experiment 3 investigated antagonism of 
amphetamine-induced disruption of LI by 5.0mg/kg sertindole. The results
demonstrated that sertindole (5.0mg/kg) possesses a neuroleptic-like profile in
the LI model: it facilitates the development of LI and antagonizes
amphetamine-induced disruption of LI.

PMID: 11224259  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


218. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Apr;14(4):2438-46.

A cellular factor stimulates ligand-dependent release of hsp90 from the basic
helix-loop-helix dioxin receptor.

McGuire J(1), Whitelaw ML, Pongratz I, Gustafsson JA, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge University
Hospital, Novum, Sweden.

In response to dioxin, the nuclear basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) dioxin receptor 
forms a complex with the bHLH partner factor Arnt that regulates target gene
transcription by binding to dioxin-responsive sequence motifs. Previously, we
have demonstrated that the latent form of dioxin receptor present in extracts
from untreated cells is stably associated with molecular chaperone protein hsp90,
and Arnt is not a component of this complex. Here, we used a
coimmunoprecipitation assay to demonstrate that the in vitro-translated dioxin
receptor, but not Arnt, is stably associated with hsp90. Although it showed
ligand-binding activity, the in vitro-translated dioxin receptor failed to
dissociate from hsp90 upon exposure to ligand. Addition of a specific fraction
from wild-type hepatoma cells, however, to the in vitro-expressed receptor
promoted dioxin-dependent release of hsp90. This stimulatory effect was mediated 
via the bHLH dimerization and DNA-binding motif of the receptor. Moreover,
ligand-dependent release of hsp90 from the receptor was not promoted by
fractionated cytosolic extracts from mutant hepatoma cells which are deficient in
the function of bHLH dioxin receptor partner factor Arnt. Thus, our results
provide a novel model for regulation of bHLH factor activity and suggest that
derepression of the dioxin receptor by ligand-induced release of hsp90 may
require bHLH-mediated concomitant recruitment of an additional cellular factor,
possibly the structurally related bHLH dimerization partner factor Arnt. In
support of this model, addition of in vitro-expressed wild-type Arnt, but not a
mutated form of Arnt lacking the bHLH motif, promoted release of hsp90 from the
dioxin receptor in the presence of dioxin.

PMCID: PMC358611
PMID: 8139547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mol Pharmacol. 1994 Mar;45(3):428-38.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 
protein show distinct subcellular localizations in Hepa 1c1c7 cells by
immunofluorescence microscopy.

Pollenz RS(1), Sattler CA, Poland A.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison
53706.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt) protein
were evaluated in the Hepa 1c1c7 (Hepa-1) cell line by indirect
immunofluorescence microscopy and Western blot analysis. Wild-type (WT) Hepa-1
cells stained for AhR show intense cytoplasmic fluorescence with minimal nuclear 
reactivity. WT cells treated with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) show
a time-dependent decrease in cytoplasmic AhR staining and a concomitant increase 
in nuclear fluorescence. WT cells stained for Arnt show nuclear fluorescence with
minimal cytoplasmic reactivity, a pattern unchanged after TCDD treatment. Hepa-1 
type II variants express normal levels of AhR but are defective in TCDD-mediated 
induction of cytochrome P4501A1. Type II variants stained for Arnt show reduced
nuclear fluorescence, compared with WT cells, and express minimal levels of Arnt 
protein, as determined by Western blot analysis. Type II variants stained for the
AhR show intense cytoplasmic fluorescence that becomes nuclear after TCDD
treatment. Detailed evaluation by immunoelectron microscopy of the AhR and Arnt
present in the nuclear compartment of WT cells shows that both proteins are
uniformly distributed and do not appear to be associated with nuclear pores,
membranes, or nucleoli. Western blot analysis of nuclei isolated from WT Hepa-1
cells fractionated with Nonidet P-40 shows that minimal levels of AhR or Arnt are
retained in the nuclear fraction after TCDD treatment. Collectively, these
results indicate that the unliganded AhR resides in the cytoplasm, Arnt is
localized to the nucleus, and Hepa-1 cells defective in Arnt expression exhibit
TCDD-mediated nuclear accumulation of the AhR.

PMID: 8145729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Biol Chem. 1994 Feb 18;269(7):5137-44.

Regulation of human dioxin receptor function by indolocarbazoles, receptor
ligands of dietary origin.

Kleman MI(1), Poellinger L, Gustafsson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge University
Hospital, Sweden.

The intracellular basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) dioxin receptor mediates signal
transduction by dioxin (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin). In analogy to
nuclear receptors that are members of the steroid hormone receptor superfamily
the dioxin receptor is a ligand-inducible transcriptional regulator that directly
binds to response elements within regulated genes. The most commonly studied
dioxin receptor ligands are dioxin itself and structurally related environmental 
contaminants. A physiological ligand has not yet been identified. Interestingly, 
however, indolo[3,2-b]carbazole, a compound formed from precursors in the diet,
has been shown to bind the murine dioxin receptor with high affinity in vitro. In
the present study we show that this compound and its methylated derivative
5,11-dimethylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole very potently activated transcription from a 
dioxin or xenobiotic response element (XRE)-driven reporter gene in both murine
and human hepatoma cells. This effect was not observed in mutant,
dioxin-resistant hepatoma cells which are either deficient in expression of
dioxin receptor or the bHLH receptor partner factor Arnt. In vitro
indolocarbazoles induced XRE binding activity by the human dioxin receptor-Arnt
complex in a dose-dependent manner. Thus, both dioxin- and
indolocarbazole-activated forms of dioxin receptor regulate target gene
expression by the same mechanism involving recruitment of the bHLH factor Arnt
and recognition of the XRE element. Finally, the indolo[3,2-b]carbazole-activated
human dioxin receptor appeared to generate more stable complexes with the XRE
target sequence relative to those produced by the dioxin-activated receptor form,
indicating interesting mechanistic differences between different classes of
dioxin receptor ligands in their abilities to modulate human dioxin receptor
function.

PMID: 8106494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Biol Chem. 1994 Feb 11;269(6):4438-49.

Purification of the DNA binding form of dioxin receptor. Role of the Arnt
cofactor in regulation of dioxin receptor function.

Mason GG(1), Witte AM, Whitelaw ML, Antonsson C, McGuire J, Wilhelmsson A,
Poellinger L, Gustafsson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge Hospital,
Sweden.

The basic region/helix-loop-helix dioxin receptor mediates signal transduction by
dioxin (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin). Upon ligand binding the dioxin
receptor is converted from a latent, non-DNA binding form to a form that directly
interacts with target genes by binding to dioxin-responsive transcriptional
control elements. We have purified by conventional and DNA affinity
chromatographic procedures the ligand-activated, DNA binding form of dioxin
receptor to examine its architecture and functional properties. We observed that 
the DNA binding activity of the receptor was labile. Most notably, this activity 
was lost following DNA affinity purification. In complementation experiments we
have identified an auxiliary factor(s) that exhibited very poor, if any,
intrinsic affinity for the DNA target sequence in vitro but strongly increased
the DNA binding activity of the purified receptor-containing material identified 
by immunoblot analysis. In a similar fashion the in vitro expressed basic
region/helix-loop-helix factor Arnt (that has been postulated to modulate the
nuclear translocation function of the receptor) reconstituted the DNA binding
function of the purified receptor, and the purified auxiliary factor
reconstituted receptor activity upon addition to an extract from mutant,
Arnt-deficient hepatoma cells. Conversely, purified dioxin receptor reconstituted
DNA binding activity in extracts from receptor-deficient hepatoma cells which
express bona fide levels of Arnt. Interestingly, UV cross-linking studies using a
BrdU-substituted DNA target sequence indicated that primarily the receptor
protein was bound to DNA. Moreover, we demonstrate that purified receptor or Arnt
exhibited virtually no detectable affinity for the target sequence individually
but, in the presence of one another, showed a strong synergy in DNA binding
activity in vitro. Importantly, simultaneous expression of the receptor and Arnt 
resulted in synergistic induction of gene expression in vivo. These data
demonstrate that Arnt plays a central role in control of dioxin receptor function
by cooperatively modulating the DNA binding activity of the receptor in vitro and
dioxin-dependent transactivation in vivo.

PMID: 8308014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Rev Physiol Biochem Pharmacol. 1994;125:1-42.

Aryl hydrocarbon or dioxin receptor: biologic and toxic responses.

Bock KW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, University of Tübingen, Germany.

1. The AhR represents a ligand-activated transcription factor. Receptor agonists 
include planar aromatic compounds, a variety of heterocyclic plant constituents, 
and PCDD/PCDF. The latter lead to persistent activation of the receptor due to
their strong binding affinity and long biologic half-life of over 10 years in
human blood and fat. Practically every person on earth is exposed to these
compounds via the diet (> 90%) and by high concentrations in mother's milk.
PCDD/PCDF produced toxic responses in exposed people (primarily chloracne and
immunosuppression) in the past. However, the present PCDD/PCDF levels (basal
levels) in the general population are below those warranting toxicologic concern.
2. The AhR has been characterized as a helix-loop-helix transcription factor
related to the Drosophila developmental genes sim and per. The cytosolic form of 
the receptor is present as an inactive complex with two subunits of HSP90. After 
ligand binding HSP90 is released and the receptor enters the nucleus as a
heterodimer together with a related protein ARNT. It binds with high affinity to 
certain enhancer elements in the upstream region of several genes such as
cytochrome P4501A1 (CYP1A1). The AhR transcriptionally activates several
drug-metabolizing enzymes and proteins involved in growth/differentiation, such
as the plasminogen activator inhibitor PAI-2 and IL-1 beta. In addition, it
modulates the action of a number of other nuclear transcription factors such as
receptors of the steroid hormone receptor superfamily and of cell surface
receptors such as EGF. With the exception of CYP1A1 induction, little is known
about the mechanism of transcriptional activation of the AhR-controlled genes.
Many AhR-modulated biologic responses (such as modulation of the estrogen and EGF
receptor) appear to be indirect. 3. Persistent activation of the AhR is probably 
responsible for toxic responses in experimental animals and humans. They are
markedly tissue and species specific. In rodents a wasting syndrome,
immunosuppression, teratogenicity, chloracne, and carcinogenicity/tumor promotion
have been well studied. There is good evidence for an involvement for the AhR in 
these responses. However, the chain of events from receptor activation to the
diverse toxic endpoints is largely unknown. Alteration of growth and
differentiation of epithelial tissues may underlie most of the toxic responses. A
lot has already been achieved, mostly by characterizing the AhR and
transcriptional activation of CYP1A1. Still more work lies ahead of us, for
example, elucidation of the physiologic roles of the AhR and of the chains of
events from receptor activation to the various biologic and toxic endpoints.

PMID: 7984872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Adv Enzyme Regul. 1994;34:159-71.

A genetic analysis of processes regulating cytochrome P4501A1 expression.

Hankinson O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural Biology and Molecular Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles 90024.

Cytochrome P4501A1 and its associated aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase activity are
highly inducible in the mouse hepatoma cell line, Hepa-1, by substrates of the
enzyme and related compounds, such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD).
Mutants of this cell line, deficient in P4501A1 inducibility, were isolated. Some
of the mutants show a dominant phenotype. Such mutants may have resulted from a
genetic alteration leading to the inappropriate activation of a repressor gene
that normally functions to restrict high level inducibility to the liver and
certain other organs or to certain developmental stages. One dominant mutant was 
shown to express a protein that prevents binding of the liganded aryl hydrocarbon
(Ah) receptor (which mediates induction of P4501A1) to its recognition sequence
in DNA (the xenobiotic responsive element, or XRE). The majority of mutants are
recessive, and were assigned to four different complementation groups (which
probably correspond to four different genes). Gene A corresponds to the
structural gene (Cyp1a-1) for P4501A1. Mutations in genes B, C and D all affect
functioning of the Ah receptor. A cDNA for gene C was cloned. The encoded protein
(ARNT) is required for ligand-dependent translocation of the Ah receptor to the
nucleus and its binding to the XRE. ARNT and the Ah receptor form a heterodimeric
complex which binds the XRE in a fashion such that both subunits bind the XRE
directly. Both ARNT and the Ah receptor contain basic helix-loop-helix motifs.
Such motifs have been identified in several transcription factors that bind DNA
as heterodimers or homodimers. The roles of the proteins corresponding to the B
and D genes are presently under investigation.

PMID: 7942273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Receptor. 1994 Winter;4(4):209-22.

DNA sequence requirements for Ah receptor/Arnt recognition determined by in vitro
transcription.

McLane KE(1), Whitlock JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Scripps Research Institute, Department of Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037.

The enhancer of the mouse cytochrome P450 cyp1a1 gene, which contains six binding
sites (A-F) for the Ah receptor (AhR), has been a useful model system for
studying the mechanism of AhR-mediated activation of transcription. In the
presence of ligand, AhR interacts with its dimerization partner, Arnt, and the
heteromeric complex is able to bind DNA. In the present study, we test the
effects of single base pair substitutions of site D on the ability of the
AhR/Arnt heteromer to recognize this response element using an in vitro
transcription system. Synthetic oligodeoxyribonucleotides corresponding to the
wild-type sequence of site D, or single base pair mutations of that sequence,
were used to compete for AhR/Arnt binding with the transcription template. Using 
this competition assay, the sequence of the core recognition motif 5'-GCGTG-3'
was shown to be critical for AhR/Arnt binding, and the importance of the position
and orientation of the G:C and A:T base pairs of this sequence was determined.

PMID: 7894337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Exp Clin Immunogenet. 1994;11(2-3):65-74.

Ah receptor: a novel ligand-activated transcription factor.

Fujii-Kuriyama Y(1), Ema M, Mimura J, Sogawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Two years have passed since the Ah receptor (AhR) and the AhR nuclear
translocator (Arnt) were revealed to constitute a novel ligand-activated
transcription factor by molecular biological studies on cloned cDNAs. Many
interesting properties of the AhR/Arnt system have begun to be elucidated. We
present here a brief summary of the molecular biology of AhR and Arnt.

PMID: 7826667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Receptor. 1994 Fall;4(3):157-73.

Dioxin-dependent, DNA sequence-specific binding of a multiprotein complex
containing the Ah receptor.

Elferink CJ(1), Whitlock JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
CA 94305-8233.

Fractionation of rat liver cytosol, using as an affinity reagent the DNA
recognition sequence for the liganded aromatic hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor,
enriches for proteins that are about 110, 106, 98/96, 57, and 54 kDa in size. The
proteins display 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-dependent, DNA
sequence-specific binding that is characteristic of the liganded Ah receptor.
Immunological studies imply: 1. That the 98/96-kDa protein is the Ah receptor
nuclear translocator (Arnt); 2. That the 110- and 106-kDa proteins are not
immunologically related either to each other or to Arnt; and 3. That the 110-,
the 106-kDa, and the Arnt proteins are members of a multicomponent protein
complex. cDNA cloning studies indicate that the 106-kDa protein is the rat Ah
receptor. The N-terminal 384 amino acids of the rat receptor show substantial
sequence homology to the mouse and human Ah receptor. The sequence conservation
across species imputes functional importance to this region of the receptor. In
contrast, the remainder of the protein is substantially less well conserved among
rat, mouse, and human. The tissue distribution of Ah receptor mRNA is consistent 
with previous studies of the distribution of the receptor protein. Our findings
demonstrate the use of DNA recognition site chromatography for purification of
the Ah receptor and imply that the ligand receptor binds to DNA as part of a
multiprotein complex.

PMID: 7812217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. EMBO J. 1993 Nov;12(11):4169-79.

Definition of a novel ligand binding domain of a nuclear bHLH receptor:
co-localization of ligand and hsp90 binding activities within the regulable
inactivation domain of the dioxin receptor.

Whitelaw ML(1), Göttlicher M, Gustafsson JA, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge University
Hospital, Sweden.

The dioxin receptor mediates signal transduction by dioxin
(2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin) and binds to DNA target sequences as a
heterodimer of the approximately 100 kDa ligand binding receptor and the
approximately 85 kDa auxiliary factor, Arnt. Both of these factors encompass an
N-terminal basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) motif required for DNA binding and
dimerization. In this study we describe the construction of glucocorticoid/dioxin
receptor fusion proteins which allow the regulation of glucocorticoid receptor
activity by dioxin in transient transfections of CHO and hepatoma cells. Thus, in
the absence of dioxin, chimeric receptor constructs which contain large 500-720
amino acid C-terminal dioxin receptor fragments, but lack the N-terminal bHLH
motif, confer repression upon the transcriptional activity of a glucocorticoid
receptor derivative, tau DBD, containing its N-terminal strong transactivating
signal (tau) and its DNA binding domain (DBD). In the presence of dioxin, this
repression is reversed. Importantly, these chimeric receptors did not require the
bHLH Arnt co-factor for function. A considerably smaller region of the dioxin
receptor, located between amino acids 230 and 421, showed specific dioxin binding
activity in vitro. Moreover, dioxin binding in vitro correlated with the ability 
of receptor fragments to form stable complexes in vitro with the molecular
chaperone hsp90. These findings support the notion that hsp90 may be important
for folding of a dioxin binding configuration of the receptor. Finally, tau DBD
activity was constitutively repressed in a dioxin non-responsive manner by dioxin
receptor fragments which failed to bind ligand but also failed to bind hsp90 in
vitro, indicating that alternative mechanisms in addition to hsp90 binding may
contribute to the inactivation function. In summary, the dioxin receptor system
provides a novel and complex model of regulation of bHLH factors that may also
give important insights into the mechanism of action of ligand-activated nuclear 
receptors.

PMCID: PMC413711
PMID: 8223432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Biol Chem. 1993 Oct 5;268(28):21002-6.

A factor binding to the xenobiotic responsive element (XRE) of P-4501A1 gene
consists of at least two helix-loop-helix proteins, Ah receptor and Arnt.

Matsushita N(1), Sogawa K, Ema M, Yoshida A, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Xenobiotic responsive element (XRE) is an inducible enhancer element that drives 
inducible expression of P-4501A1 gene in response to xenobiotic inducers. The
XRE-binding factor appears in the nuclei of Hepa-1 cells treated with
3-methylcholanthrene (3-MC). Association of the Ah receptor and Arnt (Ah receptor
nuclear translocator) in an XRE-binding complex was examined by anti-Ah receptor 
and Arnt antibodies. Both antibodies inhibited the sequence-specific XRE-binding 
activity of nuclear extracts from 3-MC-treated Hepa-1 cells and of the cytosolic 
fraction which was prepared from the nontreated cells and treated in vitro with
3-MC. These results indicate that Ah receptor and Arnt proteins are components of
the XRE-binding factor and suggest that Arnt as well as the Ah receptor are
localized in the cytosol of nontreated cells. The Ah receptor present in C4
cells, a mutant of Hepa-1 cells defective in the Arnt function, showed an
inducer-dependent association with Arnt synthesized in an in vitro translation
system. Co-transfection of the expression plasmids of the Ah receptor and Arnt
exhibited synergistically more activated transcription from a reporter gene
pMC6.3k consisting of the P-4501A1 gene promoter and enhancer than transfection
with either of the two plasmids alone. These findings indicate that the Ah
receptor and Arnt proteins form a complex that activates transcription in an
inducer-dependent manner.

PMID: 8407937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Pharmacogenetics. 1993 Oct;3(5):213-30.

The AH-receptor: genetics, structure and function.

Swanson HI(1), Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago,
IL 60611.

The AH-receptor is a ligand-activated transcription factor that regulates a
number of biological responses to planar aromatic hydrocarbons. Interest in this 
receptor is related to its role in the toxic action of a variety of environmental
chemicals, the simplicity and elegance of the murine genetics that led to its
characterization and the distinctive mechanism by which this receptor activates
gene expression. Recent cloning experiments have demonstrated that the
AH-receptor is structurally related to the Per, ARNT and Sim proteins. Members of
this newly described gene family are characterized by two N-terminal domains, the
most characteristic of which is a motif referred to as a PAS domain. In the
AH-receptor, this domain harbours sequences involved in the formation of a
hydrophobic pocket that bind receptor agonists. Adjacent to the PAS domain in the
AH-receptor, ARNT and Sim proteins is a basic/helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain that
appears to mediate heterodimerization and sequence specific DNA binding
properties. The observation that the bHLH domain is present in the AH-receptor
and the ARNT protein, a factor required for proper AH-receptor function, suggests
that these proteins are heterodimeric partners that activate gene expression in a
manner similar to Myc/Max and MyoD/E2A. The objectives of this review are to
describe recent experimental results in this field and to use this information to
develop a molecular model of AH-receptor mediated signal transduction.

PMID: 8287061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Med Chem. 1993 Sep 17;36(19):2761-70.

Stereospecific and selective 5-HT2 antagonism in a series of 5-substituted
trans-1-piperazino-3-phenylindans.

Bøgesø KP(1), Arnt J, Hyttel J, Pedersen H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Department, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen, Valby, Denmark.

A study of the effect of aromatic substitution on 5-HT2, D2, and alpha 1 receptor
affinity in a subseries of new and previously synthesized
1-piperazino-3-phenylindans indicated that high 5-HT2 selectivity could be
obtained in 5-substituted derivatives. Accordingly, a series of 5-substituted
derivatives was synthesized with the goal of obtaining stereospecific and
selective, centrally acting 5-HT2 antagonists. This goal was fulfilled in
5-chloro- or 5-fluoro-substituted compounds with
2-(3-alkyl-2-oxoimidazolidin-1-yl)ethyl- or
2-(tetrahydro-2-oxo-1H-pyrimidin-1-yl)ethylpiperazine substituents, as well as in
their imidazolidine-2-thione or pyrimidine-2-thione analogues. The most
interesting derivatives were resolved either directly via diastereomeric salts or
by syntheses from resolved starting materials. Optical purity was determined by a
1H NMR method, using the chiral shift reagent
(R)-(-)-2,2,2-trifluoro-1-(9-anthryl)ethanol. The compound
(-)-trans-1-[2-[4-[5-chloro-3-(4-fluorophenyl)-2,3-dihydro-1H-inden++ +-1-
yl]piperazin-1-yl]ethyl]-3-isopropyl-2-imidazolidinone ((-)-20) had the overall
best profile with a high stereoselectivity (eudismic ratio: 68) and a high
selectivity versus D2 and alpha 1 receptors (affinity ratios 182 and 191,
respectively). It had a potent central effect but was shorter-acting than the
tetrahydropyrimidinone or thione derivatives ((-)-39, (+)-40, (-)-41, and
(+)-42). The observed activities of the compounds are settled in perspective in
relation to a recently proposed D2 receptor interaction model. While there are no
indications so far that trans-1-piperazino-3-phenylindans interact with D2 and
5-HT2 receptors in different conformations, the present study shows important
differences in aromatic substitution effects. Only 5-HT2 receptors are able to
accommodate a 5-substituent in the indan benzene ring, thus allowing syntheses of
highly selective compounds.

PMID: 8410990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Sep 15;90(18):8566-70.

In vitro analysis of Ah receptor domains involved in ligand-activated DNA
recognition.

Dolwick KM(1), Swanson HI, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago,
IL 60611.

The Ah receptor (AHR) is a basic helix-loop-helix protein that mediates the
effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachloro-dibenzo-p-dioxin. In this report, we describe a
rabbit reticulocyte system that allows functional expression of both the AHR and 
its dimeric partner, the AHR nuclear translocator protein (ARNT). By using this
in vitro system, we were able to reconstitute agonist binding to the AHR and
agonist-induced AHR-ARNT recognition of a cognate DNA enhancer sequence.
Expression of AHR deletion mutants revealed the location of N-terminal domains
responsible for ligand and DNA recognition and C-terminal domains that play roles
in agonist-induced DNA recognition.

PMCID: PMC47398
PMID: 8397410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mol Pharmacol. 1993 Sep;44(3):511-8.

Role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator protein in aryl
hydrocarbon (dioxin) receptor action.

Probst MR(1), Reisz-Porszasz S, Agbunag RV, Ong MS, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural Biology and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles 90024.

Immunoprecipitation experiments performed on cytosolic extracts of the mouse
hepatoma cell line Hepa-1c1c7 (Hepa-1) confirm that the 9-S, unliganded,
cytosolic aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor complex contains the 90-kDa heat shock
protein and the Ah receptor protein but reveal that it does not contain the Ah
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) protein. These experiments confirm that the 
6-S liganded form of the receptor identified in nuclear extracts of cells treated
with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) contains the Ah receptor protein 
and ARNT but not the 90-kDa heat shock protein. The 6-S liganded Ah receptor
complex activates transcription of the CYP1A1 gene via its binding to upstream
xenobiotic-responsive elements (XREs). Treatment of cytosolic extracts of Hepa-1 
cells with TCDD in vitro transforms the Ah receptor complex to the XRE-binding
state. No such transformation occurs in a C- mutant deficient in ARNT activity.
When in vitro synthesized ARNT was added concomitantly with TCDD to C- cytosolic 
extracts, it associated with the Ah receptor and restored Ah receptor-dependent
XRE-binding activity to the extracts. Covalent cross-linking experiments in
nuclear extracts of Hepa-1 and human LS180 cells treated with TCDD in vivo
demonstrate that both ARNT and the Ah receptor bind directly to the XRE core
sequence.

PMID: 8396713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Genomics. 1993 Sep;17(3):592-8.

The Ah receptor nuclear translocator gene (ARNT) is located on q21 of human
chromosome 1 and on mouse chromosome 3 near Cf-3.

Johnson B(1), Brooks BA, Heinzmann C, Diep A, Mohandas T, Sparkes RS, Reyes H,
Hoffman E, Lange E, Gatti RA, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biomedical and Environmental Sciences, University of California,
Los Angeles 90024.

We have mapped the Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) gene to a conserved
linkage group located on mouse chromosome 3 and human chromosome 1.
EcoRI-digested DNA from a panel of 17 human x mouse somatic cell hybrids was
probed with a cDNA fragment of the human ARNT gene. Six of the 17 independent
mouse x human hybrids were positive for human bands. Human chromosome 1 showed
complete cosegregation with the gene, whereas discordant segregation was observed
for all other human chromosomes. The human gene was localized to 1q21 by using
DNA from mouse x human hybrid clones that retain translocations involving human
chromosome 1, by segregation analysis in nine informative CEPH families, and by
in situ hybridization. The mouse homologue was mapped to mouse chromosome 3 using
a panel of 16 hamster x mouse somatic cell hybrids. Six of 16 mouse x hamster
hybrids were positive for mouse bands, showing complete concordance with mouse
chromosome 3. The mouse Arnt gene was regionally mapped on chromosome 3, using
linkage analysis in an interspecific backcross. The results indicate that the
mouse gene resides about 40 cM from the centromere and about 10 cM proximal to
Cf-3, the gene for tissue factor.

PMID: 8244375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1993 Jun 23;685:624-40.

Role of the Ah receptor and the dioxin-inducible [Ah] gene battery in toxicity,
cancer, and signal transduction.

Nebert DW(1), Puga A, Vasiliou V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati Medical Center,
Ohio 45267-0056.

1. On the basis of our current knowledge about the evolution of drug-metabolizing
enzymes, it appears to be extremely likely that these enzymes play a critical
role in maintaining steady-state levels of the ligands involved in
ligand-modulated transcription of genes effecting growth, differentiation,
homeostasis, and neuroendocrine functions. 2. The original observations about
genetic differences in CYP1A1 (cytochrome P1-450) induction by TCDD or
benzo[a]pyrene in the mouse have led to an appreciation for a similar
polymorphism in the human and the recent cloning of the murine Ah receptor (Ahr) 
and human Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) genes. It is most likely that
the correlation between genetic differences in human or murine CYP1A1
inducibility by polycyclic hydrocarbons or TCDD and increased risk of cancer will
be explained by differences in the AHR gene, leading to enhanced tumor promotion 
(rather than in the CYP1A1 structural gene). Perhaps the same will be found for
birth defects, immunotoxicity, and other forms of toxic damage caused by these
environmental chemicals. 3. In a manner similar to that of the phorbol ester
tumor promoter, TCDD induces intracellular Ca2+ changes, accumulation of FOS and 
JUN mRNAs, and large increases in AP-1 transcription factor activity.
Interestingly, these early effects of TCDD, and also of benzo[a]pyrene, appear
not to require the Ah receptor. 4. Many genes are induced by TCDD, and many
others are induced by electrophilic metabolites such as quinones and H2O2; using 
several mouse experimental systems, we have defined a subset of six of these
genes as constituting the [Ah] battery by the sole criterion that a functional
CYP1A1 or CYP1A2 enzyme is able to repress the expression of genes that are
members of this gene battery.

PMID: 8395783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;13(4):2504-14.

Ligand-dependent recruitment of the Arnt coregulator determines DNA recognition
by the dioxin receptor.

Whitelaw M(1), Pongratz I, Wilhelmsson A, Gustafsson JA, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge University
Hospital, Sweden.

The intracellular basic region/helix-loop-helix (bHLH) dioxin receptor mediates
signal transduction by dioxin (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin) and functions
as a ligand-activated DNA binding protein directly interacting with target genes 
by binding to dioxin response elements. Here we show that the partially purified,
ligand-bound receptor alone could not bind target DNA. In contrast, DNA binding
by the receptor could be induced by addition of a cytosolic auxiliary activity
which functionally and biochemically corresponded to the bHLH factor Arnt. While 
Arnt exhibited no detectable affinity for the dioxin response element in the
absence of the dioxin receptor, it strongly promoted the DNA binding function of 
the ligand-activated but not the ligand-free receptor forms. Arnt also
functionally reconstituted in vitro the DNA binding activity of a mutant, nuclear
translocation-deficient dioxin receptor phenotype in cytosolic extracts from a
dioxin-resistant hepatoma cell line. Importantly, coimmunoprecipitation
experiments showed that Arnt physically interacted in solution with the
ligand-activated dioxin receptor but failed to heterodimerize with the
ligand-free, hsp90-associated receptor form. Mutational analysis suggested that
the functional interaction between these two factors occurred via the bHLH motif 
of Arnt. These data suggest that dioxin receptor activity is governed by a
complex pattern of combinatorial regulation involving repression by hsp90 and
then by ligand-dependent recruitment of the positive coregulator Arnt. The dioxin
receptor system also provides the first example of signal-controlled dimerization
of bHLH factors.

PMCID: PMC359572
PMID: 8384309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jan;13(1):677-89.

Cross-coupling of signal transduction pathways: the dioxin receptor mediates
induction of cytochrome P-450IA1 expression via a protein kinase C-dependent
mechanism.

Berghard A(1), Gradin K, Pongratz I, Whitelaw M, Poellinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge, Sweden.

Signal transduction by dioxin (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin) is mediated
by the intracellular dioxin receptor which, in its dioxin-activated state,
regulates transcription of target genes encoding drug-metabolizing enzymes, such 
as cytochrome P-450IA1 and glutathione S-transferase Ya. Exposure of the dioxin
receptor to dioxin leads to an apparent translocation of the receptor to the
nucleus in vivo and to a rapid conversion of the receptor from a latent,
non-DNA-binding form to a species that binds to dioxin-responsive positive
control elements in vitro. This DNA-binding form of receptor appears to be a
heterodimeric complex with the helix-loop-helix factor Arnt. In this study, we
show that activation of the cytochrome P-450IA1 gene and minimal
dioxin-responsive reporter constructs by the dioxin receptor was inhibited
following prolonged treatment of human keratinocytes with the phorbol ester
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate. Inhibition of the receptor-mediated
activation response was also achieved by treatment of the cells with a number of 
protein kinase inhibitors, one of which, calphostin C, shows selectivity for
protein kinase C. Taken together, these data suggest that protein kinase
C-dependent phosphorylation may play an essential role in the dioxin signaling
pathway. This hypothesis is supported by the observation that pretreatment of the
cells with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate inhibited the DNA-binding
activity of the dioxin receptor in vivo. In vivo, the dioxin receptor was found
to be a phosphoprotein. In vitro, dephosphorylation of the ligand-activated,
heteromeric dioxin receptor form or dephosphorylation of the individual
ligand-binding and Arnt receptor subunits inhibited the xenobiotic response
element-binding activity. Moreover, dephosphorylation experiments with the
individual receptor subunits prior to assembly of the xenobiotic response
element-binding receptor form indicated that phosphorylation seemed to be
important for the DNA-binding activity per se of the receptor, whereas Arnt
appeared to require phosphorylation to interact with the receptor. Finally, a
protein kinase C inhibitor-sensitive cytosolic catalytic activity that could
restore the DNA-binding activity of the dephosphorylated dioxin receptor form was
identified.

PMCID: PMC358946
PMID: 8380231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Recept Res. 1993;13(8):1147-59.

Investigation on the potential role of the Ah receptor nuclear translocator
protein in vitamin D receptor action.

Reisz-Porszasz S(1), Reyes H, DeLuca HF, Prahl JM, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biomedical and Environmental Sciences, University of California,
Los Angeles.

The Ah receptor nuclear translocator protein (ARNT) is required for binding of
the Ah (dioxin) receptor to the xenobiotic responsive element (XRE), and is a
structural component of the XRE-binding form of the Ah receptor. The vitamin D
receptor requires an accessory protein for binding to the vitamin D responsive
element (VDRE) in the osteocalcin gene. Since the vitamin D receptor has
similarities to the Ah receptor, we investigated whether ARNT is also required
for vitamin D receptor activity. Two lines of evidence demonstrate that ARNT is
not required for vitamin D receptor activity, and therefore does not correspond
to the vitamin D receptor accessory protein: i) Antibodies to ARNT have no effect
on binding of the vitamin D receptor to the VDRE. ii) c4, a mutant of Hepa-1
cells that is defective in ARNT activity, and in which binding of the Ah receptor
to the XRE does not occur, possesses a vitamin D receptor with full activity for 
binding the VDRE.

PMID: 8254580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1993;110(1-2):53-59.

The role of serotonergic mechanisms in inhibition of isolation-induced aggression
in male mice.

Sánchez C(1), Arnt J, Hyttel J, Moltzen EK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, H. Lundbeck A/S, Valby, Denmark.

The role of serotonergic (5-HT) receptor subtypes in mediation of aggressive
behaviour in isolated male mice has been studied. Increase of attack latency was 
used as a simple measure of antiaggressive behaviour. 5-HT1A agonists (BAY R
1531, 8-OHDPAT, flesinoxan, gepirone, 5MeO DMT, buspirone, ipsapirone, BMY 14802)
completely inhibit the aggressive behaviour irrespective of their intrinsic
activities. Also the putative antagonists spiroxatrine and NAN 190 as well as the
non-selective 5-HT1 agonists RU 24969, TFMPP, mCPP and eltoprazine have an
antiaggressive effect. The mixed 5-HT1A and beta-adrenoceptor antagonists
(-)-alprenolol and pindolol are ineffective and do not inhibit the effect of
8-OHDPAT. Neither does the non-selective 5-HT antagonist metergoline. The
antiaggressive effect correlates with 5-HT1A receptor affinity in vitro and with 
generalization to the 8-OHDPAT-induced discriminative stimulus. The selective
5-HT uptake inhibitor citalopram does not inhibit aggressive behaviour. The 5-HT2
agonist DOI has an antiaggressive effect only at high doses, whereas the 5-HT2
antagonist ritanserin and the 5-HT3 antagonist ondansetron are ineffective.
Prazosin (alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonist), clonidine (alpha 2-adrenoceptor
agonist), clenbuterol (beta-adrenoceptor agonist), ketanserin (5-HT2 receptor and
alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonist), clozapine and (-)-octoclothepin (dopamine (DA),
5-HT2 receptor and alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonist) all show an antiaggressive
effect. SCH 23390 (DA D1 receptor antagonist) and emonapride (DA D2 receptor
antagonist) are ineffective. In conclusion, 5-HT1A receptors are involved in
mediation of isolation-induced aggressive behaviour in mice. The involvement of
other 5-HT receptor subtypes needs further clarification. The adrenergic system
may also be involved.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7870899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Med Chem. 1992 Dec 25;35(26):4823-31.

Selective, centrally acting serotonin 5-HT2 antagonists. 2. Substituted
3-(4-fluorophenyl)-1H-indoles.

Andersen K(1), Perregaard J, Arnt J, Nielsen JB, Begtrup M.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

A series of 3-(4-fluorophenyl)-1H-indoles substituted in the 1-position with
4-piperidinyl, 1,2,3,6-tetrahydro-4-pyridinyl, and 4-piperazinyl was synthesized.
By variation of the substituents in the benzene part of the indole nucleus in
1-[2-[4-[3-4-fluorophenyl)-1H-indol-1-yl]-1-piperidinyl]-ethyl]-2-
imidazolidinones, the highest 5-HT2 receptor affinity and selectivity with
respect to dopamine D2 receptors and alpha 1 adrenoceptors were obtained by
5-methyl substitution. Different substituents were introduced in the 1-position
of the piperidine ring in the 5-methyl-substituted derivative. Thus replacement
of the 2-(2-imidazolidinon-1-yl)ethyl side chain with a
2-(1,3-dimethyl-1-ureido)ethyl or methyl substituent resulted in unchanged
affinity and selectivity for 5-HT2 receptors. Replacement with a
2-[3-(2-propyl)-2-imidazolidinon-1-yl]ethyl side chain reduced binding to alpha 1
adrenoceptors with a factor of four, while affinities for 5-HT2 and D2 receptors 
were retained, compared to the 3-unsubstituted imidazolidinone. Indoles
substituted in the 1-position with 4-piperazinyl had generally weaker affinity
for both 5-HT2 and D2 receptors compared to corresponding 4-piperidinyl- and
1,2,3,6-tetrahydro-4-pyridinyl-substituted indoles. Introduction of a methyl
group in the 2-position of the 5-methyl-substituted indole resulted in further
increase of selectivity for the 5-HT2 receptor. Compounds with potent receptor
binding also potently inhibited the quipazine-induced head twitch syndrome in
rats. The compounds were equally active after oral and subcutaneous
administration and showed a long duration of action (> 24 h). In general, the
derivatives were found to be considerably more potent at 24 h than at 2 h after
the administration. The compounds within this series were prepared as analogues
of the previously described 1-(4-fluorophenyl)-3-(4-piperidyl)-1H-indoles by
interchange of the C-3 carbon atom and the nitrogen atom in the indole nucleus.
The pharmacological results indicate that this isosteric replacement results in
higher selectivity for 5-HT2 receptors compared to the former series. The
1-[2-[4-[2,5-dimethyl-3-(4-fluorophenyl)-1H-indol-1-yl]-1-
piperidinyl]ethyl]-2-imidazolidinone has high affinity for 5-HT2 receptors (IC50 
= 3.4 nM) and extremely low affinity for both dopamine D2 receptors (IC50 = 6900 
nM) and alpha 1 adrenoceptors (IC50 = 2300 nM).

PMID: 1336054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Sep 1;89(17):8185-9.

Cloning of the Ah-receptor cDNA reveals a distinctive ligand-activated
transcription factor.

Burbach KM(1), Poland A, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago,
IL 60611.

A cDNA encoding the murine Ah receptor (Ahb-1 allele for aromatic hydrocarbon
responsiveness) has been isolated and characterized. Analysis of the deduced
protein sequence revealed a region with similarity to the basic
region/helix-loop-helix (BR/HLH) motif found in many transcription factors that
undergo dimerization for function. In addition to the BR/HLH domain, the
N-terminal domain of the Ah receptor has extensive sequence similarity to the
human ARNT (aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator) protein and two
regulatory proteins of Drosophila, Sim and Per. Photoaffinity labeling and
peptide mapping studies indicate that the Ah receptor binds agonist at a domain
that lies within this conserved N-terminal domain. The Ah receptor appears to be 
a ligand-activated transcription factor with a helix-loop-helix motif similar to 
those found in a variety of DNA-binding proteins, including Myc and MyoD.

PMCID: PMC49882
PMID: 1325649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Hum Mol Genet. 1992 Aug;1(5):351.

An MspI RFLP in the human ARNT gene, encoding a subunit of the nuclear form of
the Ah (dioxin) receptor.

Johnson BS(1), Brooks BA, Reyes H, Hoffman EC, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles 90024-1786.

PMID: 1284629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Eur J Pharmacol. 1992 Jul 21;218(1):159-69.

Discriminative stimulus properties of the muscarinic receptor agonists Lu 26-046 
and O-Me-THPO in rats: evidence for involvement of different muscarinic receptor 
subtypes.

Arnt J(1), Lembøl HL, Meier E, Pedersen H.

Author information: 
(1)Research laboratories, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark.

The discriminative cues induced by the muscarinic receptor agonists Lu 26-046
((-)-7-methyl-3(2-propynyloxy)-4,5,6,7-tetrahydroisothiazolo [4,5-c]pyridine )
and O-Me-THPO (3-methoxy-4,5,6,7-tetrahydroisoxazolo[4,5-c]pyridine) were
investigated. The results were compared with those obtained for the binding
profiles of these agonists at central muscarinic receptors and with results
concerning their functional effects at peripheral muscarinic receptors in vitro. 
Lu 26-046 had preferential affinity for M1 versus M2 receptors (Ki index
[3H]quinuclidinyl benzilate ([3H]QNB/[3H]pirenzepine 4.2) and had partial
agonistic activity at M1 and M2 receptors in rat superior cervical ganglion and
guinea pig left atrim, respectively. A weak antagonistic effect at M3 receptors
in guinea pig ileum was observed. O-Me-THPO had non-selective agonistic effects
at peripheral M1, M2 and M3 receptors and had a slight preference for central M2 
receptors in binding experiments (M2/M1 index 0.31). Lu 26-046 dose dependently
substituted for Lu 26-046 and partially substituted for O-Me-THPO in rats trained
to discriminate Lu 26-046 and O-Me-THPO from saline, respectively. The
(+)-enantiomer of Lu 26-046, Lu 26-047, had weak partial M1 agonistic activity
and M2/M3 antagonistic effects at peripheral receptors. Lu 26-047 also had a high
M2/M1 index (9.3) in binding experiments. Lu 26-047 substituted for Lu 26-046,
but preferentially inhibited the effect of O-Me-THPO. Pilocarpine had a
preferential effect in Lu 26-046-trained rats, while oxotremorine and arecoline
had preferential effects in O-Me-THPO-trained rats. Large increases in latency
times or a disruption of responding was generally observed. These compounds were 
full agonists at peripheral M1, M2 and M3 receptors. The muscarinic receptor
antagonist scopolamine antagonized the effect of O-Me-THPO and partially
inhibited the effect of Lu 26-046. Scopolamine partially substituted for Lu
26-046. The quaternary muscarinic receptor agonist N-methyl atropine had no
effect, indicating that the cues are mediated by central muscarinic receptors. It
is suggested that the discriminative cues of Lu 26-046 and O-Me-THPO are
preferentially mediated by central M1 (partial) and M2 receptor stimulation,
respectively. The role of central M3 receptors is not known.

PMID: 1397027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Zhonghua Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1992 Jul;27(4):198-9, 255.

[The nerve fiber projection of trigeminal ganglion cell to dental pulp, dentine
and periodontal membrane in the rat].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang LM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Stomatology, Beijing Medical University.

The nerve fiber projection of the trigeminal ganglion cell to dental pulp,
dentine and periodontal membrane was investigated with the technique of
anterograde radioautographic neuroanatomical tracing (ARNT) in the rat. Results
showed that the innervation in dentine and pulp was not uniform. The nerve
endings were most numerous in the pulp horn, and in the tubular dentine of the
cusp and cervical regions. In the periodontal membrane, both large- and
small-diameter nerve fibers were found. And at least part of the innervation in
the periodontal membrane was of trigeminal ganglion origin.

PMID: 1303826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Science. 1992 May 22;256(5060):1193-5.

Identification of the Ah receptor nuclear translocator protein (Arnt) as a
component of the DNA binding form of the Ah receptor.

Reyes H(1), Reisz-Porszasz S, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, Los Angeles 90024.

The Ah (dioxin) receptor binds a number of widely disseminated environmental
pollutants, including 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons, and mediates their carcinogenic effects. The ligand-bound 
receptor activates Cyp 1a1 gene transcription through interaction with specific
DNA sequences, termed xenobiotic responsive elements (XREs). The Ah receptor
nuclear translocator protein (Arnt) is required for Ah receptor function. Arnt is
now shown to be a structural component of the XRE binding form of the Ah
receptor. Furthermore, Arnt and the ligand-binding subunit of the receptor were
extracted as a complex from the nuclei of cells treated with ligand. Arnt
contains a basic helix-loop-helix motif, which may be responsible for interacting
with both the XRE and the ligand-binding subunit.

PMID: 1317062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1992 Apr 15;184(1):246-53.

cDNA cloning and structure of mouse putative Ah receptor.

Ema M(1), Sogawa K, Watanabe N, Chujoh Y, Matsushita N, Gotoh O, Funae Y,
Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Mouse cDNA clones for a putative Ah receptor have been isolated from a cDNA
library of mRNA from Hepa-1 cells by an oligonucleotide probe produced by PCR
with a pair of primers which was synthesized according to the reported N-terminal
sequence of 26 amino acids. The cDNA clones encode a polypeptide of 805 amino
acids with a helix-loop-helix motif and with some similarity to a certain region 
designated PAS of Drosophila Per and Sim, and human Arnt protein. Cotransfection 
of an expression vector of the Ah receptor with a reporter plasmid pMC6.3k
consisting of CYP1A1 promoter and CAT structural gene into CV-1 cells enhanced
the CAT expression in response to added 3-methylcholanthrene.

PMID: 1314586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Eur J Pharmacol. 1992 Mar 24;213(2):259-67.

Partial and full dopamine D1 receptor agonists in mice and rats: relation between
behavioural effects and stimulation of adenylate cyclase activity in vitro.

Arnt J(1), Hyttel J, Sánchez C.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

The dopamine (DA) D1 agonists, SK&F 83959, SK&F 75670, SK&F 38993, SK&F 81297 and
SK&F 80723, had variable abilities to stimulate adenylate cyclase activity in rat
striatal homogenates. Their efficacies, in relation to the effect of 100 microM
DA were 0, 33, 69, 68 and 81%, respectively. In rats, all compounds induced (1)
contralateral circling behaviour after unilateral 6-hydroxy-DA lesions, (2)
ipsilateral circling behaviour after midbrain hemitransection after cotreatment
with the D2 agonist quinpirole and (3) oral stereotypies after their combination 
with quinpirole. Maximum effects and rank order of potencies were similar in the 
three test models. In mice SK&F 83959, SK&F 75670 and SK&F 38393 inhibited
methylphenidate-induced gnawing behaviour and induced no or only weak
hypermotility. SK&F 81297 induced marked hypermotility which was partially
inhibited by SK&F 83959 and SK&F 75670 and was completely blocked by the D1
antagonist, SCH 23390. It is concluded that no relation could be demonstrated
between the efficacy to stimulate adenylate cyclase and to induce circling
behaviours and stereotypies in rats. In contrast, a relation between biochemical 
and behavioural efficacies was found in the mouse models. The results suggest
that different subtypes of D1 receptors mediate the behavioural effects reported 
in this study.

PMID: 1355737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Med Chem. 1992 Mar 20;35(6):1092-101.

Noncataleptogenic, centrally acting dopamine D-2 and serotonin 5-HT2 antagonists 
within a series of 3-substituted 1-(4-fluorophenyl)-1H-indoles.

Perregaard J(1), Arnt J, Bøgesø KP, Hyttel J, Sánchez C.

Author information: 
(1)Research Department, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

A series of 1-(4-fluorophenyl)-1H-indoles substituted at the 3-position with
1-piperazinyl, 1,2,3,6-tetrahydro-4-pyridinyl, and 4-piperidinyl was synthesized.
Within all three subseries potent dopamine D-2 and serotonin 5-HT2 receptor
affinity was found in ligand binding studies. Quipazine-induced head twitches in 
rats were inhibited by most derivatives as a measure of central 5-HT2 receptor
antagonism. Piperazinyl and tetrahydropyridyl indoles were cataleptogenic, while 
piperidyl substituted indoles surprisingly were found to be noncataleptogenic or 
only weakly cataleptogenic. Noncataleptogenic piperidyl derivatives also failed
to block dopaminergic-mediated stereotypies, that is methyl phenidate-induced
gnawing behavior in mice. These profiles resemble that of the atypical
neuroleptic clozapine. 1-Ethyl-2-imidazolidinone was found to be the optimal
substituent of the basic nitrogen atom in order to avoid catalepsy. The atypical 
neuroleptic 1-[2-[4-[5-chloro-1-(4-fluorophenyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]-1-piperidinyl]
ethyl]-2-imidazolidinone (sertindole, compound 14c) was selected for further
development as a result of these structure/activity studies.

PMID: 1348090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Behav Pharmacol. 1992 Feb;3(1):11-18.

Sertindole and several antipsychotic drugs differentially inhibit the
discriminative stimulus effects of amphetamine, LSD and St 587 in rats.

Arnt J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacological Research, H. Lundbeck A/S, Ottiliavej 9, DK-2500
Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

The effects of sertindole, clozapine, Cis(Z)-flupentixol and haloperidol on the
discriminative stimulus properties of d-amphetamine (dopamine DA stimulant),
d-LSD (5-HT(2) agonist) and St 587 (alpha(1)-adrenoceptor agonist;
2-chloro-5-trifluoromethyl-phenylimino)-imidazolidine) have been studied.
Sertindole, a putative antipsychotic compound with limbic selectivity,
antagonized the effects of d-LSD and St 587, whereas that of d-amphetamine was
unchanged. Clozapine preferentially inhibited St 587, but also antagonized d-LSD 
and d-amphetamine, together with increases in reaction time. Cis(Z)-flupentixol
antagonized d-amphetamine and St 587 effects, whereas haloperidol antagonized
d-amphetamine only. Behavioural disruption was induced by haloperidol in St 587
and d-LSD-trained animals. The 5-HT(2) antagonist ketanserin selectively
inhibited the effect of d-LSD, and the selective alpha(1)-adrenoceptor antagonist
prazosin partially inhibited the effect of St 587, but did not inhibit d-LSD or
d-amphetamine. The partial inhibition of St 587 effects by prazosin was not
further increased by co-treatment with haloperidol. Prazosin partially
substituted for the training dose of St 587. The results indicate that drug
discrimination techniques can be used to demonstrate different activity profiles 
of typical and atypical neuroleptics. The classical neuroleptics have
preferential amphetamine antagonistic activity, whereas clozapine has a broad
activity profile. Furthermore, the atypical neuroleptic sertindole fails to
induce acute DA antagonism in doses much higher than those inhibiting d-LSD and
St 587.

PMID: 11224097  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


249. Eur J Pharmacol. 1992 Jan 28;211(1):9-14.

Effects on body temperature in mice differentiate between dopamine D2 receptor
agonists with high and low efficacies.

Sánchez C(1), Arnt J.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacological Research, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

The effects of different dopamine (DA) D2 receptor agonists and the DA D2
receptor antagonist, emonapride, on body temperature were studied in male mice.
The aim of the study was to test whether DA D2 receptor agonists ranging from
full agonists to agonists with low efficacy could be differentiated by means of
their effect on body temperature. Talipexole induced a marked hypothermia
(maximum decrease of 6.5 degrees C). Apomorphine, quinelorane,
(+)-4-propyl-9-hydroxy-naphtoxazine((+)-PHNO), and (-)-N-n-propylnorapomorphine
((-)-NPA) induced a maximum hypothermia of 3.5-4.1 degrees C. Quinpirole and
(+)-3-(3-hydroxyphenyl)-N-n-propylpiperidine ((+)-3-PPP) induced a less
pronounced hypothermia (1.7 and 1.5 degrees C), and preclamol ((-)-3-PPP),
terguride and 3-(4-(4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridyl)-(1))-butyl)-indole (EMD
23448) had no or only a slight effect. Emonapride induced significant
hyperthermia at high doses. Apomorphine-, quinelorane- and talipexole-induced
hypothermia was reversed by terguride and preclamol, whereas EMD 23448 partially 
reversed the apomorphine-induced hypothermia. The alpha 2-adrenoceptor
antagonist, idazoxan, partly reversed the effect of talipexole. Quinpirole had no
effect on the hypothermic effect of the above-mentioned agonists. Pretreatment
with the catecholamine synthesis inhibitor, alpha-methyl-m-tyrosine, increased
significantly the hypothermic response to quinpirole, whereas the effect of
quinelorane was unchanged. It is suggested that the effect of DA D2 agonists on
body temperature in mice can be used to differentiate between agonists with
different efficacies.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1352251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Clin Neuropharmacol. 1992;15 Suppl 1 Pt A:267A-268A.

Pharmacological profile of the atypical neuroleptic sertindole.

Hyttel J(1), Arnt J, Costall B, Domeney A, Dragsted N, Lembøl HL, Meier E, Naylor
RJ, Nowak G, Sánchez C, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacological Research, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen--Valby, Denmark.

PMID: 1354033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Med Chem. 1991 Jul;34(7):2023-30.

Octoclothepin enantiomers. A reinvestigation of their biochemical and
pharmacological activity in relation to a new receptor-interaction model for
dopamine D-2 receptor antagonists.

Bøgesø KP(1), Liljefors T, Arnt J, Hyttel J, Pedersen H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratories, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

Octoclothepin (1) was resolved into its R and S enantiomers via the
diastereomeric tartaric acid salts. The enantiomers were shown to be of high
optical purity by 1H NMR with use of the chiral shift reagent
(R)-(-)-2,2,2-trifluoro-1-(9-anthryl)ethanol. Pharmacological and biochemical
testing confirmed that (S)-1 is the more potent dopamine (DA) D-2 antagonist both
in vitro and in vivo, although the R enantiomer still has significant D-2
antagonistic activity. In contrast, both enantiomers were equally active in test 
models detecting activity at D-1 receptors, serotonin-2 (5-HT2) receptors and
alpha 1 adrenoceptors. Contrary to a previous prediction, it was found that
norepinephrine (NE) uptake inhibition was confined solely to the S enantiomer.
Overall, (S)-1 has a "classical" neuroleptic profile, while the R enantiomer has 
a more "atypical" profile. These pharmacological profiles seem to be in agreement
with the reported clinical profiles of the two enantiomers. A previous
conformational study was revised in light of the biochemical test results with
enantiomers of known optical purity. Their relative D-2 receptor affinity
corresponded well with the calculated conformational energy difference between
their "active conformations" deduced from a previously reported new D-2 receptor 
model. Also the high enantioselectivity of (S)-1 at the NE uptake site could be
explained after a detailed conformational analysis showing strict requirements
for the orientation of the piperazine lone-pair direction at the NE uptake site.

PMID: 1676758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Science. 1991 May 17;252(5008):954-8.

Cloning of a factor required for activity of the Ah (dioxin) receptor.

Hoffman EC(1), Reyes H, Chu FF, Sander F, Conley LH, Brooks BA, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, Los Angeles 90024.

The aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor binds various environmental pollutants, such
as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, heterocyclic amines, and polychlorinated
aromatic compounds (dioxins, dibenzofurans, and biphenyls), and mediates the
carcinogenic effects of these agents. The complementary DNA and part of the gene 
for an 87-kilodalton human protein that is necessary for Ah receptor function
have been cloned. The protein is not the ligand-binding subunit of the receptor
but is a factor that is required for the ligand-binding subunit to translocate
from the cytosol to the nucleus after binding ligand. The requirement for this
factor distinguishes the Ah receptor from the glucocorticoid receptor, to which
the Ah receptor has been presumed to be similar. Two portions of the
87-kilodalton protein share sequence similarities with two Drosophila proteins,
Per and Sim. Another segment of the protein shows conformity to the consensus
sequence for the basic helix-loop-helix motif found in proteins that bind DNA as 
homodimers or heterodimers.

PMID: 1852076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Sykepleien. 1990 Apr 5;78(6):22-3.

[Namsos on fire. Interview by Arnt O. Asvang].

[Article in Norwegian]

Olsen P.

PMID: 2114163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Eur J Pharmacol. 1990 Feb 6;176(2):135-42.

L-5-HTP facilitates the electrically stimulated flexor reflex in pithed rats:
evidence for 5-HT2-receptor mediation.

Skarsfeldt T(1), Arnt J, Hyttel J.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacological Research, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

Different serotonin (5-HT) receptor agonists were tested on the electrically
stimulated flexor reflex in pithed rats. The 5-HT2 receptor agonist,
(1-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl)-2-aminopropane) [+/-)DOI), the mixed 5-HT1/5-HT2 
receptor agonist, quipazine, and the 5-HT precursor, l-5-HTP, showed agonistic
activity upon intravenous injection while 5-HT was without effect. A combination 
of the peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor, Ro 4-4602 (benzerazide), the specific 
5-HT-uptake inhibitor, citalopram, and l-5-HTP induced a prolonged (greater than 
3 h) increase of the flexor reflex in pithed rats. Different compounds were
tested for an inhibitory effect against this l-5-HTP-induced flexor reflex. The
5-HT2 antagonists (ketanserin, methergoline and methiothepin) were potent
antagonists. (-)Alprenolol (5-HT1A and 5-HT1B receptor antagonist) and the
5-HT3-receptor antagonist, ICS 205-930, were without an antagonistic effect. The 
inhibitory potencies in the reflex model (l-5-HTP, citalopram and Ro 4-4602) were
significantly correlated (r = 0.83, P less than 0.01, r2 = 0.69) with the
potencies to inhibit l-5-HTP-induced head twitches and quipazine-induced head
twitches (r = 0.81, P less than 0.01, r2 = 0.66). There was less correlation (r =
0.75, P less than 0.01, r2 = 0.56) with the affinities for 5-HT2 receptors in
vitro. There was no significant correlation between inhibitory potencies in the
reflex model and affinities for dopamine (DA) D-2 receptors or alpha
1-adrenoceptors (r2 = 0.13 and 0.14, respectively).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS)

PMID: 1968846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Life Sci. 1990;47(15):1339-46.

Effect of a dopamine D-1 agonist in rats treated chronically with zuclopenthixol.

Glenthøj B(1), Arnt J, Hyttel J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.

We have previously demonstrated long-lasting increases in vacuous chewing
movements (VCM) and tongue protrusions in rats treated discontinuously (DISC),
but not continuously (CONT), with neuroleptics. To test whether this increase in 
mouth movements could be a result of exaggerated activity at the D-1 site, 34
rats were divided into three groups receiving the neuroleptic zuclopenthixol (ZU)
DISC or CONT for 15 weeks, or no treatment. After withdrawal DISC treated animals
showed an increase in oral activity compared to CONT treated. Two weeks after
termination of medication the animals were tested with the D-1 agonist SK&F
38393. The increases in VCM after SK&F 38393 did not differ among the groups, but
in contrast to control (CTRL) rats, treated rats showed a significant increase in
tongue protrusions. There were no significant differences in the densities of D-1
and D-2 receptors in the striatum between the groups. The increase in tongue
protrusions after SK&F 38393 in neuroleptic treated animals implies behavioural
D-1 receptor supersensitivity. No significant differences in the rise in tongue
protrusions and VCM after SK&F 38393 were seen between DISC and CONT treated
animals. Our results thus do not indicate that increased D-1 receptor
responsiveness is significant for the rise in spontaneous oral activity found
after neuroleptic withdrawal.

PMID: 2146458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Neural Transm Gen Sect. 1990;80(1):33-50.

Dopamine D-2 agonists with high and low efficacies: differentiation by
behavioural techniques.

Arnt J(1), Hyttel J.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacological Research, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark.

The effects of the dopamine (DA) D-2 antagonist YM 09151-2 and the DA D-2
agonists terguride, preclamol, EMD 23448, B-HT 920, quinpirole and (-)-NPA were
studied in a battery of behavioural tests in order to evaluate their relative
efficacies. Furthermore, their affinities for DA D-2 receptors labelled by
3H-N-0437 were measured in vitro. All agonists reduced spontaneous locomotor
activity and induced marked contralateral circling behaviour in
6-hydroxy-DA-lesioned rats. Quinpirole and (-)-NPA increased motor activity after
high doses. YM 09151-2 did not induce circling. In hemitransected rats quinpirole
and (-)-NPA had weak effects when given alone, whereas the other agonists were
ineffective. After combination with DA D-1 agonist SK&F 38393, B-HT 920 became
effective, and the effects of quinpirole and (-)-NPA were facilitated. EMD 23448,
preclamol and terguride were not active. In contrast, the two latter compounds
fully inhibited the response to apomorphine. In stereotypy experiments a similar 
activity pattern was observed. Finally, drug discrimination studies showed that
quinpirole, (-)-NPA and B-HT 920 substituted for the stimulus effects induced by 
d-amphetamine or (-)-NPA in different groups of rats. EMD 23448 induced
intermediate effects, whereas preclamol and terguride had weak effects. None of
the partial agonists inhibited the response of d-amphetamine. YM 09151-2 potently
inhibited the effect of d-amphetamine. The results suggest that DA D-2 agonists
can be ranked according to gradually increasing agonist efficacies rather than
classified into autoreceptor-selective versus nonselective D-2 agonists.
Implications of this hypothesis are discussed.

PMID: 2137705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Zhonghua Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1989 May;24(3):138-40, 190.

[The innervation of the dentine].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang LM.

The innervation in both human and rat dentine was studied by modified silver
stain and anterograde radioautographic neuroanatomical tracing (ARNT). The
results showed that very fine nerve fibrils were demonstrated in human and rat
dentine. They could be traced in continuity with those in predentine and dental
pulp and extended to the dentine enamel junction. These facts show that the
innervation in dentine does exist, and the nerve fibrils in dentine originate
from dental pulp.

PMID: 2512090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Eur J Pharmacol. 1989 Feb 14;161(1):45-51.

Facilitation of 8-OHDPAT-induced forepaw treading of rats by the 5-HT2 agonist
DOI.

Arnt J(1), Hyttel J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark.

The potency of the serotonin 1A (5-HT1A) agonist,
8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino)tetralin (8-OHDPAT), to induce forepaw treading was
increased 20-fold after co-treatment with the 5-HT2 agonist,
1-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl)-2-aminopropane (DOI). DOI induced head twitches
which were inhibited by 8-OHDPAT. The putative 5-HT1B agonist,
1-(3-trifluoromethylphenyl)piperazine (TFMPP), had a weak effect on the responses
to DOI or 8-OHDPAT. The forepaw treading induced by 8-OHDPAT plus DOI was
inhibited by high doses of (-)-alprenolol, ketanserin or ritanserin, but was not 
influenced by the beta-adrenoceptor antagonist, ICI 118.551, or the 5-HT3
antagonist, ICS 205-930. A non-effective dose of (-)-alprenolol increased the
inhibitory effect of ketanserin and ritanserin. These results indicate a complex 
and different interaction between 5-HT1A and 5-HT2 receptors in the expression of
two behavioural responses mediated by 5-HT.

PMID: 2524390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Pharmacol Toxicol. 1989 Feb;64(2):165-72.

Characterization of the discriminative stimulus properties induced by 5-HT1 and
5-HT2 agonists in rats.

Arnt J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, H. Lundbeck A/S, Valby, Denmark.

The effect of different serotonin (5-HT) agonists and antagonists on the
discriminative stimulus properties (cue) induced by
8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino)-tetralin (8-OHDPAT),
1-(m-trifluoromethylphenyl)piperazine (TFMPP) and d-LSD (d-lysergic acid
diethylamide) has been investigated. The 8-OHDPAT cue was mimicked by the 5-HT1A 
agonists ipsapirone, buspirone, gepirone and partially by
5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine and d-LSD. 5-HT1B (TFMPP and RU 24969) and 5-HT2
agonists (DOM, DOI and quipazine) were ineffective and induced disruption of
responding. The 8-OHDPAT cue was antagonized by spiroxatrine and partially by
(-)-alprenolol, whereas selective antagonists of 5-HT2 (ketanserin and
ritanserin), 5-HT3 (ICS 205-930), alpha 1-adrenergic (prazosin) and
beta-adrenergic receptors (ICI 118.551) were ineffective. The TFMPP cue was
mimicked by RU 24969 and partially by quipazine. Other compounds were
ineffective. Only (-)-alprenolol antagonized the effect of TFMPP. The d-LSD cue
was mimicked by DOM, DOI, quipazine, 5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine and
partially by ipsapirone, TFMPP and RU 24969. The 3 latter compounds and 5-HT1A
agonists induced disruption of responding. The d-LSD cue was antagonized by
ketanserin and ritanserin, but not by the other antagonists mentioned above. The 
specific inhibitor of 5-HT uptake citalopram was not able to substitute for any
of the 3 agonists. It is concluded that the drug discrimination technique can be 
used to identify selective agonists and antagonists of 5-HT receptor subtypes.
Compounds with mixed effects on 5-HT receptor subtypes can also be identified.
These show additional effects on reaction time and often disrupt responding at
higher dosages.

PMID: 2526950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Psychopharmacol Ser. 1989;7:109-22.

Selective dopamine D1 and D2 receptor antagonists.

Hyttel J(1), Arnt J, van den Berghe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark.

PMID: 2574447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Pharmacol Toxicol. 1989 Jan;64(1):116-9.

Selective inactivation of dopamine D1 and D2 receptors in
6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rats: evidence that the effect of D1 and D2 agonists
can be expressed in the absence of the heterologous DA receptor.

Arnt J(1), Hyttel J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, H. Lundbeck A/S, Valby, Denmark.

EEDQ (N-ethoxycarbonyl-2-ethoxy-1,2-dihydroquinoline) markedly decreased the
density of dopamine (DA) D1 and D2 receptors in the lesioned and normal striatae 
of rats lesioned unilaterally with 6-hydroxy-DA. By treatment with either the D1 
antagonist SCH 23390 or the D2 antagonist raclopride, together with EEDQ
selective inactivation of D2 and D1 receptors, respectively, are obtained. In
rats with decreased density of D1 receptors the circling behaviour response to
the D1 agonist SK&F 38393 was markedly inhibited 24 hours after EEDQ treatment,
whereas the similar response to the D2 agonist pergolide was unchanged. In rats
with decreased density of D2 receptors the effects of pergolide and the partial
D2 agonist (-)-3-PPP were antagonized, while the effect of SK&F 38393 was
unchanged. These results indicate that the effect of D1 and D2 agonists can be
expressed in the absence of normal densities of the heterologous DA receptor. In 
contrast, the responses from homologous DA receptors, mediating the circling
behaviour from the denervated side of the brain, are highly sensitive to the
inactivating effect of EEDQ.

PMID: 2526946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Med Chem. 1988 Dec;31(12):2247-56.

Antihypertensive activity in a series of 1-piperazino-3-phenylindans with potent 
5-HT2-antagonistic activity.

Bøgesø KP(1), Arnt J, Boeck V, Christensen AV, Hyttel J, Jensen KG.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratories, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

A series of trans-1-piperazino-3-phenylindans were synthesized with the goal of
replacing their established neuroleptic profile with that of peripheral
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT2) antagonism. Compounds with an unsubstituted or
fluoro-substituted 6-position in the indan ring, and which had a five- or
six-membered heterocyclic ring attached by an ethylene chain to the piperazine
ring, satisfied this objective. Some of the compounds had potent antihypertensive
activity in conscious, spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR). In pithed rats they
antagonized the pressor effect induced by 5-HT in doses 100-1000 times lower than
doses needed to antagonize the pressor effect of phenylephrine. The effect was
stereoselective and associated with enantiomers with 1R,3S absolute
configuration. 1S,3R enantiomers inhibited the uptake of dopamine and
norepinephrine in vitro. The compound with the best antihypertensive activity was
(+)-(1R,3S)-1-[2-[4-[3-(4-fluorophenyl)-1-indanyl]-1-
piperazinyl]ethyl]-2-imidazolidinone (Lu 21-098, irindalone). Its pharmacological
profile resembled that of the standard compound ketanserin. There was a close
structural correspondence between ketanserin and irindalone in a conformation
that we recently identified as a D-2 receptor-relevant configuration of its
neuroleptic "parent" tefludazine. This suggests that the dopaminergic (D-2) and
the serotonergic (5-HT2) pharmacophores are structurally closely related.

PMID: 2903929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Eur J Pharmacol. 1988 Oct 11;155(1-2):37-47.

Inactivation of dopamine D-1 or D-2 receptors differentially inhibits
stereotypies induced by dopamine agonists in rats.

Arnt J(1), Hyttel J, Meier E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, H. Lundbeck A/S, Ottiliavej 7-9, Copenhagen-Valby,
Denmark.

Ex vivo D-1 or D-2 receptor binding in the striatum was reduced by 65-78% after
treatment with EEDQ (N-ethoxycarbonyl-2-ethoxy-1,2-dihydroquinoline) in
combination with either the D-2 antagonist, raclopride, or the D-1 antagonist,
SCH 23390, respectively. EEDQ induced a 65% reduction in D-1 receptor binding and
a 51% decrease in cAMP production in striatal homogenates. Selective D-2 receptor
inactivation inhibited the stereotyped behaviour induced by the mixed D-1/D-2
agonist, apomorphine, or by the D-2 agonist, quinpirole, when given alone and in 
combination with the D-1 agonist, SK&F 38393. Selective inactivation of D-1
receptors did not inhibit the behavioural effects of quinpirole when given alone 
and in combination with the D-1 agonists, SK&F 81297, SK&F 38393 or SK&F 75670.
Likewise, the effect of apomorphine was unchanged. These results indicate that a 
normal density of D-2 receptors is critical for the expression of the stereotyped
behaviour induced by DA agonists. In contrast, there is a large surplus of D-1
receptors to enable the response to a D-2 agonist. This is particularly
illustrated by the persistent behavioural effects of the partial D-1 agonist,
SK&F 75670, in rats with up to a 78% decrease in D-1 receptor binding.

PMID: 2907491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Eur J Pharmacol. 1988 Aug 24;153(2-3):309-11.

EEDQ, a tool for ex vivo measurement of occupancy of D-1 and D-2 dopamine
receptors.

Nowak G(1), Arnt J, Hyttel J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

EEDQ (N-ethoxycarbonyl-2-ethoxy-1,2-dihydroquinoline) inactivates dopamine (DA)
D-1 and D-2 receptors, measured by ex vivo [3H]SCH 23390 and [3H]spiperone
binding in striatal homogenates. SCH 23390 (D-1 antagonist) and SK&F 38393 (D-1
agonist) protect against inactivation of D-1 receptors (ED50 values 0.075 and 53 
mumol/kg, respectively). Raclopride (D-2 antagonist) and quinpirole (D-2 agonist)
protect against inactivation of D-2 receptors (ED50 values 0.48 and 7.1 mumol/kg,
respectively). The potencies correspond closely to those obtained by in vivo
binding experiments using radioligands.

PMID: 3053212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Pharmacol Toxicol. 1988 Mar;62(3):121-30.

Relative dopamine D1 and D2 receptor affinity and efficacy determine whether
dopamine agonists induce hyperactivity or oral stereotypy in rats.

Arnt J(1), Bøgesø KP, Hyttel J, Meier E.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratories, H. Lundbeck A/S, Valby, Denmark.

The effects of a range of dopamine (DA) agonists on stereotyped behaviour in rats
were analysed and compared both with the affinity of the compounds for D1 and D2 
receptor binding sites in vitro and their ability to stimulate the adenylate
cyclase activity in rat striatal homogenates. Full and partial agonists at the D1
receptor coupled to adenylate cyclase do not induce sterotypies when given alone,
whereas full D2 agonists (e.g. quinpirole) induce hyperactivity but not oral
sterotypies. Partial D2 agonists (e.g. (-)-3-PPP) only induce sedation. Mixed
D1/D2 agonists (e.g. apomorphine) induce both hyperactivity and oral
stereotypies. Maximum stereotypies were induced by combination of SK & F 38393
and a series of D2 agonists, including full agonists and the partial D2 agonist
B-HT 920, whereas partial agonists with low intrinsic activity (e.g. (-)-3-PPP,
EMD 23448) did not induce stereotypies when given together with SK & F 38393.
However, these partial agonists reduced the maximum effect of apomorphine,
whereas the full agonists (e.g. quinpirole, (-)-NPA) and B-HT 920 had no
apomorphine antagonistic activity. The mixed D1/D2 agonists apomorphine and
N,N-dipropyl-5,6-ADTN were only weakly influenced by SK & F 38393, or not at all.
D1 agonists with central effects, including SK & F 38393, SK & F 81297 (with
relatively high efficacies), and the partial agonist SK & F 75670 with low
efficacy, changed the hyperactivity induced by quinpirole into maximum oral
stereotypy, whereas the peripheral D1 agonist fenoldopam had no such effect.
Inhibition of DA and NA synthesis with alpha-methyl-p-tyrosine depleted striatal 
DA levels by 72 per cent and antagonized the hyperactivity induced by the D2
agonists quinpirole and (-)-NPA, but not that of apomorphine. Combination of SK &
F 38393 and quinpirole induced maximum stereotypy in DA-depleted animals. These
results suggest that D1 receptor tonus is a necessary prerequisite for the
expression of a DA agonist's effect. The hyperactivity induced by full D2
agonists appears to be mediated by D1 tonus provided by endogenous DA activity,
but stronger D1 stimulation is necessary to induce oral stereotypy. A high degree
of D1 receptor activation increases the ability of partial D2 agonists to induce 
hyperactivity or oral stereotypies since treatment with both SK & F 38393 and
B-HT 920 had marked effects while B-HT 920 was ineffective.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT
400 WORDS)

PMID: 3259694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Pharmacopsychiatry. 1988 Jan;21(1):24-7.

Behavioral differentiation between effects elicited at dopamine D-1 and D-2
receptors in rats with normosensitive DA receptors.

Arnt J(1), Hyttel J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen-Valby, Denmark.

The interaction between D-1 and D-2 receptor agonists was investigated in three
behavioral test models. In two models (circling behavior in rats with
hemitransection; stereotyped behavior in naive rats) an enabling role of D-1
receptor agonists in expressing the effect of D-2 agonists was found: D-1
agonists alone were ineffective, D-2 agonists had low maximum effects, whereas
the combination induced marked activity. Consistent with this, the effect of
combined D-1/D-2 receptor stimulation was antagonized either by D-1 or D-2
antagonists. In contrast, the effect of D-1 and D-2 agonists and antagonists were
differentiated in drug discrimination studies, using the cue induced by the D-1
agonist SK & F 38393 or by the D-2 agonist (-)-NPA versus saline. The results
thus indicate a functional relevance of D-1 receptors and show that the coupling 
between D-1 and D-2 receptors critically depends on the specific behavior under
study.

PMID: 2966410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Life Sci. 1988;42(5):565-74.

The discriminative stimulus properties of the D-1 agonist SK&F 38393 and the D-2 
agonist (-)-NPA are mediated by separate mechanisms.

Arnt J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, H. Lundbeck A/S, Valby, Denmark.

The dopamine D-1 agonist SK&F 38393 (10 mg/kg) the D-2 agonist (-)-NPA (0.04
mg/kg) and d-amphetamine (1.0 mg/kg) were established as discriminative stimuli
versus saline in rats. The stimulus induced by SK&F 38393 was stereoselective,
since the R-(+)-, but not the S-(-)-enantiomer was effective. It was mimicked by 
two partial D-1 agonists with central effects, SK&F 75670 and Lu 24-040, but not 
by the peripheral agonist fenoldopam. D-2 agonists and d-amphetamine were
ineffective. The effect of SK&F 38393 was antagonized by SCH 23390, but not by
its inactive enantiomer SCH 23388 or by the D-2 antagonist YM 09151-2. The
(-)-NPA stimulus was dependent on postsynaptic D-2 receptors: It was mimicked by 
quinpirole and pergolide in stimulant dosages, whereas the partial D-2 agonist
(-)-3-PPP inhibited the effect of (-)-NPA. The dopamine synthesis inhibitor
alpha-methyl-p-tyrosine did not antagonize the effect of (-)-NPA. Likewise, the
above-mentioned D-1 agonists produced saline responding. D-amphetamine produced
partial substitution to (-)-NPA. The (-)-NPA stimulus was blocked by YM 09151-2, 
but not by SCH 23390. In d-amphetamine-trained rats, quinpirole, (-)-NPA and
pergolide produced generalization, whereas SK&F 38393 was ineffective. Both SCH
23390 and YM 09151-2 antagonized the effect of d-amphetamine. It is concluded
that the cues induced by SK&F 38393 and (-)-NPA are mediated by separate D-1 and 
D-2 sites, whereas both sites contribute to the effect of d-amphetamine.

PMID: 2963185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Eur J Pharmacol. 1987 Nov 3;143(1):45-53.

Synergistic interaction between dopamine D-1 and D-2 receptor agonists: circling 
behaviour of rats with hemitransection.

Arnt J(1), Perregaard J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, H. Lundbeck A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Circling behaviour induced by dopamine (DA) agonists with different D-1/D-2
receptor selectivity was studied in rats with hemitransection at a level caudal
to the striatum. The mixed D-1/D-2 agonist apomorphine induced ipsilateral
circling behaviour after administration of doses similar to those that induced
stereotyped behaviour in unlesioned rats. The effect of apomorphine was not
influenced by co-treatment with SK & F 38393 or quinpirole, indicating that
apomorphine induces a comparable D-1 and D-2 receptor stimulation in vivo also.
Three selective D-1 agonists, SK & F 38393, SK & F 75670 and Lu 24-040 had no
effects alone, while the preferential D-2 agonists quinpirole, pergolide and
(-)-N-propylnorapomorphine induced ipsilateral circling of weaker intensity than 
did apomorphine. After co-treatment with SK & F 38393 the effects of these
compounds were markedly increased. Combination of SK & F 38393, SK & F 75670 or
Lu 24-040 with quinpirole induced circling with intensities similar to those seen
after apomorphine. Pretreatment with the D-1 antagonist SCH 23390 or the D-2
antagonist YM 09151-2 completely antagonized the ipsilateral circling induced by 
either apomorphine or quinpirole + SK & F 38393. A range of partial
(autoreceptor) D-2 agonists, i.e. (-)-3-PPP, (+)-3-phenethyl-PP, terguride, EMD
23448 and B-HT 920 were all ineffective as was the alpha 2-adrenoceptor agonist
clonidine. However, B-HT 920 induced strong ipsilateral circling after
combination with SK & F 38393, whereas (-)-3-PPP was ineffective.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 3500865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Eur J Pharmacol. 1987 Jan 13;133(2):137-45.

Dopamine D-1 receptor agonists combined with the selective D-2 agonist quinpirole
facilitate the expression of oral stereotyped behaviour in rats.

Arnt J, Hyttel J, Perregaard J.

The behaviour of rats was studied after combined treatment with the selective DA 
D-2 agonist quinpirole and three selective D-1 agonists (SK & F 38393, SK & F
75670 and Lu 24-040). The effects on behaviour were compared with those on
receptor binding and adenylate cyclase (AC). While the D-1 agonists alone did not
induce stereotyped behaviour, quinpirole induced dose-dependent hyperactivity
(locomotion, sniffing, head movements and rearing), whereas licking/biting was
absent or seen only occasionally. Combined treatment with quinpirole and a D-1
agonist was followed by dose-dependent licking and occasional biting behaviour.
The D-1 agonists had similar efficacies, but SK & F 75670 and Lu 24-040 were more
potent than SK & F 38393. The maximal effects of SK & F 38393 plus quinpirole
were effectively blocked by either a D-1 antagonist (SCH 23390) or a D-2
antagonist (YM 09151-2) confirming the close relation between D-1 and D-2
receptor sites in the brain. Good correspondence was found between affinities to 
D-1 receptors [( 3H]SCH 23390 binding) in vitro and the EC50 values for
stimulation of AC activity. However, the maximal effects on DA-sensitive AC
activity were less for SK & F 75670 and Lu 24-040 than for SK & F 38393. Thus,
the results indicate that efficacies in the adenylate cyclase assay are
dissociated from those on behaviour. Furthermore, the data indicate that in
normal rats D-1 receptors are functionally relevant since D-1 agonists facilitate
the expression of oral stereotyped behaviour after combination with a D-2
agonist.

PMID: 2949991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Med Chem. 1987 Jan;30(1):142-50.

Indolizidine and quinolizidine derivatives of the dopamine autoreceptor agonist
3-(3-hydroxyphenyl)-N-n-propylpiperidine (3-PPP).

Bøgesø KP, Arnt J, Lundmark M, Sundell S.

Eight indolizidine and quinolizidine derivatives of 3-PPP were synthesized and
tested for possible dopamine (DA) autoreceptor activity. The equatorial
indolizidine derivative 19e had the profile of a selective autoreceptor agonist
and was half as active as 3-PPP. However, resolution of the compound revealed
that the 8R enantiomer was an unselective DA agonist with a profile similar to
(+)-3-PPP, while the 8S enantiomer was a weak DA antagonist without any DA
agonist activity. The unsaturated quinolizidine derivative 21 also had the
profile of a DA antagonist while the axial quinolizidine derivative 18a had an
amphetamine-like profile in 6-OHDA-lesioned rats. All other derivatives were
inactive. The observed structure-activity relationships were in agreement with
existing DA receptor models, although these models are not apparently detailed
enough to explain why the 8S enantiomer of 19e is inactive as a DA agonist.

PMID: 3806591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Neural Transm. 1987;68(3-4):171-89.

Characterization of binding of 3H-SCH 23390 to dopamine D-1 receptors.
Correlation to other D-1 and D-2 measures and effect of selective lesions.

Hyttel J, Arnt J.

The binding of 3H-SCH 23390 to membranes from rat and mouse brain tissue has been
investigated. The binding was saturable and reached equilibrium after 60 minutes.
Nonspecific binding was low. Association and dissociation rates were
Mg++-sensitive. In almost all respects the binding of 3H-SCH 23390 was comparable
to the binding of 3H-piflutixol and 3H-cis(Z)-flupentixol. The density of binding
sites in striatum was greater than in limbic structures which in turn was greater
than in frontal cortex. The density of binding sites in these structures were
comparable with those of 3H-piflutixol and 3H-cis(Z)-flupenthixol, 2-3 times
higher than the D-2-receptor density. Whereas an increase was seen in 3H-SCH
23390 binding. The binding was decreased approximately 72% 3 weeks after
unilateral kainic acid lesion whereas that of 3H-spiperone was only decreased
56%. Finally, the affinities of neuroleptics to the 3H-SCH 23390-binding sites
correlated to the affinities to 3H-piflutixol-binding sites and to the effects on
DA-sensitive adenylate cyclase. Agonist competition curves were shallow and the
data best fit a two-site model composed of a high and a low affinity component.
Thus, 3H-SCH 23390 is regarded as a highly selective ligand for brain dopamine
D-1 receptors in vitro.

PMID: 2881976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol (Copenh). 1986 Oct;59(4):319-24.

Further studies of the mechanism behind scopolamine-induced reversal of
antistereotypic and cataleptogenic effects of neuroleptics in rats.

Arnt J, Hyttel J, Bach-Lauritsen T.

Scopolamine is known to attenuate the amphetamine antagonistic and cataleptogenic
effect of selective DA D-2 antagonists. To study further the influence of other
receptor systems three approaches were taken: concomitant treatment with receptor
blockers (scopolamine, prazosin and ketanserin) and a selective D-2 antagonist YM
09151-2, testing of a neuroleptic droperidol, with mixed D-2, alpha 1 and 5-HT2
antagonistic properties and testing a selective D-1 antagonist SCH 23390.
Scopolamine markedly attenuated both effects of YM 09151-2 and droperidol. In
contrast neither prazosin nor ketanserin influenced the effects of YM 09151-2.
Furthermore, prazosin did not influence the interaction between scopolamine and
YM 09151-2 in the tests of stereotypy and catalepsy. Scopolamine did not change
the amphetamine antagonistic potency of SCH 23390, but decreased moderately its
cataleptogenic potency. It is concluded that 5-HT2 and alpha 1-adrenergic
receptor blockade are of minor importance in order to determine the sensitivity
of a DA D-2 antagonist to the reversal induced by scopolamine. Thus, our earlier 
hypothesis, that DA D-1 receptor blockade is the main mechanism stabilizing these
neuroleptic effects against scopolamine reversal, are further supported by the
present experiments.

PMID: 2879412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Clin Neuropharmacol. 1986;9 Suppl 4:17-9.

Behavioural differentiation between effects elicited at dopamine D-1 and D-2
receptors in rats.

Arnt J, Hyttel J.

PMID: 2952268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Neural Transm. 1986;67(3-4):225-40.

Inhibition of SKF 38393- and pergolide-induced circling in rats with unilateral
6-OHDA lesion is correlated to dopamine D-1 and D-2 receptor affinities in vitro.

Arnt J, Hyttel J.

The effects of 30 dopamine (DA) antagonists, including 4 as stereoisomeric pairs,
on circling behaviour induced by the D-1 agonist SKF 38393 and the D-2 agonist
pergolide in rats with unilateral 6-hydroxy-DA lesions have been studied. SKF
38393-induced circling was selectively blocked by the specific D-1 antagonists
SCH 23390 and SKF 83566, and was furthermore blocked by other DA antagonists with
potencies correlating to their affinities to D-1 receptors labelled by 3H-SCH
23390 in vitro. Pergolide-antagonistic potencies in contrast correlated to
affinities to D-2 receptors labelled by 3H-spiperone in vitro. Pergolide-induced 
circling was selectively blocked by the specific D-2 antagonists in the benzamide
series. No interaction between D-1 and D-2 antagonists was observed in
combination experiments with SCH 23390 and YM 09151-2 in both circling models.
Among other reference neurotransmitter antagonists acting on alpha- and
beta-adrenoceptors, histamine, serotonin and muscarinic receptors, only the alpha
1-adrenoceptor antagonist prazosin was effective in high doses. In contrast, the 
alpha 2- and beta-adrenoceptor agonists clonidine and clenbuterol as well as the 
muscarinic agonist RS 86 inhibited circling induced by SKF 38393 as well as
pergolide. The 5-HT1A agonist 8-OHDPAT inhibited pergolide-induced circling only.
It is concluded that these two behavioural models are selective in vivo measures 
of relative D-1 and D-2 receptor activity of DA antagonists.

PMID: 2949056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1986;204:15-28.

Characterization of dopamine D-1 and D-2 receptors.

Hyttel J, Arnt J.

PMID: 2878578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol (Copenh). 1985 Nov;57(5):345-51.

Reduction in locomotor activity of arthritic rats as parameter for chronic pain: 
effect of morphine, acetylsalicylic acid and citalopram.

Larsen JJ, Arnt J.

Arthritis was induced in rats by plantar injection of a suspension of killed
mycobacteria in Viscoleo. Non-treated rats served as controls. The locomotor
activities of the rats were measured weekly during the following four weeks. The 
exploratory activity was determined in the daytime in activity cages and
spontaneous locomotor activity was measured during the night in the same cages.
From one week to four weeks after treatment in one hind paw the arthritic rats
showed significantly lower exploratory activity than the control rats, whereas
the spontaneous locomotor activity in the arthritic rats was not significantly
reduced. After treatment in two hind paws both activities were significantly
smaller in the arthritic group than in the control group. The low exploratory
activity level of the arthritic rats was not changed by acetylsalicylic acid but 
was significantly increased by morphine and citalopram in doses which did not
influence the exploratory activity of the control rats. The results suggest that 
reduction of the locomotor activity of arthritic rats might be a reliable
parameter for chronic pain.

PMID: 3867235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Life Sci. 1985 Aug 26;37(8):717-23.

Hyperactivity induced by stimulation of separate dopamine D-1 and D-2 receptors
in rats with bilateral 6-OHDA lesions.

Arnt J.

The effects of DA agonists and antagonists with different dopamine (DA) D-1 and
D-2 receptor selectivity have been studied in rats with bilateral 6-OHDA lesions.
The D-1 agonist SK & F 38393, the D-2 agonist pergolide and the mixed agonist
apomorphine all induced marked hyperactivity in lesioned rats in doses which were
without stimulant effect in sham-operated animals. The hyperactivity induced by
SK & F 38393 was blocked by the DA D-1 antagonist SCH 23390, but unaffected by
the D-2 antagonists spiroperidol or clebopride. Pergolide-induced hyperactivity
showed the reverse selectivity. The mixed D-1/D-2 antagonists, cis(Z)-flupentixol
and cis(Z)-clopenthixol, however blocked the effect of both agonists.
Apomorphine-induced hyperactivity was neither blocked by selective D-1 nor D-2
antagonists, but was dose-dependently inhibited by cis(Z)-flupentixol and
cis(Z)-clopenthixol. Potent blockade was also obtained by combined treatment with
SCH 23390 and spiroperidol, indicating the need of blocking both D-1 and D-2
receptors simultaneously. The results indicate that D-1 and D-2 receptor function
can be independently manipulated in denervated rats and they confirm similar
results obtained in rats with unilateral 6-OHDA lesions using circling behaviour.

PMID: 3927097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1985 Aug;330(2):97-104.

Antistereotypic effects of dopamine D-1 and D-2 antagonists after intrastriatal
injection in rats. Pharmacological and regional specificity.

Arnt J.

Apomorphine antagonistic effects of a range of dopamine (DA) antagonists were
studied after intracerebral and after peripheral injection. Inhibitory activity
was found selectively within the ventral striatum with a D-1 antagonist (SCH
23390), D-2 antagonists (benzamides, butyrophenones) and mixed D-1/D-2
antagonists (thioxanthenes, phenothiazines), whereas alpha-adrenoceptor
antagonists, muscarinic- and serotonin S2-antagonists were ineffective. Great
differences in absolute potencies and in peripheral versus intrastriatal potency 
ratios were observed. High peripheral versus central selectivity ratios and high 
intrastriatal potencies were found with the hydrophilic compounds (-)-sulpiride, 
veralipride and domperidone which do not readily cross the blood-brain barrier.
High intrastriatal potency was also observed for the benzamide, YM 09151-2,
haloperidol and spiroperidol although these compounds had lower peripheral versus
intrastriatal selectivity ratios. Neuroleptic potency after intracerebral
administration did not depend solely on DA receptor affinity but additionally on 
physicochemical properties. On the basis of the peripheral vs. intrastriatal
potency ratios, it is concluded that only few of the neuroleptics tested in this 
study are suited for topographical studies of DA receptor function using
intracerebral injection but that (-)-sulpiride is one example combining high
potency, high central selectivity, high DA D-2 receptor specificity,
stereoselectivity and long duration of action. The site-selectivity of
apomorphine-antagonistic effects was further studied using (-)-sulpiride as a
model compound. Inhibitory activity against oral stereotypy was preferentially
found after injection into the ventral striatum, whereas the low-component
patterns of apomorphine stereotypy (sniffing, rearing, motility) were blocked
equally well in the ventral striatum and nucleus accumbens.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT
250 WORDS)

PMID: 2864641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Eur J Pharmacol. 1985 Jul 11;113(1):79-88.

Behavioural stimulation is induced by separate dopamine D-1 and D-2 receptor
sites in reserpine-pretreated but not in normal rats.

Arnt J.

The dopamine (DA) D-1 agonist SK&F 38393 as well as the D-2 agonist pergolide and
the mixed D-1/D-2 agonist apomorphine induced strong hypermotility and oral
stereotypy in rats pretreated with a daily dose of reserpine for 2 and in
particular for 4 days (3 and 5 injections, respectively). SK&F 38393 had no
behavioural stimulant effect in saline-pretreated rats, whereas pergolide and
apomorphine produced stimulation, although only after higher doses. Agonists at
5-HT and muscarinic receptors and at alpha 1-adrenoceptors were ineffective in
reserpine-pretreated rats whereas the alpha 2-adrenoceptor agonist, clonidine,
and the muscarinic antagonist, scopolamine, produced weak locomotor stimulation. 
The hypermotility induced by SK&F 38393 in reserpinized rats was blocked by
pretreatment with the DA D-1 antagonists, SCH 23390 and SK&F 83566c, whereas the 
DA D-2 antagonists, YM 09151-2, clebopride and spiroperidol were weak or
ineffective. In contrast pergolide-induced hypermotility was blocked by low doses
of the D-2 antagonists but was weakly or not influenced by the D-1 antagonists.
Selectivity ratios between drug potencies in the two models ranged from 65 to
more than 600. The mixed D-1/D-2 antagonists, cis(Z)-flupentixol and
cis(Z)-clopenthixol, blocked the effect of both SK&F 38393 and pergolide. The
alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonist, prazosin, and the 5-HT2 receptor antagonist,
ketanserin, did not modify the effect of SK&F 38393 or pergolide. Stereotyped
behaviour induced by a high pergolide dose in normal rats was, in contrast to the
effect in reserpinized rats, blocked by low doses of either SCH 23390 or
spiroperidol. Finally, the hypermotility induced by apomorphine in reserpinized
rats was markedly antagonized by both SCH 23390 and spiroperidol. The results
suggest a close relation between D-1 and D-2 receptor sites in normal rats. After
prolonged reserpine treatment, the D-1 agonist acquires full DA agonist efficacy.
Furthermore, behavioural stimulation under these conditions is mediated by two
separate D-1 and D-2 receptor sites which can be manipulated independently by
antagonists. The mechanism by which this phenomenon occurs is unknown but the
adaptational changes show close similarities to those observed after
6-hydroxyDA-induced denervation.

PMID: 2931283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1985 Apr;329(2):101-7.

Pharmacology in vivo of the phenylindan derivative, Lu 19-005, a new potent
inhibitor of dopamine, noradrenaline and 5-hydroxytryptamine uptake in rat brain.

Arnt J, Christensen AV, Hyttel J.

Behavioural effects on dopaminergic transmission of a phenylindane derivative, Lu
19-005 [(+/-)-trans-3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-N-methyl-l-indanamine, HCI], with
potent inhibitory effect on dopamine (DA), noradrenaline (NA) and serotonin
(5-HT) uptake in rats and the effect on DA, NA and 5-HT activity in mice have
been studied and compared with those of other known DA, NA and 5-HT uptake
inhibitors with different selectivity ratios. Lu 19-005 induced stereotyped
behaviour after parenteral and oral administration with a duration of action of
more than 24 h. The stereotyped licking and biting induced by Lu 19-005 was
antagonized by reserpine and cis(Z)-flupentixol, but not affected by prazosin,
p-chlorophenylalanine and alpha-methyl-p-tyrosine pretreatments. Metergoline
slightly facilitated the onset of stereotypy. Lower doses of Lu 19-005 induced
ipsilateral circling in unilaterally 6-hydroxy-DA-lesioned rats. Finally, Lu
19-005 antagonized the catalepsy induced by perphenazine. In mice, Lu 19-005
potentiated the apomorphine-induced gnawing, reversed tetrabenazine-induced
ptosis and potentiated the behavioural effects of 5-HTP within a similar dose
range. The effects of Lu 19-005 were compared with those of other reference
compounds. Nomifensine had qualitatively similar effects in rats although of much
shorter duration. In mice, nomifensine selectively reversed tetrabenazine-induced
ptosis. Weaker effects in all test models were found with bupropion, LR 5182 and 
GBR 13.069, compounds with inhibitory effect on DA and NA uptake. The DA-, NA-
and 5-HT-uptake inhibitor diclofensine, however, had no effect in rats except in 
the 6-hydroxy-DA-circling test and had low potency in mice. The specific 5-HT-
and NA-uptake inhibitors citalopram and talsupram, respectively, were ineffective
in all rat models.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2409454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Psychopharmacology Suppl. 1985;2:60-1.

Differential effects of dopamine D-1 and D-2 agonists and antagonists in
6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rats.

Arnt J.

PMID: 3159011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Psychopharmacology Suppl. 1985;2:46-57.

New aspects on the role of dopamine, acetylcholine, and GABA in the development
of tardive dyskinesia.

Scheel-Krüger J, Arnt J.

In this paper various new findings on the possible anatomical substrates of
tardive dyskinesia will be presented. The results show that the striatum is
heterogeneously organized, and the syndromes of biting, gnawing, and licking
activities in the rat model involve a complex balance between various dopamine
(DA), cholinergic, and GABAergic systems within the striatum and the mesolimbic
and mesocortical systems.

PMID: 2987907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1985;85(3):346-52.

Differential involvement of dopamine D-1 and D-2 receptors in the circling
behaviour induced by apomorphine, SK & F 38393, pergolide and LY 171555 in
6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rats.

Arnt J, Hyttel J.

The antagonistic effect of dopamine (DA) D-1 and D-2 antagonists against circling
behaviour induced by various DA agonists in 6-OHDA-lesioned rats has been
investigated. DA D-1/D-2 selectivity of agonists in vitro was measured by the
stimulatory effect on DA-sensitive adenylate cyclase in rat striatal homogenates 
(D-1), the inhibitory effect on electrically-induced release of 3H-DA in rabbit
striatal slices (D-2) and the affinity to 3H-piflutixol (D-1) and 3H-spiroperidol
(D-2) binding sites in rat striatal membranes. The contralateral circling
behaviour induced by the DA D-1 agonist SK & F 38393 was blocked by the DA D-1
antagonist, SCH 23390, and by the mixed DA D-1/D-2 antagonist cis(Z)-flupentixol,
but was not influenced by the DA D-2 antagonists spiroperidol and clebopride. In 
contrast, circling behaviour induced by the preferential DA D-2 agonists
pergolide and LY 171555 was blocked by clebopride, spiroperidol, and
cis(Z)-flupentixol, but weakly or not influenced by SCH 23390.
Apomorphine-induced circling behaviour was blocked by cis(Z)-flupentixol,
partially antagonized by SCH 23390 and clebopride but not inhibited by
spiroperidol, although the time-course of circling was changed. Combinations of
SCH 23390 with spiroperidol or clebopride in low doses completely blocked the
effect of apomorphine. These results indicate that DA D-1 and D-2 receptors
mediate circling behaviour through separate mechanisms which can be independently
manipulated with respective agonists and antagonists.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS)

PMID: 2860689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Psychopharmacology Suppl. 1985;2:9-18.

Receptor-binding profiles of neuroleptics.

Hyttel J, Larsen JJ, Christensen AV, Arnt J.

Dopamine-receptor blockade seems to be a prominent effect of neuroleptics.
Blockade of other receptors might, however, contribute to the therapeutic effect.
A series of neuroleptics have been tested for affinity to DA D-1 and D-2
receptors, serotonin receptors (S2), alpha-adrenoceptors (alpha 1), histamine
receptors (H1), and muscarinic cholinergic receptors. According to the affinity
to DA D-1 and D-2 receptors, neuroleptics can be divided into different groups.
Thioxanthenes have affinity for both D-1 and D-2 receptors; phenothiazines have
affinity for D-2 receptors and considerably lower affinity for D-1 receptors; and
butyrophenones, diphenylbutylpiperidines, and benzamides have affinity only for
D-2 receptors. Concerning affinity to other receptors the only consistent finding
is affinity for S2 receptors. The clinical significance of these findings is
speculative. In several behavioral tests the D-1/D-2 classification is also
observed, and it is suggested that D-1-receptor activation is responsible for
dyskinesia, and that thioxanthenes - due to their D-1 receptor blocking
effect-induce less dyskinesia than other neuroleptics.

PMID: 2860665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Psychopharmacology Suppl. 1985;2:182-90.

Pharmacological differentiation of dopamine D-1 and D-2 antagonists after single 
and repeated administration.

Christensen AV, Arnt J, Svendsen O.

In single-dose experiments neuroleptics antagonize dopamine (DA)-agonist-induced 
stereotypies in animals. The antagonistic potency correlates with their clinical 
antipsychotic effects. In a series of experiments where DA-agonist-induced
stereotyped gnawing in mice and rats was inhibited by neuroleptics it was shown
that the antagonistic effect of butyrophenones was greatly attenuated by
concomitant treatment with anticholinergics. The effect of phenothiazines was
slightly attenuated and that of thioxanthenes and SCH 23390 remained unchanged.
After repeated administration a differentiation is also seen in the ability of
the antagonists to suppress DA-agonist-induced stereotypies. The differentiation 
in these experiments is similar to that seen in dopamine D-1 and D-2 receptor
binding. The compounds can be classified into three pharmacological subgroups:
butyrophenones (e.g., haloperidol) with affinity for D-2 receptors;
phenothiazines (e.g., fluphenazine and perphenazine) with affinity for both D-2
and D-1 receptors but with preference for the D-2 receptors; and thioxanthenes
(e.g., cis(Z)-flupentixol and cis(Z)-clopenthixol) with equal affinity for D-1
and D-2 receptors, and the selective D-1 antagonist SCH 23390. This compound has 
the same antistereotypic effect as is seen with the neuroleptics. We have also
investigated the effect of the above-mentioned neuroleptics and SCH 23390 after
12 days' treatment and 3-5 days withdrawal. They were given either alone or in
combination. When they were given alone a clear differentiation was seen between 
the groups when mice were tested for methylphenidate antagonism. The
thioxanthenes and SCH 23390 retain their ability to antagonize the stereotyped
gnawing; the phenothiazines show a reduced effect; and the butyrophenones have
almost lost their ability to antagonize the stereotyped behavior.

PMID: 2860659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Neural Transm. 1985;64(3-4):227-38.

Down-regulation of dopamine D-2, 5-HT2 receptors and beta-adrenoceptors in rat
brain after prolonged treatment with a new potential antidepressant, Lu 19-005.

Nowak G, Arnt J, Hyttel J, Svendsen O.

Lu 19-005 is a new phenylindan derivative with strong and equipotent inhibitory
effect on dopamine (DA), noradrenaline (NA) and serotonin (5-HT) uptake. The
adaptive effects of 2 weeks treatment with Lu 19-005, on receptor binding in
vitro and on d-amphetamine responsiveness in vivo have been investigated in rats.
One or 3 days after the final dose the number of beta-adrenoceptors and of 5-HT2 
and DA D-2 receptors was decreased by 20-30%, whereas alpha 1-adrenoceptor number
was slightly decreased only 1 day after withdrawal. The DA D-2 receptor number
remained decreased at 7 days withdrawal, but returned to normal after another 3
days. The brain levels of DA, NA and 5-HT were not changed by 2 weeks' Lu 19-005 
treatment. The down-regulation of DA D-2 receptors was accompanied by tolerance
to d-amphetamine-induced hypermotility (after low doses) and stereotyped licking 
or biting (after a high dose). The tolerance to d-amphetamine-induced
hypermotility was maximal at 3-5 days withdrawal time, and remained significant
also 15 days after the last dose. An acute dose of Lu 19-005 did not modify the
effects of d-amphetamine. The results are discussed in relation to the effect of 
prolonged treatment with other antidepressant drugs.

PMID: 2418155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol (Copenh). 1984 Nov;55(5):363-72.

The citalopram/5-HTP-induced head shake syndrome is correlated to 5-HT2 receptor 
affinity and also influenced by other transmitters.

Arnt J, Hyttel J, Larsen JJ.

Combination of the 5-HT-uptake inhibitor, citalopram, with 1-5-HTP induced a
characteristic head shake syndrome in rats. This was blocked by a range of 5-HT
antagonists, including the selective 5-HT2 antagonists, ketanserin and
pirenperone and was also blocked by the alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonists,
prazosin and WB 4101, and the alpha 2-adrenoceptor agonist, clonidine.
1-5-HTP-antagonistic effect was also recorded for 26 neuroleptic drugs. Their
inhibitory potencies showed close correlation to 5-HT2-receptor affinity in vitro
and, slightly weaker, to alpha 1-adrenoceptor affinity. In contrast, no
correlation to dopamine D-2 receptor affinity was found, indicating that the
cataleptogenic and motility-inhibitory properties of neuroleptics did not
unspecifically influence 1-5-HTP-induced head shakes. These were not influenced
by a histaminic antagonist, muscarinic antagonist or alpha 2-adrenoceptor
antagonist, but were inhibited by beta-adrenoceptor blockers, GABA agonists, a
benzodiazepine and morphine. The results indicate that 1-5-HTP-induced head
shakes are most sensitive to 5-HT2 antagonists, but that the syndrome is
influenced by other neuronal systems. Since 5-HT2 affinity and alpha
1-adrenoceptor affinity of many compounds is found concomitantly, caution is
needed to evaluate the relative importance of these properties for 1-5-HTP
antagonism.

PMID: 6152104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Eur J Pharmacol. 1984 Jul 13;102(2):349-54.

Differential inhibition by dopamine D-1 and D-2 antagonists of circling behaviour
induced by dopamine agonists in rats with unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine lesions.

Arnt J, Hyttel J.

The selective dopamine (DA) D-1 antagonist SCH 23390 antagonized the
contralateral circling behaviour induced by the DA D-1 agonist SK & F 38393 in
rats lesioned unilaterally with 6-hydroxy-DA but had a 600 times weaker effect
against the preferential DA D-2 agonist pergolide. The D-2 antagonists clebopride
and spiroperidol had the reverse selectivity. The mixed D-1/D-2 antagonists
cis(Z)-flupentixol and cis(Z)-clopenthixol blocked the circling induced by either
agonist. It is concluded that circling behaviour is mediated by closely related
but independent DA D-1 and D-2 receptor sites.

PMID: 6148252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Eur J Pharmacol. 1984 Jun 15;102(1):91-9.

Effects of S (+)-3-phenethyl-PP, a putative dopamine autoreceptors agonist with
greater autoreceptor selectivity than 3-PPP enantiomers.

Arnt J, Bøgesø KP, Hyttel J, Larsen JJ, Svendsen O.

The experiments concerned the pharmacology of the enantiomers of the
phenethyl-analogue (3-phenethyl-PP) of the putative dopamine (DA) autoreceptor
agonist 3-PPP. In contrast to the almost equipotency of 3-PPP enantiomers, the
phenethyl enantiomers showed marked stereoselectivity. S(+)-3-Phenethyl-PP had 25
times higher affinity to D-2 DA receptors in vitro than the R(-)-enantiomer. In
vivo a similar potency difference was seen for the inhibition of motility,
induction of circling behaviour in 6-OHDA-lesioned rats and emetic effect in
dogs. None of the enantiomers induced stereotypy and hypermotility in normal rats
or in rats pretreated with reserpine and alpha-methyl-p-tyrosine. In test models 
for antidopaminergic activity only slight activity of either enantiomer was
observed. The S(+)-enantiomer had no antagonistic effect against apomorphine- and
amphetamine-induced stereotypies, no cataleptogenic activity and only partially
antagonized amphetamine-induced hypermotility. Apomorphine-induced emesis was
weakly antagonized. The results indicate a greater and higher selectivity of
S(+)-3-phenethyl-PP for DA receptors mediating sedation compared with 3-PPP
enantiomers which previously have been shown to exert significant effects on
postsynaptic DA receptors. Thus S(+)-3-phenethyl-PP may be a more selective model
compound for the differential study of effects elicited by stimulation of pre-
and postsynaptic DA receptors.

PMID: 6148247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Life Sci. 1984 Apr 16;34(16):1529-40.

Pharmacological effects of a specific dopamine D-1 antagonist SCH 23390 in
comparison with neuroleptics.

Christensen AV, Arnt J, Hyttel J, Larsen JJ, Svendsen O.

Neuroleptics such as thioxanthenes (cis(Z)-flupentixol and cis(Z)-clopenthixol)
and phenothiazines (fluphenazine and perphenazine), which block both dopamine
(DA) D-1 and D-2 receptors and the butyrophenones (haloperidol and spiroperidol),
which block D-2 receptors only, are equipotent both behaviorally and clinically. 
A new compound SCH 23390 which selectively blocks DA D-1 receptors, resembles
many neuroleptics in its pharmacological profile: antistereotypic effects in
mice, rats and dogs, cataleptogenic effect and inhibitory effect on amphetamine
circling. In contrast SCH 23390 has no effect on apomorphine-induced vomiting in 
dogs and little effects on 6-OHDA-denervated supersensitive DA receptors,
stimulated by the DA agonist 3-PPP. In a series of experiments where
methylphenidate-induced stereotyped gnawing in mice was inhibited by
neuroleptics, it was shown that concomitant treatment with scopolamine or
diazepam attenuated the effect of butyrophenones (D-2 antagonists). The same
treatment attenuated the effect of phenothiazines, to a lesser extent, and hardly
attenuated the effect of thioxanthenes and SCH 23390 at all. It is concluded that
DA D-1 receptors are as important as D-2 receptors for the expression of
neuroleptic activity in most animal models believed to be predictive of
antipsychotic and extrapyramidal side-effect potential. However, the D-1
antagonist is less sensitive than D-2 antagonists to antimuscarinic compounds and
benzodiazepines.

PMID: 6144029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Pol J Pharmacol Pharm. 1984 Mar-Jun;36(2-3):221-30.

Prolonged treatment with the specific 5-HT-uptake inhibitor citalopram: effect on
dopaminergic and serotonergic functions.

Arnt J, Hyttel J, Overø KF.

The effect of prolonged administration of the clinically effective and specific
serotonin (5-HT)-uptake-inhibitor, citalopram, has been studied in rats on
behavioural measures of dopaminergic (DA) and serotonergic activity and on DA
D-2, 5-HT2, alpha 1- and beta-adrenergic receptor number and affinity in vitro.
Thirteen days treatment with citalopram in the diet (40 mg/kg/day) did not change
receptor binding for either of the ligands studied, although citalopram was
detected in high concentrations in brain and plasma and induced a 75% depletion
of 5-HT in whole blood. This citalopram dose-regimen was followed by a
potentiated hypermotility response to d-amphetamine. Also DA-dependent
hypermotility induced by methylphenidate and (+)-3-PPP was increased. In
contrast, the 5-HT2-receptor mediated head shake syndrome induced by 1-5-HTP or
quipazine was decreased after prolonged citalopram treatment. Two weeks oral
bolus treatment (10 mg/kg once or twice daily) with the 5-HT-uptake-inhibitors
citalopram, fluoxetine, zimelidine, cyanimipramine or paroxetine induced
d-amphetamine potentiation, whereas amitriptyline, nortriptyline, imipramine,
iprindole, and mianserin treatment showed no effect. It is suggested that
d-amphetamine potentiation induced by citalopram is mainly dependent on DA
mechanisms, and that this profile is characteristic for preferential
5-HT-uptake-inhibitors. The lack of correlation between behavioural effect and
receptor changes was important. Since citalopram has been shown to have clinical 
antidepressant activity, it is concluded that down-regulation of
beta-adrenoceptors is not a prerequisite for antidepressant action.

PMID: 6591152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Pol J Pharmacol Pharm. 1984 Mar-Jun;36(2-3):249-64.

Behavioural correlates to the dopamine D-1 and D-2 antagonists.

Christensen AV, Arnt J, Hyttel J, Svendsen O.

The acute dopamine (DA) receptor blockade of neuroleptics can be demonstrated in 
mice by antagonism of stereotypies induced by the DA-agonist methylphenidate and 
in rats by antagonism of stereotypies induced by the DA-agonists amphetamine or
apomorphine. Neuroleptics such as the thioxanthene, cis(Z)-flupentixol, the
phenothiazine, fluphenazine, the butyrophenone, haloperidol and the benzamide
clebopride are equipotent behaviourally as well as clinically. Also the D-1
receptor-antagonist SCH 23390 has the same pharmacological effects. In a series
of experiments where the methylphenidate-induced stereotyped gnawing in mice was 
inhibited by neuroleptics it was shown that the effect of butyrophenones was
greatly attenuated by concomitant treatment with scopolamine and diazepam.
Similar results were obtained in rats experiments. The effect of phenothiazines
was less influenced and that of thioxanthenes and SCH 23390 remained nearly
unchanged. Besides, a clear differentiation of these drugs was seen when they
were tested in mice rendered supersensitive by 12 days treatment with different
neuroleptics. In the withdrawal phase the decrease effects against
methylphenidate were shown by increased ED50 values for methylphenidate
antagonism and an increased response to methylphenidate. The thioxanthenes and
SCH 23390 retained the ability to antagonize the stereotyped gnawing, the
phenothiazines showed a reduced effect, whereas the butyrophenones showed both
tolerance and cross tolerance to the stereotyped behaviour. This behavioural
classification of neuroleptics into three different groups is comparable with the
classification obtained by DA-receptor binding techniques in vitro.

PMID: 6147830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol (Copenh). 1984 Jan;54(1):72-5.

Spinal 5-HT or NA uptake inhibition potentiates supraspinal morphine
antinociception in rats.

Larsen JJ, Arnt J.

Spinal injection of the specific uptake inhibitor of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), 
citalopram, or of noradrenaline (NA), desipramine, potentiated the
antinociception following intracerebroventricular injection of morphine in rats
tested on the hot plate. Combined spinal injection of citalopram and desipramine 
caused a synergistic potentiation. The unselective and less potent inhibitor of
both 5-HT and NA uptake, amitriptyline, did not cause potentiation. The results
support the suggested involvement of both 5-HT and NA pathways in supraspinal
morphine antinociception.

PMID: 6583982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1984;84(4):457-65.

Changes in rat dopamine- and serotonin function in vivo after prolonged
administration of the specific 5-HT uptake inhibitor, citalopram.

Arnt J, Overø KF, Hyttel J, Olsen R.

The effect of prolonged administration of the potent and specific 5-HT uptake
inhibitor citalopram on behavioural measures of dopaminergic and serotonergic
activity has been studied in rats. Administration of citalopram in the diet at a 
daily dose of 99 mumol/kg led to supersensitivity to d-amphetamine-induced
hypermotility and stereotypy and to subsensitivity to apomorphine-induced
hypomotility 2 h after withdrawal. Forepaw clonus induced by
5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine was decreased 2 h and 24 h after withdrawal and 
the number of head shakes induced by 1-5-HTP and citalopram were decreased 24 h
after withdrawal. The d-amphetamine potentiation was still seen after 24 h,
whereas the response had returned to normal 3 and 7 days after withdrawal. The
content of amphetamine in three different brain regions was about 50% higher
compared with controls 24 h after withdrawal of prolonged citalopram
administration. At this time citalopram had been eliminated, and citalopram
itself could not affect amphetamine metabolism. Other experiments indicated a
linear relation between d-amphetamine brain concentration and motility level.
Thus, a 50% increase in citalopram-treated rats cannot alone account for 3-fold
increase in d-amphetamine-induced motility. Potentiation of d-amphetamine-induced
hypermotility was also found after citalopram in a daily dietary dose of 25
mumol/kg for 13 days and after oral bolus injection (49 mumol/kg twice daily for 
14 days). Acute citalopram injection had no effect in any of these models. The
results suggest increased responsiveness of dopaminergic mechanisms mediating
hypermotility, and decreased sensitivity of dopamine receptors mediating sedation
(proposed autoreceptors). Sensitivity of 5-HT receptors was also decreased. The
mechanisms by which citalopram induces d-amphetamine supersensitivity as well as 
subsensitivity to apomorphine and 5-HT agonists are presently unknown, since no
changes in dopaminergic and serotonergic receptor binding have been found after
an identical dose regimen.

PMID: 6441945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Neural Transm. 1984;60(3-4):205-23.

Postsynaptic dopamine agonistic effects of 3-PPP enantiomers revealed by
bilateral 6-hydroxy-dopamine lesions and by chronic reserpine treatment in rats.

Arnt J, Hyttel J.

The motor effects of some DA autoreceptor agonists and apomorphine in rats with
bilateral 6-hydroxydopamine lesions of the median forebrain bundle were studied. 
Whereas (-)-3-PPP, (+)-3-phenethyl-PP and EMD 23448 decreased motility in
sham-operated controls, a pronounced hypermotility was induced in 6-OHDA-lesioned
rats. 3-PPP enantiomers and apomorphine had similar potency as that found in test
models for DA autoreceptor activity in normal rats, e.g. motility inhibition. The
DA receptor involvement in the effect of (-)-3-PPP was confirmed by neuroleptic
antagonism. (-)-3-PPP and EMD 23448 had similar intrinsic activity as
apomorphine, whereas (+)-3-phenethyl-PP and (+)-3-PPP had lower maximal effect.
However, the DA autoreceptor agonists differed from apomorphine: The development 
of postsynaptic supersensitivity to these drugs appeared 4-7 days after the
lesion compared to 1-2 days for apomorphine and (+)-3-PPP. Furthermore, no active
oral stereotypy was induced by the autoreceptor selective compounds in contrast
to the effect observed after apomorphine and (+)-3-PPP. In a separate experiment 
using circling behaviour in unilaterally 6-OHDA-lesioned rats the different
time-course of appearance of supersensitivity to (-)-3-PPP, (+)-3-PPP and
apomorphine was confirmed. After chronic reserpine treatment a similar
postsynaptic supersensitivity to (-)-3-PPP was observed with a development time
between 4 and 7 days and with a similar intensity as that observed in
6-OHDA-lesioned rats. In contrast, after chronic neuroleptic treatment for 12
days, (-)-3-PPP was unable to induce hyperactivity 3-7 days after withdrawal. The
results indicate that DA autoreceptor agonists are able to stimulate postsynaptic
DA receptors in conditions without endogenous transmitter supply for at least 4-7
days, but not after chronic receptor blockade in a similar period. This should
lead to consideration of DA autoreceptor agonists as potential antiparkinsonian
drugs without stimulant effects on normosensitive postsynaptic DA receptors.

PMID: 6441835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1984;83(1):20-7.

Biochemical effects and drug levels in rats after long-term treatment with the
specific 5-HT-uptake inhibitor, citalopram.

Hyttel J, Overø KF, Arnt J.

The effects in rats of long-term administration of the potent, specific 5-HT
uptake inhibitor citalopram have been investigated. Citalopram hydrobromide (MW =
405) was given in the diet, 99 or 25 mumol/kg daily, for 13 days or orally, 49
mumol/kg twice a day, for 14 days. High plasma and brain levels of citalopram
were found during the treatment period, whereas negligible amounts were found 24 
h after withdrawal. The 5-HT uptake mechanism in blood platelets was completely
blocked, since levels of whole blood 5-HT during and shortly (2 days) after
treatment were decreased by 75-90%. The drug load after the two highest doses in 
terms of plasma drug levels was the same as in depressed patients treated with
citalopram. Receptor binding technique ex vivo was applied to different brain
parts to measure receptor parameters for several neurotransmitters. All data were
evaluated by Eadie- Hoffstee analysis. No changes were seen in Bmax and Kd for
beta-receptors (3H-dihydroalprenolol) in frontal cortex, occipital + temporal
cortex, whole cortex and limbic structures, 5-HT2 receptors (3H-spiroperidol) in 
frontal and whole cortex, alpha 1-receptors (3H-prazosin) in "rest of brain" and 
DA D-2 receptors (3H-spiroperidol) in corpus striatum and limbic structures. The 
uptake mechanism for 5-HT as well as the inhibitory effect of citalopram on this 
uptake remained unaffected in brain synaptosomes derived from control and from
citalopram (99 mumol/kg)-treated rats. Thus long-term treatment with citalopram
does not induce changes in neurotransmitter receptors as seen with most tricyclic
as well as newer " atypical " antidepressants.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 6429698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Eur J Pharmacol. 1983 Jul 22;91(2-3):273-8.

Differential behavioural effects of dopamine agonists in developing rats: a study
of 3-PPP enantiomers.

Arnt J.

The effect of different dopamine (DA) agonists on spontaneous activity and
d-amphetamine-induced hyperactivity was studied in 11, 20 and 30 day old rats.
The proposed selective DA autoreceptor agonist 3-PPP induced biphasic
hyperactivity at 11 and 20 days of age, whereas only hypoactivity was observed at
30 days of age, as shown previously for adult rats. The enantiomers of 3-PPP had 
differential effect: (+)-3-PPP increased activity in 11 and 20 day old rats,
where (-)-3-PPP had no effect in similar doses but motility decreased at a higher
dose. At 30 days of age (+)-3-PPP decreased motility at low doses and increased
motility at a high dose, whereas (-)-3-PPP induced a monotonic decrease, as
observed in adult rats. The reference DA agonists apomorphine and pergolide
induced only hyperactivity at 11 and 20 days of age. At 30 days the usual
sedative effect of low doses was seen. These results confirm that DA
autoreceptors mediating sedation are developed later than postsynaptic DA
receptors mediating hyperactivity and suggest that 3-PPP (by its (+)-enantiomer) 
stimulates postsynaptically. (-)-3-PPP had no detectable postsynaptic DA
stimulating activity and may, in contrast, act as a postsynaptic antagonist at
high doses. Racemic-and (-)-3-PPP antagonized the d-amphetamine-induced
hyperactivity at all ages, whereas (+)-3-PPP had no effect and apomorphine was
effective at 30 days of age only. These results suggest that the d-amphetamine
antagonism by (-)-3-PPP cannot be explained solely by DA autoreceptor stimulation
but that autoreceptor stimulation may contribute to the inhibitory effect in
mature rats.

PMID: 6617748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Eur J Pharmacol. 1983 May 20;90(1):47-55.

Neuroleptic inhibition of 6,7-ADTN-induced hyperactivity after injection into the
nucleus accumbens. Specificity and comparison with other models.

Arnt J.

The dopamine agonist 6,7-ADTN induced locomotor stimulation after injection into 
the nucleus accumbens of rats. This hyperactivity was stereospecifically
antagonized by peripheral injection of typical and atypical neuroleptics, except 
sulpiride, regardless of structural class. The potency of 14 neuroleptics
correlated significantly to that in other neuroleptic in vivo models in rats,
i.e. cataleptogenic and amphetamine-antagonistic (stereotypy, circling) activity.
Sulpiride was inactive after peripheral injection, whereas intraacumbens
sulpiride antagonized 6,7-ADTN-induced hyperactivity with a higher potency than
that found for locally injected cis-(Z)-flupentixol, haloperidol and clebopride. 
Blockade of alpha 1-adrenergic receptors by systemic prazosin or locally injected
phentolamine also antagonized 6,7-ADTN, whereas antagonists of alpha
2-adrenergic, beta-adrenergic, muscarinic and serotoninergic receptors were
without effect. Furthermore, the cis-(Z)-flupentixol and haloperidol-induced
6,7-ADTN blockade was only slightly or not reversed by additional antimuscarinic 
(scopolamine) or antiserotonergic (methysergide) treatment. It is concluded that 
antagonism of 6,7-ADTN-induced hyperactivity is a relevant model for detecting
neuroleptic activity with minimal influence of anticholinergic and
antiserotonergic activity, but that the dopamine receptor within the nucleus
accumbens responsible for the locomotor stimulation is similar to that involved
in other behavioural effects of neuroleptics. It is suggested that an apparent
preferential limbic action of some neuroleptics (e.g. clozapine and
chlorprothixene) is more likely to be explainable by their simultaneous blocking 
effect on dopaminergic, alpha-adrenergic and muscarinic receptors.

PMID: 6135618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Mod Probl Pharmacopsychiatry. 1983;21:49-64.

Neuroleptic classification: implications for tardive dyskinesia.

Hyttel J, Christensen AV, Arnt J.

PMID: 6140632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1983;81(3):199-207.

Dopamine receptor agonistic and antagonistic effects of 3-PPP enantiomers.

Arnt J, Bøgesø KP, Christensen AV, Hyttel J, Larsen JJ, Svendsen O.

The pharmacological profile of the enantiomers of the proposed selective dopamine
(DA) autoreceptor agonist 3-PPP [3-(3-hydroxyphenyl)-N-n-propylpiperidine] has
been studied. In vitro both enantiomers showed weak DA agonistic activity, and
(--)-3-PPP some DA antagonistic effect on DA-stimulated adenylate cyclase
activity. Both enantiomers in low doses had a similar profile in vivo: Inhibition
of locomotor activity of mice and rats, induction of contralateral circling
behaviour in 6-hydroxy-DA-lesioned rats and an emetic effect in dogs. At higher
doses, differential effects of the enantiomers were found: (+)-3-PPP induced
hyperactivity, weak stereotyped behaviour and ipsilateral circling in
hemitransected rats. (--)-3-PPP had depressant effects in high doses, inhibited
d-amphetamine-induced hyperactivity and d-amphetamine-, methylphenidate- and
apomorphine-induced stereotyped licking/biting in rats and antagonized
apomorphine-induced emesis in dogs. However, (+)-3-PPP also showed a weak
antagonistic activity against d-amphetamine-induced hyperactivity and
d-amphetamine- and apomorphine-induced stereotypy in rats and inhibited
apomorphine-induced emesis in dogs. It is suggested that both enantiomers have
significant effects on postsynaptic DA receptors in high doses: (--)-3-PPP with
weak antagonistic activity in some test models and (+)-3-PPP with agonistic and
antagonistic effect. Since these effects of (+)-3-PPP were of low intensity at
high doses, (+)-3-PPP may be a partial DA agonist at postsynaptic receptors in
high doses.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 6139838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Eur J Pharmacol. 1982 Dec 24;86(2):185-98.

Effects of putative dopamine autoreceptor agonists in pharmacological models
related to dopaminergic and neuroleptic activity.

Arnt J, Christensen AV, Hyttel J, Larsen JJ, Svendsen O.

PMID: 6130958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol (Copenh). 1982 Oct;51(4):321-9.

Pharmacological specificity of conditioned avoidance response inhibition in rats:
inhibition by neuroleptics and correlation to dopamine receptor blockade.

Arnt J.

The inhibitory effect of 36 neuroleptic compounds on conditioned avoidance
response (CAR) and unconditioned escape response (UER) has been studied in rats. 
All neuroleptics antagonized CAR in doses below those inhibiting UER and below
those inducing catalepsy. Stereospecificity was shown in two cases. Significant
correlation was found between CAR inhibitory and cataleptogenic potency. Also
inhibition of amphetamine induced stereotypy, affinity to 3H-haloperidol binding 
sites in vitro and clinical potency was significantly correlated to CAR
inhibition. CAR and UER inhibition induced by cis(Z)-flupentixol and haloperidol 
was attenuated by scopolamine, but was only weakly influenced by methysergide and
prazosin. Among a wide range of other CNS active compounds tested, CAR was
inhibited by alpha 1-adrenergic antagonists, benzodiazepines, a barbiturate, GABA
agonists, morphine and a serotonin agonist, but in doses inducing other motor
disturbances. It is concluded that CAR inhibition is a sensitive test for
dopamine receptor antagonists. However, additional alpha-adrenergic activity
found for some neuroleptics (e.g. clozapine, chlorprothixene) may contribute to
the CAR inhibitory potency. Additional antimuscarinic activity of neuroleptics
may moderately attenuate CAR inhibition whereas serotonin receptor blockade is of
minor importance.

PMID: 6129770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Neuropharmacology. 1981 Dec;20(12B):1331-4.

Differential reversal by scopolamine of effects of neuroleptics in rats.
Relevance for evaluation of therapeutic and extrapyramidal side-effect potential.

Arnt J, Christensen AV, Hyttel J.

PMID: 6119645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Neurosci Lett. 1981 May 29;23(3):337-42.

Turning behaviour and catalepsy after injection of excitatory amino acids into
rat substantia nigra.

Arnt J.

Unilateral injection of AMPA
((R,S)-alpha-3-hydroxyl-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid), 4-bromohomoibotenic 
acid, kainic acid and N-methylaspartic acid into the caudal part of substantia
nigra induced ipsilateral turning behaviour. AMPA and kainic acid were most
potent. Ibotenic acid produced short-lasting ipsilateral turning followed by
long-lasting contralateral turning behaviour which was antagonized by the GABA
antagonist bicuculline methiodide. The turning induced by AMPA was not blocked by
previous 6-hydroxydopamine lesion of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway and
was increased by systemic apomorphine. High doses of bilateral intranigral AMPA
induced rigid catalepsy. The results are consistent with an involvement of
glutamate or aspartate receptors in the regulation of dopamine output systems.

PMID: 7196552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Life Sci. 1981 Apr 6;28(14):1597-603.

Hyperactivity following injection of a glutamate agonist and 6,7-ADTN into rat
nucleus accumbens and its inhibition by THIP.

Arnt J.

PMID: 6264256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Eur J Pharmacol. 1981 Jan 5;69(1):107-11.

Differential reversal by scopolamine and THIP of the antistereotypic and
cataleptic effects of neuroleptics.

Arnt J, Christensen AV.

Scopolamine reversed the neuroleptic-induced catalepsy and neuroleptic blockade
of amphetamine-induced stereotypies in rats. The effect on catalepsy was the most
pronounced. Butyrophenones were mainly sensitive to scopolamine reversal whereas 
the thioxanthenes cis-Z-flupentixol and piflutixol were not significantly
influenced. THIP did not change the effects of cis-Z-flupentixol, fluphenazine
and haloperidol. The relevance of these findings for the use of stereotypy and
catalepsy tests as screening for antiscizophrenic and extrapyramidal
side-effects, respectively, is discussed.

PMID: 6110555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Int J Epidemiol. 1980 Dec;9(4):329-34.

Smallpox surveillance in Bangladesh: I - Development of surveillance containment 
strategy.

Foster SO, Ward NA, Joarder AK, Arnt N, Tarantola D, Rahman M, Hughes K.

A major epidemic of Variola major with an estimated 90 000 cases and 18 000
deaths occurred in Bangladesh in 1972. During a 3-year period methods of active
surveillance (market search, outbreak investigation, and house-to-house search)
were developed to supplement the passive reporting system. The percentage of
smallpox cases detected increased from 11.8% in 1972 to 83% in 1975. Together
with the implementation of improved methods of outbreak control, smallpox
transmission was interrupted in October 1975.

PMID: 7203775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Eur J Pharmacol. 1980 Mar 7;62(1):51-61.

Intranigral GABA antagonists produce dopamine-independent biting in rats.

Arnt J, Scheel-Krüger J.

Behavioural effects following bilateral intranigral administration of GABA
antagonists have been investigated. Bicuculline methiodide (BMI), picrotoxin and 
isopropylbicyclophosphate all induced biting behaviour, teeth-chattering and
chewing. Sub-threshold doses for biting induced locomotor activity and sniffing. 
The strongest response was observed after injection into the caudal pars
reticulata, whereas weaker effects were seen after injection into the rostral
pars reticulata or the pars compacta. The biting induced by intranigral BMI was
not antagonized by prior catecholamine depletion with reserpine plus
alpha-methyl-p-tyrosine or by dopamine receptor blockade with haloperido.
Concomitant intranigral injection of the GABA agonists muscimol and THIP,
however, completely antagonized biting. Systemic GABAergic drugs also antagonized
the BMI-induced biting: the benzodiazepine, diazepam and the GABA transaminase
inhibitor, gamma-acetylenic GABE, were most effective, whereas muscimol was only 
partially effective and THIP was without effect. It is suggested that this animal
model may be used for the evaluation of antidyskinetic drugs.

PMID: 7189466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1979 Dec;310(1):43-51.

Behavioral differences induced by muscimol selectively injected into pars
compacta and pars reticulata of Substantia nigra.

Arnt J, Scheel-Krüger J.

PMID: 575196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Brain Res. 1979 Nov 16;177(2):395-400.

GABA agonists and potential antagonists related to muscimol.

Arnt J, Krogsgaard-Larsen P.

PMID: 227538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Life Sci. 1979 Oct 8;25(15):1351-60.

GABA in the ventral tegmental area: differential regional effects on locomotion, 
aggression and food intake after microinjection of GABA agonists and antagonists.

Arnt J, Scheel-Krüger J.

PMID: 574606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Pharm Pharmacol. 1979 May;31(5):306-13.

Muscimol and related GABA receptor agonists: the potency of GABAergic drugs in
vivo determined after intranigral injection.

Arnt J, Scheel-Krüger J, Magelund G, Krogsgaard-Larsen P.

Contralateral turning behaviour following unilateral intranigral injection of a
large series of GABA analogues was investigated. The results indicated that the
turning behaviour was induced stereospecifically and was selectively antagonized 
by the GABA antagonist bicuculline methochloride. The comparative potencies of a 
series of GABA agonists related to muscimol in general corresponded well to the
affinity for 3H-GABA receptor sites and to the depressant action on single
neurons using microelectrophoretic administration. However, the GABA agonists
trans-aminocrotonic acid and 3-aminopropanesulphonic acid were much weaker than
expected from in vitro studies. The GABA-uptake inhibitors nipecotic acid and
guvacine showed only weak and short-lasting effects. The GABA-transaminase
inhibitor gamma-acetylenic GABA showed delayed effects compared with the agonists
which acted immediately. It is proposed that this behavioural effect may be a
sensitive and quantitative method for evaluation of GABA agonists in vivo.

PMID: 37300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1979 Apr 25;62(3):267-77.

GABAergic and glycinergic mechanisms within the substantia nigra: pharmacological
specificity of dopamine-independent contralateral turning behavior and
interactions with other neurotransmitters.

Arnt J, Scheel-Krüger J.

The pharmacological specificity of the GABA agonist muscimol-induced
contralateral turning behavior after unilateral injection into substantia nigra
pars reticulata (SNR) has been studied. Muscimol-induced turning was antagonized 
by intranigral bicuculline methochloride (BMC) and picrotoxin, whereas
antagonists of glycine, morphine, dopamine, noradrenaline, and serotonin were
ineffective. Glycine induced a qualitatively similar turning behavior which was
strychnine-sensitive but relatively BMC and picrotoxin-insensitive. Other drugs, 
including substance P, kainic acid, clonidine, oxymetazoline, serotonin, and
carbachol, induced turning that could be dissociated from the effect of muscimol.
Muscimol-induced turning was dopamine-independent, indicated by resistance to
haloperidol (1 mg/kg), to pretreatment with reserpine (7.5 mg/kg) plus
alpha-methyl-p-tyrosine (200 mg/kg), to haloperidol injections into the SNR,
striatum and nucleus accumbens, and finally to kainic acid lesions of the
striatum. 6-Hydroxydopamine lesions increased the efficacy of intranigral
muscimol, while kainic acid lesions of the SNR antagonized muscimol.
Muscimol-induced turning was inhibited by oxotremorine (0.25 mg/kg), by
intranigral carbachol, and by apomorphine (0.1--0.5 mg/kg), but only moderately
by intranigrally injected apomorphine. These data suggest specificity of
GABA-agonist-induced contralateral turning and indicate an interaction between
nigral GABA and other neurotransmitters, particularly dopamine and acetylcholine.

PMID: 37544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Life Sci. 1979 Apr 9;24(15):1395-402.

Decreased antistereotypic effect of neuroliptics after additional treatment with 
a benzodiazepine, a GABA agonist or an anticholinergic compound.

Christensen AV, Arnt J, Scheel-Krüger J.

PMID: 39205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1979;123:303-21.

GABA receptor agonists: relationship between structure and biological activity in
vivo and in vitro.

Krogsgaard-Larsen P, Krogsgaard-Larsen P, Arnt J, Arnt J.

PMID: 390994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Pharm Pharmacol. 1979 Jan;31(1):56-8.

Benzodiazepines potentiate GABA-dopamine stereotyped dependent gnawing in mice.

Arnt J, Christensen AV, Scheel-Krüger J.

PMID: 32373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Eur J Pharmacol. 1978 Apr 15;48(4):459-62.

Muscimol antagonizes morphine hypermotility without potentiation of analgesia.

Christensen AV, Arnt J, Scheel-Krüger J.

Muscimol, a very potent and specific GABA agonist, strongly depressed
characteristic morphine-induced locomotor activity. Muscimol induced only a very 
weak increase in the morphine analgesia measured in the hot plate test which
perhaps could be a result of a freezing reaction. No effect on morphine analgesia
was observed in the wire grid test. These results indicate that GABA
differentially influences morphine stimulation and analgesia.

PMID: 648589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Adv Biochem Psychopharmacol. 1978;19:343-6.

GABA-dopamine interaction in substantia nigra and nucleus accumbens--relevance to
behavioral stimulation and stereotyped behavior.

Scheel-Krüger J, Arnt J, Braestrup C, Christensen AV, Cools AR, Magelund G.

PMID: 567933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Life Sci. 1978 Jan;22(1):75-84.

Muscimol differentially facilitates stereotypy but antagonizes motility induced
by dopaminergic drugs: a complex GABA-dopamine interaction.

Scheel-Krüger J, Christensen AV, Arnt J.

PMID: 564437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Neurosci Lett. 1977 May;4(6):351-6.

Behavioural stimulation induced by muscimol and other GABA agonists injected into
the substantia nigra.

Scheel-Krüger J(1), Arnt J, Magelund G.

Author information: 
(1)Psychopharmacological Research Laboratory, Dept. E, St. Hans Mental Hospital, 
DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark.

The unilateral injection of putative GABA agonists, muscimol, baclofen, imidazole
acetic acid and GABA into the caudal area of substantia nigra (SN, zona
reticulata) induced immediately a contralateral turning, whereas the antogonists 
picrotoxin and bicuculline methiodide induced ipsilateral turning. In the rostral
area picrotoxin induced contralateral turning. Muscimol (10 ng bilaterally
injected into SN) induced behavioural stimulation and antagonism of catelepsy in 
rats pretreated with high subcutaneous doses of perphenazine, haloperidol or
reserpine and alpha-methyltyrosine. The muscimol behavioural stimulation seems
dependent on a non-catecholaminergic neuronal pathway, probably present in the SN
with GABA as the mediating neurotransmitter.

PMID: 19556189  [PubMed]


321. Fertil Steril. 1977 May;28(5):549-53.

Low-dose combination oral contraceptives: a controlled clinical study of three
different norgestrel-ethinyl estradiol ratios.

Arnt IC, Ferrari A, Sartoretto JN, Woutersz TB.

Three doses of norgestrel-ethinyl estradiol in altered ratios were investigated
in a double-blind, randomized study. The estrogen content was maintained at 20
microng or less, while the progestogen dose was increased in 100-microng
increments. Two pregnancies were reported for the lowest dose. No pregnancies
occurred in the two higher doses. Each dosage increase improved cycle control and
lessened bleeding irregularities. The incidence of patients reporting
intermenstrual bleeding was inversely proportional to the doses studied. Dropouts
for cycle disturbances followed a similar pattern.

PMID: 323074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Fed Proc. 1975 Jun;34(7):1612-5.

Tracing neuronal connections with radioisotopes applied extracellularly.

Hendrickson A.

Methodological and technical problems of the autoradiographic-neuroanatomical
tracing (ARNT) technique are discussed. The size of the labeled area after a
tritiated amino acid injection varies directly with the volume of isotope, the
rate of injection, and the length of exposure of the secretion to the emulsion.
Frozen sections can be used for autoradiography if they are mounted on subbed
slides, dehydrated in ethanol, defatted for 1 hour in xylene, rehydrated through 
ethanol and water, and dried before coating with emulsion. Brushes used for
mounting frozen sections should be used only for this purpose and dipped in
boiling distilled water before use to avoid chemoreduced streaks in the emulsion 
due to contamination from the brushes. Excessive dilution of Kodak emulsion can
leave less than a monolayer of grains over certain types of sections; the
emulsion thickness should be checked by exposing coated test sections to a brief 
flash of light and developing immediately. A high intensity safelight recommended
for the ARNT darkroom is the Thomas Duplex Super monochromatic sodium vapor bulb 
safelight; for Kodak NTB-2, -3 and Ilford L4 emulsions the red-banded and
yellow-banded filters are used. A useful stain combination for ARNT is Luxol fast
blue stained before coating and cresyl violet stained after developing which
demonstrates both neuronal cell bodies and myelinated tracts in the same section.

PMID: 48480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Am J Epidemiol. 1972 Apr;95(4):363-70.

Smallpox outbreaks in two Brazilian villages: epidemiologic characteristics.

Arnt N, Morris L.

PMID: 5015585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Bull World Health Organ. 1972;46(2):165-71.

Epidemiology of variola minor in Brazil based on a study of 33 outbreaks.

De Quadros CC, Morris L, Da Costa EA, Arnt N, Tigre CH.

Surveillance-containment units were established in 1969 in four States of Brazil 
as part of the national smallpox eradication programme. Their responsibilities
included both the investigation of reported cases and the control of outbreaks,
and the further extension and development of the reporting network. Altogether,
33 outbreaks of smallpox were investigated in detail, all in endemic areas not
yet reached by the attack phase of the eradication programme. Official reports of
27 cases led to the discovery of an additional 1 465 cases, suggesting that
reporting was not more than 2% complete in endemic areas. The total of 1 492
cases in 33 outbreaks occurred in 493 households comprising a study population of
3 088 persons: three-quarters of the cases were in children under 15 years of
age. Only 5% were in individuals aged 30 years or more. The case-fatality ratio
was 0.8%. The overall attack rate among unvaccinated persons (76.2%) was 23 times
that among vaccinated persons (3.3%). Age-specific vaccine effectiveness ratios
ranged from 94% to 100% with an overall reduction in expected cases among the
vaccinated of 95%. There was no evidence to suggest waning of immunity among
persons who had been successfully vaccinated. There was an inverse relationship
between susceptibility and age since a greater proportion of adults had already
had smallpox or a successful vaccination; 97% of pre-school-age children and 82% 
of school-age children had no history of smallpox and no vaccination scar. In all
33 outbreaks, more than 60% of unvaccinated persons became ill; in 5 outbreaks
the attack rate for unvaccinated persons was greater than 90%.

PMCID: PMC2480711
PMID: 4537480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Bras Ginecol. 1970;70(3):135-60.

[Clinical pharmacology of a combination of linestrenol and mestranol].

[Article in Portuguese]

Arnt IC, Meyrelles JC, Martins Ad Et AL.

PMID: 12309321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Obstet Gynecol. 1968 Jan;31(1):90-6.

Aortoiliac compression by uterus containing hydrocephalic fetus.

Bieniarz J, Gulin L, Arnt IC, Hashimoto T, Saguier V, Caldeyro-Barcia R.

PMID: 5638369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1967 Feb 15;97(4):530-45.

Relationship between blood pH and heart rate in the human fetus during labor.

Méndez-Bauer C, Arnt IC, Gulin L, Escarcena L, Caldeyro-Barcia R.

PMID: 6066720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Endocrinol. 1966 Sep;36(1):7-14.

Comparison of the milk-ejecting protencies of oxytocin and deamino-oxytocin in
lactating women.

Althabe O Jr, Arnt IC, Branda LA, Caldeyro-Barcia R.

PMID: 5950815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. An Bras Ginecol. 1965 Apr;59:137-45.

[STUDY OF UTERINE CONTRACTILITY DURING INDUCED LABOR IN WOMEN WITH NEGATIVE RH].

[Article in Portuguese]

ARAMBURU G, ARNT IC.

PMID: 14341898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. An Bras Ginecol. 1964 Oct;58:243-50.

[SUGGESTIONS FOR THE TEACHING OF OBSTETRICS].

[Article in Portuguese]

ARNT IC.

PMID: 14238519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. An Bras Ginecol. 1964 Apr;57:111-22.

[PROBLEMS OF OBSTETRICAL CARE IN THE MATERNIDADE-ESCOLA].

[Article in Portuguese]

VALERIO C, ARNT IC.

PMID: 14159225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


