
1. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2015 Nov;25(9):689-97. doi: 10.3109/15376516.2015.1070227. 
Epub 2015 Aug 31.

Different regulation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-regulated genes in response to 
dioxin in undifferentiated and neuronally differentiated human neuroblastoma
SH-SY5Y cells.

Imran S(1), Ferretti P(2), Vrzal R(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Science , Palacky
University , Olomouc , Czech Republic and. (2)b Stem Cells and Regenerative
Medicine Section, UCL Institute of Child Health , London , UK.

Some environmental pollutants derived from industrial processes have been
suggested to be responsible for neurological impairment in children, especially
in heavily polluted areas. Since these compounds are usually activators of aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), it would be important to better understand the
molecular pathways downstream of AhR leading to neural deficits. To this purpose,
appropriate in vitro human neural model is much needed. Here we have investigated
whether undifferentiated and neuronally differentiated human neuroblastoma cells,
SH-SY5Y cells, can provide a suitable model for monitoring AhR activity induced
by environmental pollutants, focusing on 2,3,7,8-tetrachlordibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD), a known activator of AhR. Further characterization of differentiated
SH-SY5Y showed an increase in AhRR (aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor), no
change in ARNT1 (AhR nuclear translocator 1), and a decrease in ARNT2 expression 
with differentiation; in contrast, AhR was undetectable in both undifferentiated 
and differentiated cells. Nonetheless, treatment of parental as well as
differentiated SH-SY5Y cells with TCDD resulted in the induction of AhR-regulated
genes, CYP1A1 and CYP1B1; AhRR expression was also affected, but to a much
smaller extent. These results indicate that undifferentiated SH-SY5Y are less
sensitive to TCDD than neuronally differentiated ones, suggesting a higher
resistance of the undifferentiated tumor cells to toxic insults. They also
suggest that TCDD in these cells may not act via direct activation of AhR that is
undetectable in SH-SY5Y as well as in differentiated neurons. Hence, these cells 
do not provide an appropriate model for studying ligand-mediated activation of
AhR.

PMID: 26567990  [PubMed - in process]


2. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol. 2016 Jan;96(1):55-61. doi:
10.1007/s00128-015-1683-5. Epub 2015 Oct 27.

A Study of 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin Induced Liver Injury in Jian Carp 
(Cyprinus carpio var. Jian) Using Precision-Cut Liver Slices.

Du JL(1,)(2), Cao LP(1,)(2), Liu YJ(3), Jia R(3), Yin GJ(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fisheries and Germplasm Resources Utilization,
Ministry of Agriculture, Freshwater Fisheries Research Center, Chinese Academy of
Fishery Sciences, Wuxi, 214081, China. (2)International Joint Research Laboratory
for Fish Immunopharmacology, Freshwater Fisheries Research Center, Chinese
Academy of Fishery Sciences, Wuxi, 214081, China. (3)Wuxi Fisheries College,
Nanjing Agricultural University, Wuxi, 214081, China. (4)Key Laboratory of
Freshwater Fisheries and Germplasm Resources Utilization, Ministry of
Agriculture, Freshwater Fisheries Research Center, Chinese Academy of Fishery
Sciences, Wuxi, 214081, China. yingj@ffrc.cn. (5)International Joint Research
Laboratory for Fish Immunopharmacology, Freshwater Fisheries Research Center,
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Wuxi, 214081, China. yingj@ffrc.cn. (6)Wuxi 
Fisheries College, Nanjing Agricultural University, Wuxi, 214081, China.
yingj@ffrc.cn.

The aim of this study was to establish a model for the study of liver injury
induced by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in Jian carp using
precision-cut liver slices (PCLS). PCLS were treated with TCDD at concentrations 
of 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.3, and 0.6 µg/L for 6 h, followed by collection of the culture
supernatant and PCLS for analysis. Several biochemical indices were analyzed,
including glutamic pyruvic transaminase (GPT), glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase 
(GOT), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione
peroxidase (GSH-Px), and malondialdehyde (MDA). Expression of mRNA was also
estimated for cytochrome P4501A (CYP1A), aryl hydrocarbon receptor2 (AhR2), and
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator2 (ARNT2). Results showed that some
significant effects (p < 0.05) in MDA, GSH-Px and PCLS viability were observed at
a TCDD concentration as low as 0.05 µg/L, and the observed effects increased with
exposure concentration. Following exposure to TCDD for 6 h at a concentration of 
0.3 µg/L, significant increases (p < 0.01) in the content of GPT, GOT, MDA, and
LDH were observed, while SOD activity, GSH-Px activity, and PCLS viability were
decreased (p < 0.01 or p < 0.05). Exposure to 0.3 µg/L TCDD also resulted in
increased expression of mRNA for CYP1A, AhR2, and ARNT2. Overall, these results
provide evidence of TCDD-induced liver injury and oxidative stress in Jian carp. 
These results also support the use of PCLS as an in vitro model for the
evaluation of hepatotoxicity in Jian carp.

PMID: 26508429  [PubMed - in process]


3. Aquat Toxicol. 2015 Aug;165:222-30. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2015.06.006. Epub 2015
Jun 17.

Diluted bitumen causes deformities and molecular responses indicative of
oxidative stress in Japanese medaka embryos.

Madison BN(1), Hodson PV(2), Langlois VS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Royal Military College of
Canada, Canada. (2)School of Environmental Studies, Queen's University, Kingston,
ON, Canada. (3)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Royal Military
College of Canada, Canada; School of Environmental Studies, Queen's University,
Kingston, ON, Canada. Electronic address: Valerie.Langlois@rmc.ca.

This study characterized the toxicity and physiological effects of unweathered
diluted bitumen (Access Western Blend dilbit; AWB) to fish. Embryos of Japanese
medaka (Oryzias latipes) were exposed for 17 days to dilutions of
physically-dispersed (water accommodated fraction; WAF) and chemically-dispersed 
(chemically-enhanced WAF; CEWAF) dilbit. AWB dilbit exposure was not lethal to
medaka, but resulted in a high prevalence of blue sac disease (BSD), impaired
development, and abnormal or un-inflated swim bladders at hatch. Physiological
effects were indicated by the relative mRNA levels of key genes associated with, 
among others, cell cycling and the response to mutations (p53), xenobiotic
metabolism (ahr, arnt2), phase I (cyp1a) and II processes associated with
oxidative stress (cat, g6pdh, hsp70, gst, gpx, gsr, nfe2, and sod). AWB dilbit
treatment increased p53 and cyp1a transcript levels (1.5-fold and >15-fold,
respectively), with significant, but less pronounced changes in indicators of
oxidative stress and metabolism. The exposure-related changes in embryotoxicity
and mRNA synthesis were consistent with metabolism of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) to reactive and toxic metabolites. Medaka embryos responded
similarly to WAF and CEWAF treatments, but CEWAF was about 100 times more
efficient in delivering toxic concentrations of PAHs. The toxicity of
chemically-dispersed nujol, a non-toxic mineral oil used as an experimental
control, suggested that a portion of the observed effects of AWB could be
attributed to excess dispersant in solution. This first study of the
physiological effects of dilbit toxicity to fish embryos provides a baseline to
compare toxicity between dilbit and conventional crude oils, and the groundwork
for the development of molecular biomarkers of the sensitivity and level of risk 
of native Canadian fish species to dilbit exposure.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26118968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Autism. 2015 Feb 27;6:9. doi: 10.1186/s13229-015-0009-0. eCollection 2015.

Genetic variant rs17225178 in the ARNT2 gene is associated with Asperger
Syndrome.

Di Napoli A(1), Warrier V(1), Baron-Cohen S(2), Chakrabarti B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Autism Research Centre, University of Cambridge,
Douglas House, 18B Trumpington Road, Cambridge, CB2 8AH UK. (2)Department of
Psychiatry, Autism Research Centre, University of Cambridge, Douglas House, 18B
Trumpington Road, Cambridge, CB2 8AH UK ; Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS
Foundation Trust, CLASS Clinic, Cambridge, UK. (3)Centre for Integrative
Neuroscience and Neurodynamics, School of Psychology and Clinical Language
Sciences, University of Reading, Reading, UK.

BACKGROUND: Autism Spectrum Conditions (ASC) are neurodevelopmental conditions
characterized by difficulties in communication and social interaction, alongside 
unusually repetitive behaviours and narrow interests. Asperger Syndrome (AS) is
one subgroup of ASC and differs from classic autism in that in AS there is no
language or general cognitive delay. Genetic, epigenetic and environmental
factors are implicated in ASC and genes involved in neural connectivity and
neurodevelopment are good candidates for studying the susceptibility to ASC. The 
aryl-hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2 (ARNT2) gene encodes a
transcription factor involved in neurodevelopmental processes, neuronal
connectivity and cellular responses to hypoxia. A mutation in this gene has been 
identified in individuals with ASC and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
have been nominally associated with AS and autistic traits in previous studies.
METHODS: In this study, we tested 34 SNPs in ARNT2 for association with AS in 118
cases and 412 controls of Caucasian origin. P values were adjusted for multiple
comparisons, and linkage disequilibrium (LD) among the SNPs analysed was
calculated in our sample. Finally, SNP annotation allowed functional and
structural analyses of the genetic variants in ARNT2. We tested the replicability
of our result using the genome-wide association studies (GWAS) database of the
Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC).
RESULTS: We report statistically significant association of rs17225178 with AS.
This SNP modifies transcription factor binding sites and regions that regulate
the chromatin state in neural cell lines. It is also included in a LD block in
our sample, alongside other genetic variants that alter chromatin regulatory
regions in neural cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that rs17225178 in the ARNT2 gene is
associated with AS and support previous studies that pointed out an involvement
of this gene in the predisposition to ASC.

PMCID: PMC4350913
PMID: 25745553  [PubMed]


5. Tumour Biol. 2015 Mar;36(3):2111-9. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2820-1. Epub 2015 Jan
23.

ARNT2 is downregulated and serves as a potential tumor suppressor gene in
non-small cell lung cancer.

Yang B(1), Yang E, Liao H, Wang Z, Den Z, Ren H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Health
Science Center, Xi'an Jiao Tong University, 277 The West of Yan Ta Road, Xi'an,
710061, Shanxi, China.

The present study aims to investigate the expression pattern of aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor nuclear translocator 2 (ARNT2) protein and its clinical significance in 
human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We investigated the expression levels
of ARNT2 in 104 NSCLC surgical specimens by immunohistochemistry and then
analyzed its clinical significance. Additionally, the role of ARNT2 on the
biological properties of the NSCLC line HCC827 was experimentally tested in vitro
and in vivo to confirm the clinical observations. We found that the expression
level of ARNT2 was significantly higher in normal lung tissues compared with
NSCLC tissues (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). Overall survival (OS) of patients with a high
intratumoral ARNT2 level was significantly longer than survival of those with a
low ARNT2 level (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004). In addition, intratumoral ARNT2 expression was an
independent prognostic factors for OS (hazard ratio [HR]<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.529; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001).
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay showed
that the ARNT2 overexpression inhibited cell viability, while ARNT2 knockdown
promoted cell growth in NSCLC cell lines HCC827 and A549. Annexin V/PI assay
showed that ARNT2 overexpression increased cell apoptosis, while ARNT2 knockdown 
decreased cell apoptosis in HCC827 and A549 cells. Moreover, in vivo study showed
that attenuated ARNT2 expression in HCC827 cells greatly promoted tumor growth,
while overexpressed ARNT2 remarkably inhibited tumor growth in a HCC827 xenograft
model. Taken together, our data demonstrate that ARNT2 might serve as a tumor
suppressor in NSCLC progression.

PMID: 25613063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015 Jun;30(6):1085-93. doi: 10.1111/jgh.12905.

Downregulation of ARNT2 promotes tumor growth and predicts poor prognosis in
human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Li W(1), Liang Y, Yang B, Sun H, Wu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
Fudan University, Shanghai, China; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical
College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Aryl-hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2 (ARNT2) is a
transcriptional regulator and member of the basic helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-SIM
(bHLH/PAS) superfamily. Recently, evidence of that ARNT is involved in
carcinogenesis and cancer progression has emerged. The aim of current study was
to investigate the role of ARNT2, a homolog of ARNT, in tumor growth, invasion,
and prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: Tissue microarray and immunohistochemical staining were used to examine 
the expression of ARNT2 in 195 HCC tissues. Factors associated with ARNT2 levels 
were assessed by univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses. Cell
proliferation, migration, and invasion assays were performed by using ARNT2
silencing and overexpressing HCCLM6 cell line. Orthotopic xenograft HCC model was
used to elucidate the effects of ARNT2 on HCC progression in vivo.
RESULTS: High intratumoral of ARNT2 level was well correlated with longer overall
survival (OS) and lower tumor to recurrence (TTR) of HCC patients after
resection. Multivariate analysis revealed that intratumoral ARNT2 overexpression 
was an independent prognostic factor for both OS and TTR. Knockdown of ARNT2 in
HCCLM6 cells was significantly enhanced while overexpression of ARNT2
significantly inhibited the ability of cell proliferation, invasion, and
migration. In animal studies, downregulation of ARNT2 in HCCLM6 cells promoted,
whereas upregulation of ARNT2 in HCCLM6 cells reduced HCCLM6 growth in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that ARNT2 plays an inhibitory role in HCC
progression and suggest that ARNT2 may be a potential prognostic predictor and
therapeutic target for HCC.

© 2015 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley Publishing
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25611915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Chem Neuroanat. 2014 Nov;61-62:64-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jchemneu.2014.07.001. Epub
2014 Jul 10.

Differential distribution of hypoxia-inducible factor 1-beta (ARNT or ARNT2) in
mouse substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area.

Dela Cruz JA(1), Schmidt-Kastner R(2), Stevens JA(3), Steinbusch HW(3), Rutten
BP(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Mental Health and Neuroscience (MHeNs), Faculty of Health, Medicine 
and Life Sciences, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands;
Department of Psychology, Neuropsychology Doctoral Subprogram, The City
University of New York (CUNY) Graduate Center, New York, NY, USA. (2)School of
Mental Health and Neuroscience (MHeNs), Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life
Sciences, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands; C.E.
Schmidt College of Medicine, Florida Atlantic University (FAU), Boca Raton, FL,
USA. (3)School of Mental Health and Neuroscience (MHeNs), Faculty of Health,
Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht,
Netherlands. (4)School of Mental Health and Neuroscience (MHeNs), Faculty of
Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University Medical Center,
Maastricht, Netherlands. Electronic address: b.rutten@maastrichtuniversity.nl.

Hypoxia has been proposed as a mechanism underlying gene-environment interactions
in the neurodevelopmental model of schizophrenia, and hypoxia-inducible factor 1 
(HIF-1) could mediate the interactions. In the current study, we analyzed the
HIF-1 beta subunit, as formed by aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT) or ARNT2, in the mouse substantia nigra (SN) and the ventral tegmental
area (VTA). We performed immunohistochemical studies of ARNT and ARNT2 in the
adult mouse brain, and colocalization analyses, with specific emphasis on
dopaminergic cells, i.e. tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunoreactive cells.
Bioinformatic analyses identified shared protein partners for ARNT and ARNT2.
ARNT immunoreactivity showed widespread neuronal labeling without overt regional 
specificity. We observed co-localization of ARNT and TH in the SN compacta and
VTA. Nuclei strongly labeled for ARNT2 were observed in the SN reticulata, while 
only weak immunoreactivity for ARNT2 was found in TH-immunoreactive neurons in SN
compacta and VTA. Stereological analysis showed that ARNT was preferentially
expressed in dopaminergic neurons in SN compacta and VTA. Nuclei strongly labeled
for ARNT2 were present in neocortex and CA1 of hippocampus. Differential
expression of ARNT and ARNT2 in dopaminergic neurons may relate to the
vulnerability of distinct dopaminergic projections to hypoxia and to functional
vulnerability in schizophrenia and other neuropsychiatric disorders.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25017895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biochem J. 2014 Aug 1;461(3):403-12. doi: 10.1042/BJ20131618.

Characterization of human variants in obesity-related SIM1 protein identifies a
hot-spot for dimerization with the partner protein ARNT2.

Sullivan AE(1), Raimondo A(1), Schwab TA(1), Bruning JB(1), Froguel P, Farooqi
IS(2), Peet DJ(1), Whitelaw ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)*School of Molecular and Biomedical Science (Biochemistry) and Centre for
Molecular Pathology, University of Adelaide, Adelaide 5005, South Australia,
Australia. (2)<U+2225>University of Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories, Wellcome 
Trust-MRC Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2
0QQ, U.K.

The bHLH (basic helix-loop-helix) PAS (Per/Arnt/Sim) transcription factor SIM1
(single-minded 1) is important for development and function of regions of the
hypothalamus that regulate energy homoeostasis and the feeding response.
Low-activity SIM1 variants have been identified in individuals with severe
early-onset obesity, but the underlying molecular causes of impaired function are
unknown. In the present study we assess a number of human SIM1 variants with
reduced activity and determine that impaired function is frequently due to
defects in dimerization with the essential partner protein ARNT2 (aryl
hydrocarbon nuclear translocator 2). Equivalent variants generated in the highly 
related protein SIM2 (single-minded 2) produce near-identical impaired function
and dimerization defects, indicating that these effects are not unique to the
structure of SIM1. On the basis of these data, we predict that other select SIM1 
and SIM2 variants reported in human genomic databases will also be deficient in
activity, and identify two new low-activity SIM1 variants (V290E and V326F)
present in the population. The cumulative data is used in homology modelling to
make novel observations about the dimerization interface between the PAS domains 
of SIM1 and ARNT2, and to define a mutational 'hot-spot' in SIM1 that is critical
for protein function.

PMID: 24814368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Arch Toxicol. 2015 Mar;89(3):393-404. doi: 10.1007/s00204-014-1261-3. Epub 2014
Apr 29.

Progesterone, as well as 17ß-estradiol, is important for regulating AHR battery
homoeostasis in the rat uterus.

Rataj F(1), Möller FJ, Jähne M, Hönscheid P, Zierau O, Vollmer G, Kretzschmar G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Physiology and Endocrinology, Institute for Zoology, Technische
Universität Dresden, 01062, Dresden, Germany.

Several studies indicate that the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), which plays an
important role in mediating the toxicity of many industrial chemicals, plays an
important role in the physiology of female reproductive tract organs. This makes 
it likely that the AHR and additional components of the AHR signalling pathway
are under the control of female sex steroids. In a previous study, we could
already demonstrate the regulation of many members of the AHR battery by
17ß-estradiol (E2) in the uterus of rats. In this study, we addressed the
potential role of progesterone (P4) in this context. In a comparative approach
using ovariectomized rats which were treated for 3 days with either vehicle
control, E2, progesterone (P4) or the combination of both hormones in addition to
sham-operated animals, we could demonstrate that in addition to E2, P4 is also an
important factor in regulating AHR signalling in the rat uterus. P4 has effects
similar to E2 on uterine Ahr, Arnt and Arnt2 mRNA levels, resulting in a
downregulation of these genes, while the E2-mediated downregulation of key AHR
response genes Cyp1a1, Gsta2 and Ugt1 is completely antagonized by P4. As with
E2, P4 leads to an increase in uterine AHR levels, especially in the endometrial 
epithelium despite the decrease in corresponding mRNA levels. This indicates a
complex gene-specific regulatory network involving E2, P4 and possibly AHR itself
to maintain all components of the AHR signalling cascade at the required levels
during all stages of the oestrous cycle and pregnancy.

PMID: 24777823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 15;9(4):e94968. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094968. eCollection
2014.

Heat shock alters the expression of schizophrenia and autism candidate genes in
an induced pluripotent stem cell model of the human telencephalon.

Lin M(1), Zhao D(2), Hrabovsky A(3), Pedrosa E(3), Zheng D(4), Lachman HM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
United States of America. (2)Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America. (3)Department of Psychiatry 
and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York,
United States of America. (4)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America; Department of Neurology,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America;
Dominick Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York, United States of America. (5)Department of Genetics, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America;
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America; Dominick Purpura Department 
of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United
States of America; Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York, United States of America.

Schizophrenia (SZ) and autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are highly heritable
neuropsychiatric disorders, although environmental factors, such as maternal
immune activation (MIA), play a role as well. Cytokines mediate the effects of
MIA on neurogenesis and behavior in animal models. However, MIA stimulators can
also induce a febrile reaction, which could have independent effects on
neurogenesis through heat shock (HS)-regulated cellular stress pathways. However,
this has not been well-studied. To help understand the role of fever in MIA, we
used a recently described model of human brain development in which induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) differentiate into 3-dimensional neuronal
aggregates that resemble a first trimester telencephalon. RNA-seq was carried out
on aggregates that were heat shocked at 39°C for 24 hours, along with their
control partners maintained at 37°C. 186 genes showed significant differences in 
expression following HS (p<0.05), including known HS-inducible genes, as
expected, as well as those coding for NGFR and a number of SZ and ASD candidates,
including SMARCA2, DPP10, ARNT2, AHI1 and ZNF804A. The degree to which the
expression of these genes decrease or increase during HS is similar to that found
in copy loss and copy gain copy number variants (CNVs), although the effects of
HS are likely to be transient. The dramatic effect on the expression of some SZ
and ASD genes places HS, and perhaps other cellular stressors, into a common
conceptual framework with disease-causing genetic variants. The findings also
suggest that some candidate genes that are assumed to have a relatively limited
impact on SZ and ASD pathogenesis based on a small number of positive genetic
findings, such as SMARCA2 and ARNT2, may in fact have a much more substantial
role in these disorders - as targets of common environmental stressors.

PMCID: PMC3988108
PMID: 24736721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Sci Total Environ. 2014 Jun 1;482-483:125-36. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.02.109. Epub 2014 Mar 15.

Benzotriazole UV-stabilizers and benzotriazole: Antiandrogenic activity in vitro 
and activation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway in zebrafish
eleuthero-embryos.

Fent K(1), Chew G(2), Li J(2), Gomez E(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland, School of
Life Sciences, Gründenstrasse 40, CH-4132 Muttenz, Switzerland; ETH Zurich,
Institute of Biogeochemistry and Pollutant Dynamics, Universitätsstrasse 16,
CH-8092 Zürich, Switzerland. Electronic address: karl.fent@fhnw.ch. (2)University
of Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland, School of Life Sciences,
Gründenstrasse 40, CH-4132 Muttenz, Switzerland. (3)UMR Hydrosciences -
Université Montpellier 1, DSESP - Faculté de Pharmacie, BP 1449115, Av. Charles
Flahault, F-34093 Montpellier Cedex 05, France.

Benzotriazole UV-stabilizers (BUVs) are applied in materials for protection
against UV-irradiation. They are widely used, bioaccumulate and share structural 
similarities to benzotriazole. Benzotriazole (1HBT) finds application as
corrosion inhibitor in dishwashing detergents, antifreeze (vehicles) and aircraft
de-icing agent. BUVs and 1HBT are persistent and ubiquitous in the aquatic
environment, but there is little understanding of the ecotoxicological
implications. Here, we comparatively analyze the hormonal activity in vitro and
effects in zebrafish eleuthero-embryos in vivo.
2-(2-Hydroxy-5-methylphenyl)benzotriazole (UV-P),
2-(3-t-butyl-2-hydroxy-5-methylphenyl)-5-chlorobenzotriazole (UV-326), UV-327,
UV-328, UV-329 and UV-320 showed no estrogenicity (YES assay) and androgenicity
(YAS assay). However, UV-P and 1HBT showed significant antiandrogenic activity.
We assessed the transcription profiles of up to 26 genes associated with
different toxicological pathways in zebrafish eleuthero-embryos to elucidate
potential modes of action of UV-P, UV-326 and 1HBT. Embryos were experimentally
exposed for 144hpf to three measured concentrations of 15.8, 70.8, and 690µg/L
UV-P, 7.5, 31.7, and 84.3µg/L UV-326 and 7.9, 97.3 and 1197.3µg/L 1HBT. Among the
26 transcripts, the induction of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) pathway by
UV-P and UV-326 was the most significant finding. UV-P led to dose-related
induction of AHR1, ARNT2 and cyp1a1, as well as of phase II enzymes
glutathione-S-transferase (gstp1) and ugt1a. UV-326 led to a significant
induction of cyp1a1 and AHR2, but down-regulation of gstp1 at 84µg/L. Only little
transcriptional alterations occurred in genes related to apoptosis, oxidative
stress, hormone receptors, and steroidogenesis including aromatase. 1HBT led to
only a few expressional changes at 1197µg/L. Our data lead to the conclusion that
UV-P and UV-326 activate the AHR-pathway, whereas 1HBT shows only little
transcriptional alterations. It should be noted, however, that effects have been 
observed at concentration much higher than those occurring in the environment.
Forthcoming studies should show whether the observed antiandrogenic activities
and transcriptional changes translate into physiological effects .

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24642098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Comput Math Methods Med. 2014;2014:813067. doi: 10.1155/2014/813067. Epub 2014
Feb 3.

A supervised network analysis on gene expression profiles of breast tumors
predicts a 41-gene prognostic signature of the transcription factor MYB across
molecular subtypes.

Liu LY(1), Chang LY(2), Kuo WH(3), Hwa HL(2), Chang KJ(4), Hsieh FJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biometry Division, Department of Agronomy, National Taiwan University, Taipei 
106, Taiwan. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University, Taipei 100, Taiwan. (3)Department of Surgery, College
of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 100, Taiwan. (4)Department of
Surgery, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 100, Taiwan ;
Cheng Ching General Hospital, Taichung 400, Taiwan. (5)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 100,
Taiwan ; Research Center for Developmental Biology and Regenerative Medicine,
National Taiwan University, Taipei 100, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: MYB is predicted to be a favorable prognostic predictor in a breast
cancer population. We proposed to find the inferred mechanism(s) relevant to the 
prognostic features of MYB via a supervised network analysis.
METHODS: Both coefficient of intrinsic dependence (CID) and Galton Pierson's
correlation coefficient (GPCC) were combined and designated as CIDUGPCC. It is
for the univariate network analysis. Multivariate CID is for the multivariate
network analysis. Other analyses using bioinformatic tools and statistical
methods are included.
RESULTS: ARNT2 is predicted to be the essential gene partner of MYB. We
classified four prognostic relevant gene subpools in three breast cancer cohorts 
as feature types I-IV. Only the probes in feature type II are the potential
prognostic feature of MYB. Moreover, we further validated 41 prognosis relevant
probes to be the favorable prognostic signature. Surprisingly, two additional
family members of MYB are elevated to promote poor prognosis when both levels of 
MYB and ARNT2 decline. Both MYBL1 and MYBL2 may partially decrease the tumor
suppressive activities that are predicted to be up-regulated by MYB and ARNT2.
CONCLUSIONS: The major prognostic feature of MYB is predicted to be determined by
the MYB subnetwork (41 probes) that is relevant across subtypes.

PMCID: PMC3930188
PMID: 24639887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Soc Neurosci. 2014;9(4):378-86. doi: 10.1080/17470919.2014.897995. Epub 2014 Mar 
17.

Associations between oxytocin-related genes and autistic-like traits.

Hovey D(1), Zettergren A, Jonsson L, Melke J, Anckarsäter H, Lichtenstein P,
Westberg L.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, The
Sahlgrenska Academy , University of Gothenburg , Gothenburg , Sweden.

Oxytocin has repeatedly been shown to influence human behavior in social
contexts; also, a relationship between oxytocin and the pathophysiology of autism
spectrum disorder (ASD) has been suggested. In the present study, we investigated
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the oxytocin gene (OXT) and the genes
for single-minded 1 (SIM1), aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2
(ARNT2) and cluster of differentiation 38 (CD38) in a population of 1771 children
from the Child and Adolescent Twin Study in Sweden (CATSS). Statistical analyses 
were performed to investigate any association between SNPs and autistic-like
traits (ALTs), measured through ASD scores in the Autism-Tics, ADHD and other
Co-morbidities inventory. Firstly, we found a statistically significant
association between the SIM1 SNP rs3734354 (Pro352Thr) and scores for language
impairment (p = .0004), but due to low statistical power this should be
interpreted cautiously. Furthermore, nominal associations were found between ASD 
scores and SNPs in OXT, ARNT2 and CD38. In summary, the present study lends
support to the hypothesis that oxytocin and oxytocin neuron development may have 
an influence on the development of ALTs and suggests a new candidate gene in the 
search for the pathophysiology of ASD.

PMID: 24635660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Lab Invest. 2014 May;94(5):557-68. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2014.48. Epub 2014 Mar 
3.

HIF-mediated metabolic switching in bladder outlet obstruction mitigates the
relaxing effect of mitochondrial inhibition.

Ekman M(1), Uvelius B(2), Albinsson S(3), Swärd K(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Biomedical
Centre, BMC D12, Lund, Sweden [2] Department of Biology, Faculty of Science,
Sölvegatan 35, Lund, Sweden. (2)Department of Urology, Clinical Sciences, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. (3)Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund
University, Biomedical Centre, BMC D12, Lund, Sweden.

Prior work demonstrated increased levels of hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) 
in the bladder following outlet obstruction, associated with bladder growth and
fibrosis. Here we hypothesized that HIF induction in outlet obstruction also
switches energetic support of contraction from mitochondrial respiration to
glycolysis. To address this hypothesis, we created infravesical outlet
obstruction in female Sprague-Dawley rats and examined HIF induction and
transcriptional activation. HIF-1a increased after 6 weeks of outlet obstruction 
as assessed by western blotting and yet transcription factor-binding site
analysis indicated HIF activation already at 10 days of obstruction. Accumulation
HIF-2a and of Arnt2 proteins were found at 10 days, providing an explanation for 
the lack of correlation between HIF-1a protein and transcriptional activation.
HIF signature targets, including Slc2a1, Tpi1, Eno1 and Ldha increased in
obstructed compared with sham-operated bladders. The autophagy markers Bnip3 and 
LC3B-II were also increased at 6 week of obstruction, but electron microscopy did
not support mitophagy. Mitochondria were, however, remodeled with increased
expression of Cox4 compared with other markers. In keeping with a switch toward
glycolytic support of contraction, we found that relaxation by the mitochondrial 
inhibitor cyanide was reduced in obstructed bladders. This was mimicked by organ 
culture with the HIF-inducer dimethyloxalylglycine, which also upregulated
expression of Ldha. On the basis of these findings, we conclude that HIF
activation in outlet obstruction involves mechanisms beyond the accumulation of
HIF-1a protein and that it results in a switch of the energetic support of
contraction to anaerobic glycolysis. This metabolic adaptation encompasses
increased expression of glucose transporters and glycolytic enzymes combined with
mitochondrial remodeling. Together, these changes uphold contractility when
mitochondrial respiration is limited.

PMID: 24589856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 17;9(1):e85768. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085768. eCollection
2014.

Human variants in the neuronal basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH/PAS)
transcription factor complex NPAS4/ARNT2 disrupt function.

Bersten DC(1), Bruning JB(1), Peet DJ(1), Whitelaw ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science (Biochemistry), and Australian
Research Council Special Research Centre for the Molecular Genetics of
Development, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Neuronal Per-Arnt-Sim homology (PAS) Factor 4 (NPAS4) is a neuronal
activity-dependent transcription factor which heterodimerises with ARNT2 to
regulate genes involved in inhibitory synapse formation. NPAS4 functions to
maintain excitatory/inhibitory balance in neurons, while mouse models have shown 
it to play roles in memory formation, social interaction and neurodegeneration.
NPAS4 has therefore been implicated in a number of neuropsychiatric or
neurodegenerative diseases which are underpinned by defects in
excitatory/inhibitory balance. Here we have explored a broad set of
non-synonymous human variants in NPAS4 and ARNT2 for disruption of NPAS4
function. We found two variants in NPAS4 (F147S and E257K) and two variants in
ARNT2 (R46W and R107H) which significantly reduced transcriptional activity of
the heterodimer on a luciferase reporter gene. Furthermore, we found that
NPAS4.F147S was unable to activate expression of the NPAS4 target gene BDNF due
to reduced dimerisation with ARNT2. Homology modelling predicts F147 in NPAS4 to 
lie at the dimer interface, where it appears to directly contribute to
protein/protein interaction. We also found that reduced transcriptional
activation by ARNT2 R46W was due to disruption of nuclear localisation. These
results provide insight into the mechanisms of NPAS4/ARNT dimerisation and
transcriptional activation and have potential implications for cognitive
phenotypic variation and diseases such as autism, schizophrenia and dementia.

PMCID: PMC3894988
PMID: 24465693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Aquat Toxicol. 2013 Oct 15;142-143:447-57. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2013.09.014.
Epub 2013 Sep 20.

Functional characterization of a full length pregnane X receptor, expression in
vivo, and identification of PXR alleles, in zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Bainy AC(1), Kubota A, Goldstone JV, Lille-Langøy R, Karchner SI, Celander MC,
Hahn ME, Goksøyr A, Stegeman JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA
02543, USA; Departamento de Bioquímica, CCB, Universidade Federal de Santa
Catarina, Florianópolis, SC 88040-900, Brazil.

The pregnane X receptor (PXR) (nuclear receptor NR1I2) is a ligand activated
transcription factor, mediating responses to diverse xenobiotic and endogenous
chemicals. The properties of PXR in fish are not fully understood. Here we report
on cloning and characterization of full-length PXR of zebrafish, Danio rerio, and
pxr expression in vivo. Initial efforts gave a cDNA encoding a 430 amino acid
protein identified as zebrafish pxr by phylogenetic and synteny analysis. The
sequence of the cloned Pxr DNA binding domain (DBD) was highly conserved, with
74% identity to human PXR-DBD, while the ligand-binding domain (LBD) of the
cloned sequence was only 44% identical to human PXR-LBD. Sequence variation among
clones in the initial effort prompted sequencing of multiple clones from a single
fish. There were two prominent variants, one sequence with S183, Y218 and H383
and the other with I183, C218 and N383, which we designate as alleles pxr*1
(nr1i2*1) and pxr*2 (nr1i2*2), respectively. In COS-7 cells co-transfected with a
PXR-responsive reporter gene, the full-length Pxr*1 (the more common variant) was
activated by known PXR agonists clotrimazole and pregnenolone 16a-carbonitrile
but to a lesser extent than the full-length human PXR. Activation of full-length 
Pxr*1 was only 10% of that with the Pxr*1 LBD. Quantitative real time PCR
analysis showed prominent expression of pxr in liver and eye, as well as brain
and intestine of adult zebrafish. The pxr was expressed in heart and kidney at
levels similar to that in intestine. The expression of pxr in liver was weakly
induced by ligands for mammalian PXR or constitutive androstane receptor (NR1I3).
The results establish a foundation for PXR studies in this vertebrate model. PXR 
allelic variation and the differences between the full-length PXR and the LBD in 
reporter assays have implications for assessing the action of PXR ligands in
zebrafish.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3873750
PMID: 24121122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Brain. 2013 Oct;136(Pt 10):3096-105. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt218. Epub 2013 Sep 10.

ARNT2 mutation causes hypopituitarism, post-natal microcephaly, visual and renal 
anomalies.

Webb EA(1), AlMutair A, Kelberman D, Bacchelli C, Chanudet E, Lescai F,
Andoniadou CL, Banyan A, Alsawaid A, Alrifai MT, Alahmesh MA, Balwi M,
Mousavy-Gharavy SN, Lukovic B, Burke D, McCabe MJ, Kasia T, Kleta R, Stupka E,
Beales PL, Thompson DA, Chong WK, Alkuraya FS, Martinez-Barbera JP, Sowden JC,
Dattani MT.

Author information: 
(1)1 Developmental Endocrinology Research Group, UCL Institute of Child Health
and Department of Endocrinology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children,
London, WC1N 1EH, UK.

We describe a previously unreported syndrome characterized by secondary
(post-natal) microcephaly with fronto-temporal lobe hypoplasia, multiple
pituitary hormone deficiency, seizures, severe visual impairment and
abnormalities of the kidneys and urinary tract in a highly consanguineous family 
with six affected children. Homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing revealed a 
novel homozygous frameshift mutation in the basic helix-loop-helix transcription 
factor gene ARNT2 (c.1373_1374dupTC) in affected individuals. This mutation
results in absence of detectable levels of ARNT2 transcript and protein from
patient fibroblasts compared with controls, consistent with nonsense-mediated
decay of the mutant transcript and loss of ARNT2 function. We also show
expression of ARNT2 within the central nervous system, including the
hypothalamus, as well as the renal tract during human embryonic development. The 
progressive neurological abnormalities, congenital hypopituitarism and
post-retinal visual pathway dysfunction in affected individuals demonstrates for 
the first time the essential role of ARNT2 in the development of the
hypothalamo-pituitary axis, post-natal brain growth, and visual and renal
function in humans.

PMCID: PMC3784281
PMID: 24022475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Bioinform Biol Insights. 2013 Jul 14;7:193-216. doi: 10.4137/BBI.S12205. Print
2013.

Bioinformatics and Gene Network Analyses of the Swine Mammary Gland Transcriptome
during Late Gestation.

Zhao W(1), Shahzad K, Jiang M, Graugnard DE, Rodriguez-Zas SL, Luo J, Loor JJ,
Hurley WL.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest Agricultural and Forestry 
University, YangLing, Shaanxi, China. ; Department of Animal Sciences, University
of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA.

We used the newly-developed Dynamic Impact Approach (DIA) and gene network
analysis to study the sow mammary transcriptome at 80, 100, and 110 days of
pregnancy. A swine oligoarray with 13,290 inserts was used for transcriptome
profiling. An ANOVA with false discovery rate (FDR < 0.15) correction resulted in
1,409 genes with a significant time effect across time comparisons. The DIA
uncovered that Fatty acid biosynthesis, Interleukin-4 receptor binding, Galactose
metabolism, and mTOR signaling were among the most-impacted pathways. IL-4
receptor binding, ABC transporters, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, and
Jak-STAT signaling were markedly activated at 110 days compared with 80 and 100
days. Epigenetic and transcription factor regulatory mechanisms appear important 
in coordinating the final stages of mammary development during pregnancy. Network
analysis revealed a crucial role for TP53, ARNT2, E2F4, and PPARG. The
bioinformatics analyses revealed a number of pathways and functions that perform 
an irreplaceable role during late gestation to farrowing.

PMCID: PMC3728096
PMID: 23908586  [PubMed]


19. Neurol Sci. 2014 Feb;35(2):277-82. doi: 10.1007/s10072-013-1505-7. Epub 2013 Jul 
17.

Hippocampal expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2 and
neuronal PAS domain protein 4 in a rat model of depression.

Zhang Z(1), Fei P, Mu J, Li W, Song J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Xinxiang Medical University, Xinxiang, 453002, Henan, China.

The transcription factors aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2
(ARNT2) and neuronal PAS domain protein 4 (NPAS4) may influence emotion and
cognitive function by regulating brain-derived neurotrophic factor expression in 
the hippocampus. We estimated hippocampal ARNT2 and NPAS4 expression in chronic
unexpected mild stress (CUMS) rat model. The possible association was
investigated between expression of these transcription factors and depressive
behaviors. Behavioral tests were conducted before, during, and after 28 days of
group housing or isolation plus CUMS. The sucrose solution consumption test was
used to assess changes in interest and pleasure-seeking, and the open field test 
(OFT) was conducted to measure spontaneous activity and exploratory behavior.
Expression levels of ARNT2 and NPAS4 were estimated by semiquantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Compared to controls, rats
subjected to isolation plus CUMS exhibited significantly reduced weight gain (t =
9.317, P = 0.000), sucrose consumption (t = 3.756, P = 0.003), horizontal
ambulation (t = 2.362, P = 0.041), and number of rearings (vertical motion) (t = 
2.268, P = 0.040). Relative hippocampal NPAS4 expression was significantly lower 
in depression model rats compared to controls (t = 2.995, P = 0.010) but there
was no significant difference in hippocampal ARNT2 expression between groups (t =
0.091, P = 0.929). The relationship between the CUMS model of depression and
NPAS4 expression requires further exploration.

PMID: 23861074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Oncogenesis. 2013 Jul 1;2:e54. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2013.15.

More targets, more pathways and more clues for mutant p53.

Garritano S(1), Inga A, Gemignani F, Landi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

Mutations in the transcription factor p53 are among the most common genetic
alterations in human cancer, and missense p53 mutations in cancer cells can lead 
to aggressive phenotypes. So far, only few studies investigated transcriptional
reprogramming under mutant p53 expression as a means to identify deregulated
targets and pathways. A review of the literature was carried out focusing on
mutant p53-dependent transcriptome changes with the aims of (i) verifying whether
different p53 mutations can be equivalent for their effects, or whether there is 
a mutation-specific transcriptional reprogramming of target genes, (ii)
understanding what is the main mechanism at the basis of upregulation or
downregulation of gene expression under the p53 mutant background, (iii)
identifying novel candidate target genes of WT and/or mutant p53 and (iv)
defining cellular pathways affected by the mutant p53-dependent gene expression
reprogramming. Nearly 600 genes were consistently found upregulated or
downregulated upon ectopic expression of mutant p53, regardless of the specific
p53 mutation studied. Promoter analysis and the use of ChIP-seq data indicate
that, for most genes, the expression changes could be ascribed to a loss both of 
WT p53 transcriptional activation and repressor functions. Pathway analysis
indicated changes in the metabolism/catabolism of amino acids such as aspartate, 
glutamate, arginine and proline. Novel p53 candidate target genes were also
identified, including ARID3B, ARNT2, CLMN, FADS1, FTH1, KPNA2, LPHN2, PARD6B,
PDE4C, PIAS2, PRPF40A, PYGL and RHOBTB2, involved in the metabolism, xenobiotic
responses and cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3740285
PMID: 23817466  [PubMed]


21. J Clin Invest. 2013 Jul;123(7):3042-50. doi: 10.1172/JCI68016. Epub 2013 Jun 17.

Rare variants in single-minded 1 (SIM1) are associated with severe obesity.

Ramachandrappa S(1), Raimondo A, Cali AM, Keogh JM, Henning E, Saeed S, Thompson 
A, Garg S, Bochukova EG, Brage S, Trowse V, Wheeler E, Sullivan AE, Dattani M,
Clayton PE, Datta V, Bruning JB, Wareham NJ, O'Rahilly S, Peet DJ, Barroso I,
Whitelaw ML, Farooqi IS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories and NIHR Cambridge
Biomedical Research Centre, Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2013 Aug 1;123(8):3635. Datta, Vippan [corrected to Datta, Vipan].

Single-minded 1 (SIM1) is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor involved 
in the development and function of the paraventricular nucleus of the
hypothalamus. Obesity has been reported in Sim1 haploinsufficient mice and in a
patient with a balanced translocation disrupting SIM1. We sequenced the coding
region of SIM1 in 2,100 patients with severe, early onset obesity and in 1,680
controls. Thirteen different heterozygous variants in SIM1 were identified in 28 
unrelated severely obese patients. Nine of the 13 variants significantly reduced 
the ability of SIM1 to activate a SIM1-responsive reporter gene when studied in
stably transfected cells coexpressing the heterodimeric partners of SIM1 (ARNT or
ARNT2). SIM1 variants with reduced activity cosegregated with obesity in extended
family studies with variable penetrance. We studied the phenotype of patients
carrying variants that exhibited reduced activity in vitro. Variant carriers
exhibited increased ad libitum food intake at a test meal, normal basal metabolic
rate, and evidence of autonomic dysfunction. Eleven of the 13 probands had
evidence of a neurobehavioral phenotype. The phenotypic similarities between
patients with SIM1 deficiency and melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) deficiency
suggest that some of the effects of SIM1 deficiency on energy homeostasis are
mediated by altered melanocortin signaling.

PMCID: PMC3696558
PMID: 23778139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jun;41(11):5626-38. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt206. Epub 2013
Apr 17.

Reciprocal regulation of the basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim partner
proteins, Arnt and Arnt2, during neuronal differentiation.

Hao N(1), Bhakti VL, Peet DJ, Whitelaw ML.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science (Biochemistry), The University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia.

Basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH/PAS) transcription factors function
broadly in development, homeostasis and stress response. Active bHLH/PAS
heterodimers consist of a ubiquitous signal-regulated subunit (e.g.,
hypoxia-inducible factors, HIF-1a/2a/3a; the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, AhR) or
tissue-restricted subunit (e.g., NPAS1/3/4, Single Minded 1/2), paired with a
general partner protein, aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt or 
Arnt2). We have investigated regulation of the neuron-enriched Arnt paralogue,
Arnt2. We find high Arnt/Arnt2 ratios in P19 embryonic carcinoma cells and ES
cells are dramatically reversed to high Arnt2/Arnt on neuronal differentiation.
mRNA half-lives of Arnt and Arnt2 remain similar in both parent and neuronal
differentiated cells. The GC-rich Arnt2 promoter, while heavily methylated in
Arnt only expressing hepatoma cells, is methylation free in P19 and ES cells,
where it is bivalent with respect to active H3K4me3 and repressive H3K27me3
histone marks. Typical of a 'transcription poised' developmental gene, H3K27me3
repressive marks are removed from Arnt2 during neuronal differentiation. Our data
are consistent with a switch to predominant Arnt2 expression in neurons to allow 
specific functions of neuronal bHLH/PAS factors and/or to avoid neuronal bHLH/PAS
factors from interfering with AhR/Arnt signalling.

PMCID: PMC3675461
PMID: 23599003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Jun;27(6):979-89. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1366. Epub 2013 Apr
18.

Npas4 is activated by melatonin, and drives the clock gene Cry1 in the ovine pars
tuberalis.

West A(1), Dupré SM, Yu L, Paton IR, Miedzinska K, McNeilly AS, Davis JR, Burt
DW, Loudon AS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

Seasonal mammals integrate changes in the duration of nocturnal melatonin
secretion to drive annual physiologic cycles. Melatonin receptors within the
proximal pituitary region, the pars tuberalis (PT), are essential in regulating
seasonal neuroendocrine responses. In the ovine PT, melatonin is known to
influence acute changes in transcriptional dynamics coupled to the onset (dusk)
and offset (dawn) of melatonin secretion, leading to a potential interval-timing 
mechanism capable of decoding changes in day length (photoperiod). Melatonin
offset at dawn is linked to cAMP accumulation, which directly induces
transcription of the clock gene Per1. The rise of melatonin at dusk induces a
separate and distinct cohort, including the clock-regulated genes Cry1 and Nampt,
but little is known of the up-stream mechanisms involved. Here, we used
next-generation sequencing of the ovine PT transcriptome at melatonin onset and
identified Npas4 as a rapidly induced basic helix-loop-helix Per-Arnt-Sim domain 
transcription factor. In vivo we show nuclear localization of NPAS4 protein in
presumptive melatonin target cells of the PT (a-glycoprotein hormone-expressing
cells), whereas in situ hybridization studies identified acute and transient
expression in the PT of Npas4 in response to melatonin. In vitro, NPAS4 forms
functional dimers with basic helix loop helix-PAS domain cofactors aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT), ARNT2, and ARNTL,
transactivating both Cry1 and Nampt ovine promoter reporters. Using a combination
of 5'-deletions and site-directed mutagenesis, we show NPAS4-ARNT transactivation
to be codependent upon two conserved central midline elements within the Cry1
promoter. Our data thus reveal NPAS4 as a candidate immediate early-response gene
in the ovine PT, driving molecular responses to melatonin.

PMCID: PMC3689899
PMID: 23598442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Endocrinology. 2013 Jun;154(6):2174-87. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-2256. Epub 2013 Apr 
11.

The absence of ER-ß results in altered gene expression in ovarian granulosa cells
isolated from in vivo preovulatory follicles.

Binder AK(1), Rodriguez KF, Hamilton KJ, Stockton PS, Reed CE, Korach KS.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Laboratory of
Reproduction and Developmental Toxicology, 111 TW Alexander Drive, MD B3-02,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Determining the spatial and temporal expression of genes involved in the
ovulatory pathway is critical for the understanding of the role of each estrogen 
receptor in the modulation of folliculogenesis and ovulation. Estrogen receptor
(ER)-ß is highly expressed in ovarian granulosa cells, and mice lacking ER-ß are 
subfertile due to inefficient ovulation. Previous work has focused on isolated
granulosa cells or cultured follicles and, although informative, provides
confounding results due to the heterogeneous cell types present including
granulosa and theca cells and oocytes and exposure to in vitro conditions. Herein
we isolated preovulatory granulosa cells from wild-type (WT) and ERß-null mice
using laser capture microdissection to examine the genomic transcriptional
response downstream of pregnant mare serum gonadotropin (mimicking FSH) and
pregnant mare serum gonadotropin/human chorionic gonadotropin (mimicking LH)
stimulation. This allows for a direct comparison of in vivo granulosa cells at
the same stage of development from both WT and ERß-null ovaries. ERß-null
granulosa cells showed altered expression of genes known to be regulated by FSH
(Akap12 and Runx2) as well as not previously reported (Arnt2 and Pou5f1) in WT
granulosa cells. Our analysis also identified 304 genes not previously associated
with ERß in granulosa cells. LH-responsive genes including Abcb1b and Fam110c
show reduced expression in ERß-null granulosa cells; however, novel genes
including Rassf2 and Megf10 were also identified as being downstream of LH
signaling in granulosa cells. Collectively, our data suggest that granulosa cells
from ERß-null ovaries may not be appropriately differentiated and are unable to
respond properly to gonadotropin stimulation.

PMCID: PMC3740481
PMID: 23580569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e57973. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057973. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Altered subcellular localization of heat shock protein 90 is associated with
impaired expression of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway in dogs.

van Steenbeek FG(1), Spee B, Penning LC, Kummeling A, van Gils IH, Grinwis GC,
Van Leenen D, Holstege FC, Vos-Loohuis M, Rothuizen J, Leegwater PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands. f.g.vansteenbeek@uu.nl

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) mediates biological responses to toxic
chemicals. An unexpected role for AHR in vascularization was suggested when mice 
lacking AHR displayed impaired closure of the ductus venosus after birth, as did 
knockout mice for aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) and aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT). The resulting intrahepatic
portosystemic shunts (IHPSS) are frequently diagnosed in specific dog breeds,
such as the Irish wolfhound. We compared the expression of components of the AHR 
pathway in healthy Irish wolfhounds and dogs with IHPSS. To this end, we analyzed
the mRNA expression in the liver of AHR,AIP, ARNT, and other genes involved in
this pathway, namely, those for aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2 
(ARNT2), hypoxia inducible factor 1alpha (HIF1A), heat shock protein 90AA1
(HSP90AA1), cytochromes P450 (CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1), vascular endothelial
growth factor A (VEGFA), nitric oxide synthesase 3 (NOS3), and endothelin (EDN1).
The observed low expression of AHR mRNA in the Irish wolfhounds is in associated 
with a LINE-1 insertion in intron 2, for which these dogs were homozygous. Down
regulation in Irish wolfhounds was observed for AIP, ARNT2, CYP1A2, CYP1B1 and
HSP90AA1 expression, whereas the expression of HIF1A was increased.
Immunohistochemistry revealed lower levels of AHR, HIF1A, and VEGFA protein in
the nucleus and lower levels of ARNT and HSP90AA1 protein in the cytoplasm of the
liver cells of Irish wolfhounds. The impaired expression of HSP90AA1 could
trigger the observed differences in mRNA and protein levels and therefore explain
the link between two very different functions of AHR: regulation of the closure
of the ductus venosus and the response to toxins.

PMCID: PMC3589449
PMID: 23472125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Urol. 2013 Oct;190(4 Suppl):1603-9. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.02.026. Epub 2013 
Feb 19.

Chronic cyclic bladder over distention up-regulates hypoxia dependent pathways.

Stephany HA(1), Strand DW, Ching CB, Tanaka ST, Milne GL, Cajaiba MM, Thomas JC, 
Pope JC 4th, Adams MC, Brock JW 3rd, Hayward SW, Matusik RJ, Clayton DB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Urology, Monroe Carell Jr. Children's Hospital at
Vanderbilt, Nashville, Tennessee.

PURPOSE: Bladder over distention secondary to anatomical or functional
obstruction can eventually lead to pathological changes, including decreased
elasticity and contractile dysfunction. We hypothesized that chronic bladder
distention in a murine model would activate hypoxia dependent signaling pathways 
despite intermittent relief of distention.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Female C57Bl/6 mice were oophorectomized at age 5 to 6
weeks and underwent urethral catheterization and 90-minute bladder distention.
Acute and chronic time points were evaluated. Bladder tissue was harvested for
hematoxylin and eosin, and immunohistochemical staining with the hypoxia markers 
Glut-1 (EMD Millipore, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and Hypoxyprobe-1. Bladder
tissue was also harvested for real-time polymerase chain reaction and oxidative
stress measurement. Hypoxia polymerase chain reaction arrays were done to
determine changes in gene expression. Oxidative stress was measured using
F2-IsoP. Functional bladder changes were evaluated using voided urine blots.
RESULTS: After acute distention and 5 consecutive distentions, bladders showed
marked inflammatory changes on hematoxylin and eosin staining, and evidence of
tissue hypoxia on immunohistochemistry. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction revealed up-regulation of hypoxia and oxidative stress related genes,
including Hif1a, Arnt2, Ctgf, Gpx1 and Hmox1. Measurements of oxidative stress
with F2-IsoP did not change. Voided urine blots before and after bladder
distention showed marked changes with an overactive voiding pattern.
CONCLUSIONS: Chronic bladder distention is possible in the female mouse. It
generates hypoxic injury, as characterized functionally by increased voiding
patterns. This bladder injury model might more closely replicate bladder
dysfunction in patients with poor bladder emptying due to neurological disease,
including those noncompliant with intermittent catheterization.

Copyright © 2013 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4085185
PMID: 23429070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52756. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052756. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Individual variation of the genetic response to bisphenol a in human foreskin
fibroblast cells derived from cryptorchidism and hypospadias patients.

Qin XY(1), Sone H, Kojima Y, Mizuno K, Ueoka K, Muroya K, Miyado M, Hisada A,
Zaha H, Fukuda T, Yoshinaga J, Yonemoto J, Kohri K, Hayashi Y, Fukami M, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Health Risk Research Section, Research Center for Environmental Risk, National
Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: We hypothesized that polymorphic differences among
individuals might cause variations in the effect that environmental endocrine
disruptors (EEDs) have on male genital malformations (MGMs). In this study,
individual variation in the genetic response to low-dose bisphenol A (BPA) was
investigated in human foreskin fibroblast cells (hFFCs) derived from child
cryptorchidism (CO) and hypospadias (HS) patients.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: hFFCs were collected from control children
without MGMs (n=5) and child CO and HS patients (n=8 and 21, respectively). BPA
exposure (10 nM) was found to inhibit matrix metalloproteinase-11 (MMP11)
expression in the HS group (0.74-fold, P=0.0034) but not in the control group
(0.93-fold, P=0.84) and CO group (0.94-fold, P=0.70). Significantly lower levels 
of MMP11 expression were observed in the HS group compared with the control group
(0.80-fold, P=0.0088) and CO group (0.79-fold, P=0.039) in response to 10 nM BPA.
The effect of single-nucleotide polymorphism rs5000770 (G>A), located within the 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2 (ARNT2) locus, on individual
sensitivity to low-dose BPA was investigated in the HS group. A significant
difference in neurotensin receptor 1 (NTSR1) expression in response to 10 nM BPA 
was observed between AA and AG/GG groups (n=6 and 15, respectively. P=0.031).
However, no significant difference in ARNT2 expression was observed (P=0.18).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study advances our understanding of the
specificity of low-dose BPA effects on human reproductive health. Our results
suggest that genetic variability among individuals affects susceptibility to the 
effects of EEDs exposure as a potential cause of HS.

PMCID: PMC3532342
PMID: 23285176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Development. 2013 Jan 1;140(1):93-106. doi: 10.1242/dev.087825.

Sim1a and Arnt2 contribute to hypothalamo-spinal axon guidance by regulating
Robo2 activity via a Robo3-dependent mechanism.

Schweitzer J(1), Löhr H, Bonkowsky JL, Hübscher K, Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology, Institute Biology 1, Faculty of Biology, University of 
Freiburg, Hauptstrasse 1, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.
joern.schweitzer@biologie.uni-freiburg.de

Precise spatiotemporal control of axon guidance factor expression is a
prerequisite for formation of functional neuronal connections. Although
Netrin/Dcc- and Robo/Slit-mediated attractive and repulsive guidance of
commissural axons have been extensively studied, little is known about mechanisms
controlling mediolateral positioning of longitudinal axons in vertebrates. Here, 
we use a genetic approach in zebrafish embryos to study pathfinding mechanisms of
dopaminergic and neuroendocrine longitudinal axons projecting from the
hypothalamus into hindbrain and spinal cord. The transcription factors Sim1a and 
Arnt2 contribute to differentiation of a defined population of dopaminergic and
neuroendocrine neurons. We show that both factors also control aspects of axon
guidance: Sim1a or Arnt2 depletion results in displacement of hypothalamo-spinal 
longitudinal axons towards the midline. This phenotype is suppressed in robo3
guidance receptor mutant embryos. In the absence of Sim1a and Arnt2, expression
of the robo3 splice isoform robo3a.1 is increased in the hypothalamus, indicating
negative control of robo3a.1 transcription by these factors. We further provide
evidence that increased Robo3a.1 levels interfere with Robo2-mediated repulsive
axon guidance. Finally, we show that the N-terminal domain unique to Robo3a.1
mediates the block of Robo2 repulsive activity. Therefore, Sim1a and Arnt2
contribute to control of lateral positioning of longitudinal hypothalamic-spinal 
axons by negative regulation of robo3a.1 expression, which in turn attenuates the
repulsive activity of Robo2.

PMCID: PMC4497291
PMID: 23222439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Arch Toxicol. 2012 Oct;86(10):1603-12. doi: 10.1007/s00204-012-0870-y. Epub 2012 
Jun 4.

Regulation of uterine AHR battery gene expression by 17ß-Estradiol is
predominantly mediated by estrogen receptor a.

Rataj F(1), Möller FJ, Jähne M, Zierau O, Diel P, Vollmer G, Kretzschmar G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Physiology and Endocrinology, Institute for Zoology, Technische
Universität Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is known to mediate the cellular response to 
numerous xenobiotics including dioxin. Surprisingly AHR knockout mice provide
evidence for the involvement of the AHR signalling cascade in estrogen regulated 
physiological functions of the female reproductive system. Several studies
already aimed to investigate the impact of the AHR mediated xenobiotic response
pathway on estrogen receptor (ER) signalling, whereas on contrary availability of
data describing the effect of 17ß-Estradiol (E2) on the AHR signalling cascade is
rather limited. In this study we observed an inhibitory effect of E2 treatment on
uterine Ahr, Arnt, Arnt2, Ahrr, Cyp1a1, Ugt1 and Nfe2l2 gene expression in
ovariectomized Wistar rats, whereas Cyp1b1, Nqo1 and Gsta2 displayed an increased
transcription. The usage of the ER selective agonists, 16a-LE(2) (ERa selective) 
and 8ß-VE(2) (ERß selective), enabled us to distinguish between ER subtype
specific responses. On mRNA level the observed changes in gene expression were
mainly mediated by ERa except for the expression of Nqo1. In most cases the
activation of ERß caused effects opposite to the ones observed following
activation of ERa. Despite the significant changes in AHR mRNA levels
immunohistochemical staining uterine tissue section did not reveal changes of the
AHR protein level. Taken together our results validate, support and extend the
hypothesis of uterine crosstalk between AHR and ER signalling pathways.
Furthermore they give an insight into how the AHR and its related genes may
participate in E2 dependent uterine physiological processes and provide another
potential mechanism of action for xenoestrogens.

PMID: 22659940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Hum Genet. 2012 Jul;57(7):434-41. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.48. Epub 2012 May 31.

Association of variants in genes involved in environmental chemical metabolism
and risk of cryptorchidism and hypospadias.

Qin XY(1), Kojima Y, Mizuno K, Ueoka K, Massart F, Spinelli C, Zaha H, Okura M,
Yoshinaga J, Yonemoto J, Kohri K, Hayashi Y, Ogata T, Sone H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Environmental Risk, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Comment in
    J Hum Genet. 2012 Jul;57(7):405-6.

We hypothesized that single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of genes involved in 
environmental endocrine disruptors (EEDs) metabolism might influence the risk of 
male genital malformations. In this study, we explored for association between
384 SNPs in 15 genes (AHR, AHRR, ARNT, ARNT2, NR1I2, RXRA, RXRB, RXRG, CYP1A1,
CYP1A2, CYP1B1, CYP2B6, CYP3A4, CYP17A1 and CYP19A1) and risk of cryptorchidism
(CO) and hypospadias (HS) in 334 Japanese (JPN) males (141 controls, 95 CO and 98
HS) and 187 Italian (ITA) males (129 controls and 58 CO). In the JPN study group,
five SNPs from ARNT2 (rs2278705 and rs5000770), CYP1A2 (rs2069521), CYP17A1
(rs4919686) and NR1I2 (rs2472680) were significantly associated at both allelic
and genotypic levels with risk of at least one genital malformation phenotype. In
the ITA study group, two SNPs in AHR (rs3757824) and ARNT2 (rs1020397) were
significantly associated with risk of CO. Interaction analysis of the positive
SNPs using multifactor dimensionality reduction demonstrated that synergistic
interaction between rs2472680, rs4919686 and rs5000770 had 62.81% prediction
accuracy for CO (P=0.011) and that between rs2069521 and rs2278705 had 69.98%
prediction accuracy for HS (P=0.001) in JPN population. In a combined analysis of
JPN and ITA population, the most significant multi-locus association was observed
between rs5000770 and rs3757824, which had 65.70% prediction accuracy for CO
(P=0.055). Our findings indicate that genetic polymorphisms in genes involved in 
EED metabolism are associated with risk of CO and HS.

PMID: 22648180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Genome Biol. 2012 Jan 20;13(1):R1. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-1-r1.

Genetic adaptation to high altitude in the Ethiopian highlands.

Scheinfeldt LB(1), Soi S, Thompson S, Ranciaro A, Woldemeskel D, Beggs W, Lambert
C, Jarvis JP, Abate D, Belay G, Tishkoff SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Boulevard,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

BACKGROUND: Genomic analysis of high-altitude populations residing in the Andes
and Tibet has revealed several candidate loci for involvement in high-altitude
adaptation, a subset of which have also been shown to be associated with
hemoglobin levels, including EPAS1, EGLN1, and PPARA, which play a role in the
HIF-1 pathway. Here, we have extended this work to high- and low-altitude
populations living in Ethiopia, for which we have measured hemoglobin levels. We 
genotyped the Illumina 1M SNP array and employed several genome-wide scans for
selection and targeted association with hemoglobin levels to identify genes that 
play a role in adaptation to high altitude.
RESULTS: We have identified a set of candidate genes for positive selection in
our high-altitude population sample, demonstrated significantly different
hemoglobin levels between high- and low-altitude Ethiopians and have identified a
subset of candidate genes for selection, several of which also show suggestive
associations with hemoglobin levels.
CONCLUSIONS: We highlight several candidate genes for involvement in
high-altitude adaptation in Ethiopia, including CBARA1, VAV3, ARNT2 and THRB.
Although most of these genes have not been identified in previous studies of
high-altitude Tibetan or Andean population samples, two of these genes (THRB and 
ARNT2) play a role in the HIF-1 pathway, a pathway implicated in previous work
reported in Tibetan and Andean studies. These combined results suggest that
adaptation to high altitude arose independently due to convergent evolution in
high-altitude Amhara populations in Ethiopia.

PMCID: PMC3334582
PMID: 22264333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Arch Toxicol. 2012 Apr;86(4):591-601. doi: 10.1007/s00204-011-0787-x. Epub 2011
Nov 30.

Cadmium modulates expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-associated genes in rat
uterus by interaction with the estrogen receptor.

Kluxen FM(1), Höfer N, Kretzschmar G, Degen GH, Diel P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Research and Sports Medicine, Department of
Molecular and Cellular Sports Medicine, German Sports University Cologne, Am
Sportpark Müngersdorf 6, 50933 Köln, Germany.

Estrogen-like effects of the heavy metal cadmium have been reported in both in
vitro and in vivo studies. Yet, the molecular mechanisms involved in the hormonal
activity of cadmium ions have not been fully elucidated. There are extensive data
on cross-talk between aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and estrogen receptor (ER).
Recently, 17ß-estradiol (E(2)) was found to modulate the expression of AhR and
AhR-regulated genes in rat uterus (Kretzschmar et al. in Mol Cell Endocrinol
321:253-257, 2010). Thus, we hypothesized that cadmium may also affect AhR
signaling and examined whether cadmium or E(2) modulate AhR-associated genes via 
the ER in rat uterus. Ovariectomized Wistar rats received E(2) (0.5 mg/kg bw) or 
cadmium chloride (0.05 and 2 mg/kg bw i.p.) alone and in combination with the
pure anti-estrogen ZK191703. We also co-treated a group with E(2) and cadmium 2
mg/kg bw to assess how they act in concert. Uterus wet weight, uterus epithelial 
height, complement C3 mRNA, and progesterone receptor (PR) protein expression
served as estrogen response parameters, and expression of Mt1a mRNA was analyzed 
as a cadmium responsive gene. The expression of AhR protein and AhR-associated
gene expression, i.e., Ahr, Arnt1, Arnt2, Cyp1a1, and Gsta2, were analyzed to
examine effects on AhR-mediated signaling pathways in the uterus of all groups.
Both, E(2) and cadmium induced C3 and PR expression, and this was antagonized by 
ZK191703. Mt1a expression was clearly induced by cadmium but slightly reduced by 
E(2) compared to controls. Uterine Ahr, Arnt1, Arnt2, and Cyp1a1 expression was
modulated by E(2) via the ER since down-regulation by E(2) was reversed by
anti-estrogen. Cadmium apparently also modulated Cyp1a1 expression via the ER.
Furthermore, cadmium-induced AhR was antagonized by E(2,) and
anti-estrogen-induced Gsta2 expression was antagonized by cadmium. Together our
findings provide evidence for cross-talk of ER and AhR in the rat uterus.

PMID: 22127542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Lab Invest. 2012 Jan;92(1):110-24. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2011.134. Epub 2011 Sep
26.

Loss of Arnt (Hif1ß) in mouse epidermis triggers dermal angiogenesis, blood
vessel dilation and clotting defects.

Wondimu A(1), Weir L, Robertson D, Mezentsev A, Kalachikov S, Panteleyev AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

Targeted ablation of Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) in the
mouse epidermis results in severe abnormalities in dermal vasculature reminiscent
of petechia induced in human skin by anticoagulants or certain genetic disorders.
Lack of Arnt leads to downregulation of Egln3/Phd3 hydroxylase and concomitant
hypoxia-independent stabilization of hypoxia-induced factor 1a (Hif1a) along with
compensatory induction of Arnt2. Ectopic induction of Arnt2 results in its
heterodimerization with stabilized Hif1a and is associated with activation of
genes coding for secreted proteins implicated in control of angiogenesis,
coagulation, vasodilation and blood vessel permeability such as S100a8/S100a9,
S100a10, Serpine1, Defb3, Socs3, Cxcl1 and Thbd. Since ARNT and ARNT2
heterodimers with HIF1a are known to have different (yet overlapping) downstream 
targets our findings suggest that loss of Arnt in the epidermis activates an
aberrant paracrine regulatory pathway responsible for dermal vascular phenotype
in K14-Arnt KO mice. This assumption is supported by a significant decline of von
Willebrand factor in dermal vasculature of these mice where Arnt level remains
normal. Given the essential role of ARNT in the adaptive response to
environmental stress and striking similarity between skin vascular phenotype in
K14-Arnt KO mice and specific vascular features of tumour stroma and psoriatic
skin, we believe that further characterization of Arnt-dependent epidermal-dermal
signalling may provide insight into the role of macro- and micro-environmental
factors in control of skin vasculature and in pathogenesis of environmentally
modulated skin disorders.

PMID: 21946855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. FEBS Lett. 2011 Oct 20;585(20):3310-5. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.09.017. Epub
2011 Sep 19.

siRNA-mediated knockdown of aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2
affects hypoxia-inducible factor-1 regulatory signaling and metabolism in human
breast cancer cells.

Qin XY(1), Wei F, Yoshinaga J, Yonemoto J, Tanokura M, Sone H.

Author information: 
(1)Health Risk Research Section, Research Center for Environmental Risk, National
Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
y_qin@envhlth.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Recent human studies found that the mRNA expression level of aryl-hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator 2 (ARNT2) was positively associated with the
prognosis of breast cancer. In this study, we used small interfering RNA
techniques to knockdown ARNT2 expression in MCF7 human breast cancer cells, and
found that an almost 40% downregulation of ARNT2 mRNA expression increased the
expression of sensitive to apoptosis gene (3.36-fold), and decreased the
expression of von Hippel-Lindau (0.27-fold) and matrix metalloproteinase-1
(0.35-fold). The metabolite analysis revealed the contents of glucose, glycine,
betaine, phosphocholine, pyruvate and lactate involved in the hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF)-1-dependent glycolytic pathway were significantly lower in cells
treated with siARNT2. Our results suggested that ARNT2 might play an important
role in the modulation of HIF-1-regulated signaling and metabolism.

Copyright © 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21945317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Toxicol Lett. 2011 Oct 10;206(2):152-7. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2011.07.007. Epub
2011 Jul 12.

Xenoestrogens down-regulate aryl-hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2 mRNA
expression in human breast cancer cells via an estrogen receptor alpha-dependent 
mechanism.

Qin XY(1), Zaha H, Nagano R, Yoshinaga J, Yonemoto J, Sone H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Environmental Risk, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Japan.

Environmental chemicals with estrogenic activity, known as xenoestrogens, may
cause impaired reproductive development and endocrine-related cancers in humans
by disrupting endocrine functions. Aryl-hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
2 (ARNT2) is believed to play important roles in a variety of physiological
processes, including estrogen signaling pathways, that may be involved in the
pathogenesis and therapeutic responses of endocrine-related cancers. However,
much of the underlying mechanism remains unknown. In this study, we investigated 
whether ARNT2 expression is regulated by a range of representative xenoestrogens 
in human cancer cell lines. Bisphenol A (BPA), benzyl butyl phthalate (BBP), and 
1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(2-chlorophenyl-4-chlorophenyl)ethane (o,p'-DDT) were
found to be estrogenic toward BG1Luc4E2 cells by an E-CALUX bioassay. ARNT2
expression was downregulated by BPA, BBP, and o,p'-DDT in a dose-dependent manner
in estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1)-positive MCF-7 and BG1Luc4E2 cells, but not in
estrogen receptor-negative LNCaP cells. The reduction in ARNT2 expression in
cells treated with the xenoestrogens was fully recovered by the addition of a
specific ESR1 antagonist, MPP. In conclusion, we have shown for the first time
that ARNT2 expression is modulated by xenoestrogens by an ESR1-dependent
mechanism in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21771643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Lipid Res. 2011 Jul;52(7):1411-9. doi: 10.1194/jlr.P013672. Epub 2011 May 10.

Genetic loci for blood lipid levels identified by linkage and association
analyses in Caribbean Hispanics.

Dong C(1), Beecham A, Wang L, Slifer S, Wright CB, Blanton SH, Rundek T, Sacco
RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami,
Miami, FL, USA.

To identify genetic loci influencing blood lipid levels in Caribbean Hispanics,
we first conducted a genome-wide linkage scan in 1,211 subjects from 100
Dominican families on five lipid quantitative traits: total cholesterol (TC), low
density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), high density lipoprotein cholesterol
(HDL-C), triglycerides (TG), and LDL-C/HDL-C ratio. We then investigated the
association between blood lipid levels and 21,361 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNP) under the 1-logarithm of odds (LOD) unit down regions of linkage peaks in
an independent community-based subcohort (N = 814, 42% Dominican) from the
Northern Manhattan Study (NOMAS). We found significant linkage evidence for
LDL-C/HDL-C on 7p12 (multipoint LOD = 3.91) and for TC on 16q23 (LOD = 3.35). In 
addition, we identified suggestive linkage evidence of LOD > 2.0 on 15q23 for TG,
16q23 for LDL-C, 19q12 for TC and LDL-C, and 20p12 for LDL-C. In the association 
analysis of the linkage peaks, we found that seven SNPs near FLJ45974 were
associated with LDL-C/HDL-C with a nominal P < 3.5 × 10(-5), in addition to
associations (P < 0.0001) for other lipid traits with SNPs in or near CDH13,
SUMF2, TLE3, FAH, ARNT2, TSHZ3, ZNF343, RPL7AL2, and TMC3. Further studies are
warranted to perform in-depth investigations of functional genetic variants in
these regions.

PMCID: PMC3122911
PMID: 21558551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2011 Dec;19(12):2394-403. doi: 10.1038/oby.2011.79. Epub
2011 Apr 21.

Replication and extension of association between common genetic variants in SIM1 
and human adiposity.

Swarbrick MM(1), Evans DS, Valle MI, Favre H, Wu SH, Njajou OT, Li R, Zmuda JM,
Miljkovic I, Harris TB, Kwok PY, Vaisse C, Hsueh WC.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center and Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, California, USA.

Haplo-insufficiency of the bHLH (basic helix-loop-helix) transcription factor
single-minded 1 (SIM1) causes severe obesity in mice and humans. We hypothesized 
that common genetic variations in/near SIM1 could exert more subtle effects on
its function and associate with human adiposity. First, SIM1 coding regions were 
sequenced in severely obese subjects, and two common nonsynonymous
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) in complete linkage disequilibrium (LD) 
were identified: Pro352Thr (rs3734354) and Ala371Val (rs3734355). We next carried
out a SNP association study of five adiposity traits (BMI, % body fat, abdominal 
visceral and subcutaneous fat, and leptin concentrations) in 1,699 whites and
1,173 blacks. TagSNPs covering SIM1 and nearby conserved regions, and the only
common nsSNP in SIM1's binding partner aryl-hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator 2 (ARNT2) (Gly679Ser/rs4072568), were investigated. The effects of
rs3734355/4 on SIM1 activity were tested using an in vitro reporter assay. We
replicated previous observations that homozygosity for the 371Val allele was
associated with higher BMI in white males (P = 0.003). Together with previous
findings in white males (combined n = 3,479), BMI was increased by 1.10 kg/m(2)
in 371Val homozygotes (95% confidence interval (CI): 0.25-1.95 kg/m(2), P =
0.01). In vitro, the 352Thr-371Val haplotype impaired SIM1 transcriptional
activity by 22% (P < 0.0001). TagSNP analysis of SIM1 revealed two SNPs in the 3'
region (rs9390322 and rs7746743) and another in intron 5 (rs3734353) to be
significantly associated with various adiposity measures in ethnicity- and
sex-specific manners after multiple testing correction. In white males, rs4072568
in ARNT2 was also associated with BMI (P = 9 × 10(-4)) and % body fat (P =
0.001). Our findings implicate heritable defects of the SIM1-ARNT2 axis in the
predisposition to human obesity.

PMCID: PMC4646950
PMID: 21512513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Neurosci. 2011 Mar 2;31(9):3295-308. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4540-10.2011.

Identification of cis-elements and transcription factors regulating neuronal
activity-dependent transcription of human BDNF gene.

Pruunsild P(1), Sepp M, Orav E, Koppel I, Timmusk T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, 12618 Tallinn,
Estonia. priit.pruunsild@ttu.ee

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is an important mediator of
activity-dependent functions of the nervous system and its expression is
dysregulated in several neuropsychiatric disorders. Regulation of rodent BDNF
neuronal activity-dependent transcription has been relatively well characterized.
Here, we have studied regulation of human BDNF (hBDNF) transcription by membrane 
depolarization of cultured mouse or rat primary cortical neurons expressing hBDNF
gene or transfected with hBDNF promoter constructs, respectively. We identified
an asymmetric E-box-like element, PasRE [basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS
transcription factor response element], in hBDNF promoter I and demonstrate that 
binding of this element by bHLH-PAS transcription factors ARNT2 (aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator 2) and NPAS4 (neuronal PAS domain protein 4) is
crucial for neuronal activity-dependent transcription from promoter I. We show
that binding of CREB (cAMP response element-binding protein) to the
cAMP/Ca(2+)-response element (CRE) in hBDNF promoter IV is critical for
activity-dependent transcription from this promoter and that upstream stimulatory
factor (USF) transcription factors also contribute to the activation by binding
to the upstream stimulatory factor binding element (UBE) in hBDNF promoter IV.
However, we report that full induction of hBDNF exon IV mRNA transcription is
dependent on ARNT2 and NPAS4 binding to a PasRE in promoter IV. Finally, we
demonstrate that CRE and PasRE elements in hBDNF promoter IX are required for the
induction of this promoter by neuronal activity. Together, the results of this
study have identified the cis-elements and transcription factors regulating
neuronal activity-dependent transcription of human BDNF gene.

PMID: 21368041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2011 Jun;38(3):352-5. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2010.09.010. Epub
2011 Jan 26.

Expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor and aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocators in human adenoid tissue.

Kubo K(1), Sakaki M, Ohashi M, Komune S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Fukuoka, Japan. kubokazu@qent.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine whether aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) and AhR nuclear translocators (ARNTs) are expressed in human
adenoid tissue.
METHODS: Paraffin-embedded human adenoid tissue specimens were obtained from
eight children with adenoid hypertrophy. Sections were stained
immunohistochemically with specific polyclonal antibodies to evaluate the
expression pattern of AhR, ARNT1 and ARNT2 were evaluated.
RESULTS: AhR-immunoreactivity was ubiquitously seen in human adenoid tissue such 
as the epithelium, subepithelial layer, germinal center, mantle zone and
interfollicular area. ARNT1 was also widely expressed in the same regions as AhR.
Although ARNT2 was expressed in the human adenoid, the expression level was
significantly lower than that of ARNT1.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that the relationship between AhR and ARNTs may
play an important role in the local immune response in adenoid and that ARNT1 may
be more important than ARNT2 especially in adenoid tissue.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21273015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2011 Apr;153(3):269-79. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpc.2010.11.005. Epub 2010 Dec 4.

Molecular and functional characterization of aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator 1 (ARNT1) and ARNT2 in chicken (Gallus gallus).

Lee JS(1), Kim EY, Iwabuchi K, Iwata H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Toxicology, Center for Marine Environmental
Studies, Ehime University, Bunkyo-cho 2-5, Matsuyama 790-8577, Japan.

Our previous studies have provided evidence that birds have two isoforms of aryl 
hydrocarbon receptors (AHR1 and AHR2) and AHR nuclear translocators (ARNT1 and
ARNT2) that potentially mediate toxic responses to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related compounds. We have also
shown that while both in vitro-expressed chicken AHR1 (ckAHR1) and AHR2 (ckAHR2) 
exhibit binding affinities to TCDD, only ckAHR1 but not ckAHR2 showed a
TCDD-dose-dependent transactivation potency of chicken cytochrome P450 1A5
(ckCYP1A5) in in vitro reporter gene assays. To explore the molecular mechanism
of functional difference in the two ckAHRs, the present study investigated the
molecular characteristics and function of chicken ARNT (ckARNT) that is a
potential dimerization partner for the activation of ckAHR. The full-length
ckARNT1 and ckARNT2 cDNAs were isolated and their alternative splice variants
were also identified. The ckARNT1 transcript was ubiquitously expressed in
various tissues, but ckARNT2 showed restricted expressions in brain, kidney and
eye, indicating a similar expression pattern to mammalian ARNTs. The expressions 
of tagged-ckARNT1 and -ckARNT2 were confirmed in a chicken hepatoma LMH cells by 
western blot analyses, and their interactions with each ckAHR and a specific
recognition DNA element, xenobiotic response element (XRE), were examined by gel 
shift assays. The result showed that ckARNT1 and ckARNT2 dimerize with each ckAHR
isoform and bind with the XRE in a TCDD-dependent manner. Hence, we conclude that
functional loss on the dimerization with ckARNTs or the XRE binding is not the
major cause of the deficient TCDD-dependency of ckAHR2 for the transactivation.
Furthermore, in vitro reporter gene assays showed that transfected ckARNT1 failed
to modulate the transcriptional induction of ckAHR-mediated ckCYP1A5 gene by TCDD
in COS-7 and LMH cells, whereas ckARNT2 could potentiate the TCDD-dependent
response in COS-7 but not in LMH cells. This suggests that ckARNT2 has a distinct
role from ckARNT1 in AHR signaling pathway and in a cell-specific mode of action.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21134488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Gastroenterology. 2011 Feb;140(2):572-582.e2. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.10.044. 
Epub 2010 Oct 25.

Variants in RET associated with Hirschsprung's disease affect binding of
transcription factors and gene expression.

Sribudiani Y(1), Metzger M, Osinga J, Rey A, Burns AJ, Thapar N, Hofstra RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Two noncoding variations in RET-the T allele of the single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs2435357 (Enh1:C>T) and the A allele of the SNP
rs2506004 (Enh2:C>A)-are associated with Hirschsprung's disease. These SNPs are
in strong linkage disequilibrium and located in an enhancer element in intron 1
of the RET gene. The T allele of the Enh1 variant results in reduced expression
of RET, compared with the C allele, because the T allele disrupts binding to the 
transcription factor SOX10. We studied whether the A allele of Enh2 (Enh2-A) also
affects RET gene expression.
METHODS: We evaluated the function of Enh1 and Enh2 using luciferase reporter
assays with constructs that contained each allele, separately or in combination. 
We performed in silico analysis to identify transcription activators or
repressors that bind to Enh2-C.
RESULTS: The Enh1-T and the Enh2-A alleles reduced expression of the luciferase
reporter gene. In silico analysis identified the sequence of Enh2-C and its
surrounding sequence (ACGTG) as a potential binding site for the NXF-ARNT2 and
SIM2-ARNT2 transcription factor heterodimers. The affinity of NXF-ARNT2 for
Enh2-C was confirmed by electrophoresis mobility shift and supershift assays.
Transfection of neuroblastoma cell lines with NXF-ARNT2 or SIM2-ARNT2 increased
and decreased expression of RET, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: More than one SNP on an associated haplotype can influence gene
expression and ultimately disease phenotype. Binding of the transcription factors
NXF, ARNT2, and SIM2 to RET depend on the RET polymorphism of Enh2 and affect RET
expression and the development of Hirschsprung's disease.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20977903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Am J Pathol. 2010 Oct;177(4):1969-76. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.100138. Epub 2010 
Aug 13.

Mice with inactivation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (Aip)
display complete penetrance of pituitary adenomas with aberrant ARNT expression.

Raitila A(1), Lehtonen HJ, Arola J, Heliövaara E, Ahlsten M, Georgitsi M, Jalanko
A, Paetau A, Aaltonen LA, Karhu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP) gene have
been shown to predispose to pituitary adenoma predisposition, a condition
characterized by growth hormone (GH)-secreting pituitary tumors. To study
AIP-mediated tumorigenesis, we generated an Aip mouse model. Heterozygous mice
developed normally but were prone to pituitary adenomas, in particular to those
secreting GH. A complete loss of AIP was detected in these lesions, and full
penetrance was reached at the age of 15 months. No excess of any other tumor type
was found. Ki-67 analysis indicated that Aip-deficient tumors have higher
proliferation rates compared with Aip-proficient tumors, suggesting a more
aggressive disease. Similar to human AIP-deficient pituitary adenomas,
immunohistochemical studies showed that expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator 1 or 2 (ARNT or ARNT2) protein was lost in the mouse tumors,
suggesting that mechanisms of AIP-related tumorigenesis involve aberrant ARNT
function. The Aip(+/-) mouse appears to be an excellent model for the respective 
human disease phenotype. This model constitutes a tool to further study
AIP-associated pituitary tumorigenesis and may be potentially valuable in efforts
to develop therapeutic strategies to treat pituitary adenomas.

PMCID: PMC2947291
PMID: 20709796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2010 Aug;152(2):224-31. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpc.2010.04.010. Epub 2010 Apr 22.

Effects of in ovo exposure to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin on hepatic
AHR/ARNT-CYP1A signaling pathways in common cormorants (Phalacrocorax carbo).

Iwata H(1), Nagahama N, Kim EY, Watanabe MX, Sudo A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Marine Environmental Studies, Ehime University, Bunkyo-cho 2-5,
Matsuyama 790-8577, Japan. iwatah@agr.ehime-u.ac.jp

Our previous studies have isolated multiple isoforms of aryl hydrocarbon
receptors (AHRs) and AHR nuclear translocators (ARNTs) in avian species. However,
roles of such genes on cytochrome P450 1A (CYP1A) expression are not fully
understood. To investigate the effects of dioxins on the hepatic expression
profiles of AHR1, AHR2, ARNT1 and ARNT2 in avian species, and whether the
expression levels of AHRs and ARNTs affect the transcriptions of CYP1A4 and
CYP1A5 genes, the eggs of common (great) cormorants (Phalacrocorax carbo)
collected from Lake Biwa, Japan, were in ovo administrated with 0, 1500 and
4500pg/g egg of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), and the hepatic
expression levels of AHRs, ARNTs and CYP1As in embryos were monitored with
two-step real-time RT-PCR. In young and adult cormorants collected from the same 
location, the hepatic expressions of these genes were also measured to understand
the effects of growth stage. The residue levels of TCDD and other chlorinated
dioxin-like congeners (DLCs) in the body of cormorants were quantified with
high-resolution gas chromatography equipped with mass-spectrometry. There was no 
observable effect of in ovo TCDD treatment even at the highest dosage on
mortality, body weight and morphology of the liver, heart, spleen, kidney and
lung in the embryos. The mRNA expression of ARNT2 was slightly suppressed by the 
treatment with TCDD, while no alteration was observed for the expression of AHR1,
AHR2 and ARNT1. Expressions of CYP1A4 and CYP1A5 were dose-dependently enhanced
by TCDD, but CYP1A4 mRNA level increased more prominently than CYP1A5, indicating
the difference in induction efficiency between the CYP1A isozymes. Comparison of 
hepatic mRNA levels of these genes among embryonic, young and adult cormorants
revealed that young and adult cormorants had greater CYP1A5 expression levels
than embryos, independently of the accumulation levels of DLCs. These results
suggest that the hepatic induction of each CYP1A by DLCs in cormorants occurs in 
an isoform-specific manner and CYP1A5 expression, at least partially, depends on 
the factors related to the growth of cormorants, but the transcriptional
processes of CYP1As are not related to the expression levels of AHRs and ARNTs.
This study yielded results supporting our previous observations that in reality, 
high accumulation of DLCs induces hepatic CYP1A4 and 1A5 expressions in the wild 
cormorant population.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20417310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Brain Res. 2010 May 12;1330:61-71. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.03.005. Epub 2010
Mar 15.

Neuroglobin, cytoglobin, and transcriptional profiling of hypoxia-related genes
in the rat cerebellum after prenatal chronic very mild carbon monoxide exposure
(25 ppm).

Beltran-Parrazal L(1), Acuna D, Ngan AM, Kim E, Ngan A, Kawakami K, Edmond J,
Lopez IA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Head & Neck, UCLA, David Geffen School of
Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The expression of neuroglobin (Ngb) and cytoglobin (Cygb), two recently
discovered globins with a potential neuroprotective activity against hypoxia and 
oxidative stress, was investigated in the cerebellum of young rats (postnatal day
20) after being exposed to chronic mild carbon monoxide (CO) at 25 ppm during
prenatal (group A), prenatal and postnatal (group B), the postnatal period only
(group C), and air (group D). The expression of genes associated with hypoxia
signaling pathways was also investigated in the rat cerebella by real-time RT-PCR
after CO exposure. Ngb and Cygb mRNAs did not change in any CO-exposed group.
Quantitative immunohistochemistry showed no significant change in Ngb protein;
however, there was a significant increase of Cygb protein in rats from groups A, 
B, and C when compared with group D. In group B, genes related to the generation 
of reactive oxygen species (Nos2) and lipid metabolism (Apat2) were upregulated. 
In contrast, no changes were found in the expression of 8 genes typically
upregulated by hypoxic conditions (Angptl4, Arnt2, Casp1, Crebbp, Hif1a, Hif3a,
Mt3, or Vegfa) in any CO-exposed group, suggesting that hypoxia-related gene
expression is not altered by this mild CO exposure. Cygb but not Ngb may protect 
cerebellar cells from the chronic presence of CO exposure during prenatal and
postnatal development.

(c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20230802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2010 Jun 10;321(2):253-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.02.018.
Epub 2010 Feb 20.

Estradiol regulates aryl hydrocarbon receptor expression in the rat uterus.

Kretzschmar G(1), Papke A, Zierau O, Möller FJ, Medjakovic S, Jungbauer A,
Vollmer G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Physiology & Endocrinology, Institute for Zoology, Technische
Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany. georg.kretzschmar@tu-dresden.de

Several authors have investigated the role of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) in 
the reproductive tract, but there are no data available whether 17beta-estradiol 
(E2) regulates expression of members of the AHR pathway in the uterus. We
therefore examined the mRNA expression of Ahr as well as the genes of the AHR
dimerization partners ARNT1 and ARNT2 and the AHR regulated genes Cyp1a1 and
Gsta2 in the uterus of ovariectomized rats after administration of E2 at two
different doses. The data show that Ahr mRNA expression is downregulated while
AHR protein amounts increased in all uterine tissue compartments. In addition we 
observed a downregulation of Arnt1, Arnt2 and Cyp1a1 while Gsta2 mRNA expression 
is upregulated by E2 in a dose-dependent manner. These results show that members 
of the AHR pathway are regulated by E2 in the uterus. AHR may therefore play an
important role in the mediation of uterine estrogenic effects.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20176079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2010 Jan;18(1):27-31. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1007-3418.2010.01.007.

[Effects of ARNT2 gene on invasion and migration of human hepatocellular
carcinoma HCCLM6 cell line].

[Article in Chinese]

Li WW(1), Wu WZ, Liang Y, Xiao CL, Tao ZH, Wang L, Sun HC, Fan J.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute and Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan Unviersity, Shanghai
200032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of ARNT2 on invasion and migration of
HCCLM6 cells.
METHODS: Four short hairpin oligos targeting to ARNT2 were s cloned into the
pLVTHM vector. Lentiviral vectors shRNA-ARNT2i, pCMV-dR8.74 and pMD2G were
cotransfected into 293T cells using Lipofectamine 2000. HCCLM6 was infected with 
virus supernatant. ARNT2 mRNA and protein expressions were detected using
quantitative Real time-PCR and Western blot, respectively. The invasion and
migration of HCCLM6 cells were evaluated using wound healing assay and cell
invasion assay in vitro. Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS 16.0.
RESULTS: The relative mRNA levels of ARNT2 were 0.154+/-0.024, 0.860+/-0.145,
1.004+/-0.009 in shRNA-ARNT2i virus infected HCCLM6 cells, mock-infected cells
and control vector virus infected cells (F = 113.14, P more than 0.01). The
expression of ARNT2 at protein level was 16.45+/-1.6, 44.56+/-2.07 in the HCCLM6 
cells infected with shRNA-ARNT2i virus and negative control vector virus,
respectively (t = 18.58, P less than 0.01). The scrape wound of HCCLM6 cells
infected with shRNA-ARNT2i virus healed faster than cells infected with control
vector virus or mock-infected cells. The number of cells invading through
Matrigel was higher in the HCCLM6 cells infected with shRNA-ARNT2i virus
(13.25+/-1.04) than that in mock-infected HCCLM6 cells and the HCCLM6 cells
infected with negative control vector virus (6.50+/-2.56, 6.75+/-2.05) (F =
29.645, P less than 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Inhibition of ARNT2 gene promotes the invasion and migration of
HCCLM6 cells.

PMID: 20128965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Neuroscience. 2009 Aug 18;162(2):396-403. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.04.055. Epub 2009 May 3.

Neuroglobin-overexpression alters hypoxic response gene expression in primary
neuron culture following oxygen glucose deprivation.

Yu Z(1), Liu J, Guo S, Xing C, Fan X, Ning M, Yuan JC, Lo EH, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroprotection Research Laboratory, Department of Neurology and Radiology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Program in Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, 
149 13th Street, Room 2411A, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Neuroglobin (Ngb) is a tissue globin specifically expressed in neurons. Our
laboratory and others have shown that Ngb overexpression protects neurons against
hypoxia/ischemia, but the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Recent 
studies demonstrate that hypoxia/ischemia induces a multitude of spatially and
temporally regulated responses in gene expression, and initial evidence suggested
that Ngb might function in altering biological processes of gene expression. In
this study, we asked how Ngb may help regulate genes responsive to hypoxia.
Expression of hypoxic response genes following oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD)
was examined using mRNA arrays in neuroglobin-overexpressing transgenic (Ngb-Tg) 
and wild type (WT) mouse neurons. From a total of 113 genes on the microarray,
mRNA expression of 65 genes was detected. Under rest condition, 14 genes were
downregulated in Ngb-Tg neurons compared to WT. In WT neurons, after 4-h OGD
followed by 4-h reoxygenation (O4/R4), 20 genes were significantly downregulated,
and only Fos mRNA was significantly increased. However, out of the 20
downregulated genes in WT neurons, 12 of them were no longer significantly
changed in Ngb-Tg neurons: Add1, Arnt2, Camk2g, Cstb, Dr1, Epas1, Gna11, Hif1a,
Il6st, Khsrp, Mars and Rara. Among these 12 genes, 8 (Add1, Camk2g, Cstb, Dr1,
Epas1, Gna11, Hif1a, Khsrp) were already reduced in Ngb-Tg neurons compared to WT
under rest conditions. Additionally, three genes that initially showed no changes
in WT neurons (Ctgf, Egfr and Pea15) were downregulated after OGD in the Ngb-Tg
neurons. These findings suggest that Ngb overexpression modulates mRNA expression
of multiple hypoxic response genes in the early phase after OGD/reoxygenation.
Further studies on these gene networks and interactions may lead to better
understanding of Ngb in signaling pathways that contribute to neuroprotection.

PMCID: PMC2787411
PMID: 19401220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Zebrafish. 2009 Mar;6(1):79-91. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2008.0536.

Potential roles of Arnt2 in zebrafish larval development.

Hill AJ(1), Heiden TC, Heideman W, Peterson RE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53705-2222,
USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is a basic
helix-loop-helix-PAS heterodimeric transcription factor that dimerizes with other
basic helix-loop-helix-PAS proteins to mediate biological responses. The function
of ARNT2 is poorly understood. Here we provide an initial characterization of the
zebrafish arnt2 null (arnt2(-/-)) mutant to identify functions of Arnt2 during
development. Arnt2(-/-) mutant zebrafish develop normally until 120 hours
postfertilization (hpf ) when morphological changes and functional deficits
occur. The C-start escape response initiated by either touch or startle stimuli
is absent in the mutants. Brain ventricle size is markedly increased at 120 hpf. 
Heart ventricles are enlarged, with decreased ventricle wall thickness. A cardiac
arrhythmia, characterized by missing beats, is also observed in the mutants. This
is associated with bradycardia in arnt2(-/-) larvae. Dilated liver sinusoids
merge abnormally to form an extensive, labyrinth-like network of vascular
channels. External appearance of arnt2(-/-) larvae at 120 hpf is
indistinguishable from wild type except that the swim bladder is not inflated.
The arnt2(-/-) mutants are not debilitated when phenotypic effects are first
detected at 120 hpf that culminate in mortality, 4 days later around 216 hpf.
Gross morphological assessment of the development of forebrain, midbrain, and
hindbrain regions, neuromasts and Mauthner neurons, inner ear semicircular canals
and otoliths, primary motor neurons, trigeminal ganglia, and trunk skeletal
muscles, before or when the arnt2(-/-) phenotype was observed, failed to
demonstrate a difference from wild type. The only effect in arnt2(-/-) larvae
that occurred before 120 hpf was a decrease in expression of sim1, an Arnt2
dimerization partner, in the hypothalamus and ventral thalamus at 72 hpf. Further
research is needed to determine if the primary functions of Arnt2 occur during
the larval stage, when the phenotype is observed, or earlier in development.

PMCID: PMC3140857
PMID: 19374551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Mar;1789(3):192-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2009.01.003.

Characterization of functional heterodimer partners in brain for a bHLH-PAS
factor NXF.

Ooe N(1), Saito K, Kaneko H.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Science Laboratory, Sumitomo Chemical Co., Ltd.,
Konohana-ku, Osaka 554-8558, Japan. ooe@sc.sumitomo-chem.co.jp

NXF, a brain-specific bHLH-PAS transcription factor, can regulate the
transcription of target genes forming heterodimer complexes, along with several
other bHLH-PAS family members (Arnt1, Arnt2, BMAL1) in vitro. To characterize its
dimerization partner protein(s) in vivo, we performed a co-immunoprecipitation
analysis of whole brain extracts using anti-NXF IgG. In the protein fraction
co-precipitating with the NXF protein, in addition to the major precipitate of
Arnt2 protein, a faint protein band of Arnt1 protein was consistently observed.
The following in vitro co-precipitation analysis with recombinant proteins and
yeast-two-hybrid analysis confirmed the specific physical associations. Reporter 
gene analyses further revealed comparable levels of transcriptional activity with
Arnt1:NXF and Arnt2:NXF combinations. mRNA expression for Arnt1 was found in
several NXF-containing regions in brain, even an example with no Arnt2
expression. The data thus suggest that Arnt1, as well as Arnt2, could have the
separate significance for NXF signaling, with Arnt1: NXF heterodimer complexes in
vivo.

PMID: 19284974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Development. 2009 Mar;136(6):1007-17. doi: 10.1242/dev.033878.

Zebrafish diencephalic A11-related dopaminergic neurons share a conserved
transcriptional network with neuroendocrine cell lineages.

Löhr H(1), Ryu S, Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology, Institute Biology I, Faculty of Biology, University of 
Freiburg, Hauptstrasse 1, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Vertebrate dopaminergic neurons develop in distinct neural territories to
constitute one of the major neuromodulatory systems. We have identified a
zebrafish mutation in the bHLH-PAS family member arnt2, based on a strong
reduction in cell number of specific dopaminergic neuron groups in the
hypothalamus and posterior tuberculum. Knockdown of sim1 causes a dopaminergic
phenotype similar to arnt2 mutants, suggesting that Sim1 acts as a binding
partner of Arnt2, similar to their role in hypothalamic neuroendocrine cell
specification. sim1, arnt2 and otp are co-expressed in dopaminergic neurons, and 
combined overexpression of Sim1 and Otp leads to formation of supernumerary
dopaminergic neurons in the ventral diencephalon. Arnt2, Sim1 and Otp thus are
core components of a conserved transcriptional network, which specifies
neuroendocrine as well as A11-related dopaminergic neurons in the fish
hypothalamus and posterior tuberculum. Our data suggest a common evolutionary
origin of specific hypothalamic neuroendocrine and dopaminergic systems.

PMID: 19234064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Genome Res. 2009 Feb;19(2):255-65. doi: 10.1101/gr.084541.108. Epub 2008 Dec 11.

Genome-wide detection and analysis of hippocampus core promoters using DeepCAGE.

Valen E(1), Pascarella G, Chalk A, Maeda N, Kojima M, Kawazu C, Murata M,
Nishiyori H, Lazarevic D, Motti D, Marstrand TT, Tang MH, Zhao X, Krogh A,
Winther O, Arakawa T, Kawai J, Wells C, Daub C, Harbers M, Hayashizaki Y,
Gustincich S, Sandelin A, Carninci P.

Author information: 
(1)The Bioinformatics Centre, Department of Biology and Biotech Research and
Innovation Centre, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaloes vej 5, DK-2200, Denmark.

Finding and characterizing mRNAs, their transcription start sites (TSS), and
their associated promoters is a major focus in post-genome biology. Mammalian
cells have at least 5-10 magnitudes more TSS than previously believed, and deeper
sequencing is necessary to detect all active promoters in a given tissue. Here,
we present a new method for high-throughput sequencing of 5' cDNA tags-DeepCAGE: 
merging the Cap Analysis of Gene Expression method with ultra-high-throughput
sequence technology. We apply DeepCAGE to characterize 1.4 million sequenced TSS 
from mouse hippocampus and reveal a wealth of novel core promoters that are
preferentially used in hippocampus: This is the most comprehensive promoter data 
set for any tissue to date. Using these data, we present evidence indicating a
key role for the Arnt2 transcription factor in hippocampus gene regulation.
DeepCAGE can also detect promoters used only in a small subset of cells within
the complex tissue.

PMCID: PMC2652207
PMID: 19074369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Toxicol Sci. 2008 May;103(1):1-3. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfn032.

Why does ARNT2 behave differently from ARNT?

Hankinson O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.
ohank@mednet.ucla.edu

PMCID: PMC2938178
PMID: 18397918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Radiat Res. 2008 Mar;169(3):280-7. doi: 10.1667/RR1155.1.

Low-dose photons modify liver response to simulated solar particle event protons.

Gridley DS(1), Coutrakon GB, Rizvi A, Bayeta EJ, Luo-Owen X, Makinde AY, Baqai F,
Koss P, Slater JM, Pecaut MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Molecular Radiation Biology Laboratories,
Loma Linda University and Medical Center, Loma Linda, California 92354, USA.
dgridley@dominion.llumc.edu

The health consequences of exposure to low-dose radiation combined with a solar
particle event during space travel remain unresolved. The goal of this study was 
to determine whether protracted radiation exposure alters gene expression and
oxidative burst capacity in the liver, an organ vital in many biological
processes. C57BL/6 mice were whole-body irradiated with 2 Gy simulated solar
particle event (SPE) protons over 36 h, both with and without pre-exposure to
low-dose/low-dose-rate photons ((57)Co, 0.049 Gy total at 0.024 cGy/h). Livers
were excised immediately after irradiation (day 0) or on day 21 thereafter for
analysis of 84 oxidative stress-related genes using RT-PCR; genes up or
down-regulated by more than twofold were noted. On day 0, genes with increased
expression were: photons, none; simulated SPE, Id1; photons + simulated SPE, Bax,
Id1, Snrp70. Down-regulated genes at this same time were: photons, Igfbp1;
simulated SPE, Arnt2, Igfbp1, Il6, Lct, Mybl2, Ptx3. By day 21, a much greater
effect was noted than on day 0. Exposure to photons + simulated SPE up-regulated 
completely different genes than those up-regulated after either photons or the
simulated SPE alone (photons, Cstb; simulated SPE, Dctn2, Khsrp, Man2b1, Snrp70; 
photons + simulated SPE, Casp1, Col1a1, Hspcb, Il6st, Rpl28, Spnb2). There were
many down-regulated genes in all irradiated groups on day 21 (photons, 13;
simulated SPE, 16; photons + simulated SPE, 16), with very little overlap among
groups. Oxygen radical production by liver phagocytes was significantly enhanced 
by photons on day 21. The results demonstrate that whole-body irradiation with
low-dose-rate photons, as well as time after exposure, had a great impact on
liver response to a simulated solar particle event.

PMID: 18302490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Toxicol Sci. 2008 May;103(1):191-206. Epub 2007 Dec 20.

Analysis of Ah receptor-ARNT and Ah receptor-ARNT2 complexes in vitro and in cell
culture.

Dougherty EJ(1), Pollenz RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, Department of
Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620, USA.

ARNT and ARNT2 proteins are expressed in mammalian and aquatic species and
exhibit a high level of amino acid identity in the basic-helix loop-helix
PER/ARNT/SIM domains involved in protein interactions and DNA binding. Since the 
analysis of ARNT2 function at the protein level has been limited, ARNT2 function 
in aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)-mediated signaling was evaluated and compared 
to ARNT. In vitro, ARNT and ARNT2 dimerized equally with the AHR in the presence 
of 2,3,7,8-tetracholorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and ARNT2 outcompeted ARNT for
binding to the AHR when expressed in excess. In contrast, activation of the AHR
with 3-methylcholanthrene or benzo[a]pyrene resulted in predominant formation of 
AHR*ARNT complexes. ARNT2 expressed in Hepa-1 cell culture lines with reduced
ARNT protein resulted in minimal induction of endogenous CYP1A1 protein compared 
to cells expressing ARNT, and mutation of the putative proline residue at amino
acid 352 to histidine failed to produce an ARNT2 that could function in
AHR-mediated signaling. However, the expression of ARNT2 in wild-type Hepa-1
cells reduced TCDD-mediated induction of endogenous CYP1A1 protein by 30%, even
though AHR*ARNT2 complexes could not be detected in nuclear extracts. Western
blot analysis of numerous mouse tissues and various cell culture lines showed
that both endogenous ARNT and ARNT2 could be detected in cells derived from
kidney, central nervous system, and retinal epithelium. Thus, ARNT2 has the
ability to dimerize with the liganded AHR in vitro and is influenced by the
activating ligand yet appears to be limited in its ability to influence
AHR-mediated signaling in cell culture.

PMCID: PMC2396590
PMID: 18096572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008 Aug;110(3):521-30. Epub 2007 Sep 27.

Drug metabolism-related genes as potential biomarkers: analysis of expression in 
normal and tumour breast tissue.

Martinez V(1), Kennedy S, Doolan P, Gammell P, Joyce H, Kenny E, Prakash Mehta J,
Ryan E, O'Connor R, Crown J, Clynes M, O'Driscoll L.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Cellular Biotechnology (NICB), Dublin City University, 
Dublin 9, Ireland.

The complex role of drug metabolism-related enzymes and their possible influence 
in cancer development, treatment and outcome has not yet been completely
elucidated. There is evidence that these enzymes can activate certain
environmental procarcinogens to more toxic derivatives and thus a role has been
proposed for them in carcinogenesis. The fact that they can also inactivate a
number of chemotherapeutic drugs has raised the possibility of these enzymes
influencing the sensitivity of tumour cells to anticancer agents. In this report,
we analyse the expression of drug metabolism-related genes within a whole genome 
microarray study of 104 breast cancer and 17 normal breast specimens.
Kaplan-Meier survival curves, Chi-squared, and Cox Regression analyses were used 
to identify associations between expression of gene transcripts and patients'
clinicopathological and survival data. Our results show that several of these
genes are significantly expressed in both normal and tumour tissue; in many
cases, expression is altered in the tumour specimens as compared to normal breast
tissue. Moreover, expression of ARNT2 and GST A1 was correlated with prognosis.
Kaplan-Meier analysis showed expression of ARNT2 mRNA to correlate significantly 
with favourable disease outcome for patients, in terms of both their disease-free
survival (P = 0.0094) and overall survival (P = 0.0018) times from diagnosis,
while detection of GST A1 mRNA correlated with shortened disease-free survival (P
= 0.0131) and overall survival (P = 0.0028). Multivariate analysis indicated GST 
A1 expression to be an independent prognostic factor for overall survival (P =
0.045). Our results suggest a possible use of ARNT2 and GST A1 as prognostic
breast cancer biomarkers.

PMID: 17899366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Nov 9;363(1):113-8. Epub 2007 Aug 29.

Separate necdin domains bind ARNT2 and HIF1alpha and repress transcription.

Friedman ER(1), Fan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Carnegie Institution of Washington, 3520 San Martin 
Drive, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

PWS is caused by the loss of expression of a set of maternally imprinted genes
including NECDIN (NDN). NDN is expressed in post-mitotic neurons and plays an
essential role in PWS as mouse models lacking only the Ndn gene mimic aspects of 
this disease. Patients haploid for SIM1 develop a PW-like syndrome. Here, we
report that NDN directly interacts with ARNT2, a bHLH-PAS protein and dimer
partner for SIM1. We also found that NDN can interact with HIF1alpha. We showed
that NDN can repress transcriptional activation mediated by ARNT2:SIM1 as well as
ARNT2:HIF1alpha. The N-terminal 115 residues of NDN are sufficient for
interaction with the bHLH domains of ARNT2 or HIF1alpha but not for
transcriptional repression. Using GAL4-NDN fusion proteins, we determined that
NDN possesses multiple repression domains. We thus propose that NDN regulates
neuronal function and hypoxic response by regulating the activities of the
ARNT2:SIM1 and ARNT2:HIF1alpha dimers, respectively.

PMCID: PMC2083645
PMID: 17826745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Gene. 2007 Oct 1;400(1-2):122-30. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Characterization of Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans NXF-like-factors,
putative homologs of mammalian NXF.

Ooe N(1), Saito K, Oeda K, Nakatuka I, Kaneko H.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Science Laboratory, Sumitomo Chemical Co., Ltd.,
Konohana-ku, Osaka 554-8558, Japan. ooe@sc.sumitomo-chem.co.jp

The basic helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS) homology protein family is an 
important class of transcriptional regulators that are involved in a wide variety
of biological processes. In a previous study, we characterized a novel bHLH-PAS
factor 'NXF' as a new member of the mammalian bHLH-PAS family. If model animals
have ortholog genes for NXF, they might have advantages for characterization of
its function and regulation in vivo. Here we document cDNA cloning and
characterization of putative NXF homolog genes (for NXF-like-factors) in
Drosophila and C. elegans. Some conservation of the exon-intron gene architecture
was noted in the bHLH-PAS domains among NXF-like-factors and human NXF. The
NXF-like-factors selectively interacted with an Arnt ortholog in vitro assay.
Moreover, they selectively associated with the mammalian NXF:Arnt2 binding
element in the presence of the Arnt ortholog, and synergistically activated a
mammalian NXF:Arnt-responsive promoter. These data strongly suggest that the
Drosophila and C. elegans NXF-like-factors reported here are homologs of
mammalian NXF. Further elucidation of whether they are true orthologs with the
same function in vivo is now necessary.

PMID: 17628356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2007 May 1;220(3):320-32. Epub 2007 Feb 6.

Microarray analysis of the AHR system: tissue-specific flexibility in signal and 
target genes.

Frericks M(1), Meissner M, Esser C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Umweltmedizinische Forschung (IUF) at the Heinrich
Heine-University of Düsseldorf, Auf'm Hennekamp 50, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

Data mining published microarray experiments require that expression profiles are
directly comparable. We performed linear global normalization on the data of 1967
Affymetrix U74av2 microarrays, i.e. the transcriptomes of >100 murine tissues or 
cell types. The mathematical transformation effectively nullifies
inter-experimental or inter-laboratory differences between microarrays. The
correctness of expression values was validated by quantitative RT-PCR. Using the 
database we analyze components of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) signaling
pathway in various tissues. We identified lineage and differentiation specific
variant expression of AHR, ARNT, and HIF1alpha in the T-cell lineage and high
expression of CYP1A1 in immature B cells and dendritic cells. Performing
co-expression analysis we found unorthodox expression of the AHR in the absence
of ARNT, particularly in stem cell populations, and can reject the hypothesis
that ARNT2 takes over and is highly expressed when ARNT expression is low or
absent. Furthermore the AHR shows no co-expression with any other transcript
present on the chip. Analysis of differential gene expression under 308
conditions revealed 53 conditions under which the AHR is regulated, numerous
conditions under which an intrinsic AHR action is modified as well as conditions 
activating the AHR even in the absence of known AHR ligands. Thus meta-analysis
of published expression profiles is a powerful tool to gain novel insights into
known and unknown systems.

PMID: 17350064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2007 Apr;145(3):379-93. Epub 2007 Jan
30.

Molecular characterization and tissue distribution of aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator isoforms, ARNT1 and ARNT2, and identification of novel
splice variants in common cormorant (Phalacrocorax carbo).

Lee JS(1), Kim EY, Iwata H, Tanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Marine Environmental Studies (CMES), Ehime University, Bunkyo-cho
2-5, Matsuyama 790-8577, Ehime, Japan.

High levels of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related planar
halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (PHAHs) are accumulated in fish-eating birds
including common cormorant (Phalacrocorax carbo). Most of the biochemical and
toxic effects of TCDD are mediated by a basic helix-loop-helix and a conserved
region among Per, ARNT, and Sim (bHLH/PAS) proteins, aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AHR) and AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT). To study the molecular mechanism of
TCDD toxicity in common cormorant as an avian model species, characterization of 
the AHR/ARNT signaling pathway in this species is necessary. The present study
focuses on molecular characterization of ARNT from common cormorant (ccARNT). The
cDNA of the ccARNT isoform, ccARNT1 obtained by the screening of hepatic cDNA
library contains a 2424-bp open reading frame that encodes 807 amino acids,
exhibiting high identities (92%) with chicken ARNT. This isoform contains a
unique 22 amino acid residue in 3' end of PAS A domain as is also recognized in
chicken ARNT. The ccARNT2 cDNA isolated from brain tissue has a 2151-bp open
reading frame. The deduced amino acid sequence of ccARNT2 protein (716 aa) shows 
a conservation of bHLH and PAS motif in its N-terminal region with high
similarities (96% and 78%, respectively) to that of ccARNT1. Using quantitative
RT-PCR methods, the tissue distribution profiles of ccARNT1 and ccARNT2 were
unveiled. Both ccARNT1 and ccARNT2 mRNAs were ubiquitously expressed in all
examined tissues including liver. The expression profile of ccARNT1 was
comparable with that of rodent ARNT1, but ccARNT2 was not with rodent ARNT2,
implying different roles of ARNT2 between the two species. There was a
significant positive correlation between ARNT1 and ARNT2 mRNA expression levels
in the liver of wild cormorant population, indicating that their expressions may 
be enforced by similar transcriptional regulation mechanism. Novel variants of
ccARNT1 and ccARNT2 isoforms that were supposed to arise from their splicing
process were also identified and their hepatic expression profiles were
determined. These results indicate that ccARNT1, ccARNT2 and their splice
variants may more intricately regulate the AHR/ARNT signaling pathway and
consequently may be responsible for the species diversity of toxic effects and
susceptibility to PHAHs.

PMID: 17337252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Brain Res. 2007 Mar 2;1135(1):1-11. Epub 2007 Jan 9.

Transient expression of Nxf, a bHLH-PAS transactivator induced by neuronal
preconditioning, confers neuroprotection in cultured cells.

Hester I(1), McKee S, Pelletier P, Thompson C, Storbeck C, Mears A, Schulz JB,
Hakim AA, Sabourin LA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Ottawa, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Ottawa,
ON, Canada.

Cortical spreading depression (CSD) induces waves of neuronal depolarization that
confer neuroprotection to subsequent ischemic events in the rat brain. To gain
insights into the molecular mechanisms elicited by CSD, we used representational 
difference analysis (RDA) to identify mRNAs induced by potassium depolarization
in vivo. Using this approach, we have isolated a cDNA encoding the SIM2-related
bHLH-PAS protein Nxf. Our results confirm that Nxf mRNA and protein are rapidly
and transiently expressed in cortical neurons following CSD. Reporter assays show
that Nxf is a transcriptional activator that associates with the bHLH-PAS
sub-class co-factor ARNT2. Adenovirus-mediated expression of epitope-tagged Nxf
results in cell death and the direct activation of the Bax gene in cultured
cells. However, RNA interference studies show that endogenous Nxf is required for
optimal neuroprotection by preconditioning in cultured F-11 cells. Together, our 
data indicate that Nxf is a novel bHLH-PAS transactivator transiently induced by 
preconditioning and that its sustained expression is detrimental. The
identification of Nxf may represent an important step in our understanding of the
molecular mechanisms of brain preconditioning and injury.

PMID: 17214977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Dev Genes Evol. 2007 Feb;217(2):149-58. Epub 2006 Dec 19.

Zebrafish orthopedia (otp) is required for isotocin cell development.

Eaton JL(1), Glasgow E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Georgetown
University Medical Center, 232 Building D, 4000 Reservoir Rd, NW Washington, DC
20057, USA.

Several behavioral and physiological processes such as social, sexual, and
maternal behaviors, learning and memory, and parturition are influenced by the
neurohypophysial peptide oxytocin. Studies in knockout mice have identified four 
transcriptional regulatory genes that are required for oxytocin neuronal
development in the hypothalamus. These are the basic helix-loop-helix PAS genes
Single-minded 1 (Sim1) and Arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2
(Arnt2), the POU homeobox gene Pou3f2, and the paired homeobox gene Orthopedia
(Otp). Overall, however, the molecular control of oxytocin cell development is
poorly understood. Studies in zebrafish provide a complementary view to mouse
knockout experiments and facilitate understanding of neuroendocrine cell
development. Isotocin, which is orthologous to oxytocin, is expressed early in
the developing zebrafish brain. In this paper we show that zebrafish otp mRNA
expression in the embryonic forebrain is dynamic and complex, and that it
overlaps with isotocin expression in the dorsal preoptic area. Additionally,
these studies demonstrate that otp is required for isotocin cell development.
Evidence is also provided that otp and sim1 function in parallel to direct the
differentiation of isotocin cells, and that otp is unlikely to affect brain
patterning. Overall, these studies support the hypothesis that the role of otp in
zebrafish neuroendocrine cell development is evolutionarily conserved with that
of mammals.

PMID: 17180684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2007 Mar;292(3):L704-15. Epub 2006 Nov 10.

A search for genes that may confer divergent morphology and function in the
carotid body between two strains of mice.

Balbir A(1), Lee H, Okumura M, Biswal S, Fitzgerald RS, Shirahata M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Physiology, Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, E7610, 615 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD
21205, USA.

The carotid body (CB) is the primary hypoxic chemosensory organ. Its hypoxic
response appears to be genetically controlled. We have hypothesized that: 1)
genes related to CB function are expressed less in the A/J mice (low responder to
hypoxia) compared with DBA/2J mice (high responder to hypoxia); and 2) gene
expression levels of morphogenic and trophic factors of the CB are significantly 
lower in the A/J mice than DBA/2J mice. This study utilizes microarray analysis
to test these hypotheses. Three sets of CBs were harvested from both strains. RNA
was isolated and used for global gene expression profiling (Affymetrix Mouse 430 
v2.0 array). Statistically significant gene expression was determined as a
minimum six counts of nine pairwise comparisons, a minimum 1.5-fold change, and P
<or= 0.05. Our results demonstrated that 793 genes were expressed less and that
568 genes were expressed more in the A/J strain vs. the DBA/2J strain. Analysis
of individual genes indicates that genes encoding ion channels are differentially
expressed between the two strains. Genes related to neurotransmitter metabolism, 
synaptic vesicles, and the development of neural crest-derived cells are
expressed less in the A/J CB vs. the DBA/2J CB. Through pathway analysis, we have
constructed a model that shows gene interactions and offers a roadmap to
investigate CB development and hypoxic chemosensing/chemotransduction processes. 
Particularly, Gdnf, Bmp2, Kcnmb2, Tph1, Hif1a, and Arnt2 may contribute to the
functional differences in the CB between the two strains. Bmp2, Phox2b, Dlx2, and
Msx2 may be important for the morphological differences.

PMID: 17098806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 8;281(49):37507-16. Epub 2006 Oct 5.

Unique and overlapping transcriptional roles of arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear 
translocator (Arnt) and Arnt2 in xenobiotic and hypoxic responses.

Sekine H(1), Mimura J, Yamamoto M, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance and Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, Tsukuba 305-8577, Japan.

Arnt and the homologous Arnt2 share a high degree of sequence similarity and are 
believed to function as obligate common partners for a number of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS transcription factors including arylhydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) and HIFalpha. Genetic disruption of both Arnt and Arnt2
demonstrated both unique and overlapping functions in response to environmental
stimuli and during mouse development. Either stably or transiently expressed
Arnt/Arnt2 wild type and various mutants or chimeric constructs in Hepa1-c4 cells
exhibit similar levels of hypoxic response element-driven reporter gene
expression and the induction of endogenous Glut-1 through binding with HIFalpha
in response to hypoxia. In contrast, we observed clear functional differences in 
the ability of Arnt and Arnt2 to induce xenobiotic response element-driven
reporter and endogenous CYP1A1 gene expression. In contrast with Arnt, Arnt2 was 
practically incapable of interacting with ligand-activated AhR to induce the
expression of target genes for xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes in response to
xenobiotics. The differential binding of AhR by Arnt and Arnt2 can be ascribed to
a single His/Pro amino acid difference in the PASB region of Arnt and Arnt2,
suggesting that the PASB/PASB interaction between bHLH-PAS transcription factors 
plays a selective role for their specific partner molecule.

PMID: 17023418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 10;281(45):34617-29. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Neuronal PAS domain protein 1 is a transcriptional repressor and requires
arylhydrocarbon nuclear translocator for its nuclear localization.

Teh CH(1), Lam KK, Loh CC, Loo JM, Yan T, Lim TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 14
Science Drive 4, Kent Ridge, Singapore 117542.

Neuronal PAS domain protein 1 (NPAS1), a basic helix-loop-helix-PAS transcription
factor expressed in the central nervous system, has been suggested to be involved
in neuronal differentiation. However, relatively little is known about the
molecular mechanism underlying the role of NPAS1 during development. In this
study we set out to characterize the different domains within NPAS1. We showed
that the nuclear localization of NPAS1 is dependent on the presence of ARNT. In
addition, the transcriptional potential of ARNT is not required for this
localization. In the absence of ARNT, NPAS1 is excluded from the nucleus, and
this exclusion is due to the presence of a nuclear export signal within the N
terminus of NPAS1. The interaction between NPAS1 and ARNT is via their N termini.
We found no transactivation domain within NPAS1; instead, we mapped out at least 
three repression domains within NPAS1, suggesting that NPAS1 acts as a repressor.
Furthermore, our experiments showed that NPAS1 is able to repress the
transactivation functions of ARNT and ARNT2. We suggest that NPAS1 is guided into
the nucleus by ARNT via the ARNT nuclear localization signal, and NPAS1 can
override the activation function of adjacent transcription factors, providing a
mechanism by which NPAS1 may inhibit transcription.

PMID: 16954219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Mol Vis. 2006 May 12;12:499-505.

Fine mapping of the keratoconus with cataract locus on chromosome 15q and
candidate gene analysis.

Dash DP(1), Silvestri G, Hughes AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Queen's University of Belfast, Royal Victoria 
Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom. d.dash@queens-belfast.ac.uk

PURPOSE: To report the fine mapping of the keratoconus with cataract locus on
chromosome 15q and the mutational analysis of positional candidate genes.
METHODS: Genotyping of two novel microsatellite markers and a single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) in the critical region of linkage for keratoconus with
cataract on 15q was performed. Positional candidate genes (MORF4L1, KIAA1055,
ETFA, AWP1, REC14, KIAA1199, RCN2, FAH, IDH3A, MTHFS, ADAMTS7, MAN2C1, PTPN9,
KIAA1024, ARNT2, BCL2A1, ISL2, C15ORF22 (P24B), DNAJA4, FLJ14594, CIB2 (KIP2),
C15ORF5, and PSMA4) prioritized on the basis of ocular expression and probable
function were screened by PCR-based DNA sequencing methods.
RESULTS: We report the refinement of the linkage region for keratoconus with
cataract to an interval of approximately 5.5 Mb flanked by the MAN2C1 gene and
the D15S211 marker on chromosome 15q. Mutational analysis of positional candidate
genes detected many sequence variations and single nucleotide polymorphisms. None
of the sequence variants were considered pathogenic as they were also found in
unaffected family members and normal control DNA samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Fine mapping of the keratoconus with cataract locus on 15q has
reduced the linked region to 5.5 Mb, thereby excluding 28 candidate genes. A
further 23 candidate genes were excluded by direct sequencing methods, although a
pathogenic genomic rearrangement or exonic deletion would not have been detected.

PMID: 16735990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Biol Pharm Bull. 2006 Apr;29(4):640-7.

Primary structure and organ-specific expression of the rat aryl hydrocarbon
receptor repressor gene.

Nishihashi H(1), Kanno Y, Tomuro K, Nakahama T, Inouye Y.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Toho University, Funabashi, Chiba, Japan.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AhRR) is a member of the basic
helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH/PAS) family of transcription factors,
providing a negative feedback loop with a xenobiotic or endogenous
ligand-dependent signal transduction mediated by the AhR. We sequenced
full-length AhRR mRNA extracted from the heart of a male Wistar rat injected
intraperitoneally with 3-methylcholanthrene (3-MC) 24 h before. The 95.6 kb-long 
AhRR genome was clarified to consist of 11 exons and 10 introns. The constitutive
expression of AhRR mRNA was prominent in males when compared with females in
parallel with the sexual difference in AhR expression. Although AhRR was
ubiquitously expressed in all tissues tested, the levels of AhRR expression were 
higher in the small intestine, where the 3-MC-dependent induction of CYP1A1
transcription was less significant, than in the heart, lung, liver, and kidney.
The dose-dependent suppression of AhR-dependent transcriptional activation in
both the presence and absence of 3-MC was observed in rat liver-derived RL-34
cells transiently transfected with the expression plasmid for AhRR in combination
with the reporter plasmid.

PMID: 16595894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 21;281(16):10839-48. Epub 2006 Feb 9.

Differential transcriptional regulation by mouse single-minded 2s.

Metz RP(1), Kwak HI, Gustafson T, Laffin B, Porter WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas
A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843-4458, USA.

Single-minded 1 and 2 are unique members of the basic helix-loop-helix
Per-Arnt-Sim family as they are transcriptional repressors. Here we report the
identification and transcriptional characterization of mouse Sim2s, a splice
variant of Sim2, which is missing the carboxyl Pro/Ala-rich repressive domain.
Sim2s is expressed at high levels in kidney and skeletal muscle; however, the
ratio of Sim2 to Sim2s mRNA differs between these tissues. Similar to full-length
Sim2, Sim2s interacts with Arnt and to a lesser extent, Arnt2. The effects of
Sim2s on transcriptional regulation through hypoxia, dioxin, and central midline 
response elements are different than that of full-length Sim2. Specifically,
Sim2s exerts a less repressive effect on hypoxia-induced gene expression than
full-length Sim2, but is just as effective as Sim2 at repressing TCDD-induced
gene expression from a dioxin response element. Interestingly, Sim2s bind to and 
activates expression from a central midline response element-controlled reporter 
through an Arnt transactivation domain-dependent mechanism. The differences in
expression pattern, protein interactions, and transcriptional activities between 
Sim2 and Sim2s may reflect differential roles each isoform plays during
development or in tissue-specific effects on other protein-mediated pathways.

PMID: 16484282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2006 Jan-Feb;142(1-2):85-94. Epub 2005 
Dec 20.

Development and characterization of polyclonal antibodies against the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor protein family (AHR1, AHR2, and AHR repressor) of Atlantic
killifish Fundulus heteroclitus.

Merson RR(1), Franks DG, Karchner SI, Hahn ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, MA 02543, USA.
rmerson@whoi.edu

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and AHR repressor (AHRR) proteins regulate
gene expression in response to some halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons and
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. The Atlantic killifish is a valuable model of
the AHR signaling pathway, but antibodies are not available to fully characterize
AHR and AHRR proteins. Using bacterially expressed AHRs, we developed specific
and sensitive polyclonal antisera against the killifish AHR1, AHR2, and AHRR. In 
immunoblots, these antibodies recognized full-length killifish AHR and AHRR
proteins synthesized in rabbit reticulocyte lysate, proteins expressed in
mammalian cells transfected with killifish AHR and AHRR constructs, and AHR
proteins in cytosol preparations from killifish tissues. Killifish AHR1 and AHR2 
proteins were detected in brain, gill, kidney, heart, liver, and spleen. Antisera
specifically precipitated their respective target proteins in immunoprecipitation
experiments with in vitro-expressed proteins. Killifish ARNT2 co-precipitated
with AHR1 and AHR2. These sensitive, specific, and versatile antibodies will be
valuable to researchers investigating AHR signaling and other physiological
processes involving AHR and AHRR proteins.

PMID: 16364694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Toxicology. 2005 Mar 1;208(1):1-11.

Effect of TCDD on mRNA expression of genes encoding bHLH/PAS proteins in rat
hypothalamus.

Korkalainen M(1), Lindén J, Tuomisto J, Pohjanvirta R.

Author information: 
(1)National Public Health Institute, Department of Environmental Health, P.O. Box
95, FIN-70701 Kuopio, Finland. merja.korkalainen@ktl.fi

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) brings about a wide variety of toxic
and biochemical effects via an AH receptor (AHR)-mediated signalling pathway.
Wasting syndrome and acute lethality are TCDD-induced endpoints showing a
striking sensitivity difference between two rat strains, TCDD-sensitive
Long-Evans (Turku/AB) (L-E) and TCDD-resistant Han/Wistar (Kuopio) (H/W). These
rat strains were used to study hypothalamic effects of TCDD on expression of
genes encoding AHR-regulated bHLH/PAS proteins potentially involved in molecular 
pathogenesis of the wasting syndrome. In addition, two well-established target
genes of TCDD, CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 were also examined. Quantitative RT-PCR was used
to measure mRNA levels in hypothalamus, which is a major center of food intake
and body weight regulation. At both 6 and 96 h after a single dose of 50
microg/kg TCDD, significant elevations were found in mRNA levels of AHR repressor
(AHRR), CYP1A1 and CYP1A2, but not those of AHR, ARNT or ARNT2. Likewise, TCDD
(100 microg/kg) did not alter the expression of SIM1, implicated in the
suppressive impact of TCDD on food intake, nor that of PER2, involved in
regulation of circadian rhythms. Differences between H/W and L-E rats appeared in
constitutive levels of AHR and ARNT and in TCDD-induced levels of CYP1A2, AHRR,
AHR and ARNT, which all were about two- to four-fold lower in H/W rats. Thus,
although the changes found do not account for the wasting syndrome, expression of
all principal genes of the AHR-signalling pathway in rat hypothalamus make it a
candidate target for TCDD.

PMID: 15664428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004 Oct;15(10):2569-78.

Divergent expression patterns for hypoxia-inducible factor-1beta and aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear transporter-2 in developing kidney.

Freeburg PB(1), Abrahamson DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City 66160, USA.

The hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF) are alpha/beta heterodimeric transcription
factors of the basic helix-loop-helix-Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS) superfamily and are
chiefly responsible for cellular adaptation to oxygen deprivation. HIF function
relies on the stabilization of the alpha subunit. When oxygen tension falls,
HIF-alpha subunits translocate to the nucleus and, upon dimerization with
HIF-beta, activate transcription of target genes, including vascular endothelial 
growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1 and -2, and WT-1,
which are vital for kidney development. HIF-beta subunits are stable regardless
of oxygen concentration and constitutively translocate to the nucleus. It was
shown previously that HIF-1beta protein expression is nearly ubiquitous in
newborn kidney and that HIF-1beta dimerizes with either HIF-1alpha or -2alpha.
Here it is shown that aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear transporter-2
(ARNT2/HIF-2beta) also heterodimerized with HIF-1alpha and -2alpha.
ARNT2/HIF-2beta protein was highly expressed in newborn kidney but decreased
significantly with age, whereas HIF-1beta levels remained relatively constant. By
immunohistochemical analysis, widespread expression of HIF-1beta was observed in 
developing and mature kidneys. ARNT2/HIF-2beta protein distribution was
restricted to distal segments of developing nephrons and in mature kidney was
confined specifically to thick ascending limb of Henle's loop. The data presented
here suggest that ARNT2/HIF-2beta is required at high levels during nephrogenesis
in distal tubules and later exclusively in thick ascending limb. Furthermore,
Hypoxyprobe-1 and lotus lectin co-localization studies showed that developing
proximal convoluted tubules were the most severely hypoxic nephron segment in
immature kidney. Because HIF-2beta protein was not abundantly expressed in this
segment, it may not be engaged in mediating responses to severe hypoxia. The
differential distribution patterns for HIF-1beta and -2beta suggest divergent
roles during kidney development for these highly related bHLH-PAS proteins.

PMID: 15466261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Toxicol Sci. 2004 Nov;82(1):250-8. Epub 2004 Jul 28.

ARNT2 is not required for TCDD developmental toxicity in zebrafish.

Prasch AL(1), Heideman W, Peterson RE.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Center, and School of Pharmacy,
University of Wisconsin, 77 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

ZfAHR2 has been identified as the receptor that is essential for mediating the
developmental toxicity caused by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in
zebrafish. One form of zfARNT2, zfARNT2b, forms a functional heterodimer with
zfAHR2 that specifically recognizes XREs in gel shift experiments and induces
XRE-driven transcription in COS-7 cells treated with TCDD. However, it has not
been demonstrated that zfARNT2b acts as the physiological dimerization partner
for zfAHR2 to mediate TCDD toxicity in developing zebrafish. An antisense
morpholino targeted against zfARNT2 (zfarnt2-MO) along with a line of mutant
zebrafish lacking expression of the zfarnt2 gene have been used to test the
hypothesis that zfARNT2 mediates the developmental toxicity of TCDD. Injection of
the zfarnt2-MO decreased expression of the zfARNT2 protein but did not provide
any protection against the formation of pericardial edema at 72 hpf. In addition,
in TCDD dose response studies the zfarnt2(-/-) embryos showed no protection
against three endpoints of TCDD toxicity observed at 96 hpf: pericardial edema,
reduced trunk blood flow, and shortened lower jaw. Finally, immunostaining
results at 96 hpf demonstrate that the zfarnt2(-/-) embryos show a similar
pattern of TCDD-induced zfCYP1A expression as WT embryos. These results
demonstrate that zfARNT2 is not essential for mediating TCDD developmental
toxicity in zebrafish and suggest that alternate dimerization partner(s) exist
for zfAHR2 in vivo.

PMID: 15282404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 May;18(5):1251-62. Epub 2004 Feb 26.

Sim2 contributes to neuroendocrine hormone gene expression in the anterior
hypothalamus.

Goshu E(1), Jin H, Lovejoy J, Marion JF, Michaud JL, Fan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Carnegie Institution of Washington, 115 West
University Parkway, Baltimore, Maryland 21210, USA.

Paraventricular (PVN) and supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus maintain
homeostasis by modulating pituitary hormonal output. PVN and supraoptic nuclei
contain five major cell types: oxytocin-, vasopressin-, CRH-, somatostatin-, and 
TRH-secreting neurons. Sim1, Arnt2, and Otp genes are essential for terminal
differentiation of these neurons. One of their common downstream genes, Brn2, is 
necessary for oxytocin, vasopressin, and CRH cell differentiation. Here we show
that Sim2, a paralog of Sim1, contributes to the expression of Trh and Ss genes
in the dorsal preoptic area, anterior-periventricular nucleus, and PVN. Sim2
expression overlaps with Trh- and Ss-expressing cells, and Sim2 mutants contain
reduced numbers of Trh and Ss cells. Genetically, Sim1 acts upstream of Sim2 and 
partially compensates for the loss of Sim2. Comparative expression studies at the
anterior hypothalamus at early stages reveal that there are separate pools of Trh
cells with distinctive molecular codes defined by Sim1 and Sim2 expression.
Together with previous reports, our results demonstrate that Sim1 and Otp utilize
two common downstream genes, Brn2 and Sim2, to mediate distinctive sets of
neuroendocrine hormone gene expression.

PMID: 14988428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2003 Dec 15;300(1):48-57.

ARNT gene multiplicity in amphibians: characterization of ARNT2 from the frog
Xenopus laevis.

Rowatt AJ(1), DePowell JJ, Powell WH.

Author information: 
(1)Kenyon College, Gambier, Ohio 43022, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is a member of the
Per-ARNT-Sim (PAS) protein superfamily, transcription factors that mediate the
cellular responses to various developmental signals and environmental conditions.
A beta-class ("partner") PAS protein, ARNT exhibits the capacity to form
transcriptionally active heterodimers with several alpha-class ("sensor")
proteins, including the aryl hydrocarbon receptors (AHRs), the hypoxia-inducible 
factors (HIFs), and the Single minded (Sim) proteins. Two genes encode different 
forms of ARNT in mammals: ARNT1, which is widely expressed, and ARNT2, which is
limited to the brain and kidneys of adults and specific neural and branchial
tissues of embryos. In contrast, fish apparently express only a single ARNT gene,
although in different species, this may be either ARNT1 or ARNT2. In efforts to
understand the evolution of ARNT proteins throughout the vertebrate lineage, we
isolated an ARNT cDNA from early life stages of the amphibian Xenopus laevis. The
encoded protein binds cognate DNA sequences in concert with mouse AHR.
Phylogenetic analysis reveals that this sequence is orthologous to mammalian
ARNT2 and paralogous to the recently reported X. laevis ARNT1. ARNT2 mRNA
expression begins later than ARNT1 (stage 22 vs. stage 8), suggesting the two
proteins play distinct roles during development. Hence, in the expression of two 
well-conserved ARNT paralogs with distinct expression patterns, X. laevis
resembles mammals rather than fish. Diversity in the number and function of PAS
proteins, including ARNT, may underlie significant species differences in
developmental programming and biochemical response to environmental conditions.
The identification of multiple amphibian ARNT paralogs represents an important
step in the understanding of evolution and functional variation of ARNT in
vertebrates.

PMID: 14984034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Aquat Toxicol. 2004 Jan 7;66(1):25-38.

Histological analysis of acute toxicity of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) in zebrafish.

Zodrow JM(1), Stegeman JJ, Tanguay RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 80262, USA.

Previous studies have demonstrated that acute exposure to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) by injection leads to inhibition of
caudal fin regeneration in zebrafish. Since the TCDD exposure in these studies is
systemic, it is possible that pathology in organs other than the fin could result
in inhibition of fin regeneration. Therefore, histopathology of adult zebrafish
(Danio rerio) organs was characterized following abdominal cavity injection of a 
TCDD dose (70ng/g). The most pronounced histopathologic changes 5 days
post-injection included lipidosis and hypertrophy of liver hepatocytes and
hypertrophy of gill lamellae. Effects of TCDD exposure on immunolocalization of
the zebrafish aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT2), the
heterodimer partner of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR2), and an AHR regulated
gene cytochrome P450 1A (CYP1A) was also determined. ARNT2 was immunolocalized to
the gastrointestinal tract, gill lamellae, kidney, ventricle of the heart, caudal
fin, brain and liver of zebrafish. TCDD exposure had no measurable effect on
ARNT2 abundance or localization. CYP1A was immunolocalized in TCDD exposed fish
as a biomarker for cells with an activated AHR pathway. CYP1A was not detected in
any tissue from vehicle exposed fish. Significant TCDD-dependent induction of
CYP1A was detected in the proximal tubules of the kidney, in liver hepatocytes
and in the gastrointestinal tract of TCDD exposed fish. Significant but lower
TCDD-dependent CYP1A expression was evident in the gill, caudal fin and ventricle
of the heart. Overall, TCDD exposure in adult zebrafish leads to histopathology
similar to that reported in other fish species, and it appears unlikely that the 
histopathology in these organs completely explains the inhibition of fin
regeneration.

PMID: 14687977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 5;279(10):9306-12. Epub 2003 Dec 1.

Regulatory interaction between arylhydrocarbon receptor and SIM1, two basic
helix-loop-helix PAS proteins involved in the control of food intake.

Yang C(1), Boucher F, Tremblay A, Michaud JL.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center, Hôpital Sainte-Justine, 3175 Côte Sainte-Catherine, Montréal,
Québec H3T 1C5, Canada.

The basic helix-loop-helix PAS (bHLH-PAS) transcription factors SIM1 and
arylhydrocarbon receptor (AHR) are involved in the control of feeding behavior.
Sim1 haploinsufficiency causes hyperphagia in mice and humans, most likely by
perturbing the hypothalamus function. The administration of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), a ligand of AHR, causes severe
anorexia, which also appears to be of central origin. Both SIM1 and AHR require
heterodimerization either with ARNT or ARNT2 to function. Here, we characterize
the promoter for Sim1 and show that a consensus AHR-ARNT/2 binding site
positively regulates its activity in the context of transfection experiments in
Neuro-2A cells. A gel shift assay indicated that AHR-ARNT/2 can bind its putative
site in the Sim1 promoter. Overexpression of Arnt, Arnt2, or Ahr increased the
activity of a reporter construct containing the Sim1 promoter by 1.8-, 1.5-, and 
2.2-fold, respectively, but failed to do so when the AHR-ARNT/2 binding site was 
mutated. Similarly, TCDD increased the activity of the reporter construct by
1.8-fold but not that of its mutated version. Finally, we found that TCDD
increased Sim1 expression in Neuro-2A cells and in mouse kidney and hypothalamus 
by 4-, 3-, and 2-fold, respectively. We conclude that Sim1 expression is
regulated by AHR-ARNT/2. This result raises the possibility that Sim1 mediates
the effect of TCDD on feeding and points to a complex network of regulatory
interactions between bHLH-PAS proteins.

PMID: 14660629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 7;278(45):44857-67. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

Identification of the downstream targets of SIM1 and ARNT2, a pair of
transcription factors essential for neuroendocrine cell differentiation.

Liu C(1), Goshu E, Wells A, Fan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Baltimore,
Maryland 21210, USA.

SIM1 and ARNT2 are two basic helix-loop-helix/PAS (Per-Arnt-Sim) transcription
factors that control the differentiation of neuroendocrine lineages in the mouse 
hypothalamus. Heterozygous Sim1 mice also develop early onset obesity, possibly
due to hypodevelopment of the hypothalamus. Although SIM1 and ARNT2 form
heterodimers to direct the same molecular pathway, knowledge of this pathway is
limited. To facilitate the identification of their downstream genes, we combined 
an inducible gene expression system in a neuronal cell line with microarray
analysis to screen for their transcriptional targets. This method identified 268 
potential target genes of SIM1/ARNT2 that displayed >1.7-fold induced expression.
15 of these genes were subjected to Northern analysis, and a high percentage of
them were confirmed to be up-regulated. In vivo, several of these genes showed
neuroendocrine hypothalamic expression correlating with that of Sim1.
Furthermore, we found that expression of two of these potential targets, the Jak2
and thyroid hormone receptor beta2 genes, was lost in the neuroendocrine
hypothalamus of the Sim1 mutant. The expression and predicted functions of many
of these genes provide new insight into both the Sim1/Arnt2 action in
neuroendocrine hypothalamus development and the molecular basis for the Sim1
haplo-insufficient obesity phenotype.

PMID: 12947113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jul 25;307(2):248-53.

Estrogen increases messenger RNA and immunoreactivity of aryl-hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator 2 in the rat mediobasal hypothalamus.

Mitsushima D(1), Funabashi T, Kimura F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroendocrinology, Yokohama City University, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan.

We examined the effect of estrogen on the expression of aryl-hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR) and two types of AhR nuclear translocator (Arnt1 and Arnt2) mRNAs in the
hypothalamus of ovariectomized rats. Northern blotting demonstrated that, in the 
mediobasal hypothalamus, a subcutaneous injection of 20 microg estradiol benzoate
(E(2)) significantly increased the expression of Arnt2 mRNA, but induced no
significant changes in the expression of AhR and Arnt1 mRNAs. The expression of
Arnt2 mRNA was significantly increased at 4, 24, and 72h after the injection.
Immunocytochemical study revealed that the number of Arnt2 immunoreactive cells
was also significantly increased at 72h after the injection. Conversely, in the
preoptic area, injection of E(2) did not cause significant changes in the
expression of any of the three mRNAs. These observations suggest that estrogen
regulates Arnt2 expression in the mediobasal hypothalamus and modulates the toxic
action of dioxins in rats.

PMID: 12859947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Apr 18;303(4):1095-100.

Identification of novel splice variants of ARNT and ARNT2 in the rat.

Korkalainen M(1), Tuomisto J, Pohjanvirta R.

Author information: 
(1)National Public Health Institute, Laboratory of Toxicology, Department of
Environmental Health, P.O. Box 95, Neulaniementie 4, FIN-70701 Kuopio, Finland.
Merja.Korkalainen@ktl.fi

Most of the biochemical and toxic effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin 
(TCDD) are mediated by the bHLH/PAS protein AH receptor (AHR). For regulation of 
gene activities, AHR dimerizes with another member of the bHLH/PAS protein
family, AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT). A substrain of Wistar rats, Han/Wistar
(Kuopio) (H/W), is about 1000-fold more resistant to the acute lethality of TCDD 
than other strains, exemplified by Long-Evans (Turku/AB) (L-E); the LD50 values
for these two strains are >9600 and 10-20 microg/kg, respectively. Previous
studies have demonstrated that the major reason for the exceptional TCDD
resistance of H/W rats lies in their AHR, which is remodeled at its C-terminal
transactivation domain, but there appears to be another contributing gene
product. The present study set out to compare the primary structure of ARNT and
the closely related ARNT2 proteins in H/W and L-E rats by cDNA cloning. To our
surprise, we found several isoforms of these proteins only one of which has
previously been reported in rats. All of the isoforms appeared to arise from
alternative splicing. For ARNT, isoforms with deletions at exon 5, 3(') end of
exon 6 or 5(') end of exon 11, or with an insertion at 5(') end of exon 20 were
discovered. There was also interindividual variation in the number of
glutamine-encoding codons at 5(') end of exon 16. The most exciting new variant
was revealed for ARNT2, because the insertion found at 5(') end of exon 19
disrupts the functionally critical transactivation domain in the protein,
implying a dominant negative role for this isoform. The relative expression
levels of the variants did not differ in the two rat strains, nor did TCDD modify
the ratios, suggesting that the variants do not contribute to TCDD resistance.
However, the regulation of ARNT and ARNT2 activities may be more intricate than
previously assumed.

PMID: 12684048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Oncogene. 2003 Jan 9;22(1):41-9.

Identification of target genes for EWS/ATF-1 chimeric transcription factor.

Jishage M(1), Fujino T, Yamazaki Y, Kuroda H, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation is a useful technique to detect in vivo direct
interaction between any transcription factor and its binding site on genomic DNA.
We applied this skill to identify the direct target gene for EWS/ATF-1 by
coupling with a GFP reporter assay. This novel approach isolated 62 of cloned DNA
fragments responding upon EWS/ATF-1 expression and 16 of 62 clones included
putative ATF-1 binding sites. Further analysis revealed that six of the cloned
fragments included possible regulatory regions of ATM, GPP34, ARNT2, NKX6.1,
NYD-SP28 and POSH. Most of these clones upregulated reporter activity by
overexpression of EWS/ATF-1, suggesting that putative ATF-1 binding sites in
these clones are functional elements for ATF-1 in vivo. Consistently, endogenous 
expression of these genes was upregulated by EWS/ATF-1. Interestingly, the clone 
containing the promoter region of POSH, which is known to be a strong inducer of 
apoptosis, repressed reporter activity by overexpression of EWS/ATF-1.
Correspondingly, EWS/ATF-1 expression decreased endogenous POSH expression,
suggesting that six isolated genes may be involved in direct regulation by
EWS/ATF-1. Moreover, induction of POSH brought apoptotic cell death to KAS, the
clear cell sarcoma (CCS) cell line, suggesting that repressed expression of POSH 
in CCS may be relevant to the normal signaling pathway in apoptosis.

PMID: 12527906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Histochem Cytochem. 2003 Jan;51(1):41-54.

Expression of Arnt and Arnt2 mRNA in developing murine tissues.

Aitola MH(1), Pelto-Huikko MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere,
Finland.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH-PAS) proteins aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear 
translocator (Arnt) and Arnt2 are transcriptional regulators that function as
dimerizing partners for several bHLH-PAS proteins and also some nonrelated
partners. They are involved in various biological functions, including regulation
of developmental genes. In earlier studies, the developmental expression of Arnt 
was reported to be almost ubiquitous, whereas Arnt2 expression has been shown to 
be more limited, comprising neuronal tissues as the main site of expression. Here
we provide a detailed description of the expression of Arnt and Arnt2 mRNA in
mouse tissues during embryonic and early postnatal development. Arnt and also
Arnt2 transcripts, in contrast to earlier reports, are shown to be expressed more
widely during development yet show a temporally and spatially specific pattern.

PMID: 12502753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Blood. 2002 Oct 1;100(7):2623-8.

Hypoxia-inducible erythropoietin gene expression in human neuroblastoma cells.

Stolze I(1), Berchner-Pfannschmidt U, Freitag P, Wotzlaw C, Rössler J, Frede S,
Acker H, Fandrey J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologie der Universität Essen, Dortmund, Germany.

Two human neuroblastoma (NB) cell lines, SH-SY5Y and Kelly, were found to express
the gene for erythropoietin (EPO) in an oxygen (O(2))-dependent manner. However, 
NB cells had maximal production of EPO with lower partial pressure of O(2) values
than the well-characterized hepatoma cell line HepG2. This maximal EPO expression
was preceded by accumulation of the O(2)-sensitive alpha subunit of the
heterodimeric transcription-factor complex hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1).
Western blot analysis revealed that the amount of the beta subunit of HIF-1,
identical to aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 1 (ARNT1), and the
homolog ARNT2 increased in nuclear extracts from SH-SY5Y cells exposed to anoxia.
In neuronal cells, ARNT1 and ARNT2 can form a heterodimer with HIF-1alpha,
generating a functional HIF-1 complex. Using the hypoxia response element of the 
human EPO enhancer, we conducted electrophoretic mobility shift assays that
showed accumulation and binding of HIF-1 complexes containing both ARNT1 and
ARNT2 in NB cells. In addition to the HIF-1 complex, hepatocyte nuclear factor
4alpha (HNF4alpha) was found to be indispensable for hypoxia-induced EPO gene
expression in hepatoma cells. Western blot analysis and polymerase chain reaction
assessment showed that NB cells express neither HNF4alpha nor the splicing
variant HNF4alpha7 and thus express EPO in an HNF4alpha-independent manner.
Together, SH-SY5Y and Kelly cells may provide a new in vitro model for studying
the mechanism of tissue-specific, hypoxia-inducible EPO gene expression.

PMID: 12239177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Toxicol Sci. 2002 Sep;69(1):117-24.

2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin causes alterations in lymphocyte development 
and thymic atrophy in hemopoietic chimeras generated from mice deficient in
ARNT2.

Laiosa MD(1), Lai ZW, Thurmond TS, Fiore NC, DeRossi C, Holdener BC, Gasiewicz
TA, Silverstone AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, State University of New York,
Upstate Medical University, 750 East Adams Street, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.

It is well established that dioxins cause a variety of toxic effects and
syndromes including alterations of lymphocyte development. Exposure to the
prototypical dioxin, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) leads to severe
thymic atrophy in all species studied. It has been shown that most of this
toxicity is due to TCDD binding to and activating the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AHR). Upon activation, the AHR enters the nucleus, dimerizes with the AHR
nuclear translocator (ARNT), and this heterodimer modulates a number of genes
that mediate toxicity. The AHR and ARNT are members of the
basic-helix-loop-helix-Per, ARNT, and Sim homology (bHLH-PAS) family of
transcription factors. In this study, we wanted to determine if another bHLH-PAS 
transcription factor, ARNT2, which has high amino acid sequence identity to ARNT 
and has been shown to dimerize with the TCDD-activated AHR, is involved in
mediating TCDD's effect on lymphocyte development. We determined by RT-PCR that
ARNT2 is expressed at a low level in whole thymus, thymocytes, and bone marrow
lymphocytes. We created hemopoietic chimeras by lethally irradiating C57BL/6 mice
and reconstituting them with fetal liver stem cells that either have or are
deficient in a portion of chromosome 7 that contains ARNT2. Regardless of whether
chimeras possessed or lacked this chromosome fragment, equal sensitivity to
TCDD-induced thymic atrophy was observed despite expression of ARNT2 in the
thymus. Furthermore, the absence of ARNT2 (or any other genes found on this
portion of chromosome 7) did not confer any protection against TCDD-induced
alterations in bone marrow B-cell subsets. These data indicate that in this model
system the effects of TCDD-induced thymic atrophy and alterations in B-cell
maturation are not dependent on an AHR-ARNT2 heterodimer.

PMID: 12215665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Teratology. 2002 Aug;66(2):85-90.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2 (ARNT2): structure, gene
mapping, polymorphisms, and candidate evaluation for human orofacial clefts.

Barrow LL(1), Wines ME, Romitti PA, Holdener BC, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, Iowa 52242, USA.

BACKGROUND: Nonsyndromic orofacial clefts have an estimated incidence of 1/1000
live births. Population genetic and embryologic studies suggest that cleft palate
only (CPO) may be a distinct clinical entity from cleft lip with or without cleft
palate (CL/P). Both CPO and CL/P are thought to be multifactorial in etiology,
with evidence indicating that genetic, environmental, and developmental
determinants may all play a role. The ARNT2 gene localizes to a conserved linkage
group on mouse chromosome 7 that is syntenic with human chromosome 15q23-25. This
chromosomal region was previously identified as a teratogen-induced clefting
susceptibility locus in a genome-wide scan of AXB and BXA recombinant inbred
mice. Arnt2 is expressed in the first branchial arch in mice. The teratogen
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) acts through the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (Ahr) pathway to produce dose-dependent CPO and thymic wasting in mice
exposed in utero. Arnt2 and Ahr proteins dimerize in vitro. TCDD exposure is also
associated with orofacial clefting in children of parents involved in
agricultural work.
METHODS: To determine whether ARNT2 influences human craniofacial development, we
identified the human ARNT2 gene and conducted genomic structural analysis.
Mutational screening was performed in infants with nonsyndromic CPO or CL/P who
were identified by the Iowa Birth Defects Registry.
RESULTS: A common amino acid polymorphism was detected but, no obvious
disease-causing mutations were detected by SSCP analysis. The microsatellite
marker, GATA89D04 (D15S823) was identified within intron 11 of the human ARNT2
gene, and linkage disequilibrium of nonsyndromic CPO and CL/P parent-infant trios
was conducted.
CONCLUSIONS: No association was demonstrated with CPO (n = 45) and CL/P (n = 37).
Teratology 66:85-90, 2002.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12210012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Toxicol Sci. 2002 Aug;68(2):403-19.

Tissue-specific expression of AHR2, ARNT2, and CYP1A in zebrafish embryos and
larvae: effects of developmental stage and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
exposure.

Andreasen EA(1), Spitsbergen JM, Tanguay RL, Stegeman JJ, Heideman W, Peterson
RE.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Toxicology Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin
53705, USA.

To better understand the role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) signaling
pathway in causing tissue-specific signs of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) toxicity in zebrafish, the temporal and spatial expression of the
zebrafish aryl hydrocarbon receptor 2 (zfAHR2), aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator 2 (zfARNT2), and an AHR regulated gene, cytochrome P4501A (zfCYP1A),
were assessed in larvae exposed to vehicle or TCDD (1.55 nM) from 3-4 h
postfertilization (hpf). Coexpression of a transcriptionally active AHR pathway
was apparent by the expression of zfCYP1A mRNA and protein in certain larval
tissues. zfCYP1A protein was first detected in the skin and vasculature of
TCDD-exposed larvae at 36 hpf. Vascular-specific zfCYP1A protein expression
continued from 36 to120 hpf at which time it was also detected in the heart,
kidney, and liver. zfCYP1A mRNA was observed in TCDD treated larvae as early as
24 hpf in the developing vascular system. Vascular specific zfCYP1A mRNA
expression in the head, trunk, and tail by 36 hpf in TCDD-exposed larvae,
confirmed immunohistochemical localization. The expression of zfAHR2 and zfARNT2 
mRNAs was generally similar in control and TCDD-exposed larvae. Coexpression of
zfAHR2, zfARNT2, and zfCYP1A mRNAs was evident in TCDD-exposed larvae by 36 hpf
and in the vasculature, heart, and trunk kidney by 48 hpf, well before the first 
signs of overt developmental toxicity are observed. In addition to their function
in response to AHR agonists, zfAHR2 and zfARNT2 may be involved in development
and function of the nervous system. zfAHR2 and zfARNT2 were detected in the
brain, spinal cord, and sensory organs. However, TCDD-induced zfCYP1A expression 
was not detected in these tissues. Taken together, these results are consistent
with the notion that the cardiovascular system is a primary target of TCDD
developmental toxicity in zebrafish.

PMID: 12151636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Exp Zool. 2002 Apr 15;294(1):17-29.

Identification and functional characterization of hypoxia-inducible factor 2alpha
from the estuarine teleost, Fundulus heteroclitus: interaction of HIF-2alpha with
two ARNT2 splice variants.

Powell WH(1), Hahn ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Kenyon College, Gambier, Ohio 43022, USA.
powellw@kenyon.edu

The hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) are dimeric transcription factors that
mediate changes in gene expression during adaptation of animals to oxygen stress.
Both alpha (HIFalpha) and beta (ARNT) subunits are members of the basic
helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-Sim family of proteins. Mammals have at least three
different HIF-alpha subunits, paralogous proteins expressed in tissue-specific
fashion (HIF-1alpha, HIF-2alpha, and HIF-3alpha). However, the diversity and
functional properties of teleost HIFs are poorly understood. In efforts to
characterize mechanisms of hypoxia adaptation in estuarine fish, we have isolated
cDNAs encoding HIF subunits from Fundulus heteroclitus (Atlantic killifish or
mummichog), including a HIF-2alpha homolog and ARNT2alt, a splice variant of
ARNT2 that contains an additional exon encoding 16 amino acids near the amino
terminus. HIF-2alpha protein synthesized in vitro binds cognate DNA elements in
concert with either Fundulus ARNT2 splice variant or murine ARNT1. HIF-2alpha,
ARNT2, and ARNT2alt mRNAs are expressed in all organs examined. The HIF-2alpha
cDNA encodes a protein of 96.4 kDa, sharing 53-54% identity with mammalian and
avian orthologs. The oxygen-dependent degradation domain, however, exhibits
substantial divergence from well-conserved mammalian sequences, suggesting the
possibility of important functional differences, perhaps in the sensitivity to
induction of activity by hypoxia. Hypoxia-tolerant fishes such as F. heteroclitus
represent a unique opportunity for the study of functional and evolutionary
aspects of adaptation to hypoxia at the molecular, cellular, and organismal
levels. This study extends the understanding of hypoxia signaling in fish, the
evolution and diversity of HIF function, and the evolution of the PAS family of
proteins.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11932946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Feb 1;290(4):1228-36.

The bHLH/PAS factor MOP3 does not participate in hypoxia responses.

Cowden KD(1), Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate Group, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19014, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix/PAS (bHLH/PAS) family of proteins regulates
transcriptional responses during development and in response to environmental
stimuli. bHLH/PAS factors act as heterodimers, and genetic and biochemical data
indicate that multiple heterodimeric combinations are found in vivo to regulate
hypoxic gene expression. For example, HIF1alpha heterodimerizes with the highly
related proteins ARNT or ARNT2 in neurons. In vivo, MOP3 interacts with CLOCK to 
regulate circadian rhythms; however, its role in hypoxia responses is unclear. We
show here that unlike ARNT and ARNT2, MOP3 does not effectively form HIF-1
complexes or restore HIF-1 target gene expression in response to low oxygen when 
expressed in Arnt(-/-) ES cells. Furthermore, Mop3(-/-) day 9.5 embryos exhibit
no angiogenic defects as shown for Arnt(-/-), Hif1alpha(-/-), and Hif2alpha(-/-) 
embryos. Therefore, by a variety of criteria, we show that MOP3 has little if any
role in the regulation of hypoxia responses in vivo.

©2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11811994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mech Dev. 2001 Oct;108(1-2):227-31.

Molecular cloning and embryonic expression of the Xenopus Arnt gene.

Bollérot K(1), Angelier N, Coumailleau P.

Author information: 
(1)Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Groupe Genes et Developpement, UMR7622-CNRS 
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Développement, 9 quai St Bernard, 75252
Paris Cedex 05, France.

In this paper, we report the cloning of a Xenopus bHLH/PAS factor homologous to
the mammalian aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) or Drosophila
Tango gene. Sequence data analysis indicates that protein domains organization in
xArnt is strongly conserved and that xArnt is highly related to the mammalian
Arnt1 isoform. As revealed by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and
whole-mount in situ hybridization, xArnt gene is expressed during early and late 
development. At early stages, xArnt transcripts are restricted to the ectoderm
and extends to the marginal zone at gastrula stage. In tail bud embryo, xArnt is 
strongly expressed in branchial arches, optical and optical vesicles, and
pronephros and pronephritic duct.

PMID: 11578881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mar Environ Res. 2000 Jul-Dec;50(1-5):39-44.

The evolution of aryl hydrocarbon signaling proteins: diversity of ARNT isoforms 
among fish species.

Powell WH(1), Hahn ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, MS#32, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole,
MA 02543, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) mediates aryl
hydrocarbon signaling and toxicity by dimerizing with the ligand-activated aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), forming a complex that binds specific DNA elements
and alters transcription of target genes. Two genes encode different forms of
ARNT in rodents: ARNT1, which is widely expressed, and ARNT2, which exhibits a
very restricted expression pattern. In an effort to characterize aryl hydrocarbon
signaling mechanisms in fishes, we previously isolated an ARNT cDNA from Fundulus
heteroclitus and discovered that this species expresses ARNT2 ubiquitously. This 
situation differs not only from mammals, but also from rainbow trout, which
expresses a divergent ARNT gene that we hypothesized was peculiar to salmonids
(rtARNTa/b). In this communication, we examine the ARNT sequences of multiple
fish species, including a newly isolated cDNA from scup (Stenotomus chrysops).
Our phylogenetic analysis demonstrates that zebrafish ARNT, like the Fundulus
protein, is an ARNT2. Contrary to expectations, the scup ARNT is closely related 
to the rainbow trout protein, demonstrating that the existence of this ARNT
isoform predates the divergence of salmonids from the other teleosts. Thus,
different species of fish express distinct and highly conserved isoforms of ARNT.
The number, type, and expression pattern of ARNT proteins may contribute to
interspecies differences in aryl hydrocarbon toxicity, possibly through distinct 
interactions with additional PAS-family proteins.

PMID: 11460724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Mar 30;282(2):487-92.

Ectopic expression of negative ARNT2 factor disrupts fish development.

Hsu HJ(1), Wang WD, Hu CH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Marine Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University, 2,
Pei-Ning Road, Keelung, Taiwan, 202-24, Republic of China.

ARNT factors are a cluster of bHLH-PAS factors that heterodimerize with other
specific bHLH-PAS factors to mediate a wide range of biological responses.
Previously, we obtained a truncated form of ARNT2-like factor, ARNT2A, from
zebrafish, which encompasses the basic-helix-loop-helix and PAS A/B domains, but 
lacks a transactivation domain at its carboxyl end. Herein, we report another
truncated ARNT2-like factor, ARNT2X, in zebrafish, which differs from ARNT2A at
its N-terminal region. In cultured ZLE cells, transiently expressed ARNT2X and
ARNT2A inhibited 2,3,7,8-TCDD-activated cyp1a1 transcription with different
efficiencies. In the developing embryo, arnt2X mRNA was consistently expressed in
the retinal and neural tube regions until the hatching stages, but it exhibited a
more specific pattern at larval stages, including expression in the brain, eyes, 
hypothalamus, pharyngeal skeleton, heart, liver, pronephros duct, pectoral fin,
and epithelial cells of the swim bladder. In contrast, arnt2A transcription
diminished after hatching. Microinjecting a recombinant arnt2X-expression vector 
into fertilized eggs before cleavage stages caused severe defects in brain, eyes,
pectoral fin, heart, and gut development. This suggests that the ARNT-mediated
signal transduction pathways play important roles in fish tissue development.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11401485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jun 5;98(12):6692-7. Epub 2001 May 29.

Targeted mutation of the murine arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2
(Arnt2) gene reveals partial redundancy with Arnt.

Keith B(1), Adelman DM, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Cell and Developmental Biology, Abramson Family
Cancer Research Institute, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Pennsylvania, 421 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The ubiquitously expressed basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS protein ARNT
(arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear transporter) forms transcriptionally active
heterodimers with a variety of other bHLH-PAS proteins, including HIF-1alpha
(hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha) and AHR (arylhydrocarbon receptor). These
complexes regulate gene expression in response to hypoxia and xenobiotics,
respectively, and mutation of the murine Arnt locus results in embryonic death by
day 10.5 associated with placental, vascular, and hematopoietic defects. The
closely related protein ARNT2 is highly expressed in the central nervous system
and kidney and also forms complexes with HIF-1alpha and AHR. To assess unique
roles for ARNT2 in development, and reveal potential functional overlap with
ARNT, we generated a targeted null mutation of the murine Arnt2 locus. Arnt2(-/-)
embryos die perinatally and exhibit impaired hypothalamic development, phenotypes
previously observed for a targeted mutation in the murine bHLH-PAS gene Sim1
(Single-minded 1), and consistent with the recent proposal that ARNT2 and SIM1
form an essential heterodimer in vivo [Michaud, J. L., DeRossi, C., May, N. R.,
Holdener, B. C. & Fan, C. (2000) Mech. Dev. 90, 253-261]. In addition, cultured
Arnt2(-/-) neurons display decreased hypoxic induction of HIF-1 target genes,
demonstrating formally that ARNT2/HIF-1alpha complexes regulate oxygen-responsive
genes. Finally, a strong genetic interaction between Arnt and Arnt2 mutations was
observed, indicating that either gene can fulfill essential functions in a
dose-dependent manner before embryonic day 8.5. These results demonstrate that
Arnt and Arnt2 have both unique and overlapping essential functions in embryonic 
development.

PMCID: PMC34414
PMID: 11381139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Genes Cells. 2001 Apr;6(4):361-74.

Defective development of secretory neurones in the hypothalamus of Arnt2-knockout
mice.

Hosoya T(1), Oda Y, Takahashi S, Morita M, Kawauchi S, Ema M, Yamamoto M,
Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai
980-8578, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Within the basic region-helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS family of
transcription factors, Arnt and Arnt2 play unique roles; these two factors not
only heterodimerize with themselves, but also with other members of this family
and they act as transcription regulators which bind to specific DNA elements.
Whereas Arnt is broadly expressed in various tissues, the expression of Arnt2 is 
known to be limited to the neural tissues.
RESULTS: To elucidate the function of Arnt2 in detail, we cloned the mouse Arnt2 
gene and its gene structure was determined. We subsequently generated germ line
Arnt2 mutant mice by gene targeting technology. Heterozygous Arnt2 mice were
viable, but homozygous Arnt2 gene knockout mice died shortly after birth.
Histological and immunological analyses revealed that the supraoptic nuclei (SON)
and the paraventricular nuclei (PVN) are hypocellular. Moreover, secretory
neurones identified by the expression of neurosecretory hormone such as arginine 
vasopressin, oxytocin, corticotrophin-releasing hormone and somatostatin are
completely absent in SON and PVN in the mutant Arnt2 mice. Consistent with these 
observations, prospective SON and PVN neurones which express Brn2 appeared around
E13.5 in the mantle zone, but no neurones which expressed the neurosecretory
hormones were found in the SON and PVN regions.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that the transcription factor Arnt2 controls the
development of the secretory neurones at the later or final stages of
differentiation rather than at the beginning stage. Strikingly similar
observations have been reported with the Sim1 deficient mice. Taken together, our
results demonstrate that Arnt2 is an indispensable transcription factor for the
development of the hypothalamus, and suggest that Arnt2 is an obligatory partner 
molecule of Sim1 in the developmental process of the neuroendocrinological cell
lineages.

PMID: 11318878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Nov 15;1494(1-2):117-28.

Identification and expression of alternatively spliced aryl hydrocarbon nuclear
translocator 2 (ARNT2) cDNAs from zebrafish with distinct functions.

Tanguay RL(1), Andreasen E, Heideman W, Peterson RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 80262, USA. robert.tanguay@uchsc.edu

In order to further establish zebrafish as a vertebrate model for studying the
mechanism of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) toxicity it is necessary 
to characterize the aryl hydrocarbon receptor/aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator (AhR/ARNT) signaling pathways in this species. In this study, three 
zfARNT2 cDNAs were isolated, expressed, and characterized and named zfARNT2b,
zfARNT2c, and zfARNT2a. zfARNT2b, zfARNT2c, and zfARNT2a encode proteins with
theoretical molecular weights of 81, 79, and 45 kDa, respectively. zfARNT2b and
zfARNT2a proteins are identical over the first 403 amino acids but differ in
their C-terminal domains as a result of alternative mRNA splicing. zfARNT2c is
nearly identical to zfARNT2b, with the exception of an in frame 15 amino acid
deletion adjacent to the basic region of zfARNT2c. Using quantitative RT-PCR
methods the tissue distribution of each zfARNT2 isoform was determined. In COS-7 
cells expressing zfARNT2b and zfAhR2, 10 nM TCDD causes a nine-fold induction of 
a dioxin responsive reporter gene. In COS-7 cells expressing zfARNT2a or
zfARNT2c, TCDD does not induce reporter gene expression. In contrast, all three
zfARNT2 proteins induce reporter gene activity under control of hypoxia
responsive elements when cotransfected with the zebrafish endothelial specific
PAS protein 1. DNA gel shift analysis suggests that the decreased function of
zfARNT2a is due to inefficient binding of zfARNT2a/zfAhR2 complexes to dioxin
responsive elements. These results also indicate that alternative mRNA splicing
results in formation of ARNT proteins with distinct functional properties.

PMID: 11072074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Comp Neurol. 2000 Nov 20;427(3):428-39.

Distribution of mRNAs encoding the arylhydrocarbon receptor, arylhydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator, and arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator-2 in the rat brain and brainstem.

Petersen SL(1), Curran MA, Marconi SA, Carpenter CD, Lubbers LS, McAbee MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Center for Neuroendocrine Studies, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts 01003, USA. sandyp@bio.umass.edu

Dioxin exposure alters a variety of neural functions, most likely through
activation of the arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) pathway. Many of the adverse
effects, including disruption of circadian changes in hormone release and
depressed appetite, seem to be mediated by hypothalamic and/or brainstem neurons.
However, it is unclear whether these effects are direct or indirect, because
there have been no comprehensive studies mapping the expression of components of 
the AhR pathway in the brain. Therefore, we used a sensitive in situ
hybridization histochemical (ISHH) method to map the neural expression of AhR
mRNA, as well as those of the mRNAs encoding the AhR dimerization partners,
arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) and ARNT2. We found that
AhR, ARNT, and ARNT2 mRNAs were widely distributed throughout the brain and
brainstem. There was no neuroanatomic evidence that AhR is preferentially
colocalized with ARNT or ARNT2. However, ARNT2, unlike ARNT expression, was
relatively high in most regions. The most noteworthy regions in which we found
AhR, ARNT, and ARNT2 mRNA were several hypothalamic and brainstem regions
involved in the regulation of appetite and circadian rhythms, functions that are 
disrupted by dioxin exposure. These regions included the arcuate nucleus (Arc),
ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH), paraventricular nucleus (PVN), suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN), nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), and the dorsal and median
raphe nuclei. This neuroanatomic information provides important clues as to the
sites and mechanisms underlying the previously unexplained effects of dioxins in 
the central nervous system.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11054704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Eur J Neurosci. 2000 Oct;12(10):3701-8.

Two splice variants of the hypoxia-inducible factor HIF-1alpha as potential
dimerization partners of ARNT2 in neurons.

Drutel G(1), Kathmann M, Héron A, Gros C, Macé S, Schwartz JC, Arrang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Neurobiologie et Pharmacologie Moléculaire (U.109) INSERM, Centre
Paul Broca, 2ter rue d'Alésia, 75014 Paris, France.

The hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1alpha), a basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor, is known to heterodimerize with ARNT1, a nuclear translocator, to trigger
the overexpression in many cells of genes involved in resistance to hypoxia.
Although HIF-1alpha and ARNT1 are both expressed in brain, their cellular
localization and function therein are unknown. Here, using in situ hybridization 
and immunocytochemistry, we show that HIF-1alpha is expressed in normoxic
cerebral neurons together with not only ARNT1 but also ARNT2, a cerebral
translocator homologous to ARNT1 but displaying, unlike ARNT1, a selective
neuronal expression. In contrast, other potential partners of the translocators, 
i.e. the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and the single-minded protein 2 (SIM2), 
are not expressed in the adult brain. We also identify two splice variants of
HIF-1alpha in brain, one of which dimerizes with ARNT2 even more avidly than with
ARNT1. The resulting heterodimer, in contrast with the HIF-1alpha/ARNT1 complex, 
does not recognize the HIF-1-binding site of the hypoxia-induced erythropoietin
(Epo) gene, suggesting that it controls transcription of a distinct set of genes.
We therefore propose that HIF-1alpha and ARNT2 function as preferential
dimerization partners in neurons to control specific responses, some of which may
not be triggered by hypoxia. In support of this proposal, in nonhypoxic PC12
cells constitutively coexpressing HIF-1alpha, ARNT1 and ARNT2, downregulation of 
either HIF-1alpha or ARNT2, obtained with selective antisense nucleotides,
resulted in inhibition of [3H]thymidine incorporation.

PMID: 11029639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mech Dev. 2000 Oct;97(1-2):13-26.

Isolation and characterization of AINT: a novel ARNT interacting protein
expressed during murine embryonic development.

Sadek CM(1), Jalaguier S, Feeney EP, Aitola M, Damdimopoulos AE, Pelto-Huikko M, 
Gustafsson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Center for Biotechnology, Novum, Karolinska
Institute, 141 57, Huddinge, Sweden. christine.sadek@cbt.ki.se

Basic helix-loop-helix-PER-ARNT-SIM (bHLH-PAS) proteins form dimeric
transcription factors to mediate diverse biological functions including
xenobiotic metabolism, hypoxic response, circadian rhythm and central nervous
system midline development. The Ah receptor nuclear translocator protein (ARNT)
plays a central role as a common heterodimerization partner. Herein, we describe 
a novel, embryonically expressed, ARNT interacting protein (AINT) that may be a
member of a larger coiled-coil PAS interacting protein family. The AINT
C-terminus mediates interaction with the PAS domain of ARNT in yeast and
interacts in vitro with ARNT and ARNT2 specifically. AINT localizes to the
cytoplasm and overexpression leads to non-nuclear localization of ARNT. A dynamic
pattern of AINT mRNA expression during embryogenesis and cerebellum ontogeny
supports a role for AINT in development.

PMID: 11025203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Toxicol Sci. 2000 Oct;57(2):229-39.

Developmental and tissue-specific expression of AHR1, AHR2, and ARNT2 in
dioxin-sensitive and -resistant populations of the marine fish Fundulus
heteroclitus.

Powell WH(1), Bright R, Bello SM, Hahn ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole,
Massachusetts 02543, USA.

Fundulus heteroclitus is a well-characterized marine fish model for studying aryl
hydrocarbon toxicity. The F. heteroclitus population in New Bedford Harbor (NBH),
a Superfund site in southeastern Massachusetts, exhibits heritable resistance to 
the toxic effects of planar halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (PHAHs), including 
2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
To investigate the role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) signal
transduction pathway in PHAH resistance, we measured the relative levels of AHR1,
AHR2, and ARNT2 mRNA in whole embryos at different developmental stages and in
dissected tissues of adults, comparing expression of these genes in NBH fish with
fish from a reference site (Scorton Creek, MA [SC]). Expression of both AHR1 and 
AHR2 mRNA increased during development, achieving maximum levels prior to
hatching. Maximal embryonic expression of AHR1 was delayed relative to AHR2.
Whole NBH and SC embryos exhibited no discernable differences in expression of
these genes. As we have previously observed, adult SC fish expressed AHR2 and
ARNT2 mRNA in all tissues examined, while AHR1 was expressed predominantly in
brain, heart, and gonads. In contrast, AHR1 mRNA was widely expressed in NBH
fish, appearing with unusual abundance in gill, gut, kidney, liver, and spleen.
This AHR1 expression pattern was not observed in the lab-reared progeny of NBH
fish, demonstrating that constitutive AHR1 expression in gill, gut, kidney,
liver, and spleen is not a heritable phenotype. Furthermore, widespread AHR1
expression was not induced in reference-site fish by TCDD or PCB mixtures,
suggesting that aberrant AHR1 expression is not simply a normal physiological
response of contaminant exposure. These results identify ubiquitous AHR1
expression as an attribute unique to feral NBH F. heteroclitus, and they
represent a first step in determining the regulatory mechanisms underlying this
expression pattern and its possible role in TCDD resistance.

PMID: 11006353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mar Biotechnol (NY). 2000 Jul;2(4):376-386.

Overexpression of a Zebrafish ARNT2-like Factor Represses CYP1A Transcription in 
ZLE Cells.

Wang WD(1), Wu JC, Hsu HJ, Kong ZL, Hu CH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Marine Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University, 2
Pei-Ning Road, Keelung 20224, Taiwan, Republic of China

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) factors belong to a novel
basic-helix-loop-helix-PAS (bHLH-PAS) transcription factor family that controls a
variety of physiological and developmental processes. In a previous study, we
obtained a partial complementary DNA fragment of an ARNT2-like factor from
zebrafish embryo, liver, and other tissues by reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction. In an effort to characterize the function of this factor, we
screened an embryonic complementary DNA library and obtained a complete cDNA of
this ARNT2-like factor, zARNT2A. The deduced protein sequence of zARNT2A
encompasses the basic-helix-loop-helix and PAS-A/B motifs and shares highest
sequence similarity with the amino-terminal half of mouse ARNT2 factor. However, 
it lacks a carboxy-terminal transactivation motif following the PAS-A/B motifs.
Transient expression of zARNT2A in cultured cells resulted in repression of
TCDD-dependent CYP1A transcription. Whole-mount in situ hybridization revealed
that zARNT2A is expressed in brain and pronephros at prime-5 stages. In adult
fish, zARNT2A messenger RNA is transcribed in a wide range of tissues, which
indicates that zARNT2A and its corresponding signal transduction mechanisms have 
important roles in fish development and other physiological aspects.

PMID: 10960127  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


98. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Jun 24;273(1):231-8.

The role of ARNT2 in tumor angiogenesis and the neural response to hypoxia.

Maltepe E(1), Keith B, Arsham AM, Brorson JR, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology and Oncology, Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois 60637, USA.

The Hypoxia-Inducible Factor-1 (HIF-1) activates the transcription of many genes 
required for cellular and organismal responses to oxygen deprivation. The HIF-1
complex is composed of the ubiquitously expressed basic helix-loop-helix/PAS
(bHLH/PAS) proteins HIF-1alpha and Arylhydrocarbon Receptor Nuclear Translocator 
(ARNT). ARNT2 is a conserved ARNT homolog that is highly expressed in neurons,
suggesting that ARNT2/HIF-1alpha heterodimers mediate transcriptional responses
to oxygen deprivation in the nervous system. We show here that ARNT2 forms
functional HIF complexes in vivo, and that ARNT2 restores hypoxia-induced gene
expression to ARNT-deficient ES cells and hepatocytes. Formation of neural
ARNT2/HIF-1alpha complexes in Arnt(-/-) ES cell-derived teratocarcinomas may
explain why these tumors express VEGF, vascularize and grow efficiently, in
contrast to ARNT-deficient hepatomas. Interestingly, all neural cell types
studied accumulate both ARNT- and ARNT2-containing HIF complexes. We conclude
that ARNT2 forms functional HIF complexes in neurons and plays an integral role
in hypoxic responses in the CNS.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10873592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. FEBS Lett. 2000 Jan 21;466(1):80-6.

Different transcriptional properties of mSim-1 and mSim-2.

Moffett P(1), Pelletier J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, 3655 Drummond St., Montreal,
Que., Canada.

The mSim-1 and mSim-2 gene products are mammalian homologues of the Drosophila
Sim gene. The dSim gene product transactivates through a DNA binding site known
as the CNS midline enhancer (CME) element. We have investigated the
transcriptional properties of mSIM-1 and mSIM-2 mediated through the CME element 
in concert with their dimerization partners, ARNT and ARNT-2. The mSIM-1/ARNT
heterodimer transactivates reporter constructs via the ARNT carboxy-terminus.
However, mSIM-2 quenches ARNT transactivation. We find that mSIM-2 competes with 
mSIM-1 for binding to ARNT, suggesting a possible antagonism between these
transcription factors.

PMID: 10648817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mech Dev. 2000 Feb;90(2):253-61.

ARNT2 acts as the dimerization partner of SIM1 for the development of the
hypothalamus.

Michaud JL(1), DeRossi C, May NR, Holdener BC, Fan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montréal, Canada.

One major function of the hypothalamus is to maintain homeostasis by modulating
the secretion of pituitary hormones. The paraventricular (PVN) and supraoptic
(SON) nuclei are major integration centers for the output of the hypothalamus to 
the pituitary. The bHLH-PAS transcription factor SIM1 is crucial for the
development of several neuroendocrine lineages within the PVN and SON. bHLH-PAS
proteins require heterodimerization for their function. ARNT, ARNT2, and BMAL1
are the three known general heterodimerization partners for bHLH-PAS proteins.
Here, we provide evidence that Sim1 and Arnt2 form dimers in vitro, that they are
co-expressed in the PVN and SON, and that their loss of function affects the
development of the same sets of neuroendocrine cell types within the PVN and SON.
Together, these results implicate ARNT2 as the in vivo dimerization partner of
SIM1 in controlling the development of these neuroendocrine lineages.

PMID: 10640708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Eur J Neurosci. 1999 May;11(5):1545-53.

ARNT2, a transcription factor for brain neuron survival?

Drutel G(1), Héron A, Kathmann M, Gros C, Macé S, Plotkine M, Schwartz JC, Arrang
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Neurobiologie et Pharmacologie Moléculaire (U 109) INSERM, Centre
Paul Broca, Paris, France.

The processes responsible for the limited ability to divide and long survival of 
neurons are not well understood but may involve aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator 2 (ARNT2), a recently identified protein, apparently belonging to
the basic helix-loop-helix superfamily of transcription factors, which is
expressed almost exclusively in brain during the whole lifetime. In agreement, we
show, in the rat, that ARNT2 immunoreactivity could be observed only within
nuclei of brain neurons and of dividing and neuronal PC12 cells, a localization
consistent with a role in transcription regulation. Cell death elicited either by
focal ischaemia in brain or oxidative stress in PC12 cells was largely preceded
by an almost complete suppression of ARNT2 expression. In contrast, when PC12
cell cycle progression was impaired, ARNT2 expression was enhanced. Finally, the 
downregulation of ARNT2 levels induced by antisense oligonucleotides prevented
PC12 cell proliferation and induced apoptosis. These observations support the
hypothesis that ARNT2 is a neuronal transcription factor, regulating cell cycle
progression and preventing cell death, whose sustained expression might ensure
brain neuron survival.

PMID: 10215907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Jan 1;361(1):156-63.

Functional diversity of vertebrate ARNT proteins: identification of ARNT2 as the 
predominant form of ARNT in the marine teleost, Fundulus heteroclitus.

Powell WH(1), Karchner SI, Bright R, Hahn ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole,
Massachusetts, 02543, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) is a member of the
bHLH/PAS protein superfamily. ARNT dimerizes with several PAS superfamily
members, including the ligand-activated aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), forming 
a complex that alters transcription by binding specific elements within the
promoters of target genes. Two genes encode different forms of the protein in
rodents: ARNT1, which is widely expressed, and ARNT2, which is limited to the
brain and kidneys of adults and specific neural and branchial tissues of embryos.
In an effort to characterize aryl hydrocarbon signaling mechanisms in Fundulus
heteroclitus, a marine teleost that can develop heritable xenobiotic resistance, 
we have isolated a liver cDNA encoding an ARNT homolog. The protein exhibits
AHR-dependent DNA binding capability typical of other vertebrate ARNTs.
Unexpectedly, phylogenetic analysis reveals that the cDNA encodes an ARNT2. This 
is the only detectable ARNT sequence in Fundulus liver, gill, ovary, and brain,
suggesting that ARNT2 is the predominant form of ARNT in this species. Also
surprising is the relative lack of sequence identity with another fish ARNT
protein, rainbow trout ARNTb, which we show forms a distinct branch outside the
ARNT1 and ARNT2 clades in phylogenetic analyses. Functional diversity of ARNT
proteins in fish may have important implications for the assessment of aryl
hydrocarbon effects on natural populations. The increasing use of fish models in 
developmental and toxicological studies underscores the importance of identifying
taxon-specific roles of ARNT proteins and their potential dimeric partners in the
PAS superfamily.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9882441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Genomics. 1998 Jul 15;51(2):223-32.

Physical localization of the mouse aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator-2 (Arnt2) gene within the c112K deletion.

Wines ME(1), Tiffany AM, Holdener BC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genetics, State University of New York at Stony Brook 11794-5215,
USA.

The albino deletions identify at least seven functional intervals essential for
pre- and postnatal development in the 6- to 10-cM region surrounding the albino
coat color (c = tyrosinase) locus on mouse chromosome 7. The c112K deletion
identifies a putative thymus functional region not removed by the overlapping c3H
deletion. Cloning the c3H proximal breakpoint provided a starting point for
construction of an 840-kb BAC contig spanning the c112K and c3H (D7Ssb3Hp)
proximal breakpoints. These breakpoints are separated by 320-350 kb. The aryl
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-2 (Arnt2) is completely removed by the 
c112K deletion and spans 130-170 kb of the interval. Although Arnt2 is a
candidate for the thymus defects in c112K homozygotes, the possibility that other
as yet unidentified genes in the c112K deletion are responsible for the
abnormalities has not been ruled out. Arnt2 is a member of the bHLH-PAS (Per,
Ahr, Arnt, Sim) family of transcription factors and shares the highest similarity
with Arnt. The survival of c112K homozygotes markedly contrasts the embryonic
lethality observed in Arnt-deficient embryos and suggests distinct roles for
these related transcription factors during embryogenesis.

PMID: 9722945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jul 30;248(3):789-94.

Transcriptionally active heterodimer formation of an Arnt-like PAS protein,
Arnt3, with HIF-1a, HLF, and clock.

Takahata S(1), Sogawa K, Kobayashi A, Ema M, Mimura J, Ozaki N, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University,
Sendai, Japan.

We isolated a cDNA clone encoding a polypeptide of 626 amino acids containing
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and PAS domains from a mouse cDNA library of P19
cells. This protein, termed Arnt3, showed the highest similarity to Arnt and
Arnt2 in the bHLH and PAS regions. Arnt3 mRNA was expressed in brain, skeletal
muscle, 13.5-day embryos, and P19 cells treated with retinoic acid. The partner
PAS proteins of Arnt3 were searched for by the two-hybrid system in yeast, and
HIF-1 alpha, HLF, and Clock among various bHLH/PAS proteins were found. Gel
mobility shift analysis using nuclear extracts from 293T cells cotransfected with
Arnt3 and HIF-1 alpha (or HLF) expression plasmids revealed that these complexes 
specifically bound the hypoxia-response element (HRE). Coexpression of Arnt3 and 
HIF-1 alpha (or HLF) in Arnt-deficient c4 cells enhanced transcription of a
reporter gene driven by the HRE sequences. We also showed that Arnt3 contained an
activation domain at the C-terminal region and a repression domain between the
PAS-A and PAS-B regions.

PMID: 9704006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mech Dev. 1998 Apr;73(1):117-23.

Expression of ARNT, ARNT2, HIF1 alpha, HIF2 alpha and Ah receptor mRNAs in the
developing mouse.

Jain S(1), Maltepe E, Lu MM, Simon C, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern
University Medical School, IL, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix-PAS (bHLH-PAS) protein ARNT is a dimeric partner of
the Ah receptor (AHR) and hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha(HIF1 alpha). These
dimers mediate biological responses to xenobiotic exposure and low oxygen
tension. The recent cloning of ARNT and HIF1(homologues (ARNT2 and HIF2 alpha)
indicates that at least six distinct bHLH-PAS heterodimeric combinations can
occur in response to a number of environmental stimuli. In an effort to
understand the biological relevance of this combinatorial complexity, we
characterized their relative expression at a number of developmental time points 
by parallel in situ hybridization of adjacent tissue sections. Our results reveal
that in general there is limited redundancy in the expression of these six
transcription factors and that each of these bHLH-PAS members displays a unique
pattern of developmental expression emerging as early as embryonic day 9.5.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 9545558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Biochem. 1997 Oct;122(4):703-10.

CBP/p300 functions as a possible transcriptional coactivator of Ah receptor
nuclear translocator (Arnt).

Kobayashi A(1), Numayama-Tsuruta K, Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University,
Sendai.

A heterodimer of AhR (aryl hydrocarbon receptor) and Arnt (AhR nuclear
translocator) conveys a transactivation signal of aromatic hydrocarbons such as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and 3-methylcholanthrene to the genes for a
group of drug-metabolizing enzymes. This inducible expression of the genes is
inhibited by adenovirus E1A, suggesting that CBP/p300 is somehow involved in the 
transactivation of the genes by the AhR and Arnt heterodimer. Yeast and mammalian
two hybrid systems revealed that CBP/p300 interacted with the transactivation
domain of Arnt, but not with that of AhR, via the CREB-binding domain. The pull
down assay using GST-Arnt hybrid protein confirmed the interaction between Arnt
and CBP/p300. Considering these results and that Arnt or Arnt2 functions as a
common partner in the formation of transcriptional regulators with other bHLH/PAS
proteins such as AhR, HLF, and HIF-1alpha, the possibility arises that CBP/p300
is extensively involved as a coactivator in the transactivation process by
bHLH/PAS (a conserved sequence motif among Per, Arnt, and Sim) heterodimer
transcription factors through interaction with Arnt or Arnt2.

PMID: 9399571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Apr 7;233(1):258-64.

cDNA cloning and tissue-specific expression of a novel basic helix-loop-helix/PAS
protein (BMAL1) and identification of alternatively spliced variants with
alternative translation initiation site usage.

Ikeda M(1), Nomura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Saitama Medical School, Moroyama, Japan.
mikeda@saitama-med.ac.jp

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/PAS proteins, such as Sim, act as transcriptional
factors, playing a critical role in the control of central nervous system (CNS)
development. To isolate novel bHLH/PAS factors in the CNS an iterative search of 
a database for expressed sequence tags (ESTs) resulted in the location of several
bHLH/PAS protein-like sequences. The rapid amplification of cDNA end (RACE)
method was applied to isolate full-length cDNAs of these ESTs. Several 5' and 3' 
terminal sequences were isolated using primers derived from an EST from the human
brain cDNA library. The predicted novel factor polypeptide had bHLH and PAS
domains that were highly homologous with those of Ah receptor nuclear
translocator (Arnt) and Arnt2. Combination of the isolated cDNA fragments
revealed the existence of several alternatively spliced variants. The
distribution of the novel bHLH/PAS factor message was analyzed by Northern blot
hybridization. This detected only one transcript, which was 2.9 kb in size.
Strong hybridization was found in the brain, skeletal muscle and heart.
Expression of the novel bHLH/PAS factor, brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1
(BMAL1), was different from that of Arnt and Arnt2, suggesting that BMAL1 has a
different function in the CNS and muscle than Arnt and Arnt2.

PMID: 9144434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Aug 14;225(2):333-9.

Cloning and selective expression in brain and kidney of ARNT2 homologous to the
Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT).

Drutel G(1), Kathmann M, Heron A, Schwartz JC, Arrang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Neurobiologie et Pharmacologie (U.109) de l'INSERM, Centre Paul
Broca, Paris, France.

Arnt2, a new member of the basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factor family,
was cloned from rat brain cDNAs. Its deduced 712 amino acid sequence displays 63%
identity with that of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt1) 
that was completely established. Whereas Arnt2 gene expression, established by
Northern blotting and in situ hybridization histochemistry, occurred selectively 
in brain and kidney, that of Arnt1 was ubiquitous, suggesting that the two
proteins play distinct roles, presumably via dimerization and DNA binding with
different partners.

PMID: 8753765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1996 Aug;139(2):272-80.

Identification of a cell-specific transcription activation domain within the
human Ah receptor nuclear translocator.

Corton JC(1), Moreno ES, Hovis SM, Leonard LS, Gaido KW, Joyce MM, Kennett SB.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Industry Institute of Toxicology, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina 27709, USA.

In the presence of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related
chemicals, the Ah receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) forms a heterodimeric
complex with the ligand-bound Ah receptor, leading to recognition of
dioxin-responsive elements within the enhancer of the CYP1A1 gene and
transcription activation by an unknown mechanism. To understand the role of Arnt 
in transcription activation by the Ah receptor-Arnt heterodimer, we performed a
deletion analysis of Arnt to locate domains that are directly involved in
transcription activation. We showed that the C-terminal 34 amino acids of Arnt
encode a transcription activation domain (TAD) that functions independently of
other sequences in the Ah receptor complex when attached to the heterologous Gal4
DNA binding domain. Deletion of the C-terminal acidic-rich 14 amino acids
completely abolishes activity. Sequences important in Arnt TAD function were
independent of the glutamine-rich region which is an important structural feature
in the TAD of other transcription factors. The strength of the Arnt TAD when
compared with the strong TAD from the herpes simplex virus VP16 protein was
cell-type specific. Both the Arnt and VP16 TAD were equally strong in COS-1
cells, but the Arnt TAD had weak activity in an Arnt-deficient mouse hepatoma
cell line and was not needed for restoration of CYP1A1 activation. These results 
imply that for CYP1A1 activation the Ah receptor provides the dominant activation
function for the heterodimer in hepatoma cells. The potential of the Arnt TAD to 
contribute to activation by the Ah receptor complex is likely determined by
availability or activity of cell-specific factors with which the TAD interacts.

PMID: 8806843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1706-13.

cDNA cloning and tissue-specific expression of a novel basic helix-loop-helix/PAS
factor (Arnt2) with close sequence similarity to the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (Arnt).

Hirose K(1), Morita M, Ema M, Mimura J, Hamada H, Fujii H, Saijo Y, Gotoh O,
Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University Sendai,
Japan.

We isolated mouse cDNA clones (Arnt2) that are highly similar to but distinct
from the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) nuclear translocator (Arnt). The
composite cDNA covered a 2,443-bp sequence consisting of a putative 2,136-bp open
reading frame encoding a polypeptide of 712 amino acids. The predicted Arnt2
polypeptide carries a characteristic basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/PAS motif in
its N-terminal region with close similarity (81% identity) to that of mouse Arnt 
and has an overall sequence identity of 57% with Arnt. Biochemical properties and
interaction of Arnt2 with other bHLH/PAS proteins were investigated by
coimmunoprecipitation assays, gel mobility shift assays, and the yeast two-hybrid
system. Arnt2 interacted with AhR and mouse Sim as efficiently as Arnt, and the
Arnt2-AhR complex recognized and bound specifically the xenobiotic responsive
element (XRE) sequence. Expression of Arnt2 successfully rescued XRE-driven
reporter gene activity in the Arnt-defective c4 mutant of Hepa-1 cells. RNA blot 
analysis revealed that expression of Arnt2 mRNA was restricted to the brains and 
kidneys of adult mice, while Arnt mRNA was expressed ubiquitously. In addition,
whole-mount in situ hybridization of 9.5-day mouse embryos showed that Arnt2 mRNA
was expressed in the dorsal neural tube and branchial arch 1, while Arnt
transcripts were detected broadly in various tissues of mesodermal and endodermal
origins. These results suggest that Arnt2 may play different roles from Arnt both
in adult mice and in developing embryos. Finally, sequence comparison of the
currently known bHLH/PAS proteins indicates a division into two phylogenetic
groups: the Arnt group, containing Arnt, Arnt2, and Per, and the AhR group,
consisting of AhR, Sim, and Hif-1alpha.

PMCID: PMC231157
PMID: 8657146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


